

FIASCO


 By Stanislaw Lem

 

 

Contents

 

I - Birnam Wood

II - The Council

III - The Survivor

IV - SETI

V - Beta Harpyiae

VI - Quinta

VII - Hunting

VIII - The Moon

IX - An Annunciation

X - The Attack

XI - Show of Strength

XII - Paroxysm

XIII - A Cosmic Eschatology

XIV - Cartoons

XV - Sodom and Gomorrah

XVI - The Quintans

 

 

I - Birnam Wood

 

"Nice landing."

The man who said this was no longer looking at the pilot in the
spacesuit with the helmet under his arm. In the circular control
room—horseshoe console in the middle—he went to the wall of glass and
looked out at the ship, a large even though distant cylinder, charred
around its jets. A blackish fluid still spilled from the jets onto the
concrete. The second controller, big in the shoulders, a beret tight on
his bald skull, put the tapes on rewind and, like an unblinking bird,
regarded the newcomer out of the corner of his eye. He wore headphones,
and in front of him was a bank of flickering monitors.

"We managed," said the pilot. Pretending that he needed support to
remove his heavy, double-buckled gloves, he leaned slightly against the
jutting edge of the console. After that landing he was wobbly in the
knees.

"What was it?"

The smaller one, by the glass, in a worn leather jacket, with a mousy,
unshaven face, clapped his pockets until he found his cigarettes.

"Deflection in the thrust," murmured the pilot, a little surprised by
the coolness of the welcome.

The man by the glass, a cigarette already in his mouth, inhaled and
asked through the smoke:

"But why? You don't know?"

"No," the pilot wanted to reply—but he remained silent, because it
seemed to him that he ought to have known. The tape ended. It fluttered
on the reel. The larger man got up, took off the headphones, only now
nodded to him, and said hoarsely:

"I'm London. And that's Goss. Welcome to Titan. What would you like to
drink? We have coffee and whiskey."

The young pilot was flustered. He knew the names of these men but had
not met them before. He had assumed, for no reason, that the larger
would be the chief, Goss, but it was the other way around. Getting this
straight in his head, he chose coffee.

"What's the cargo? Carborundum bits?" asked London when all three of
them were seated at the little table that came out of the wall. The
steaming coffee was in glasses that resembled laboratory beakers.

Goss took a yellow pill with his coffee, sighed, coughed, and blew his
nose until tears came to his eyes.

"And you brought radiators, too, right?" he asked the pilot.

The pilot, again surprised, expecting greater interest in his feat, only
nodded. It was not every day that an engine stalled in the middle of a
landing. He was full of words not about freight but about how, instead
of attempting to blow out the jets or increase the main power, he had
immediately cut the auto and went down on only the boosters, a trick
that he had never tried outside the simulator. And _that_ had been ages
ago. So he had to collect his thoughts again.

"I brought radiators, too," he said finally, and was even pleased at how
it sounded: the laconic type, emerging from danger.

"But not to the right place," smiled the smaller man, Goss.

The pilot didn't know whether or not this was a joke.

"What do you mean? You received me—you called me," he corrected himself.

"We had to."

"I don't understand."

"You were supposed to land at Grail."

"Then why did you pull me off course?"

He felt hot. The call had sounded imperative. True, while losing speed
he had caught a radio announcement from Grail about some accident, but
couldn't make out much through all the static. He had been flying to
Titan via Saturn, using the planet's gravity to decelerate and thus save
fuel, so his ship had brushed the giant's magnetosphere until there was
crackling on all the wavelengths. Immediately afterward he received the
call from this spaceport. A navigator had to do what flight control
said. And here, before he was out of his suit, they were cross-examining
him. Mentally he was still at the helm, with the straps digging into his
shoulders and chest as the rocket hit the concrete with its arms spread.
The boosters, still firing and rumbling, made the whole hull shudder.

"Where was I supposed to put down?"

"Your cargo belongs to Grail," explained the smaller man, wiping his red
nose. He had a cold. "But we intercepted you above orbit and called you
here, because we need Killian. Your passenger."

"Killian?" the young pilot said with surprise. "He's not on board.
Besides me there's only Sinko, the copilot."

The others were dumbfounded.

"Where is Killian?"

"By now, in Montreal. His wife is having a baby. He left before me, on a
shuttle. Before I took off."

"From Mars?"

"Of course, from where else? What's all this about?"

"The mess that obtains in space equals that on Earth," remarked London.
He stuffed tobacco in his pipe as if he wanted to break it. He was
angry. The pilot, too.

"You should have asked."

"We were positive he was with you. That's what the last radiogram said."
Goss blew his nose again and sighed. "You can't take off now in any
case," he said finally. "And Marlin couldn't wait to get the radiators.
Now he'll put all the blame on me."

"But they're there." The pilot indicated with his head. In the mist
stood the dark, slender spindle of his ship. "Six of them, I think. And
in gigajoules. They'll disperse any mist or cloud."

"I can't very well put them on my back and carry them to Marlin,"
returned Goss, in worse and worse humor.

The carelessness, the irresponsibility of the subordinate spaceport,
which, as its chief admitted, had intercepted him after three weeks of
flight without verifying that he had the passenger they expected,
shocked the pilot. He did not say to them that the cargo was their
problem now. Until the damage was repaired, he could do nothing, even if
he wanted to. He kept silent.

"You'll stay with us, of course." With these words London finished his
coffee and rose from the aluminum chair. He was huge, like a heavyweight
wrestler. He went over to the glass wall. The Titan landscape, a
lifeless fury of mountains of unearthly color in the rusty dimness, with
clouds of bronze thick at their peaks, made a perfect background for his
figure. The floor of the tower vibrated slightly. An old transformer,
thought the pilot. He also got up, to look at his ship. Like an ocean
lighthouse it stood vertically out of the low, rushing mist. A gust blew
away the wisps, but the marks of overheating on the jets were no longer
visible, perhaps because of the distance and the half-light. Or else
they had simply cooled.

"You have gamma defect scopes here?"

The ship mattered more to him than their trouble. They had brought the
trouble on themselves.

"We do, but I won't permit anyone to approach the rocket in an ordinary
suit," replied Goss.

"You think it's the pile?" the pilot blurted.

"You don't?"

The small chief got up and walked over. From the floor registers along
the convex glass came a pleasant warmth.

"The temperature did jump above normal during the descent, but the
Geigers were quiet. It was probably only a jet. A ceramic might have
been flushed from the combustion chamber. I had the feeling that I was
losing something."

"A ceramic, fine, but there was a leak," Goss said firmly. "Ceramics
don't melt."

"That puddle?" The pilot was surprised. They stood at the double glass.
Indeed, beneath the bottom fins lay a black puddle. Mist, wind-driven,
intermittently swept the hull of the ship.

"What do you have in the pile? Heavy water or sodium?" asked London. He
was a head taller than the pilot.

Squeaking sounds came from the radio. Goss hurried over, put on a
headset, and spoke quietly with someone.

"It can't be from the pile..." the pilot said, at a loss. "I have heavy
water. The solution is pure. Crystal-clear. But that is black as tar."

"Well, then, the refrigerant in the jets bled out," agreed London.
"Which cracked the ceramic."

It was as if he were talking about fuses. He was not in the least
bothered by the accident that had stuck the pilot and his ship in this
hole.

"Yes," said the young man. "The greatest pressure is in the funnels when
braking. If the ceramic cracks in one place, the main thrust will clean
out the rest. Everything was flushed from the starboard jet."

London said nothing.

The pilot added hesitantly: "I might have landed a little too close..."

"Nonsense. It was good that you even landed straight."

The pilot waited for more words bordering on praise, but London turned
to him and looked him over: from the tousled fair hair to the white
boots of the suit.

"Tomorrow I'll send a technician with a defect scope... Did you put the
pile in neutral?" he added suddenly.

"No, I shut the whole thing off. As if docking."

"Good."

The pilot saw by now that no one was interested in the details of his
struggle with the rocket right above the port. Coffee was fine—but
shouldn't his hosts, who had imposed so much on him, provide a room and
a bath? He longed for a hot shower. Goss kept whispering into the
microphone. London stood leaning over him. The situation was unclear but
full of tension. The pilot was beginning to feel that these two had
something on their minds more important than his adventure, something
that involved the signals from Grail. In flight, he had caught
fragments—about machines that hadn't made it, about the search for them.

Goss turned with his chair, so that the taut line to his headset pulled
the phones off his ears onto his neck.

"Where is this Sinko of yours?"

"On board. I told him to check the reactor."

London looked questioningly at the chief. The latter shook his head
slightly and muttered, "Nothing."

"And their copters?"

"They returned. Visibility zero."

"You asked about the maximum load?"

"There's nothing they can do. What does a gigajoule radiator weigh?" he
turned to the pilot, who was listening.

"I don't know exactly. Under a hundred tons."

"What are they doing?" insisted London. "What are they waiting for?"

"For Killian—" replied Goss and cursed.

From a compartment in the wall London took out a bottle of White Horse,
shook it as if debating whether it would be suitable for the situation,
and placed it back on the shelf. The pilot stood, waiting. He no longer
felt the heaviness of his suit.

"We lost two men," said Goss. "They didn't reach Grail."

"Three, not two," London corrected him gloomily.

"A month ago," Goss went on, "we received a shipment of new Diglas. Six,
for Grail. Grail couldn't accommodate the carrier; the spaceport was
still being reconcreted, and when the first freighter set down there—the
_Achilles,_ ninety-nine thousand tons—the whole reinforced slab,
guaranteed by the government, cracked. We were lucky the ship didn't
fall over. It was pulled out of its hole and kept in dock for two days.
They did some quick first aid on the concrete, put down a fireproof
cover, and opened the port again. But the Diglas stayed with us. The
experts decided that hauling them by rocket wouldn't pay. Besides, the
captain of the _Achilles_ was Ter Leoni. He wasn't about to take a
ninety-nine-thousand-ton craft a measly hundred and eighty miles, from
Grail to here, for such peanuts. Marlin sent two of his best operators.
Last week they took two machines to Grail. The machines are working
there now. The day before yesterday the same two men returned by copter,
to take two more. They set out at dawn and by noon had passed the
Promontory. When they began to descend, we lost contact with them. A lot
of time was lost because beyond the Promontory Grail itself does the
guiding. We thought they weren't answering because they were in our
radio shadow."

Goss spoke in a calm monotone. London stood at the glass, his back to
them. The pilot listened.

"In the same copter, with the operators, came Pirx. He had landed his
_Cuivier_ at Grail and wanted to see me. We've known each other for
years. The copter was supposed to take him back in the evening. It
didn't arrive, because Marlin had sent out everything available in the
search. Pirx didn't want to wait. Or he couldn't. He was supposed to
take off the next day and wanted to be on hand for the clearance of the
ship. Well, he pressed me to let him return to Grail using one of the
Diglas. I made him give me his word that he would take the southern
trail, which was longer but avoided the Depression. He gave me his
word—and broke it. I saw him, on the patsat, descending into the
Depression."

"The patsat?" asked the pilot. He was pale. Sweat beaded on his brow,
but he waited for the explanation.

"Our patrol satellite. It passes overhead every eight hours. It gave me
a clear picture. Pirx went down and disappeared."

"_Commander_ Pirx?" asked the pilot, his face changing.

"Yes. You know him?"

"Know him!" cried the pilot. "I served under him as an intern. He signed
my diploma... Pirx? For so many years he managed to extricate himself
from the worst—"

He stopped. There was a pounding in his ears. He lifted the helmet with
both hands, as if to hurl it at Goss.

"So you let him go alone in the Digla? How could you? The man's a
commander of a fleet, not a truck driver."

"He knew these machines when you were still in diapers," replied Goss.
It was obvious that he was trying to defend himself. London,
stony-faced, went to the monitors, where Goss sat with the earphones
around his neck. In front of Goss's nose, he knocked the ashes from his
pipe into an empty aluminum drum. London examined the pipe, as if not
knowing what it was, then took it in both hands. The pipe snapped. He
threw away the pieces, returned to the window, and stood motionless,
clenched fists held together behind his back.

"I couldn't refuse him."

Goss turned to London, who, as if not listening, looked through the
glass at the shifting skeins of red mist. Now only the prow of the
rocket occasionally emerged from them.

"Goss," said the pilot suddenly, "give me a machine."

"No."

"I have a license to operate thousand-ton striders."

There was a brief glitter in Goss's eyes, but he repeated:

"No. You never operated one on Titan."

Saying nothing, the pilot began to take off his suit. He unscrewed the
wide metal collar, unfastened the shoulder clasps, the zipper
underneath, then reached deep inside and brought out a folder bent from
being carried so long under the heavy padding of the suit. Its flaps
opened as if ripped. He went to Goss and placed papers before him, one
by one. "That's from Mercury. I had a Bigant there. A Japanese model.
Eighteen hundred tons. And here's my license. I drilled a glacier in
Antarctica, with a Swedish ice-strider, a cryopter. Here's a photocopy
of my second-place in the Greenland competition, and this is from
Venus."

He slapped down the photographs as if playing trumps.

"I was there with Holley's expedition. That's my thermoped, and that's
my colleague's. He was my alternate. Both models were prototypes, not
bad. Except that the air conditioning leaked."

Goss looked up at him.

"But aren't you a pilot?"

"I transferred, got my qualification, with Commander Pirx. I served on
his _Cuivier._ My first command was a tug..."

"How old are you?"

"Twenty-nine."

"You were able to switch like that?"

"If you want to, it's possible. Besides, an operator of planetary
machines can master any new type in an hour. It's like going from a
moped to a motorcycle."

He broke off. He had another packet of pictures, but didn't produce
them. He gathered the ones tossed on the console, put them in the worn
leather folder, and returned them to his inside pocket. In the opened
suit, a little red in the face, he stood near Goss. Across the monitors
ran the same streaks of light, indicating nothing. London, sitting on
the handrail by the glass, watched this scene in silence.

"Suppose I were to give you a Digla. Let us suppose. What would you do?"

The pilot smiled. Drops of sweat glistened on his forehead. The fair
hair bore the mark of the helmet's pads on top.

"I would take a radiator with me. A gigajoule, from the ship's bay. The
helicopters at Grail could never lift that, but for the Digla even a
hundred tons is nothing. I would go and have a look around... Marlin's
wasting his time searching from the air. I know there's a lot of
hematite there. And mist. From the copters you can't see a thing."

"And you'll take the machine straight to the bottom."

The pilot's smile widened, showing his white teeth. Goss noticed that
this kid—because it was practically a kid, only the size of the suit had
added a few years—had the same eyes as Pirx. A little lighter perhaps,
but with the exact same wrinkles at the corners of the eyes. When he
squinted, he had the look of a large cat in the sun—both innocent and
crafty.

"He wants to enter the Depression and 'have a look around,' " Goss said
to London, half as a question, half ridiculing the audacity of the
volunteer. London didn't blink. Goss stood, removed the earphones, went
to the cartograph, and pulled down, like a blind, a large map of the
northern hemisphere of Titan.

He pointed to two thick lines that curved on a yellow-purple field cut
with contour lines.

"We are here. As the crow flies, it's 110 miles to Grail. By this route,
the black, it's 146. We lost four people on it when the concrete was
being poured for Grail and ours was the only landing field. At that
time, pedipulators on diesels were used, powered by hypergols. For local
conditions, the weather was perfect. Two teams of machines reached Grail
without a hitch. And then, in a single day, four striders disappeared.
In the Depression. In this circle. Without a trace."

"I know," said the pilot. "I learned that in school. I know the names of
those people."

Goss put a finger on the place where, along the black trail north, a red
circle had been drawn.

"The road was lengthened, but no one knew how far the treacherous
terrain extended. Geologists were called in. It would have made just as
much sense to call in dentists—they're experts on holes, too. No planet
has traveling geysers—but we have them here. The blue in the north is
the Mare Hynicum. We and Grail are deep inland. Except that this is not
land—it's a sponge. The Mare Hynicum does not flood the depression
between us and Grail, because the entire coastline is plateau. The
geologists said that this so-called continent resembled the Baltic plate
of Finno-Scandinavia."

"They were wrong," the pilot put in. This was beginning to sound like a
lecture. He set his helmet down in a corner, sat back in the chair, and
folded his hands like an attentive student. He did not know whether Goss
intended to acquaint him with the route or scare him away from it, but
the whole situation was to his liking.

"Of course. Beneath the rocks lies a slush of frozen hydrocarbons. An
abomination discovered by the drills. A permanent ice, treacherous, made
of polymers. The stuff doesn't melt even at zero Celsius, and the
temperature here never gets higher than ninety below. Inside the
Depression, there are hundreds of old calderas and extinct geysers. The
experts said that these were the remnants of volcanic activity. When the
geysers came back to life, we received visitors with higher degrees.
Seismo-acoustics discovered, far beneath the rocks, a network of caves
that branched to an extent never before seen. There was speleological
research—people perished, and the insurance companies paid. Finally the
Consortium, too, opened its pocket book. Then the astronomers said: When
Saturn's other moons are between Titan and the Sun, and the
gravitational pull reaches its maximum, the continental plate crumples
and the fire beneath the mantle expels magma. Titan still has a hot
core. The magma cools before it rises from the depths in vents, but,
cooling, it heats all of Orlandia. The Mare Hynicum is like water, and
the bedrock of Orlandia is like a sponge. The plugged subterranean
channels soften and open. Hence the geysers. The pressure reaches a
thousand atmospheres. One never knows where the damned thing will erupt
next. But you have your heart set on going there?"

"I do," replied the pilot in a studied manner. He would have liked to
cross his legs, but could not in the suit. He remembered how a colleague
of his once tried that and fell over, taking the stool with him. "You
mean Birnam Wood?" he added. "Am I supposed to flee now, or can we talk
seriously?"

Goss, ignoring this, continued:

"The new trail cost a fortune. One had to nibble away, with successive
charges, at that ridge of lava—the main flow from the Gorgon. Even the
Mons Olympus of Mars can't compare with the Gorgon. Dynamite proved too
weak. There was a guy with us, Hornstein—you may have heard of him—who
proposed that instead of breaking through the ridge they should cut
steps in it, make stairs. Because that would be cheaper. In the U.N.
Convention there ought to be a rule barring idiots from going into
astronautics. The Typhon Ridge, anyway, they breached with special
thermonuclear bombs, after digging a tunnel. Gorgon, Typhon—we're lucky
the Greeks have so many monsters in their mythology for us to borrow.
The new trail was opened a year ago. It intersects only the southernmost
extension of the Depression. The experts pronounced it safe.

"Meanwhile, the migration of underground caverns is everywhere—beneath
all of Orlandia. Three-quarters of Africa! When Titan cooled, its orbit
was highly elliptical. It approached the Roche Zone, into which a
multitude of smaller moons had fallen. Saturn ground them up to make its
rings. So Titan cooled while boiling; great bubbles were created in the
perisaturnium of the orbit, and they froze in the aposaturnium; then
came sedimentation, glaciations, and this bubble-ridden, sponge-like,
amorphous rock was covered and pushed underneath. It's not true that the
Mare Hynicum flows in only during the ascension of all the moons of
Saturn. The invasions and eruptions of geysers cannot be predicted.
Everyone who works here knows this, and the carriers, too, including
pilots like yourself. The trail cost billions, but it ought to be closed
to heavy machines. All of us keep to the sky. We're in heaven here. Look
at the name of the mine: Grail. Except that heaven has turned out to be
damned expensive. The whole thing could have been set up better. The
bookkeeping is a nightmare. Payments for those who die are hefty, but
less money than it would take to reduce the danger. That's about all I
have to say.

"It's possible for the men to crawl out, even if they're submerged. The
tide is receding, and the armor on a Digla can take a hundred
atmospheres per square inch. They have oxygen for three hundred hours.
Marlin sent out robot hovercraft and is having two superheavies
repaired. No matter what you can accomplish, it's not worth it. It's not
worth risking your neck. The Digla is one of the heaviest—"

"You said you were finished," interrupted the pilot. "I have only one
question, all right? What about Killian?"

Goss opened his mouth, coughed, and sat down.

"It was for this, wasn't it, that I was supposed to bring him?" added
the pilot.

Goss tugged on the bottom edge of the map, which made it roll up with a
flutter, then took a cigarette and said over the flame of his lighter:

"That's his specialty. He knew the terrain. Also, he had a contract. I
can't forbid operators to do business with Grail. I can hand in my
resignation, and I will. Meanwhile, I can send any hero packing."

"You'll give me the machine," the pilot said quietly. "I can talk with
Grail right now. Marlin will jump at the offer, give me the job, and
that'll be that. You'll get an official pat on the back. Marlin doesn't
care whether it's Killian or me. And the instructions I've memorized.
We're wasting time, Mr. Goss. Give me something to eat, please. I'll
wash up, and then we can go over the details."

Goss looked to London for support, but found none in that quarter.

"He'll go," said the assistant. "I heard about him from that
speleologist who was at Grail last summer. This one's cut from the same
cloth as your Pirx. Still waters. Go and wash, hero. The showers are
below. And come right back up, or the soup will get cold."

The pilot left, giving London a grin of gratitude. On his way out, he
lifted his white helmet with such energy that the tubes slapped the
sides of his suit.

As soon as the door was closed, London began clattering pots and pans by
the hot plate.

"What good will this do?" Goss threw the question angrily at his back.
"You're a big help!"

"And you're spineless. Why did you give Pirx the machine?"

"I had to. I gave my word."

London turned to him, a pot in his hand.

"Your word! You're the kind of friend that if you give your word that
you'll jump in after me, you keep it. And if you swear that you'll stand
there and watch me drown, you jump in anyway. Am I right?"

"Who knows what's right?" Goss said, defending himself halfheartedly.
"How will _he_ be able to help them?"

"Maybe he'll find tracks. He'll be taking a radiator—"

"Stop! Let me listen to Grail. There might be some news."

 

Dusk was still far off, although the clouds settling around the
illuminated mushroom tower made everything dark. London set the table
while Goss, smoking cigarette after cigarette, his earphones on, picked
up the small talk between the base at Grail and the tractors that had
been sent out after the copters returned. At the same time, he thought
about the pilot. Hadn't the pilot changed course too readily, without
questions, to land here? A twenty-nine-year-old captain of a ship,
licensed to operate long-range spacecraft, had to be tough, hot-blooded.
Otherwise he would not have risen so quickly. Danger was a lure to
plucky youth. If he, Goss, was to blame, it was for an oversight. Had he
asked about Killian, he would have sent the ship on to Grail. Chief
Goss, after twenty hours without sleep, was unaware that in his thoughts
he had already laid the newcomer to rest. And what was the kid's name?
He'd forgotten it, and took this as a sign of advancing age.

He touched the left monitor. In green rows the letters went:

SHIP: HELIOS GENERAL CARGO II CLASS

HOME PORT: SYRTIS

MAJOR PILOT: ANGUS PARVIS

COPILOT: ROMAN SINKO

FREIGHT: ITEM LIST

He turned off the screen. They came in wearing sweatsuits. Sinko—thin,
curly-haired—greeted them with embarrassment, because the pile turned
out to have a leak after all. They sat down to canned soup. The thought
occurred to Goss that this daredevil who would be taking the machine out
had a jumbled name. He should have been not Parvis but parsifal, which
went with Grail. Not in the mood for jokes, however, Goss kept the
anagram to himself.

After a short discussion on the subject of whether they were eating
lunch or supper—unresolvable because of the difference in times: the
ship's time, Earth time, Titan time—Sinko went down to talk with the
technician about the defect scope, which was being set up for the end of
the week, when the pile would be cool and the cracks in the housing
could be temporarily sealed. The pilot, London, and Goss meanwhile
viewed a diorama of Titan in an empty part of the hall. The
image—created by holographic projectors, three-dimensional, in color,
with the routes drawn in—went from the northern pole to the tropic
parallel of latitude. It could be reduced or enlarged. Parvis studied
the region that separated them from Grail.

The room that he was given was small but cozy, with a bunk bed, a little
desk that slanted, an armchair, a cabinet, and a shower so narrow that
when he soaped himself he kept banging his elbows into the walls. He
stretched out on the blanket and opened the thick handbook of
Titanography he had borrowed from London. First he looked in the index
for BIRNAM WOOD, then WOOD, BIRNAM. It was not there; science had not
taken cognizance of the name. He leafed through until he came to the
geysers. The author's account of them was not exactly what Goss had
said. Titan, solidifying more rapidly than Earth and the other inner
planets, locked in its depths enormous masses of compressed gases. These
gases, at the folds in Titan's crust, pressed against the bases of old
volcanoes and against the subterranean veins of magma that formed a
network of roots for hundreds of kilometers; at certain configurations
of synclines or anticlines they could break into the atmosphere in
fountains of high-pressure, volatile compounds. The mixture, chemically
complex, contained carbon dioxide, which froze immediately into snow.
Carried by strong winds, the snow covered the plains and mountain slopes
with a thick layer. Parvis grew annoyed with the dry tone of the text.
He turned out the light, got into bed, was surprised that both the
blanket and the pillow stayed in place—accustomed as he was, after
nearly a month, to weightlessness—and fell asleep in an instant.

 

Some internal impulse brought him out of unconsciousness so suddenly
that he was sitting when he opened his eyes, ready to jump out of bed.
Blankly he looked around, rubbing his jaw. The jaw reminded him of his
dream. Boxing. He had been in the ring against a professional, knew the
blow was coming, and fell like a ton of bricks, kayoed. When he opened
his eyes wide, the whole room reeled like a cockpit in a sharp turn. He
woke completely. In a flash everything returned to him—yesterday's
landing, the malfunction, the argument with Goss, and the council of war
around the diorama. The room was as cramped as a cabin in a freighter,
which brought to mind Goss's parting words: that in his youth he had
served on board a whaler. Shaving, Parvis reviewed his decision. If it
hadn't been for the name Pirx, he would have thought twice before
insisting on this excursion. Under the rush of hot, then ice-cold water,
he tried singing, but it lacked conviction. He was not himself. He felt
that the thing he had asked for was not merely risky but bordered on
stupidity. With the stream in his raised face, blinded, he considered
for a moment the idea of backing out. But he knew that that was out of
the question. Only a kid would do such a thing. He toweled himself
vigorously, made the bed, dressed, and went to look for Goss. Now he was
beginning to hurry. He still had to acquaint himself with an unknown
model, practice a little, recall the right movements.

Goss was nowhere. At the base of the control tower there were two
buildings, one in either direction, connected to the tower by tunnels.
The location of the spaceport was the result of an oversight or an
outright mistake. According to unmanned soundings, mineral deposits were
supposed to lie beneath this once-volcanic valley, while actually it was
an old crater whose basin had been pushed up by the seismic contractions
of Titan. So straightaway machines and people were thrown in, and they
began to assemble the barrel-like conduit of living quarters for the
mining crews—when the news came that a few hundred miles farther on was
an incredibly rich and easily accessible lode of uranium.

The project administration, at that point, underwent a split. One group
wanted to abandon this spaceport and start all over again to the
northeast; the other group insisted on remaining, arguing that, yes,
beyond the Depression there were surface deposits, but they were shallow
and therefore would yield little. Those in favor of dismantling the
first bridgehead were called, by someone, Seekers of the Holy Grail, and
the name of Grail stuck to that area of opencast mining. The first
spaceport was not abandoned, but neither was it expanded. A weak
compromise was struck, necessitated by the lack of capital. Thus,
although the economists calculated _x_ times that in the long run it
would pay to close the landing field in the old crater and concentrate
all the activity in a single place—Grail—the ad hoc logic of meeting the
demands of the moment prevailed. Grail was unable to receive the larger
ships for a long time; but, then, the Roembden Crater (named after the
geologist who discovered it) did not have its own repair docks, loading
derricks, up-to-date equipment. And there was the constant debate over
who served whom and who got what out of the arrangement. Some of the top
brass still seemed to believe that there was uranium under the crater.
Some drilling was done. But the drilling went slowly, because as soon as
a few people and a little power were allocated here, Grail immediately
expropriated them, intervening at headquarters, and once again
construction halted and the machines stood idle by the darkening walls
of the Roembden.

Parvis, like the other transporters, did not participate in these
frictions and conflicts, though he had to have a passing knowledge of
them; that was required by the delicate position of everyone in
transport. Grail still wanted—by dint of the de facto situation—to
dismantle the spaceport, particularly after the expansion of its own
landing field, but Roembden thwarted Grail. Or, whether it thwarted
Grail or not, it demonstrated its usefulness when the excellent concrete
at Grail began to sink. Personally, Parvis was of the opinion that at
the root of this chronic schism lay psychology and not money: that two
local and therefore mutually antagonistic patriotisms—of the Roembden
Crater and of Grail—had arisen, and everything else was a
rationalization favoring one side or the other. But this was best left
unsaid to anyone working on Titan.

The passageways beneath the control tower brought to mind an abandoned
subterranean city, and it was painful to see how many supplies were
piled up, untouched. He had landed at Roembden once before, as assistant
navigator, but they were in such a hurry at the time that he did not
even leave the ship during the unloading, to supervise it. Now he looked
upon the unpacked—still sealed, even—containers with disgust, especially
since he recognized among them the ones that he had brought then.
Annoyed by the silence, he began yelling as in a forest, but only an
echo boomed dully down the corridors of this storage section.

He took an elevator up. He found London in the flight-control room, but
London had no idea where Goss was, either. No new communiqués had come
in from Grail. The monitors flickered. The smell of bacon filled the
air; London was making scrambled eggs in bacon fat. The shells he threw
in the sink.

"You have _eggs_ here?" The pilot was amazed.

"Oh, plenty."

London now spoke to him as one of the crew.

"There was an electronics guy, with ulcers. He brought a whole chicken
coop with him—watching his diet. Well, there were protests at first:
people complained that he was stinking up the place, and what would he
feed the chickens with, etc. But he left a couple of hens and a rooster,
and now we love them. Fresh eggs are a delicacy in these parts. Have a
seat. Goss will turn up."

Parvis felt hungry. Stuffing his mouth with unaesthetically large pieces
of scrambled egg, he justified this to himself: in the face of what
awaited him, he ought to stock up on calories. The telephone buzzed;
Goss wanted to talk to him. Parvis thanked London for the feast, bolted
the rest of his coffee, and took the elevator down a floor.

The chief was in the corridor, already in coveralls. The hour had
struck. Parvis ran to the supply room for his spacesuit. He got into it
efficiently, connected the oxygen tank to the hose, but did not open the
valve or put on the helmet, not sure that they would be leaving
immediately. They took a different elevator—for freight—to the basement.
There was storage there, too, piles of containers resembling artillery
caissons, with oxygen cylinders jutting from them, five apiece, like
heavy-caliber shells. The storeroom was large but packed; one walked
between walls of boxes pasted with labels in different languages. Here
was cargo from manufacturers on every continent on Earth. The pilot
waited quite a while for Goss, who went to put on his suit, and then did
not recognize him at first: the suit was the heavy kind that a mechanic
wore, smeared with grease and having a night visor drawn over the glass
of the helmet.

They went outside through a pressure chamber. The underside of the
building hung above them, the whole resembling a giant mushroom with a
glass cap. At the top, London was already busy at his station, his
silhouette against the green glow of the monitors. They went around the
base of the tower—circular, windowless, like a lighthouse raised against
the sea—and Goss opened wide the gate of a garage made of corrugated
metal. Fluorescent lights fluttered. The garage was empty except for a
lift truck by the back wall and a jeep similar to the old lunar vehicles
of the Americans. An open chassis, seats with footrests, nothing but a
frame, tires, a steering wheel, and a storage battery in the rear. Goss
drove it out onto the uneven rubble that covered the ground near the
tower and stopped so that the pilot could get on. They moved through
red-brown mist toward an indistinct, low structure, blocklike, with a
flat roof. In the distance, behind a mountain ridge, were dull columns
of illumination, like antiaircraft searchlights. They had nothing in
common, however, with such antiquated nonsense.

Titan's sun, on cloudy days, provided little light; therefore, giant
mirrors were put into stationary orbit over Grail during the working of
the uranium ore. Called "selectors," they concentrated the Sun's rays on
the mining area. Their usefulness proved problematic. Saturn and its
moons constituted a region of the interaction of many masses, setting up
perturbations impossible to calculate. Thus, despite the efforts of the
astrophysicists, the columns of light underwent deviations, often
wandering as far afield as the Roembden Crater. The solitary souls of
Roembden took pleasure—a pleasure not merely sardonic—in these solar
visitations, since, especially at night, the whole basin of the crater
emerged suddenly from darkness and showed its grim, fascinating beauty.

Goss, taking the jeep around obstacles—cylindrical blocks that resembled
misshapen vats, plugs from small volcanic fumaroles—also noticed the
brightness cold as northern lights, and muttered, half to himself:

"Heading our way. Good. In a minute or two we'll be able to see
everything like on a stage."

And he added, with obvious malice:

"Nice of Marlin to share with us."

Parvis understood the joke, because the illumination of Roembden meant
that it would be pitch-black at Grail, and therefore Marlin and his
dispatcher were now getting the selector maintenance crew out of bed, to
man the engines that would put the space mirrors back where they
belonged. But the two columns of light came closer, and under one of
them flashed an ice-covered peak on the eastern ridge. An additional
benefit for the Roembdenites was the remarkable clarity of the
atmosphere (considering Titan) in their crater. It allowed them for
weeks at a time to admire, against the starry firmament, the yellow,
flat-ringed disk of Saturn. Though it was at a distance five times
greater than the Moon was from the Earth, the ascending planet's size
always shocked novices. With the naked eye one could see the
many-colored stripes on the surface as well as the black dots that were
shadows cast by Saturn's nearer moons. Such views were made possible by
the northern wind that drove through the gorges and chasms with such
force that it produced a foehn effect. Nowhere else on Titan was it as
warm as at Roembden.

Whether the maintenance crew had not yet managed to regain control of
their selectors, or whether because of the emergency there was no one
around to do this, the beam of sunlight was already moving across the
bottom of the basin. The basin became as bright as day. The jeep didn't
even need its headlights. The pilot saw the stained gray concrete around
his _Helios._ And beyond that, in the place where they were heading,
there stood, like petrified stumps of unbelievable trees, volcanic plugs
that had been ejected from seismic blowholes millions of years ago and
congealed. In foreshortened perspective, these looked like the colonnade
of a ruined temple; their moving shadows were pointers on a row of
sundials that indicated an alien, galloping time. The jeep passed this
irregular palisade. It rolled, lurching; its electric motor whined. The
flat building still lay in darkness, but they could now see two black
silhouettes looming behind it—like Gothic cathedrals.

The pilot appreciated their true size when he and Goss got off and
approached them on foot.

Such giants he had never seen before. (And had never operated a Digla,
either, which he hadn't admitted.) Put one of these machines in a fur
suit and you had King Kong. The proportions were more anthropoid than
human. The legs, made of bridge trusswork, descended vertically to feet
as mighty as tanks, embedded in the rubble and motionless. The towerlike
thighs rose to a pelvic girdle, in which, like a flat-bottomed boat,
rested the iron trunk. The hands of the upper limbs could be seen only
by throwing one's head back. They hung alongside the torso like useless,
lowered derrick cranes with fists of steel. Both colossi were headless.
What at a distance he had taken for turrets turned out to be, against
the sky, antennas atop the shoulders of each.

Behind the first Digla, practically touching its armor plate with an arm
bent at the elbow joint—as if, intending to poke the thing in the side,
it had frozen in place—stood a second, identical. Because it was a
little farther off, one could see in its chest the gleam of a glass
window: the driver's cabin.

"This is Castor, and this is Pollux," Goss made the introduction. He
played a hand-held floodlight on the giants. The beam brought out, from
the semidarkness, the plate metal of the shin guards, the shields
protecting the knees, and the trunk that was as smooth and black as the
carcass of a whale.

"Hartz, that blockhead, couldn't even put them in the hangar," said
Goss. He groped on his chest for a knob: his breath was fogging the
glass of the helmet. "He barely braked in time, before that slope..."

The pilot understood why Hartz had packed both colossi into this gap in
the rock and why he had chosen to leave them there. It was the inertia.
Just like a seagoing vessel, a walking machine responded more sluggishly
to the helmsman the greater its mass. He was about to ask how much a
Digla weighed, but, not wanting to show his ignorance, instead took the
light from Goss and proceeded along the foot of the giant. Running the
light over the steel, he found, as he expected, a name plate riveted at
eye level. Maximum operating power 14,000 kw; overload limit 19,000 kw;
rest mass 1680 tons; reactor multishielded Tokamak with Foucault
converter; hydraulic drive, main transmission, and gears by Rolls-Royce;
chassis made in Sweden.

He directed the cone of light upward, along the beams and girders of the
leg, but couldn't take in the entire frame at once. The light barely
showed the contours of the black, headless shoulders. When he returned,
Goss was gone—probably to switch on the heating system of the landing
field. Indeed, the pipes that ran along the ground were beginning to
dispel the thin, low-flowing mist. The wandering column of sunlight
moved across the basin like a slow drunkard, tearing the darkness from
the blocks that were storehouses, or from the mushroom of the control
tower with the green band of its own light, or it made flashes that
faded instantly, touching the ice patches on more distant cliffs, as if
trying to waken the dead landscape by giving it motion. Suddenly the
column swerved, rushed across the wide concrete, jumped the mushroom
tower, the palisade of magma stumps, the hangar, and hit the pilot, who
raised a protecting glove and quickly craned his neck as much as
possible in his helmet, taking this opportunity to see the whole Digla
at once.

Coated with a black anticorrosive enamel, it gleamed above him like a
two-legged battleship rearing. Holding a pose for a flash camera. The
tempered breastplates, the circular undercarriage of the hips, the beams
and drive shafts of the thighs, the shielding on the knee joints, the
ribwork of the shins—everything shone, spotless, indicating that the
giant had as yet done no work. Parvis experienced both joy and
butterflies in the stomach. He swallowed with difficulty. As the light
moved off, he walked around behind the Digla. Its foot, as he approached
it, bore less and less of a resemblance to a human foot of steel; it
became a caricature, and then, near the sole sunken in the dust, bore no
resemblance at all. Parvis stood as if at the base of a dock derrick
that nothing could budge. The armored heel could have served as the
support of a hydraulic press. The ankle had cotter pins like screw
propellers, and the knee, bulging halfway up the leg, at a height of at
least two stories, was like the drum of a steam roller. The hands of the
giant, larger than power-shovel dippers, hung motionless, frozen at
attention.

Though Goss had gone off somewhere, the pilot did not intend to wait. He
saw the steps that jutted from the back edge of the heel, and the grip
bars, so he began to ascend. The ankle was encircled by a small platform
from which rose, now inside the trusswork of the calf, a vertical
ladder. It was not difficult so much as strange to climb its rungs. The
ladder led him to a hatch that was situated not too conveniently above
the right thigh—for the reason that the original, most logical place
(for the builders) had become the butt of endless jokes. The designers
of the first striders ignored this low humor, of course, but later they
had to take it into account. It came to light that operators were
reluctant to sign up for these Atlases, teased by their colleagues about
_how_ one got inside them.

Unbolting the hatch activated a garland of tiny lights. He took a spiral
staircase to the cabin. The cabin was like a great glass barrel or
section of pipe transfixing the chest of the Digla—not in the center but
on the left, as if the engineers had wanted to put a man in the place
the heart would be if the giant were living.

He cast his eyes around the interior, now also lit, and with
considerable relief saw that the control systems were familiar. He felt
at home. Quickly removing his helmet and getting out of his suit, he
turned up the heat: all he was wearing was a jersey and tights, and to
move the giant he would need to strip completely. Warm air filled the
cabin. At the convex front pane, he gazed into the distance. It was
daybreak, and gloomy as usual; on Titan a storm always seemed to be
brewing. In the dim light he observed the scattered rocks of a region
far beyond the landing field. He was eight stories up, and it was like
looking from the window of an office building. He could even look down
on the mushroom of the control tower. Except for the mountain peaks at
the horizon, only the prow of the _Helios_ stood above him. Through the
side walls of glass, also curved, he could see into the dark shafts,
poorly illuminated, full of machinery that slowly, steadily sighed, as
if awakened from a trance or sleep. The cabin contained no control
consoles, no steering wheels, no viewscreens; there was nothing but a
piece of clothing, crumpled on the floor like an empty, metallically
glittering skin, and two mosaics of black cubes fastened to the front
glass. The cubes were like blocks in a child's playpen, because their
surfaces held silhouettes of tiny arms and legs—the right on the right
mosaic, the left on the left. When the colossus walked and everything in
it functioned smoothly, each little picture glowed a peaceful
willow-green. In the event of a disturbance, the color changed to brown
if the problem was minor, and purple for emergencies.

This was a segmented image of the entire machine projected onto the
black mosaic. The young man, in a current of heated air, removed the
rest of his clothes; he tossed the jersey in a corner and began pulling
on the operator's suit. The elastic material, yielding, clung to his
bare feet, his thighs, belly, shoulders. Aglitter to his neck in the
electronic snakeskin, he eased his hands carefully, finger by finger,
inside the gloves. Then, when he pulled the zipper up past his chest in
a single movement, the black mosaic burst into colored lights. A glance
verified that this system was the same as in the ordinary ice striders
that he had handled in Antarctica, though those didn't compare with the
Digla in mass. He reached to the ceiling for a strap, a kind of harness,
and put it around him, buckled it tight across his chest. When the
buckle clicked shut, the harness lifted him gently, resiliency, so that,
supported from under the arms, as in a well-padded corset, he was
suspended and could move either leg freely. Checking that the arms were
just as free, he felt for the main switch at the neck, found the lever,
and threw it all the way. The lights on the cubes doubled in intensity,
and at the same time he heard, deep beneath him, the engines of all the
limbs. They idled in neutral, making soft sucking noises because there
was excess grease on the connecting rods, from the rotary bearings,
which had been packed at the Earth shipyard to protect against
corrosion.

Looking down with care, so as not to hit the side of the storage
building, he made his first, tentative, small step. In the lining of his
suit were thousands of electrodes, sewn in supple spirals. Pressed
against the naked body, they gathered the impulses from the nerves and
muscles and transmitted them to the Goliath. Just as to each of the
skeletal joints of the man there corresponded, in the machine, a
magnified, hermetically sealed joint of metal, so for each group of
muscles that flexed or straightened a limb there were cannonlike
cylinders in which pistons moved, pushed by pumped oil. But the operator
did not need to think or even know about all this. He merely moved as if
walking, as if treading the ground with his feet, or as if bending his
torso to pick up, with outstretched hand, a desired object. There were
only two significant differences. First, that of size, since a single
human footfall equaled a twelve-meter step by the machine. It was the
same with every movement. Thanks to the extraordinary precision of the
relays, the machine was able, if the operator wished to demonstrate his
skill, to lift a full liqueur glass from a table and raise it to a
height of twelve stories without spilling a drop or crushing the crystal
stem in the great tongs of its grip. But the colossus was made to lift
not little glasses or pebbles but multiton pipes, beams, and boulders.
With the appropriate tools put in its hands, it became a drilling rig, a
bulldozer, a crane—but always a mighty union of virtually inexhaustible
force with human dexterity.

The giant striders were an extension of the concept of the exoskeleton,
which, as an external amplifier of the human body, had been applied in
many twentieth-century prototypes. The invention languished, because on
Earth no immediate practical use was found for it. What revived the idea
was the exploitation of the solar system. Planetary machines arose,
adapted to the globes on which they were to work, to the local tasks and
conditions. In weight the machines varied, but in inertial mass they
were the same everywhere, and therein lay the second important
difference between them and people.

Both strength of construction material and engine power had their
limits. The limits were imposed, even at a distance from all
gravitational bodies, by the machine's inertial mass. One could not make
sudden movements in a strider, just as one could not stop an ocean liner
on a dime or spin the arm of a crane like a propeller. Trying that in a
Digla would break its girdered limbs. To protect against any such
self-destructive maneuver, therefore, the engineers had installed safety
cutoffs in each of the branching drive units. The operator, however,
could override any or all of these neutralizers if he found himself in
dire straits. He might be able, at the cost of ruining the machine, to
save his own neck—to emerge from a cave-in, for example. And if that did
not save him, he had one last resort, an ultimate refuge: the vitrifax.

The man was protected by the outer armor of the strider and by the inner
shields of its cabin—but inside, above the operator, in the shape of a
bell, was the open mouth of the vitrifax. The device could freeze a man
in the blink of an eye. Granted, medicine still lacked the means to
restore the frozen one to life. Victims of catastrophes, preserved in
cylinders of liquid nitrogen, lay waiting, unchanged, for the advent of
a resurrection technology in the next century.

This medical passing of the buck to an indefinite future seemed, to many
people, a gruesome desertion of duty, a promise of rescue with no
guarantee of its fulfillment. There was, however, more than one
precedent in medicine of such extreme, terminal measures. The first
transplants of ape hearts in dying patients evoked similar reactions of
indignation and horror. Still, polling the operators themselves revealed
how little hope they placed in the vitrifax apparatus. Their profession
may have been brand-new, but the death that lurked in it was as old as
any human enterprise. Therefore Angus Parvis, treading the ground of
Titan with heavy steps, gave no thought to the black shaft above his
head, or to the pushbutton glowing like a ruby within its transparent
little bubble-case.

With exaggerated caution he moved out onto the concrete slab of the
spaceport, to test-walk the Digla. Instantly the old feeling came back
to him, that he was both incredibly light and incredibly heavy, free and
constrained, swift and slow. The closest analogy might have been the
sensation of a diver, whose weight was lessened by the buoyancy of the
water, but who found greater resistance in the medium the faster he
tried to go. The first prototypes of the planetary machines, after a few
hours of operation, ended up on the scrap heap, lacking motion
neutralizers. The novice who took a few steps in an early strider got
the impression that there was nothing to it, and thus, when he went to
execute a simple task—say, setting a row of crossbeams on the walls of a
house under construction—he would demolish the wall and bend the pipes
before he knew what was happening. But a machine with neutralizers could
also be treacherous for an unskilled operator. Reading numbers of
maximum loads was as easy as reading a book on skiing, but no one ever
mastered the slalom from a book. Parvis, well acquainted with
thousand-ton craft, judged, from the small acceleration of the steps at
first, that the giant under his control had almost double that mass.
Suspended in his glass cabin like a spider in a strange net, he
immediately moderated the movements of his legs, and even stopped, in
order to begin—very slowly—exercises in place. He shifted from foot to
foot, bending the trunk to either side, and only then walked several
times around his ship.

His heart was beating more heavily than usual, but everything went
without a hitch. He saw the barren basin, dark gray in the low mist, the
distant rows of lights that marked the borders of the landing field,
and, at the base of the control tower, the tiny form of Goss, a
veritable ant. Parvis was surrounded by a pleasant, not insistent sound;
his ears, able more and more to distinguish the different noises,
recognized the background bass of the main engines, which sometimes
built up to a muffled singing and sometimes grumbled a mild reproach
when the hundred-ton legs, thrusting forward, were halted too abruptly.
He was now able to pick out the choral call of the hydraulics, whose oil
coursed through thousands of ducts and cylinders, setting up a steady
beat of pistons that bent and extended each limb as the tank-clad feet
walked the concrete. He could even hear the delicate whine of the
gyroscopes that autonomously assisted him in maintaining balance. When
he tried a sharper turn, the massive structure that he occupied proved
to be not so maneuverable, and although the engines obediently roared
full-force, the giant began to sway—but did not go out of control,
because Parvis instantly eased up, increasing the radius of the curve.

Then he began to play with lifting the multiton boulders that lay beyond
the edge of the concrete field. Sparks flew and there was a shrill
grating sound when the pincers grasped and bit into the stone. Before an
hour went by, he felt sure of his Digla. He had achieved, again, the
familiar state that veterans called "fusion of man and strider." The
boundary between himself and the machine had disappeared; its movements
were now his movements. To complete his preparation, he climbed quite
high up a debris-covered slope, and had become so proficient that he
could tell, from the rumble of the rocks as they began to slip from
under his crushing feet, exactly how much he could demand of his
colossus. Already he was fond of it.

It was only when he went back down to the hazily lit lines of the
landing field that his satisfaction with himself got punctured by the
needle-reminder of the excursion before him—and the knowledge that Pirx
and two other people, encased in the very same giants, had become
trapped in the Depression of Titan. Whether it was for additional
practice or to say good-bye, he could not say, but he circled the ship
in which he had landed, then held a brief conversation with Goss. The
chief was now standing beside London, behind the glass of the tower.
Parvis saw them, heard from them that there was still no news about the
missing men. Leaving, he lifted high an iron hand. Someone might have
thought the gesture melodramatic or even clownish, but he preferred it
to any words. He did a steady about-face, put a holographic of the
terrain to be crossed on the single, ceiling-high monitor, switched on
the azimuth finder and the projection of the path to Grail, and set out,
a twelve-meter step at a time.

There were two kinds of landscape characteristic of the inner planets of
the Sun: the purposeful and the desolate. Purpose informed every scene
on Earth, the planet that produced life, because every detail there had
its "benefit," its teleology. True, it did not always—but billions of
years of organic labor had accomplished much: thus flowers possessed
color for the purpose of attracting insects, and clouds existed for the
purpose of dropping rain on pastures and forests. Every form and thing
was explained by some benefit, whereas what was clearly devoid of any
benefit, like the icebergs of Antarctica or the mountain chains,
constituted an enclave of desolation, an exception to the rule, a wild
though possibly attractive waste. But even this was not certain, because
man—undertaking the deflection of the course of rivers to irrigate areas
of drought, or warming the polar regions—paid for the improvement of
some territories with the abandonment of others, thereby upsetting the
climatic equilibrium of the biosphere, which had been adjusted so
painstakingly (though with seeming indifference) by the efforts of
natural evolution. It was not that the ocean depths served the creatures
there with darkness, to protect them from attack—a darkness they could
light, as they needed, with luminescence—but vice versa: the darkness
gave rise precisely to those that were pressure-resistant and could
illuminate themselves.

On planets overgrown with life it was only in the depths, in caves and
grottoes, that the creative power of nature could timidly express
itself, a power that, not harnessed to any adaptational requirement, or
hemmed in, in the struggle for survival, by the competition of its own
results, could create—over billions of years, with infinite patience, in
droplets of hardening salt solutions—phantasmagoric forests of
stalactites and stalagmites. But on such globes this was a deviation
from the planetary labors, a deviation locked away in vaults of rock and
therefore unable to reveal its vigor. Hence the impression that such
places were not usual in nature but, rather, spawning grounds for
monstrosities only on the fringe of things. Infrequent exceptions to the
statistical rule of chaos.

In turn, on globes parched like Mars or, like Mercury, immersed in a
violent solar wind, the surfaces, due to that rarefied but incessant
exhalation from the mother star, were lifeless wastes, since all raised
forms were eroded by the fiery heat and reduced to dust that filled the
crater basins. It was only in places where eternal, still death reigned,
where neither the sieves nor the mills of natural selection were at
work, shaping every creature to fit the rigors of survival, that an
amazing realm opened up—of compositions of matter that did not imitate
anything, that were not controlled by anything, and that went beyond the
framework of the human imagination.

For this reason, the fantastic landscapes of Titan were a shock to the
first explorers. People equated order with life, and chaos with a dreary
inanimateness. One had to stand on the outer planets—on Titan, the
greatest of their moons—to appreciate the full error of this
dichotomy-dogma. The strange formations of Titan, whether relatively
safe or treacherous, were ordinary rubble heaps of chaos when viewed
from a distance and a height. But they did not appear so when one set
foot on the soil of this moon. The intense cold of this whole sector of
space, in which the Sun shone but gave no heat, proved to be not a
throttle but a spur to the creativity of matter. The cold, indeed,
slowed the creativity, but in that very slowing gave it an opportunity
to display its talent, providing a dimension that was indispensable to a
nature untouched by life and unwarmed by sun: time—time on a scale where
one million centuries, or two million, was of no significance.

The raw materials here were the same chemical elements as on Earth. But
on Earth they had entered the servitude, so to speak, of biological
evolution and only in _that_ context amazed man with subtlety—the
subtlety of the complex bondings that combined to form organisms and the
interdependent hierarchies of species. It was therefore thought that
high complexity was a property not of all matter but only of living
matter, and that chaos in the inorganic state produced nothing more than
haphazard volcanic spasms, lava flows, rains of sulfurous ash.

The Roembden Crater had cracked, once, at the northeast on its large
circle. Then a glacier of frozen gas crept through the gap. In the
following millennia, the glacier retreated, leaving on that furrowed
terrain mineral deposits—the delight and vexation of the
crystallographers and other, no less dumbfounded scientists. It was
indeed a sight to see. The pilot (now operator of a strider) faced a
sloping plain ringed by distant mountains and strewn with... with what,
exactly? It was as if the gates of unearthly museums had been flung open
and the remains of decrepit monsters had been dumped in a cascade of
bones. Or were these the aborted, insane blueprints for monsters, each
one more fantastic than the last? The shattered fragments of creatures
that only some accident had kept from participating in the cycles of
life? He saw enormous ribs, or they could have been the skeletons of
spiders whose tibiae eagerly gripped blood-speckled, bulbous eggs;
mandibles that clung to each other with crystal fangs; the platelike
vertebrae of spinal columns, as if spilled out in coin rolls from the
bodies of prehistoric reptiles after their decay.

This eerie scene was best viewed, in all its wealth, from the height of
the Digla. The area near Roembden was called, by the people there, the
Cemetery—and in fact the landscape seemed a battlefield of ancient
struggles, a burial ground that was an exuberant tangle of rotting
skeletons. Parvis saw the smooth surfaces of joints that could have
emerged from the carcass of some mountainous monstrosity. One could even
make out on them the reddish, bloodclotted places where the tendons had
been attached. Nearby were draped skin coverings, with bits of hair that
the wind gently combed and lay in changing waves. Through the mist
loomed more many-storied arthropods, gnawing through one another even in
death. From faceted, mirrorlike blocks thrusted antlers, also gleaming,
among a spill of femurs and skulls of a dirty-white color. He saw this,
realizing that the images that arose in his brain, the macabre
associations, were only an illusion, a trick of the eyes shocked by the
strangeness. If he dug methodically in his memory, he would probably
remember which compounds yielded—in a billion-year chemistry—precisely
these forms that, stained with hematites, impersonated bloody bones, or
that went beyond the modest accomplishments of terrestrial asbestos to
create an iridescent fluff as of the most delicate fleece. But such
sober analysis would have no effect on what the eyes saw.

For the very reason that here nothing served a purpose—not ever, not to
anyone—and that here no guillotine of evolution was in play, amputating
from every genotype whatever did not contribute to survival, nature,
constrained neither by the life she bore nor by the death she inflicted,
could achieve liberation, displaying a prodigality characteristic of
herself, a limitless wastefulness, a brute magnificence that was
useless, an eternal power of creation without a goal, without a need,
without a meaning. This truth, gradually penetrating the observer, was
more unsettling than the impression that he was witness to a cosmic
mimicry of death, or that these were in fact the mortal remains of
unknown beings that lay beneath the stormy horizon. So one had to turn
upside down one's natural way of thinking, which was capable of going
only in one direction: these shapes were similar to bones, ribs, skulls,
and fangs not because they had once served life—they never had—but only
because the skeletons of terrestrial vertebrates, and their fur, and the
chitinous armor of the insects, and the shells of the mollusks all
possessed the same architectonics, the same symmetry and grace, since
Nature could produce this just as well where neither life nor life's
purposefulness had ever existed, or ever would.

Fallen into such philosophical reverie, the young pilot gave a start,
remembering how he had come here, and his vehicle, and his mission.
Obediently, the iron strider magnified that waver and jerk a
thousandfold, bringing him back to reality with the howl of its drive
transmission and the trembling of its entire mass. The pilot blushed.
Collecting himself, he moved on. At first he was reluctant to set his
feet, which landed like steam hammers, on the pseudo-skeletons, but
sidestepping them proved as futile as it was troublesome. Therefore he
hesitated only on occasion, when his way was blocked by a particularly
remarkable structure, and even then he walked around it only if plowing
through the high heap and crushing it presented any difficulty to his
servant-giant. Also, from up close the impression that he was tramping
through endless bones—smashing craniums, branched phalanges of wings,
zygomatic arches that had separated from the frontals, plus various
horns—dwindled to nothing. Sometimes it was as if he were walking on the
remains of organic machines—hybrid beings, half-animal, arisen from the
union of the living and the nonliving, of reason and unreason—and
sometimes it was as if he were bringing his iridium boots down on
weirdly spreading gems, precious and impure, partially clouded due to
interpenetrations and metamorphoses. Because from his height he had to
watch constantly where and at what angle he was placing the towerlike
legs, and because this march of the first stage was taking more than an
hour—it was necessary to go slow—he laughed at the mighty efforts made
by the artists of Earth to reach beyond the boundary of human
imagination (which must visualize everything); at how the poor devils
beat against the walls in their minds; and at how little, really, they
departed from platitude, though straining to the utmost to depart—while
here, in a single acre, there was more proud originality than in a
hundred of their anxious, anguished art shows.

There being no stimulus to which a man did not soon become accustomed,
before long he was marching through the cemeteries of chalcocites,
spinels, amethysts, plagioclases—or, rather, their distant,
nonterrestrial relatives—as if this were ordinary rock debris underfoot.
In an instant he shattered a branch that had taken millions of years to
crystallize into unique, unrepeatable forkings, not wanting to but
forced to reduce it to powdered glass. Although from time to time he
regretted the loss of the more splendid of these works of eons, they
crowded each other so much, eclipsed each other in such extreme
profusion, that finally only one thing impressed him.

Namely, the extent to which this region seemed to him—and not to him
alone!—a dream, a kingdom of phantoms, and of a beauty afflicted by
madness. This was a realm—he said to himself, almost aloud—where nature
slept, incarnating her magnificent grimness, her unfettered nightmares,
directly somehow, without the mediation of any Psyche, into the solid
hardness of material forms. Just as in a dream, whatever he saw was both
totally alien and extremely familiar, reminding him continually of
something that in the next minute would always elude him, and he would
remain with a senselessness that concealed some subtle deceit—because
here things seemed definite-defined only in their ancient origins; they
could never complete themselves, never achieve full realization, never
decide on a conclusion, on a destiny.

Thus he mused, dazed by both the surroundings and his own reflections,
since he was not in the habit of philosophizing. He had the risen sun
behind him now, so his shadow preceded him, and it was strange to see,
in the movements of that long, sharp-cornered, forward-rushing
silhouette, its machine nature and his own, human, nature combined. The
shape was that of a headless robot swaying, as it went, like a boat, but
it had at the same time movements peculiar only to him, displaying them
as if with a perverse ostentation since they were magnified,
exaggerated. True, he had noticed this before, but the nearly two-hour
march in this enchanted place somehow charged or sharpened the
imagination. And it did not bother him when, turning more to the west
from Roembden, he lost radio contact with the Roembdenites. He would be
emerging from the radio shadow at mile thirty—not that far ahead—but for
now he wanted to be by himself, free of the stock questions and the
reports in reply.

On the horizon there were dark shapes, he could not tell whether of
clouds or mountains. Angus Parvis, on his way to Grail, not once in the
whole rambling sequence of his ruminations connected his name with
Parsifal. It was always difficult for a man to step out of his mental
identity—it was like jumping out of one's skin—let alone into mythology.
His attention wandered from the immediate surroundings of his route,
particularly as the scenery of counterfeit death, the anatomical theater
of planetary minerals, was thinning out. He passed places that gleamed
with such deception, as if arranged mysteriously for his eyes alone—he
passed them now with true indifference. (From the moment he made his
decision, he refused to think about what had prompted that decision.
This was not a problem for him. As an astronaut, alone for long periods,
he had learned how not to argue with himself.) He marched on in the
swaying Digla: the colossus had to tilt from side to side, but he was
well acquainted with that. The tachometer indicated about thirty miles
an hour.

The grisly reptilian-amphibian dances of death gave way to gentle folds
of rock covered with a volcanic tuff finer and lighter than sand. Though
he could accelerate, he knew that the sensations experienced at full
speed were hard to take for long, and he had a march of several hours
ahead of him, in much more difficult terrain, before he reached the
Depression. The flat, toothed contours on the horizon no longer looked
like clouds. As he walked toward them, his shadow swept before him,
misshapen. Because of the strider's great mass, the legs were only a
third the length of the trunk. Pressed to increase its speed, it had to
lengthen its steps, throwing each limb forward in turn with the hip. The
hip could move because the circular mounting of the legs (more
precisely, their undercarriage) was an enormous bearing plate into which
the trunk fitted. The problem was that to the lateral tilting was then
added the up-and-down motion of the giant, making the landscape reel
before the operator like a drunkard. Such heavy machines were not built
for running. Even a jump from a height of two meters was unwise on
Titan. On lesser spheres, and on the Earth's Moon, there was more
freedom of movement. But the constructors had not concerned themselves
about the speed of these machines, whose walking was not to serve as a
means of transportation but, rather, to perform heavy tasks. The ability
to cover a distance was a plus, making the industrious colossi more
self-sufficient.

For an hour or more, it seemed to Parvis alternately that 1) any second
he would become stuck in a chaos of rock, and that 2) the azimuth line
had been drawn by a genius, because each time Parvis approached a pile
of rubble—slabs of stone balanced so precariously that it looked as if
the least breeze would start a thundering avalanche—at the last moment
there would always be a convenient way through, so he never needed to
circle around or backtrack out of cul-de-sacs. Before long, he concluded
that on Titan the best operator would be cross-eyed, since one had to
watch the terrain in front of the machine, from a height, and at the
same time the glowing directional indicator, which quivered like the
needle of an ordinary compass on a semi-transparent map. Somehow he
managed, doing not badly at all, relying on his eyes and on the needle.
Cut off from the world by the roar of the power units and the overall
rumble of resonance in the frame, he still could see Titan through the
nonreflecting glass of his compartment. No matter where he turned his
head—and he did so whenever more level terrain permitted—he saw, above a
sea of mist, mountain ridges split by volcanoes that had been dead for
centuries. Proceeding along the ragged ice, he noticed, sunken deep
within it, the shadows of volcanic bombs and darker, unidentifiable
shapes—as of starfish or octopuses set like insects in amber.

Then the land changed. It was still forbidding, but in a different way.
The planet had gone through a period of bombardments and eruptions,
sending blind bursts of lava and basalt skyward, to freeze in wild,
alien immobility. He entered these volcanic defiles. The overhangs
farther on were unbelievable. The nonliving dynamism of these seismic
congealings—inexpressible in the language of beings raised on a tamer
planet—was accentuated by a gravitation no greater than that of Mars. To
a man lost in this labyrinth, his striding vehicle ceased to seem a
giant. It dwindled, insignificant among the crags of lava, which once,
in kilometer-long cascades of fire, had been transfixed by the cosmic
cold. The cold cut short their flow, and before they froze, falling in
the precipices, it drew them out into gigantic, vertical
icicles—monstrous colonnades—a sight that was one of a kind. It made of
the Digla a microscopic bug that inched past towering pillars—pillars of
a building abandoned, after construction as careless as it was mighty,
by the true giants of the planet. Or: a thick syrup flowing from the lip
of some vessel and hardening into stalactites—as witnessed by an ant
from its crack in the floor. The scale, however, was more awesome than
that. It was in this wilderness, in this order-disorder so foreign to
the human eye, bearing no similarity to any mountains on Earth, that the
cruel beauty of the place showed itself, of a waste vomited from the
planet's depths and turned, beneath a remote sun, from fire to stone.
Remote—because the sun here was no flaming disk as on the Moon or Earth;
it was a coldly glowing nail hammered into a dun sky, giving little
light and even less heat. Outside, it was 90 below, the temperature of
an exceptionally mild summer for this year. At the mouth of the gorge
Parvis observed a glow in the sky. The glow rose higher and higher until
it took up a quarter of the firmament. He did not realize at first that
this was neither dawn nor the illumination of a selector, but the mother
and ruler of Titan, great-ringed, yellow as honey: Saturn.

A sharp lurch, the reeling of the cabin, the sudden bellow of the
engines—countered more swiftly by the reflex of the gyroscopes than by
his maneuver—reminded him that now was not the time for astronomical or
philosophical contemplation. Humbly he returned his eyes to the ground.
Curiously, it was only then that he became aware of the ludicrousness of
his movements. Hanging in the harness, he trod the air like a child
playing on a swing, yet felt each thunderous step. The gorge grew steep.
Although he shortened his stride, the engine room filled with the howl
of the turbines. He found himself in deep shadow before he had time to
switch on the headlights, and in the next second was walking into a
bulge of rock larger than the Digla. The tendency of his pendular,
driven mass—obeying Newton's first law—to continue its straight
trajectory, when he forced it to turn, threw the engines into overload.
All the dials, until now a peaceful green, flared purple. The turbines
bellowed with despair, giving everything they had. The rpm indicator for
the main gyroscope began to flash, which meant that the fuse was
overheating. The cabin dipped, as if the Digla would fall any moment.
Parvis broke into a cold sweat. To destroy, in such an insanely stupid
way, the machine entrusted to him! But only the left elbow scraped the
rock, with a grating sound as of a ship pushed up onto a reef. Smoke,
dust, a shaft of sparks sprayed from under the steel, and the giant,
shaking, regained its balance.

The pilot pulled himself together. He was glad that in the gorge he had
lost radio contact with Goss: the automatic transmitter would have put
this little incident on the monitor. Emerging from the shadow, he
doubled his vigilance. He still felt shame, because it was an elementary
thing, as old as the world. Any engineer knew from long experience,
without thinking, that to start a locomotive by itself and to start it
when it pulled a string of cars were two entirely different matters. So
he advanced as if on inspection, and the colossus was again wonderfully
obedient. Through the glass he saw how a small motion of his hand
instantly became the sweep of a mighty tongs-shaped paw, and when he
extended a leg, a tower moved forward, its knee shield gleaming.

He was now fifty-eight miles from the spaceport. Going by the map, by
the satellite photographs that he had studied the previous evening, and
by the diorama, which had a scale of 1:800, he knew that the way to
Grail basically was divided into three parts. The first comprised the
so-called Cemetery and the volcanic gorge he had just left. The second
he could now see: a gap in the massif of frozen lava made with a series
of detonated thermonuclear charges. This massif, the greatest of the
flows from the Orlandian volcano, could not have been dealt with in any
other way, on account of the bulwark steepness of its slopes. The
nuclear blasts had chewed through the formation that blocked passage,
had cut it in two, as a heated knife bisects a lump of butter. The pass,
on the cabin's diagram of Titan, was circled with exclamation points, a
reminder that here under no circumstance should one leave one's vehicle.

The residual radiation from the thermonuclears was still unsafe for a
man outside the armor of his strider. Between the exit and entrance to
the defile lay a mile-long plain, black, as if blanketed with soot. On
it, he could hear Goss again. Parvis said nothing about his collision
with the rock. Goss told him that after the defile, at the Promontory,
the halfway point, Grail would take over on the radio to guide him.
There, also, would begin the third, final stretch of the trail, through
the Depression.

The black powder filling the plain between the two bulges of the
formation covered the legs of the Digla above its knees. Parvis walked
through the low puffs quickly and easily, toward the nearly
perpendicular walls of the corridor. He reached a wall, stepping on
rubble that was vitreous: smooth surfaces fractured by the solar heat of
the explosions. These pieces, hard as diamonds, made sounds like gunfire
when ground beneath the iridium heels of the Digla. But the bottom of
the defile was as flat as a table. He walked between the blackened
walls, in the rumbling echo of steps, steps that were his own: he had
joined with the machine, it was his magnified body. Then he found
himself in darkness so sudden, so thick, that he had to turn on the
headlights. Their mercury glare contended, in the swirl of shadows
between the pillar-jaws of rock, with the cold, reddish, unfriendly
light of the sky framed by the far gate of the defile, which became
larger the closer he drew to it. Toward the end the defile narrowed, as
if it would not let his giant pass, as if he would be wedging the square
shoulders in a chimneylike cleft. But this was an illusion—on either
side there was clearance of several meters. Nevertheless, he slowed,
because Pollux swayed more from side to side the faster it went. There
was no help for this. The duck waddle when hurrying arose from the laws
of dynamics, from angular momentum, and the engineers were unable to
overcome it completely. For the last three hundred meters he again
ascended, more and more steeply, planting the feet with care, leaning
forward a little from his high, suspended place to see what he was
stepping on. This close examination took so much of his attention that
it was only when the light surrounding him on all sides filled the cabin
that he lifted his head and saw the next—altogether different—unearthly
landscape.

The Promontory stood above a white and ruddy ocean of fleecy clouds;
solitary, black, slender, it was the only thing in the sky from horizon
to horizon. Parvis understood why some called it God's Finger. Slowly he
came to a halt and, with the magnificent scene spread out before him,
tried—over the soft singing of the turbines—to catch the voice of Grail.
But he heard nothing. He tried to raise Goss, but Goss did not respond,
either. Parvis was still in radio shadow. Then a curious thing happened.
Before, radio contact with the spaceport was somehow irritating to him,
unpleasant, perhaps because he felt, not in Goss's words so much as in
the man's voice, a concealed anxiety, a disbelief almost, that Parvis
would make it, and in that anxiety there was an element of pity, which
Parvis couldn't stand. But now that he was truly alone, with neither a
human voice nor the automatic pulse of the radio beacon from Grail to
guide him in this endless white waste, he felt not relief at being free
but the uneasiness of a man who, in a palace full of marvels, though he
has not the least desire to leave, sees the main door—before, open and
inviting—now close behind him. He scolded himself for this unproductive
frame of mind, akin to fear, and began to walk down to the surface of
the sea of cloud, along a gradual incline—icy in places—directly toward
the Promontory. Black, reaching the sky, it was bent, like a finger
beckoning.

Once, twice, the sole-plate of the strider slipped with a dull grinding
sound, sending great numbers of stones rolling down, knocked from their
ice settings, but these slips did not threaten a fall. Parvis merely
changed his gait so as to fix each step into the frozen snow crust,
using the spikes of his heels, which made him proceed more slowly than
before. He descended a bulging slope between two gullies, stamping with
stubborn exaggeration, until arcing sprays of ice rattled on his shin
guards and knee shields. He strained his eyes to see into the valley,
whose bottom now appeared through gaps in the mist, and the lower he
went, the more the black finger of the Promontory towered over him,
rising above the distant, milky clouds. In this way he reached the level
of the fluffy fog that floated evenly and slowly as over unseen water;
it flowed around his thighs, his hips; one puff of cloud enwrapped him
and the cabin, but vanished as if blown away. For a few moments yet the
Black Finger loomed above the feathery whiteness—like a club of rock
jutting out of an arctic sea, unmoved amid the foam and floes. But then
it disappeared, as from the view of a diver submerging.

He stopped, listened; he thought that he could hear an intermittent
thin, high tone. Turning the Digla now to the left, now to the right, he
waited for the plaintive note, quite clear, to sound in both ears
equally. This was not Grail itself but the directional radio beacon of
the Promontory. He was supposed to head straight for it, and if he
deviated from that path, the intermittent signal would split in two,
depending on the deviation: going too far to the right, in the perilous
direction of the Depression, he would hear in his right ear a warning
squeal; and if he strayed the opposite way, toward the impassable, sheer
walls, the signal would sound in a less urgent but nevertheless
error-indicating bass, in the left ear. The odometer read a hundred
miles. The greater, mechanically more difficult part of the trail was
behind him. The more treacherous part lay before him, wrapped in depths
of mist. Massive clouds now darkened overhead; the visibility was to
several hundred meters; the aneroid barometer verified that the syncline
trough of the Depression began here—or, more precisely, its mercifully
solid rim. He walked, using his eyes as well as his ears, since the
region was brightened by snow—frozen carbon dioxide, of course, and the
anhydrides of other solidified gases.

Sometimes an erratic boulder protruded from their whiteness, the mark of
a glacier that had once come from the north, packed itself into the rift
of this volcanic massif, deepened it southward with its creeping body,
like a plow, and put into the ground ice great hunks of rock. Later,
retreating, or melting from the magma heat that came from deep within
Titan, the glacier spat out and left behind a moraine, scattered in a
disorderly retreat. The landscape reversed itself: as if laying out a
wintry day at the bottom and then covering it with a night of
impenetrable clouds. Parvis did not even have his own shadow now for a
companion. He stepped steadily, sinking into the snow his steel boots,
covered with the dust of tiny crystals, and in his wide-angle rearview
mirrors he could see his own tracks, tracks worthy of a tyrannosaur,
that greatest of the biped predators of the Mesozoic. Glancing back, he
checked that his trail was staying straight. For an indeterminate time,
however, he had an odd feeling, an impression that grew in strength but
which he dismissed as impossible: that he was not alone in the cabin,
that behind his back there was another man. The presence of the man was
given away by his breathing. Finally, the illusion made him so nervous
(he did not doubt that it was an illusion, caused, perhaps, by the
fatigue of listening to the same, monotonous radio signal) that he held
his breath. The other gave a long, unmistakable sigh. This could not be
an illusion. In his astonishment, Parvis tripped, making the colossus
stagger. He righted it in a blaze of indicators and a howl of turbines
and brought it gradually to a halt.

The other stopped breathing. Was it, then, after all, an echo from the
machine wells of the Digla? Standing still, he cast his eye around and
noticed, on the endless beds of snow, a black mark, an exclamation point
drawn in India ink on the white horizon, though the illumination did not
show whether the horizon was a bank of windblown drifts or a bank of
clouds. Even though he had never seen a strider from a mile away in such
a winter setting, the conviction seized him that this was Pirx. He
headed for him, not caring about the increasing division of the signal
in his earphones. He hurried. The black mark, moving along the same wall
of white, was a figure now, and it, too, swayed in walking quickly.
After about fifteen minutes its true proportions became evident. A half
a mile separated them, perhaps a little more. Why didn't Parvis speak,
call him on the transmitter? He didn't know why, but somehow didn't
dare. Looking hard, he observed in the small glass window—the heart of
the colossus—an extremely tiny man who, suspended, moved like a puppet
on strings. Parvis kept after him, and both left long plumes of powder
behind them, like ships in a channel pulling foaming furrows after
themselves. Parvis rushed to overtake him, at the same time noting what
was happening ahead of them—and something was indeed happening, because
in the distance a thick white blizzard fluttered and rippled. Its
curving arcs shone brighter than the snow. This was the region of the
cold geysers. Parvis then called out, once, twice, three times, but the
one he chased, instead of answering, increased the pace, as if to flee
his rescuer; so Parvis did the same, rushing, with more and more
swinging of the trunk and waving of the powerful arms, toward the
nearing peril. The speedometer pointed, quivering, at the red limit:
forty-eight miles an hour. Parvis yelled, his voice hoarse, but the yell
died on his lips, because suddenly the black figure widened, swelled,
lengthened, and its contours lost their sharpness. It was not a man in a
Digla that he saw now, but a large shadow diffusing into an amorphous
blotch. And then it was gone.

He was alone. He had been chasing himself. Not a common phenomenon, but
known even on Earth. The Brocken Specter in the Alps, for example. One's
own reflection, enlarged, against bright clouds. Not he—it was his body,
shocked by the discovery, full of bitter disappointment, its muscles
tight, breathless in a rush of rage and despair—it was his body that
wanted to stop immediately, that instant, and then in the roar that
burst from the bowels of the colossus he was pitched forward. The dials
flared like severed veins spurting blood; the Digla shook like a vessel
striking its hull against an underwater barrier. The trunk tilted with
the momentum, and if Parvis had not supported it, had not pulled it out
of its forward plunge with a series of gradually braking steps, it
definitely would have crashed to the ground. The choral protest from the
abruptly overburdened units quieted. Feeling tears of disappointment and
anger running down his flushed face, he stood on spread legs, panting,
as if he had run the last kilometers himself. He calmed down. With the
soft inner lining of his glove he dabbed the sweat that hung on his
eyebrows, and saw the giant paw of the strider, magnifying this
involuntary gesture, lift, block the window of the cabin with the whole
width of the forearm, and with a thud hit the radiator that was secured
atop the headless shoulders. He had forgotten to disconnect the right
Hand from the amplifier circuit! This additional stupidity sobered him
completely. He turned to retrace his steps, because the tones of the
directional signals were now totally out of key. He would have to return
to the trail, then stay on it as long as possible, and in the event of
zero visibility due to a blizzard from the geyser region—he remembered
its appearance during the chase—make use of the radiator. He came to the
place where the fata morgana, with its trick mirror of clouds and gases,
had disoriented him completely. Or possibly he had gone soft in the head
sooner, when he suffered not the optical but the acoustical illusion and
stopped comparing the route indicated by the beacon with the terrain map
in his cabin.

In the place to which his own phantom had led him, not that far from the
designated path—nine miles in all, according to the odometer—there were
no geysers shown on the map. Their border ran farther north, judging by
the last survey made. On the basis of flight reports and the radar
pictures taken via the patsat, Marlin had ordered that the route from
Roembden to Grail be changed to a roundabout southern course, so that it
would run—inconveniently but safely—through a shallow of the Depression
which had never yet been inundated though it was covered with snow from
the geysers. The bed of this shallow might at worst become obstructed
with drifts of dioxide snow, but a Digla had sufficient power to wade
through drifts five meters deep; and if it got stuck, it could radio and
Grail would send unmanned bulldozers, redirected from the mines. The
problem was that no one knew exactly where the three striders vanished.
On the old trail, abandoned after previous disasters, the Depression had
permitted uninterrupted radio contact, but shortwave signals didn't
reach the southern syncline directly, and one couldn't use reflection,
since Titan possessed no ionosphere. It was necessary to employ relay
satellites, but for a week now Saturn had interfered, drowning out with
the tail of its stormy magnetosphere all emissions except lasers.
Grail's lasers, indeed, could penetrate the cloud layers and thus reach
the patsats. The patsats, however, not equipped with wave transformers
over such a wide range, were unable to convert light impulses into
radio. True, they could collimate the received flashes and send them
into the Depression, but that would be futile. In order to penetrate the
geyser storms it would be necessary to beam with an energy that would
melt the satellite mirrors. Put into orbit when Grail was still in the
setting-up stage, the mirrors had undergone slow corrosion; clouding,
they absorbed too much radiant energy, not reflecting it with 99-percent
efficiency.

Into this concatenation of oversight, poorly conceived economizing
measures, haste, shipping delays, and ordinary foul-ups—typical of
people everywhere and therefore in space as well—went one unfortunate
strider after the other. The solid ground of the southern shallow was
supposed to have been a last resort. How solid it actually was, Parvis
would soon find out. He had counted on coming across the trail of his
predecessors, but quickly gave up that hope. He followed the azimuth,
trusting it, because the terrain rose and led him away from the
blizzard. To the left he saw slopes of old magma, topped with clouds and
swept clear of snow. He traversed these with caution. He walked through
a quarry, across ice-filled gullies, but the ice contained bubbles of
unfrozen gas. When once or twice the iron foot broke through the ice
crust and sank into an empty space, the noise of the engines ceased and
his ears were filled with a rattling and snapping so loud, it was like
being aboard an icebreaker battering its way through polar ridges.
Carefully, each time, he inspected the foot pulled from the hole before
moving on. He labored in this way until the radio dialogue, keeping the
same tone and pitch, began to stammer. The right gave a strangled
whistle, and the left dropped to a bass. Parvis turned until the notes
were equal. Then before him opened a wide passageway between high stacks
of ice slabs, except that it wasn't ice, he knew, but congealed
hydrocarbons. Down dry, coarse-grained scree he stepped, braking as much
as possible to contain the pull of the seventeen-hundred-ton strider on
the incline. Volcanic walls among clouds opened into a view of a valley,
where instead of firm ground he saw Birnam Wood.

Thousands of chasms, at least, spewed from narrow outlets, throwing into
the poisonous atmosphere streams of ammonium salts. Ammonium radicals,
kept in their free state by the tremendous pressure of the rocks, shot
up into the dark sky, boiling, and turned it into churning chaos. He
knew that this was not supposed to extend here; the experts said that it
couldn't happen—but he was not thinking about the experts. He either had
to return to Roembden at once or stay with the guiding song—an innocent
song, though as false now as the sirens of Ulysses. Dirty-yellow clouds
moved slowly and heavily over the whole Depression, to fall in strange,
sticky, ropy snow that stiffened to form Birnam Wood. The name had been
given it because it traveled.

It was not a wood, of course, and only from a great distance did it
resemble a forest buried in snow. The furious play of chemical radicals,
continually fed with new material because the different groups of
geysers erupted each with its own incessant rhythm, created a crusty
porcelain jungle that attained heights of a quarter of a mile; the weak
gravitation assisted its growth, so that there were treelike formations
and thickets of glassy white laid upon each other in successive layers,
until finally the bottom could no longer support the endlessly climbing
mass of lacy branchings and collapsed with a slow, grating clatter, like
a planetary china shop leveled in an earthquake. Someone, in fact, had
casually dubbed these cave-ins of Birnam Wood "china quakes," a stunning
spectacle harmless only when viewed from the safety of a helicopter.

From close up, this forest of Titan looked like a transitory
construction, a thing of lace and white foam, and it seemed, therefore,
that not only a strider but even a man in a spacesuit could push his way
through its frozen embroidery. But it was not that easy to penetrate the
hardened froth lighter than pumice, a stuff between a snowy grease
inflated as it froze and a lace spun from the thinnest china fibers. One
could make slow progress, however, because the enormous bulk was
actually a solidified cloud formed of spiderweb capillaries in every
shade of white, from pearly opalescent to dazzling milky. It was
possible to walk into the forest, yet one never knew when the section
one was in would reach the limit of its strength and crumble, burying
the traveler beneath a several-hundred-meter layer of pulverized enamel,
which was light as fluff only in a small spray.

Even before, when he had got off the track, the forest, hidden then by
the dark spur of the mountainside, had indicated its presence by the
white glow from that direction, as if the sun were about to rise there.
The glow was exactly like the spreading brightness in the clouds of the
northern seas on Earth, when a ship, sailing clear water, approached a
field of ice.

Parvis headed for the forest. The impression that he was standing on a
ship—or that he himself was the ship—was strengthened by the rhythmic
rocking of the giant that bore him. As he descended the steep slope, he
ran his eye along the horizon, a bright line in the distance. The
forest, seen from above, seemed a cloud flattened on the ground, a cloud
whose entire surface unaccountably swelled and crawled. He walked,
swaying, and the cloud before him grew like the headland of a
continental glacier. Now he could make out long, twisted spits emerging
from it, avalanches of snow moving in weird slow motion. When no more
than a few hundred feet separated him from the snowy billows, he began
to make out openings in them like the mouths of caves, with some
smaller, like burrow holes. They gaped dark in the gleaming tangle of
fluffy limbs and antler-branches made of semiopaque, off-white glass.
Then a sharp, brittle rubble began to crunch underneath his iron boots.
The doubled radio sound continued to assure him that he was going in the
right direction. So he went, hearing over the heightened drum of the
engines—which increased their RPM to overcome the growing resistance—the
harsh screech of the thicket broken by his knees and torso. His initial
nervousness now gone, he felt not a trace of fear. He felt despair,
understanding only too well that it would take a miracle for him to hit
upon any one of those lost. He would sooner find a needle—not in a
haystack, in a mountain of hay. There could not be any footprints in
this thicket; the continually shooting geysers replenished the cloud, so
that every breach and break in it grew over quickly like a healing
wound. He cursed the beauty surrounding him, possibly unique in all the
world. Whoever had named it, from _Macbeth,_ must have been an aesthetic
soul, but Parvis in his Digla was not interested in such associations
now. The Birnam Wood of Titan, for a combination of reasons known and
unknown, alternately retreated and advanced within the Depression,
across thousands, tens of thousands of its hectares. The geysers
themselves were not too dangerous, since one became aware of their
presence at a distance, before actually seeing the skyward-spouting,
vibrating columns of gases that were thickened from subterranean
pressure. Their roar alone, the terrifying thunder and whistling—as if
the planet itself, in labor, were howling out of pain or rage—set the
foundations in motion and with the might of a cyclone leveled all the
trembling, cracking, tinkling glass thicket in the vicinity. It would
take extraordinary bad luck to tumble into the vent of a geyser that was
momentarily dead, between eruptions. But it was easy to keep a safe
distance from those that announced their activity with a constant
whistle, rumble, and the quivering of the surrounding underbrush, a
white quivering that signaled doom. Unexpected explosions, however,
explosions not even that close, were what most often caused the gigantic
cave-ins.

Parvis practically pressed his face to the reinforced window and looked,
as he slowly, slowly placed footstep after footstep. He saw milk-white
trunks of thick streams frozen vertically, and how higher up they
branched into a flickering swirl, being dense and massive only at the
bottom. And above the icy jungle of the ground level there grew—in
successive, increasingly airy stories—skeletal, weblike structures:
cocoons, nests, club moss, euglenas, gills pulled from the bodies of
fish but still pulsing, because everything, in a constant drizzle, crept
and coiled. From clumps of snow there issued thin needle-shoots, which
joined into ganglia, sank, flowed, and again were covered over with a
freezing, glutinous milk that dripped-misted from unknown heights. No
word in any terrestrial language could do justice to that artistry in
the white, shadowless silence, the stillness beyond which one could hear
a very distant, barely awakening mutter, evidence of the underground
surge forced into the vents of the geysers.

Stopping to listen, to tell the direction of this voice of disaster, he
noticed that Birnam Wood had begun to absorb him into itself. It did not
approach him like the forest in _Macbeth,_ but came as if out of
nowhere. From the air, which was completely still here, appeared
microscopic flakes of snow. The snow did not fall; it formed on the dark
plates of the armor, on the welds of the shoulder shields. Already his
entire upper trunk was dusted with this snow, which lost its similarity
to snow because it did not descend compliantly on the metal surfaces of
the hull, did not collect loosely in its hollows, but adhered like a
white syrup, sprouted, sent out milky threads, and before Parvis
realized it, he had grown snowy fur all over. Thousands of fibers
extending and catching the light covered him and changed the hull of the
Digla into an enormous white doll, an eccentric snowman. Then he made a
small movement, a jerk, and frozen molds of his iron limbs, of his shin
guards, fell away in huge pieces. But when they hit, they became piles
of delicate slivers. Light from the shaky maze brought out
phantasmagoric shapes and dazzled the eye, but it did not illuminate the
ground. Only now did Parvis appreciate the advantage given him by the
radiator. Its invisible heat melted a tunnel in the thicket, which he
entered, hearing—now on the right, now on the left—echoes of streams of
gas coming from the locked bed of the cloud like cannon blasts. At one
point he passed the plume of a geyser, not far off, jerked by furious
spurts that whipped its perimeter. Suddenly the snow forest thinned out,
making a kind of clearing beneath an inflated bubble-dome of branches.
In the center lay a black giant, showing the bottoms of two iron feet,
together, and a torso turned on its side, resembling, in perspective, a
ship beached. The left arm, on top, went between white trunks, its hand
hidden in undergrowth; the right was pinned to the ground beneath the
body. The iron colossus lay twisted but not altogether conquered,
because except for the rime on its limbs it was free of snow. The air
wavered slightly over the bulge of the torso, heated by the warmth still
inside.

Parvis, transfixed before the twin strider, could not believe his eyes,
that the miracle had taken place, after all. Of meeting. He was about to
speak when two things simultaneously came to his attention. Under the
fallen Digla was a spreading puddle of yellowish oil—from broken
hydraulic lines, which meant at least a partial paralysis. Moreover, the
front window of the cabin, now so similar to the porthole of a ship,
gaped, broken, and only strips of insulation hung from the frame. The
opening, completely dark, gave off vapor, as though the giant, in its
throes, had not quite parted with its last breath. The pilot's triumph,
joy, thankful amazement turned to horror. He knew, even before he bent
carefully, slowly, over the wreck, that it was empty. His searchlight
played across the interior: the wires hanging helter-skelter, the
metallic skin draped over them. Unable to bend more, he peered with
difficulty into the corners of the abandoned cabin, in the hope that the
one shipwrecked, departing in his spacesuit, had left some message, some
sign. But all Parvis found was an overturned toolbox and wrenches that
had spilled from it. For a while he tried to guess what had happened.
The Digla could have been knocked down by a cave-in, and the operator,
when his efforts to lift the machine out of the crushing rubble failed,
could have disconnected the system of cutoffs limiting the power
allowable. The lines might then have burst from the excessive oil
pressure. The cabin window he had not broken himself; he could have got
out by the thigh exit or through the escape hatch on the back. The glass
had probably shattered in the cave-in, when the strider fell. Originally
lying flat, the strider had turned on its side in its struggle against
the mass that bore down on it. The poisonous atmosphere entering the
cabin would have killed the man more quickly than the cold. So the
cave-in had not caught him unprepared. When the vaulted thicket began to
press on the machine from above, the operator, seeing that it would not
stop, managed to get into his spacesuit. Thus he gave up control of the
Digla, first having to remove the electronic skin. His Digla possessed
no high-temperature radiator, so he did the only thing that made sense,
which spoke well for him. He took tools, crawled into the engine room,
and, discovering that he would not be able to fix the hydraulics since
too many of the pipes were cracked and the leakage also was too great,
disconnected the whole transmission from the reactor and turned the
reactor up all the way. The strider, he knew, was lost, but the heat
from the nuclear pile, although it would burn through the power
plant—or, rather, precisely for that reason—would be emitted through the
red-hot hull and thereby melt the mountain of debris. Which created this
domed cavern, the glassy walls bearing witness to the temperature
produced by the wreck. Parvis tested his reconstruction of events,
holding a Geiger close to the back of the hulk. Immediately the Geiger
chattered. The pile had melted under its own heat and cooled, but the
outer hull remained hot and radioactive. The operator left his vehicle,
then, through the broken window, dropped the useless tools, and went
into the forest on foot. Parvis looked for prints in the spilled oil.
Finding none, he circled the metal corpse, looking for openings in the
wall of the gleaming cave large enough to let a man pass. There were
none. Parvis could not calculate in his head how much time might have
elapsed since the disaster. Two people disappeared in the forest three
days ago, and Pirx twenty to thirty hours later. The difference in time
was too small to provide any basis for determining whether the wreck
belonged to one of the operators from Grail or to Pirx. He stood—alive
in iron over the lifeless iron—and coldly deliberated what to do next.
In some recess of this melted bubble there had to be a passage used by
the operator, but it had sealed over after he left. The porcelain seam
should be very thin. From the Digla, Parvis would not see it. He turned
off the Digla, changed as quickly as he could into his spacesuit, ran
clanking down the stairs to the thigh hatch, slid down the ladder onto
the foot, and jumped to the glassy ground.

The melted-out cave immediately seemed much larger to him. Or, rather,
it was as if he had suddenly shrunk. He walked around it: almost six
hundred steps. He brought his helmet near the more transparent places
and tapped. Unfortunately, there were many of them. Using a hammer taken
from the control room, he tapped on a hollow between two truly oaklike
columns. It shattered like glass, and at the same time pieces of the
dome began to rain on him. The rubble trickled, then there was a
cracking, and a real burst of hail—small chunks, bits of glass—came down
on him. He realized then that this was pointless. He would not find any
trail of the man—and was in something of a tight spot, himself. The
breach through which he had entered this melted cave had already been
closed with white icicles, icicles already like stout pillars of
salt—but not earthly salt, because it grew in interwoven strands each
thicker than an arm. Nothing could be done. Nor was there time to think
carefully, because the dome was sinking, was now almost touching the
radiator on the shoulders of his strider, as if the strider were an
Atlas bearing the entire weight of the upward-congealed jets of the
geysers.

He did not remember how he got back in the cabin, which tilted slightly
now, as the trunk was pushed millimeter by millimeter, or how he pulled
on the electronic suit. For a moment he considered whether or not to
turn on the radiator. Every action here contained unforeseeable risk.
The remelted ceiling could just as easily collapse as yield. He found a
little space, several steps, around the black wreck, which he could use
to build momentum, and with full force rammed the frozen-over breach—not
in shameful retreat, but to get out of this tomb of glass. And then he
would see.

The engine room resounded with the turbines. The drip-formed, swollen
white of the wall cracked, struck by two steel hands; the dark cracks
spread starlike upward and to the sides, and simultaneously thunder
roared from every direction.

What happened, happened too quickly for him to follow it. He felt a blow
from above, so tremendous that the giant encompassing him gave a single
bass groan, reeled, went flying through the broken breach as through a
sheet of paper, and crashed—under an avalanche of chunks, shards, and
dust—with such violence into the ground that in spite of all the
suspension shock absorbers Parvis felt his innards driven straight into
his throat. At the same time, the final stage of the collapse was
uncannily slow: the debris, filling up the way that he had come, drew
nearer, visible in the window, as if he had not fallen at all but the
snowy, smooth surface, bombarded by a hail of rubble, had reared up
vertically before him. From the many-storied heights the hail struck the
whiteness that was wrapped in clouds of swirling dust, and then through
all the girders of the hull—the howling engines, their mountings, the
plates of armor—there sounded, claiming him, a final thunderclap.

He lay sightless. The window had not been broken but was buried in a
heap of debris, whose real mass he felt on himself, on the back of the
Digla. The turbines howled not under him now, but behind him, idling,
because at the height of the strain they had thrown themselves into
neutral. Against the coal-black window all the indicators glowed. The
ones on the right slowly paled, grayed, went to willow-green, but those
on the left winked out, one after another, like cooling embers. He lay
in a wreck that was paralyzed on the left side. To movements of his left
arm and leg there was no response. Only the outline of the right half of
the strider shone. Inhaling spasmodically, he smelled hot oil in the
air: it had happened. Could he at least crawl with the half-paralyzed
Digla? He tried. At first the turbines obediently sang in unison, but
then the warnings again flared in purple. The cave-in had thrown him not
completely forward but port side first, and when he fell that side took
the brunt of the impact. Breathing deeply, with deliberate slowness, he
turned on the interior light and checked the strider's damage
interoceptor: to learn the position of the limbs and trunk, disregarding
the drive units. In cold outline the picture showed immediately. The
steel legs were caught together; they were crossed. The left knee joint
was snapped. The left foot lay behind the right, but he could not move
the right, either. Projecting structures must have caught each other,
and the force of the cave-in did the rest. The smell of hot hydraulic
fluid, obtrusive now, irritated his nostrils, burned them. One more time
he struggled, switching the whole system of oil lines to a much weaker,
backup circuit. In vain? Something warm and slippery was flowing softly
across his feet, shins, thighs. In the white light of the fluorescent
lamp above his head, as he lay on the window, he saw the oil leaking
into the cabin. There was no alternative. He opened the zipper, slipped
out of the electronic tights, kneeled naked to open the locker in the
wall that was now the ceiling, and grunted when the spacesuit fell on
him. The oxygen cylinders struck him in the chest, and the helmet, like
a white sphere, rolled into a pool of oil. His clothes were soaked with
the hydraulic fluid. Without hesitation, naked, in the calm, artificial
light, he climbed into the suit, wiped the base of the helmet because
it, too, had oil on it, put it on, closed the fasteners, and on all
fours crawled down the well, now horizontal like a tunnel, to the thigh
hatch.

Neither the regular door nor the emergency door could be opened. It is
not known how long he sat afterward in the cabin before he removed his
helmet and, lying down on the oil-smeared window, raised a hand to the
tiny red light, to break the plastic bubble-case and push with all his
strength into the unknown future, pressing the recessed button of the
vitrifax. Nor can it be known what he thought and what he felt,
preparing himself for an icy death.

II-The Council

 

Dr. Gerbert sat at a wide-open window. Stretched out comfortably, with a
fluffy blanket tucked around his legs, he was looking through a
folio-bound packet of tissue-culture photographs. Though it was bright
outside, the room was dim. The smoke-black ceiling, with crossed, thick,
resin-saturated beams, contributed to the dimness. The floor was
parqueted with squares of wood, and the walls were made of rough-hewn
logs. Through the windows one could see the forested slopes of the Cloud
Hunter; farther on, the massif that was Cracatalq, and the sheer cliff
of the highest of all the peaks, which resembled a buffalo with a broken
horn, the formation that the Indians had called, for centuries, the
Heaven Stone. Above the valley, which was gray with boulders, rose vast
mountainsides, gleaming with ice in the shadows. Through the northern
pass showed the azure of the plains. In that tremendous distance the sky
contained a thin wisp of smoke—the sign of an active volcano.

Dr. Gerbert compared the different plates and on some of them made marks
with a ball-point pen. Not the slightest sound reached him. The candle
flames stood motionless in the cold air. Their light grotesquely
lengthened the contours of the furniture that was carved in the ancient
Indian fashion. The large armchair in the shape of a human jaw threw its
macabre shadow across the ceiling, toothed arms ending in curved
canines. Over the fireplace grinned eyeless masks made of wood, and the
little table near Dr. Gerbert stood upon a coiled snake whose head
rested on the carpet, eye sockets glittering. Semiprecious stones shone
red in them.

There was the sound of a distant bell. Dr. Gerbert put aside the films
that he was studying and got up. The room changed in the blink of an
eye. It became a large dining room. The table in the center was not
covered by a cloth; the silver, and the jasper-green of the dishes,
gleamed on black planks. Through the open door rolled a wheelchair. In
it sat a corpulent man with a fleshy face and a nose so small it was
practically lost between his cheeks. He wore a leather tunic. He nodded
amiably at Dr. Gerbert, who took a seat at the table. At the same time,
a woman entered, thin as a rail; she had black hair with a strip of gray
down the middle. Opposite Dr. Gerbert appeared a heavy, short gentleman
with an apoplectic face. When the servant, in cherry-red livery, had
served the first course, a gray man with a cleft chin entered like
someone late. Stopping at the massive stone fireplace between the
sideboards, he warmed his hands over the fire before taking a seat in
the place indicated by the host in the wheelchair.

"Your brother isn't back yet from his trip?" asked the gaunt woman.

"No doubt he's sitting on the Tooth of Mazumac and looking in our
direction," replied the host, who had moved into the gap left for him
between the chairs.

He ate quickly, with appetite. Aside from this exchange, the dinner
passed in silence. When the servant had filled the last mugs of coffee,
whose aroma mingled with the sweetish smoke of the cigars, the gaunt
woman again spoke:

"Mr. Vanteneda, you must continue for us today the story about the Eye
of Mazumac."

"Yes, yes," everyone urged.

Mondian Vanteneda complacently folded his fingers on his large belly.
Then he shot a look around the table, as if closing the circle of his
listeners. A dying log crackled in the fireplace. Someone put down his
fork. A spoon clattered, and everything was still.

"But where did I leave off?"

"Don Esteban and Don Guillermo, learning of the legend of Cratapulq,
departed for the mountains, to reach the Valley of the Seven Red
Lakes..."

"All throughout their journey," Mr. Vanteneda began, making himself
comfortable in his wheelchair, "the two Spaniards met no man or beast.
Only now and then they heard the cries of coasting eagles, and
occasionally a vulture flew overhead. After much exertion they gained
the ridge of the Dead Hand. They saw then, before them, a high arête,
like the back of a rearing horse, the misshapen head hanging into space.
The crest, sharp like a horse's neck, was covered with mist. Then Don
Esteban remembered the peculiar words of the old Indian from the
lowlands: Beware the mane of the Black Stallion. The two debated whether
or not to push on. Don Guillermo, as you recall, had a sketch of the
mountain chain tattooed on his forearm. Their supplies had run out,
though they had traveled only six days. So they ate what remained of the
salted, dried rope-meat and quenched their thirst at the spring that
bubbled beneath the Severed Head. But they could not get their bearings
in this region; the tattooed map was incomplete. Toward sunset, the mist
began to rise like a swelling sea. They proceeded up, ascending the back
of the Horse, but although they hurried until the blood rang in their
ears and they were fighting for breath like expiring animals, the mist
moved more quickly and caught them on the very neck of the Horse. In the
place where its white shroud enveloped them, the ridge had narrowed to
no wider than the handle of a machete. Thus, unable to walk, they sat
astride the ridge exactly as one sits upon a horse. Surrounded on all
sides by the impenetrable, damp white, they continued forward until
darkness fell. When they had no more strength, the ridge came to an end.
They did not know whether this was the sheer drop of a precipice or the
way down to the Valley of the Seven Red Lakes, of which the old Indian
had told them. So they sat the entire night, supporting each other by
leaning back to back, warming themselves with their own body heat, and
resisting the night wind that whistled across the ridge like a knife
whetted on a stone. If they dozed off they might fall into the abyss, so
they did not close their eyes for seven hours. Then the sun rose and
dispersed the vapors. They saw that the rock beneath their feet fell
away, as perpendicular as if they had been sitting atop a wall. Before
them gaped an eight-foot breach. The mist tore into shreds against the
neck of the Horse. They recognized then, in the distance, the dark Head
of Mazumac, and saw columns of red smoke, mingled with white clouds,
rushing upward. Bloodying their hands, they scrambled down a narrow
ravine and reached the topmost pothole of the Valley of the Seven Red
Lakes. Here, however, Don Guillermo's strength completely failed him.
Don Esteban went first onto the ledge that hung over the abyss and led
his comrade by the hand. They proceeded until they came upon a pile of
stones where they could rest. The sun was high, and the Head of Mazumac
began to spit bits of rock at them, chips from the overhangs. So they
fled down. When the Horse's Head above them had grown as small as a
child's fist, they saw the first Red Spring in a cloud of ruddy foam.
Then Don Esteban took from his breast pocket a bundle of thongs tanned
the color of acanthus wood, the fringes of which, painted red, were
twisted into numerous knots. He ran his fingers over these, reading the
Indian writing, until finally he guessed the correct way.

"Before them opened the Valley of Silence. They crossed it on enormous
boulders. The crevices between the boulders were bottomless.

" 'Are we near?' asked Don Guillermo in a whisper, for his throat was
parched.

"Don Esteban made a sign for silence. At one point Don Guillermo
stumbled and kicked a small stone, which set others in motion. In
response to this sound, the vertical walls of the Valley of Silence
began to smoke; a silver cloud covered them, and a thousand clubs of
limestone hurtled down. Don Esteban, who just then was passing beneath
an arched structure, pulled his friend into that shelter as the crushing
avalanche reached them and rushed past like a storm. In a minute, all
was silent again. Don Guillermo's head was bleeding from a flying chip
of rock. His comrade took off his shirt, tore it into strips, and bound
the wound. At last, when the valley became so narrow that the sky above
them was no wider than a river, they saw a stream that flowed over rocks
without the least sound. Its water, bright as a polished diamond, fell
into an underground channel.

"Now they had to wade knee-deep into the swift, icy current. It undercut
their legs with cruel force. Soon, however, the water turned to the
side, and they stood on dry yellow sand in front of a cavern with many
windows.

"Don Guillermo bent over, weak, and noticed how curiously the sand
gleamed. The handful that he raised to his eyes was uncommonly heavy. He
brought it to his mouth and chewed the stuff that filled his palm. He
realized that it was gold.

"Don Esteban remembered the words of the Indian and looked about the
grotto. In one corner blazed an upright, frozen, completely motionless
flame. This was a block of crystal polished by the water, and above it
was an opening in the rock. The sky shone through.

"He approached the translucent block and looked into its depths. In
shape it resembled a huge coffin driven into the ground. At first he saw
within it only millions of glimmering lights, a bewildering whirl of
silver. Then it seemed that everything around him grew dark, and he
beheld great sheets of birch bark parting. When these vanished, he saw
that at the very center of the block of ice someone was watching him. It
was a copper face full of sharp wrinkles, the eyes narrow like blades.
The more it watched, the more evil grew its smile. Cursing, he struck
the rock with his dagger, but the point glanced off harmlessly. At the
same time, the copper face and its twisted smile disappeared. Because
Don Guillermo seemed feverish, his comrade kept the secret of the vision
to himself. They moved on. The grotto spread into a network of
corridors. They took the widest, after lighting the torches they had
brought. At one point a side corridor opened like a black well in the
gallery floor. Air hot as fire blew from it. They had to jump across.
Farther on, the passageway constricted its throat. For a while they went
on all fours, then came to a place so narrow that they had to crawl.
Then suddenly the passage widened. They could kneel. When the last torch
burned low, the ground began to grate underfoot. By the torch's small
remaining light they saw that they knelt on gravel made of pure gold.
Still they were not satisfied. Having found the Mouth of Mazumac and its
Eye, they wished to see also its Gut. Suddenly Don Esteban whispered to
his comrade that he saw something.

"Don Guillermo peered over Don Esteban's shoulder in vain.

" 'What do you see?' he asked.

"The end of the smoldering brand was already burning Don Esteban's
fingers. He stood. The walls were gone; there was only a great darkness,
in which the torchlight made a reddish grotto. Don Guillermo saw his
friend step forward, and the flame wavered, casting enormous shadows.

"Then from the darkness came a giant spectral face suspended in the air,
its eyes directed downward. Don Esteban cried out. It was a terrible
cry, but Don Guillermo understood the words. His comrade invoked Jesus
and His Mother, and men like Don Esteban used such words only when face
to face with death. As the scream resounded, Don Guillermo covered his
face with his hands. Then there was thunder, fire engulfed him, and he
lost consciousness."

Mondian Vanteneda leaned back and gazed silently at his guests. He was
dark against the background of the window. The sky, cut by the sawtooth
silhouette of the mountains, turned purple in the gathering dusk.

"In the Araquerita, upstream, Indians hunting stags fished out a white
man who had around his shoulders an air-filled buffalo skin. The back
was cut open and the ribs broken and spread out like wings. The Indians,
fearing the troops of Cortes, tried to burn the body, but the cavalry of
Ponteron (called the One-eyed) chanced to stop at their settlement. The
corpse was taken to the camp and Don Guillermo was recognized. Don
Esteban never returned."

"But, then, how is this whole story known?"

The voice was discordant, jarring. The servant entered with a
candelabrum. The light of its flickering flames revealed the face of the
questioner, lemon-colored, with bloodless lips. Mr. Vanteneda smiled
politely.

"I gave you, at the beginning, the tale of the old Indian. He said that
Mazumac saw everything with his Eye. The Indian expressed himself
somewhat mythologically, perhaps, but in essence he was right. This was
the beginning of the sixteenth century, and few Europeans knew about the
possibility of amplifying the power of sight through lenses. Two giant
mountain crystals—whether created by the forces of nature or fashioned
by the hand of man, it is not known—were situated in the Head of Mazumac
and in the grotto of the Gut in such a way that, looking into one of
them, one saw everything near the other. An unusual periscope, made by
two shining prisms separated by a distance of thirty kilometers. The
Indian who stood at the summit of the Head saw both trespassers
sacrilegiously enter the Gut of Mazumac. And possibly he not only saw
but was able to effect their destruction."

Mr. Vanteneda made a quick movement with his hand. On the table, into
the circle of orange light, fell a bundle of thongs tied into a thick
knot at one end. The faded hide was marked with deep incisions. The
thing rustled as it fell, it was so old and dry.

"So there was someone," concluded Mr. Vanteneda, "who observed the
expedition and left an account of it."

"Then you know the way to the cave of gold?"

Mr. Vanteneda's smile grew more and more wooden, as if, along with the
vanishing peaks in the window, it was receding into the silent, icy,
mountain night.

"This house stands at the very entrance to the Mouth of Mazumac. When a
word was spoken in the Mouth, the Valley of Silence repeated it with
mighty thunder. It was a natural, stone loudspeaker, a thousand times
more powerful than an electric one."

"How...?"

"Ages ago, lightning struck a flat, smooth slab and melted it into a
mass of quartz. The Valley of Silence is the same valley that our
windows overlook. Don Esteban and Don Guillermo came from the direction
of the Gate of Winds... but the Red Springs have long since dried up,
and a voice will not bring down stones. Apparently, the valley was a
resonator and certain frequencies of sound loosened the limestone
pinnacles. The cave was closed by an earth tremor. There was a hanging
rock there, which like a wedge held apart two walls of stone. The tremor
knocked it from its place, and the walls closed forever. As to what
occurred afterward, when the Spaniards attempted to force their way
through the pass, and who set off the avalanche of stones on the column
of Cortes' foot soldiers—we do not know. And I do not think that we ever
will."

"But my dear Mr. Vanteneda, walls of rock can be blown up, penetrated
with machines, and water can be pumped out of caves, no?" said the squat
gentleman at the end of the table. He lit a thin cigar with a straw.

"You think so?"

Mr. Vanteneda did not hide his irony.

"There is no force that can open the Mouth of Mazumac if He does not
wish it," he said, pushing himself suddenly away from the table. A gust
extinguished two candles. The others burned with a blue flame, and
flakes of ash fluttered above them like small moths.

He thrust his hairy hand before their faces, grabbed the bundle of
thongs from the table, and spun his wheelchair around with such force
that the rubber of the tires squealed. The guests rose and began to
leave. Dr. Gerbert sat bemused, staring at the dancing flame of a
candle. From the open window came an ice-cold current of air. He
shuddered—chilled—and turned to look at the servant, who was carrying in
and setting down an armful of heavy logs in front of the burnt-blue
grate of the fireplace. Skillfully the servant scattered the embers, and
was building over them an ingenious roof of firewood when someone opened
another door and touched the wall. The whole interior again was
transformed in an instant. The fireplace of rough stones, the servant at
the hearth, the chairs with sculptured armrests, the candlesticks,
candles, windows, and the mountain night beyond them all vanished in an
even, diffused light. The wide table with the place settings also
vanished, and in a white, small room under an oval, concave, smooth
ceiling only Dr. Gerbert remained, in a single chair, before a square
surface that held his plate and a half-eaten joint of meat. This was all
that survived of the table.

"Amusing yourself? Now? With old cock-and-bull stories?" asked the
newcomer, who, switching off the scene, with some difficulty removed the
inflated, transparent wrap that covered his fluffy jump suit buttoned to
the neck. Finally he tore the wrap, with difficulty pulled it down off
his boots that shone like metal, threw it away crumpled, and ran a thumb
down his chest, at which the suit opened wide. He was younger than
Gerbert, shorter, his bare neck muscular above the collarless shirt.

"It's only one. We agreed to meet at two—and the histology I know by
heart—"

Dr. Gerbert lifted the packet as if a little embarrassed. The other man
unfastened the thick tops of his boots, shuffled over to the metal
molding strip that ran along the wall, and rapidly—as if dealing
cards—summoned up, in sequence, the holographic images of the dinner
party, running backward; of a plain with a group of steep limestone
pinnacles white in the moonlight, like the ghastly skeleton of a bat; of
a sunny jungle with the colorful fluttering of butterflies among lianas;
and finally of a sandy waste with high termite mounds. Each scene
appeared on all sides at once, surrounded them, and disappeared,
shifting into the next. Gerbert waited patiently for his colleague to
tire of this inspection. Amid the flickering play of light and color,
with the folder of tissue-culture photographs in his hand, he was now
far in his thoughts from the show—which he had used, perhaps, to take
his mind off what troubled him.

"Has any... change taken place?" he asked at last.

His younger colleague returned the room to its original austerity and,
growing serious, muttered, not that distinctly:

"No, nothing's different. It's just that Arago asked me if we would drop
in on him before the council."

Gerbert winced, as at an unpleasant surprise.

"And what did you say?"

"That we'd come. Why are you making a face? You don't like paying him a
visit?"

"I'm not thrilled. You couldn't refuse, that's clear. But even without
adding theology to this, we have a hell of a problem on our hands. What
does he want from us? Did he say anything?"

"Nothing. The man's decent, and wise, too. And discreet."

"Discreetly he'll tell us that we're cannibals."

"Nonsense. It's not as if we're on trial. We took them on board to
revive them. He knows that."

"And about the blood, too?"

"I have no idea. What's so awful about the blood? They've been doing
transfusions for hundreds of years."

"In his eyes, it won't be a transfusion but a profanation of mortal
remains—at the very least. Body snatching."

"Bodies that nothing can help now. Transplanting, too, is as old as the
hills. The religions—I'm no expert on the subject, but in any case _his_
church hasn't opposed it. Why these sudden pangs of conscience before a
priest, a monk? The Commander agrees, and the majority, if not everyone.
Arago doesn't even have a vote. He's with us as some kind of Vatican
observer or apostolic delegate. A passenger-spectator." "Fine, Victor.
But the slides were a nasty surprise. We shouldn't have taken the bodies
on board the _Eurydice._ I was against it. Why weren't they shipped to
Earth?"

"You know why—it worked out that way. Besides, as I pointed out, if
anyone had a right to our voyage, _they_ did."

"A lot of good it will do them, since at best we can restore only one—at
the cost of the others."

Victor Davis regarded Gerbert with large eyes. "What's eating you? Is
this our fault? The conditions on Titan wouldn't allow diagnoses. True
or false? Well? Speak. I'd like to know just who I'm going to that
Dominican with. Have you returned to the faith of your forefathers? In
the thing we have to do—what we have to request—you see something evil?
A sin?"

Dr. Gerbert, calm until now, fought down a burst of anger. "You know
perfectly well that I will request the same thing as you and the Head
Physician. You know my views. Resurrection is no evil. The evil lies in
the fact that out of two men fit for reanimation we can bring only one
back to life. And that no one will make the choice for us... But we're
wasting time. Let's go. I want to get this over with." "I have to
change. Will you wait?"

"No, I'll go myself. Come when you're ready. Which deck?" "The third, in
the middle section. I'll be there in five minutes." They left together
but got into different elevators. Gerbert touched the appropriate
numbers and sped off in an oval, silver interior. When the egg-shaped
vehicle came to a gentle stop, the curved wall opened in a spiral, like
a camera iris. Facing him, in light that had no source, ran rows of
concave doors with high thresholds, as on an old-fashioned ship. He
found the door with the number 84 and a small nameplate: "R. P. Arago,
D.A." While he was wondering—stupidly—what the "D.A." stood for (Doctor
Angelicus? District Attorney?), the door parted. He entered a spacious
cabin lined on all sides with glass-covered shelves of books. On two
opposite walls were paintings in bright frames, reaching from ceiling to
floor. On the right was Cranach's _Tree of Knowledge,_ with Adam, the
snake, and Eve; on the left, the _Temptation of Saint Anthony_ by Bosch.
Before he got a good look at the monsters floating in the sky of the
_Temptation,_ the Cranach was sucked in behind a bookcase, leaving an
opening in which Arago appeared, in a white frock. Before the painting
returned to its place as a door behind the Dominican, the physician got
a glimpse of a black cross on a field of white. They greeted each other
with a handshake and sat down at a low table piled chaotically with
papers, graphs, and a multitude of open volumes that had colored ribbon
bookmarks. Arago's face was lean, dusky, with gray, piercing eyes
beneath brows that were almost white. The frock seemed too big for him.
With the sinewy hands of a pianist he held an ordinary wooden yardstick.
Gerbert found himself running his eyes over the backs of the old books.
He did not want to be the first to speak.

The questions that he expected did not come.

"Dr. Gerbert, I am not your equal in knowledge. I can, however, converse
with you in the language of Aesculapius. I was a psychiatrist before I
chose this garb. The Head Physician made accessible to me the data
concerning the... procedure. It speaks for itself. Due to the
incompatibility of the blood groups, of the tissues, two people are at
stake, but only one can be awakened."

"Not awakened," Gerbert said, almost against his will—because the monk
had avoided the more direct words: "resurrected from the dead." The
Dominican caught this at once.

"Distinctions important to me, of course, you cannot take into account.
Any dispute on eschatology would be pointless. Someone like me, in my
position, would say that true death means disintegration when
irreversible changes have taken place in the body. And that we have
seven such on the ship. I know that their remains must be disturbed and
understand the necessity, though I am not permitted to sanction it. From
you, Doctor, and from your friend—who will be here any moment—I would
like an answer to one question only. You can refuse, of course."

"Go ahead," said Gerbert, feeling a shiver.

"You must have guessed. It concerns the criteria for the selection."

"Davis will say the same thing. We possess no objective criteria. And
you, too, having seen the data, know this... Father Arago."

"I do. The calculation of the chances is beyond human ability. The
medicoms, performing their x billion operations, give two out of the
nine men a ninety-nine-percent chance, with a deviation within the
bounds of theoretical error. For either alternative. There are no
objective criteria, and for that very reason I take the liberty of
asking you what yours will be."

"There are two matters before us," replied Gerbert with a kind of
relief. "As physicians, along with the Head Physician, we will be asking
the Commander for certain navigational changes. May we assume, Father,
that in this you will be on our side?"

"I cannot participate in the voting."

"True, but a position taken by you may have influence—"

"On what the council decides? But it has already decided. I cannot
imagine that there would be any opposition. The majority has declared
itself 'pro.' The Commander has the resolution in hand, and I would be
surprised if the doctors did not know what it was."

"We are asking for more changes than were first agreed upon. Ninety-nine
percent is not enough for us. Even the tenth decimal place is important.
The energy cost, along with the delay in the expedition, will be
enormous."

"This is news to me. And the second matter?"

"The selection of the corpse. We are at a complete loss as to
identities, since gross negligence—to which the radio technicians have
given the more elegant designation of 'communication-channel
overload'—has made it impossible for us to determine the names,
functions, or histories of these people. In reality, something more than
negligence was going on. When we took these containers on board, we were
not aware that the memory not only of the old units of that
mine—Grail—but of the digital machines at Roembden, too, had suffered
considerable destruction in the course of the dismantling operations.
The persons responsible for the fate of those that our Commander, with
our consent, took on board said that the facts could be obtained from
Earth. But it is not known who gave the orders for information storage,
or when, or to whom. It's evident that everyone, so to speak, washed his
hands."

"That happens whenever the jurisdictions of people overlap. Which is no
justification..."

The monk stopped, looked Gerbert in the eye, and said softly:

"You were opposed to having the victims on the ship?"

Gerbert nodded reluctantly.

"In the excitement before takeoff no single voice—let alone that of a
doctor, not an expert astronaut—could carry any weight. If I was opposed
and entertained certain fears, I am not any easier in my mind, now.

"But, then, what do you intend to go by? A flip of a coin?"

Gerbert stiffened.

"The choice will not depend on anyone but us. After the council, if our
requests are met in the purely technological area—of navigation—we will
conduct a new autopsy and go through the entire contents of the
vitrifaxes, down to the last hair."

"What influence on your choice of the one to be reanimated could his
identification have?"

"Probably none. It would not be, in any case, a quality, a factor, of
any significance in the domain of medicine."

"These people," the monk weighed his words carefully, speaking slowly,
as if venturing out on thinner and thinner ice, "perished in tragic
circumstances. Some while performing their ordinary duties, as employees
of the mines there, or of the companies. Others when attempting to
rescue the former. Would you accept such a distinction—if it could be
discovered—as a criterion?"

"No."

The answer was immediate and categorical.

The wall of books facing them parted, and Davis entered, with an apology
for being late.

The monk rose. So did Gerbert.

"I have learned everything that it was possible to learn," said Arago.
He stood taller than both physicians. Behind his back, Eve turned to
Adam, and the serpent crawled up the tree of Eden. "I thank you,
gentlemen. I have confirmed what I should have known anyway. Our fields
touch. We do not pass judgment on a man according to his virtues and
vices, just as you do not consider these when you save his life. I won't
detain you: it's time now. See you at the council."

They left. In a few words, Gerbert gave to Davis the gist of his
conversation with the apostolic observer. At a perfectly circular
intersection of corridors they got into an egg-shaped, dull-silver
vehicle. The appropriate well opened up and swallowed the wheelless car
with a long sigh. In the circular windows, lights from the passing decks
flashed by. Sitting opposite each other, they said nothing. Both,
without knowing why, were offended by the statement with which the monk
had summed up their meeting. The feeling, however, was too undefined to
merit examination—in the face of what awaited them.

 

The conference hall was located in the fifth section of the _Eurydice._
The ship, seen in flight from a distance, resembled a long, white grub
with spherically bulging segments—and it was a winged grub, since flat
fins protruded from its sides, ending in the hulls of the hydroturbines.
The head of the _Eurydice,_ flattened out, was encircled by a multitude
of antenna spines like feelers or stingers. The spherical sections,
joined by short cylinders having a diameter of thirty meters, were also
locked together and reinforced by a double inner keel whenever the
cosmic vessel accelerated, went full speed, or braked. The engines,
called hydroturbines, were actually thermonuclear reactors of the
flowstream type, and hydrogen in high vacuum served as their fuel.

This drive proved even better than the photon drive. The performance of
nuclear fuels at near-light speeds fell, because the lion's share of the
kinetic energy was expended in the propelling flame that beat uselessly
into space and only a small fraction of the liberated power was
transmitted to the rocket. A photon drive, also, required the ship to be
loaded with millions of tons of matter and antimatter as its
annihilative fuel. The flowstream engines, on the other hand, used
interstellar hydrogen. Hydrogen atoms, though ubiquitous, were so
dispersed in galactic space that the engines of this type began to work
effectively only at speeds above 30,000 kilometers a second, and reached
full capacity only when approaching the speed of light. A ship with such
a drive could therefore neither take off from a planet itself, being too
massive, nor by itself achieve the velocity at which the atoms falling
into the intakes of the reactors condensed sufficiently for ignition.
The gaping intake funnels then hurtled forward, so that even the
greatest cosmic vacuum, thus rammed, packed enough hydrogen into their
throats to kindle artificial spouts of sun in the firing chambers. The
efficiency factor increased, and the ship, not laden with its own supply
of fuel, could maintain a constant acceleration. After less than a year
of an acceleration corresponding to Earth's gravity, the ship attained
nearly 99 percent of the speed of light, and while minutes went by on
board, decades passed on Earth.

The _Eurydice_ had been built in orbit around Titan, for Titan was to
serve as her starting platform. Many trillions of tons of the mass of
that moon were converted, by conventional thermonuclear piles, into
energy for the transformers, and they in turn as laser throwers sent
columns of coherent light to the gigantic stern of the _Eurydice_—like
packing gunpowder into the bottom of a cannon beneath an artillery
shell. The moon first had to be stripped, by astroengineering, of its
thick atmosphere. Radiochemical plants and hydronuclear power stations
were built on the plateau of the equatorial continent, after all the
mountains were melted down by combined heat blasts from disposable
satellites. Their salvos turned the great formations into lava, and
cryo-ballistic bombs hastened the freezing, to make the red-hot, flowing
sea a hard, smooth plain: the artificial Mare Herculaneum. On the twelve
thousand square miles of that plain grew a forest of laser throwers, the
true Hercules of the expedition. At the critical hour it fired, to push
the _Eurydice_ from her stationary orbit. The long column of coherent
light drove the ship, hitting the mirrors at her stern, beyond the solar
system. As the driving beam weakened, the ship increasingly resorted to
her own boosters, jettisoning their burnt-out casings beyond Pluto. It
was only then that the wide-gaping hydros came into play.

Because they would be running throughout the journey, the ship
accelerated steadily, maintaining on board a pull equal to Earth's
gravitation. The pull acted only along the ship's longitudinal axis. For
this reason each spherical section of the _Eurydice_ was a separate
unit. Her decks went transversely in the hull, from side to side; up
meant toward the bow, and down was astern. When the whole vessel braked
or changed course, the vector of the force diverged from the axes of the
individual sections. Therefore, to avoid having ceilings turn into walls
and decks become upended, each segment of the hull contained within
itself a sphere capable of rotating inside the armored shell, much like
a ball-and-socket joint. The gyrostats saw to it that on the decks of
each sphere of the hull—there were eight in all, for living quarters—the
force of the thrust would always come vertically. Although during
maneuvers of this type the decks of the separate spheres diverged from
the main axis of the ship's keel, one could still pass from section to
section. There was a tunnel system of additional locks called "worms."
It was only in these flexible tunnels that one experienced a change or
lack of gravity, since the elevator ran through the cylinders between
the sections.

At the time of this general council, the first after takeoff, the
_Eurydice_ had almost a year of continuous acceleration before her, thus
there was nothing to interfere with her steady thrust.

The fifth section, called the Parliament, served for the meetings of the
entire crew. Beneath a curved ceiling lay an amphitheater, not too high,
a room surrounded by four tiers of seats that were divided at regular
intervals by ramps. By the only flat wall was a long table, actually a
line of connected consoles with screens. Behind this, facing the
assembly, sat the navigators and their subordinate specialists.

The uniqueness of the expedition called for the unusual makeup of the
command. Ter Horab was in charge of flight; the coordinator Yusupov,
power; the radiophysicist De Witt, communications; and at the head of
the corps of scientists, both of those needed in the journey itself and
those who would be going into action only at its destination, stood the
polystorian Jenkins.

When Gerbert and Davis entered the upper gallery, the deliberations had
already begun. Ter Horab was reading aloud the requests of the
physicians. No one turned to look at the latecomers. Only the Head
Physician, Vahradian, seated between the Commander and the coordinator,
indicated his reproof with a knitted brow. But they had not missed much.
In the silence the impassive voice of Ter Horab came from all sides.

"...they are asking for a reduction in thrust to one-tenth. They
consider this necessary for the reanimation of the remains that are in
cold storage. It means throttling the drive down to the lower limit. I
can do this. But then the whole flight program, with all its prepared
computations, will be canceled. It is possible to make a new program.
The old one was the product of five independent groups in the project on
Earth, to rule out the possibility of errors. Five is beyond our means.
We can make a new program with two teams—but it will not be as
dependable as the first. The risk is small but real. So I ask you: shall
we vote now on the physicians' request, without further discussion, or
instead put questions to them?"

The majority were in favor of discussion. Vahradian did not take the
floor himself, but called on Gerbert.

"Behind the words of our Commander lies a criticism," said Gerbert, not
rising from his place in the highest row of chairs. "The criticism is
directed at those who handed over to us, with no concern for their
condition, the bodies found on Titan. One could conduct an investigation
into this matter, to learn who the culprits were. Whether or not they
are among us, however, does not change the situation. The task facing us
is the complete resurrection of a man preserved little better than the
mummies of the pharaohs. Here I must go into the history of medicine.
Attempts at vitrifaction date back to the twentieth century. Doddering
old millionaires had themselves interred in liquid nitrogren, in the
hope that someday they would be restored to life. Complete nonsense:
heating a frozen corpse only serves to make it rot. Then scientists
learned how to freeze alive minute bits of tissue, egg cells, sperm, and
microorganisms. The larger the body, the more difficult its
vitrifaction. Vitrifaction involves the instantaneous congealing of all
the organism's fluids into ice—skipping the phase of crystallization,
since crystal formation causes irreversible damage to the subtle
structure of the cell. The body and brain must be turned to glass in a
split second. It is easy to heat an object to a high temperature in a
split second; to chill it that rapidly to nearly zero Kelvin is
incomparably more difficult. The bell vitrifaxes of the victims on Titan
were primitive and worked brutally. When we accepted the containers on
board, we were unaware of their make. That is why the condition of the
bodies was such a surprise."

"For whom, and why?" asked someone in the first row.

"For me as a psychonicist, for Davis, who is a somaticist, and of course
for our superior. Why? We received containers, having no specifications
or diagrams of the old vitrifaxes. We did not know that the bells with
their frozen occupants had been partly crushed by the glacier, or that
at the site they were placed into thermos cylinders with liquid helium
and immediately transported by shuttle to our ship. For the four hundred
hours after takeoff, while Hercules pushed us, we were under two g's; we
could not proceed with the examination of the containers until
afterward."

"That was three months ago, John," said the same voice.

"Yes. During that time we determined that we could not possibly bring
them all back to life. Three were ruled out at once: their brains had
been crushed. Of the rest we can reanimate only one, although in
principle two of the corpses are candidates for reanimation. The point
is that all these people had blood in their circulatory systems."

"Real blood?" asked someone from another place in the hall.

"Yes. Erythrocytes, plasma, and so on. We have the data on the blood in
our holofiles. We can't do transfusions without additional blood,
however, so erythroblasts were taken from the marrow and multiplied.
There is blood. But then we have the incompatibility of the tissues. Two
brains are candidates for reanimation. But there are only enough vital
organs for one person. Only one person can be put together, of these
two. Abominable, but true."

"A brain can be resurrected without a body," said someone.

"We have no intention of doing that," replied Gerbert. "We are not here
to run hideous experiments. At the present level of medicine they would
have to be hideous. But the issue is not merely medical. We intrude here
on navigational matters as doctors, not as astronauts. No layman can
tell us how to proceed. Therefore, I will not go into the details of the
operation. It is necessary to decalcify and metallize the skeleton. To
remove excess nitrogen from the tissues with helium. To cannibalize
bodies for one body. That's our area. I will explain to you only the
basis for our request. We must have as little gravitation as possible
during the reanimation of the brain. Complete weightlessness would be
best of all. We realize, however, that that is impossible without
shutting off the engines, which would totally ruin the flight program."

"Get to the point, John." The Head Physician did not hide his
impatience. "The Commander and the people here want to know the reason
behind your request."

He did not say _our_ request but your request. Gerbert, pretending not
to notice this slip of the tongue—but convinced that it was not
innocent—said calmly:

"The neurons in the human brain normally do not divide. They do not
divide because they constitute the material of personal identity, such
as memory, and other qualities that are commonly called character, soul,
and so on. In the brains of those vitrifacted in the primitive fashion
that we saw on Titan, losses occur. We are now able to cause the
neighboring neurons to divide, so that they fill the gaps, but in so
doing we destroy the individuality of those neurons. To preserve
personal identity, one must limit the number of divided neurons as much
as possible, because the daughter cells are like the neurons of an
infant—empty, new. Even at zero gravity there is no certainty whether
and to what extent the one resurrected will suffer amnesia. A portion of
the memory is irreversibly lost in vitrifaction, even in the best
cryostats, because the delicate contacts of the synapses sustain damage
on the molecular level. Therefore, we cannot claim that the one
resurrected will be exactly the man he was some hundred years ago. We
can only say that the weaker the gravitation during the reanimation of
the brain, the greater the chance will be to save the personality. I'm
finished."

Ter Horab glanced, as if casually, at the Head Physician, who seemed
absorbed in the papers before him.

"There's no need for a vote," Ter Horab said. "By the power vested in me
as Commander, I order the drive throttled at the time appointed by the
doctors and for the duration they require. Meeting adjourned."

A subdued murmur went through the auditorium. Ter Horab rose and touched
Yusupov's shoulder; both headed for the lower exit. Gerbert and Davis
practically ran from the gallery before anyone could approach them. In
the corridor they met the Dominican. He did not speak, only nodded, and
continued on his way.

"I didn't expect that of Vahradian," Davis exclaimed, getting into the
aft elevator with Gerbert. "The Commander, on the other hand—now,
there's a man in the right place. I could feel our colleagues from the
humanities, especially our 'psychonauts,' ready to jump us. He nipped
that in the bud..."

The elevator slowed; the passing lights flickered less frequently.

"Vahradian doesn't matter," muttered Gerbert. "If you must know, Arago
spoke with Ter Horab right before the council."

"Who told you that?"

"Yusupov. Arago was at Ter Horab's before we met with him."

"You think he—?"

"I don't think, I know. The priest helped us."

"But as a theologian..."

"I'm no authority on that. But _he_ knows both medicine and theology.
How he reconciles the one with the other is his affair. Come, let's
change. We have to get everything ready—and to set the hour."

Before the surgery, Dr. Gerbert read the record from the holofile one
more time. In the course of their work the massive planetary machines
had halted, because their sensors detected metal and, enclosed in the
metal, organic material. One by one, seven old striders were pulled from
the Birnam heap, and from those striders, six bodies. Two of the Diglas
lay no more than a few hundred meters apart. One was empty; the other
contained a man in a bell vitrifax. Compared to the eighth-generation
excavators gnawing through the glacier, the Digla was a dwarf. The
command center stopped the robot giants and sent out walking drill
towers with highly sensitive bioreaders in search of other victims,
because the Birnam Depression had claimed nine men. Of the man who left
his Digla, no trace was found. The armor of the striders had been
crushed beneath accumulating piles of ice, but the vitrifaxes held up
amazingly well. The supervisors wanted to ship these immediately to
Earth for reanimation, but that meant subjecting the frozen bodies to
above-gravity force three times: at the takeoff of the small shuttle
from Titan, at the acceleration of the transport rocket on the
Titan-Earth line, and during the descent to Earth. X rays of the
containers revealed serious injuries in all the bodies, including
fractured skulls, so that such an involved move was considered too
risky. Someone then hit on the idea of conveying the vitrifaxes to the
_Eurydice,_ which had the latest reanimation equipment. Also, the
acceleration, when it departed, would have to be inconsequential,
considering the ship's tremendous rest mass.

There remained the question of the identification of the bodies, which
could not be done until the vitrifaxes were opened. Vahradian, the Head
Physician of the _Eurydice,_ made an agreement with SETI headquarters
that specific data and the names of those taken from the ice of Titan
would be transmitted to the ship by radio from Earth—because all disks
of computer memory, for computers long since dismantled, lay in the
archives of the Swiss center of SETI. Up until the moment of takeoff,
the communication channels were overcrowded; someone or something—man or
computer—assigned the incoming data a low degree of importance; and the
_Eurydice_ left the circumlunar orbit before the doctors became aware of
the lack of this information. Gerbert went to the Commander, but nothing
could be done; the ship was on its way, picking up speed, pushed by the
Herculean lasers like a missile.

In this initial phase, Titan took the full brunt of the recoil, and some
planetologists believed that it might split apart. Their fears did not
materialize, but the acceleration did not proceed as smoothly as the
planners expected. Hercules pressed the moon's crust deep into the
lithosphere, violent seismic waves set in motion the mountings of the
laser throwers, and although they withstood these earthquakes (Titan
quakes, rather) the solar column wavered and shook. It was necessary to
lower the power, wait out the diminishing tremors, and re-aim the
collimated lasers at the mirror-stern of the ship.

This created interference; unsent messages piled up. What was worse,
Titan, pushed two years earlier from the vicinity of Saturn and stopped
in its rotation so that Hercules, while relatively stationary, could
drive the _Eurydice_ outward with its light, began to undergo libration.
Many hundreds of thousands of old thermonuclear warheads, embedded as an
emergency reserve in the heavy moon, finally extinguished this movement
as well. It was not easy. As a result, the physicians could not commence
with the reanimation. The _Eurydice,_ hit-and-missed over a series of
weeks, received each return of the solar column to her stern as a blow
that spread throughout the ship.

The difficulties with the collimation of the beam, the seismic shocks of
Titan, the few boosters that failed to fire, all postponed the
operation. To many on board, the postponement was justified also by the
fact that the odds of returning the victims to life did not seem good.
With each day of now steady acceleration, communication with Earth
worsened, and, on top of that, priority was given to radiograms that
concerned the success of the expedition. At last the ship got from Earth
the names of the six frozen castaways, and their photographs and bios,
but that was insufficient to determine identity. With vitrification,
which took place explosively, the facial parts of the skull were
crushed. Secondary implosions inside the cryo-containers tore off the
clothing worn under the spacesuits, and its shreds were forced by the
oxygen from the bursting suits into the nitrogen coffins, where they
turned to ash.

There was talk, then, of acquiring fingerprints from Earth, and dental
records. But when these arrived, they only added to the confusion.
Because of the ancient rivalry between Grail and Roembden, the computer
logs there were in disorder, and no one knew whether a portion of the
memory disks had been destroyed or had ended up, perhaps, in some
archive outside Switzerland. The man who would be revived on the
_Eurydice_ bore one of six names: Ansel, Nawada, Pirx, Koehler, Parvis,
Illmensee. All that the doctors could hope for was that the survivor,
recovering from postreanimation amnesia, would recognize his own name on
the list—if he was unable to remember it himself. Vahradian and Davis
counted on that. But Gerbert, the psychonicist, had doubts. After
setting the time of the operation, therefore, he went to the Commander
to explain the problem. Ter Horab, always clearheaded and practical,
agreed that it would be worth reexamining the contents of the vitrifaxes
that had been emptied of their bodies.

"What you need are criminologists, forensic experts," he said. "Since I
don't have any on board, I can give you"—he hesitated—"Field and
LoBianco. Physicists," he added with a grin, "are also sleuths, in a
way."

 

So a blackened—as if charred—cryocontainer resembling a curved
sarcophagus was brought to the level of the main laboratory. Held by
massive pincers while wrenches were applied to the outer catches, it
opened slowly, lengthwise, with an awful grating sound. A black interior
showed beneath the half-open coffin lid. The spacesuit in the center was
sunken, unoccupied; its owner was floating in liquid helium, for week
now, along with the nitrogen block in which he had originally been
frozen. Field and LoBianco took out the spacesuit and carried it to a
low metal table. It had been examined before, at the time the body was
removed, but nothing was found then except frozen scraps of fabric and
some air-conditioning lines interwoven in a cable. Now they cut open the
frost-covered suit, from the ring onto which the helmet fastened and
down the torso and pneumatic legs to the large boots. They unhooked
winding, spiraling tubes from the scarecrow figure, along with the
broken oxygen hoses, and did a meticulous dissection: every shred went
under the microscope. Finally, LoBianco crawled into the cylindrical
cryocontainer with a hand-held light. To make his job easier, he had the
manipulator slice through the metal plate and spread the halves wide. He
searched here because the spacesuit had burst at the welds joining the
arm sleeves to the trunk—either when the Digla was subjected to the
growing weight of the collapsed Birnam glacier, or else from the
internal pressure during the explosive vitrifaction. If the man had had
with him any personal belongings, they could have been blown out through
the rent in the suit and fallen, with the streams of solidifying
nitrogen and human blood, into the container—at the instant its open
mouth was clamped shut by the helmet shot from above, a hood of special
steel that cut off the corpse in the spacesuit from the outside world.

To pull the hood from the container, hydraulic grippers had to be
employed, since the pincers of the manipulator proved too weak. The two
physicists and the doctor stepped back several paces from the platform,
because the operation was quite violent. Before the hood—looking like
the head of a giant artillery shell—jerked and began to move from the
upper part of the container, large splinters of metal went flying from
under the vanadium teeth. They waited. It was only when the coal-black
fragments stopped dribbling and the bell, torn from the cryocontainer,
opened emptily toward them, that Field lifted it high with the
four-levered manipulator and LoBianco again began to examine the
cylinder. Then everyone stopped. Coming apart completely along the
seams, the metal plates trembled and fell slowly to the platform, as if
in reenactment of an ancient death agony. The robot jaws carried the
heavy hood through the air to the other end of the room and set it down,
like half of an empty bomb, with such care that the thing came to rest
on the aluminum table without a sound.

LoBianco approached the split container. In the center were the dark
remnants of inside padding: shriveled layers, like burned dead leaves.

Field looked over LoBianco's shoulder. He was acquainted with the
history of vitrifaction. In the days of Grail and Roembden, explosive
charges had been used to drive the headpiece onto the container with the
man, in order that the freezing process take place as rapidly as
possible. The man first had to remove his helmet, though remaining in
his suit. To keep the blow from crushing his skull, the hood was padded
with pneumatically inflated cushions. Expanding, these shielded him. An
injection cone was rammed into his mouth; it forced in liquid nitrogen,
usually breaking the teeth and even the bones of the jaw. The idea was
to congeal the brain from all sides at once, and therefore from the base
as well, located just above the palate. The technology of the time was
unable to avoid such injuries.

Bit by bit, the physicists pulled away layers of the crumbling
shielding, and placed one beside the other until the instruments bared
the metal bottom of the cryocontainer. Among the crushed ashes they
found an object, also crushed, but preserving the form of a small
booklet, the corners burned as in a fire. The half-carbonized thing was
so fragile that it fell into dust wherever touched, so they placed it
under a glass cover; even a breath could damage it.

"Looks like a small carrying case. Possibly leather. A portfolio. People
kept them on their person. But the documents, as a rule, were cellulose,
paper."

"Or made of plastic polymers," Gerbert added to what LoBianco said.

"Not encouraging," replied the physicist. "Under such conditions,
cellulose holds up no better than the old plastics. How did it find its
way into the hood?"

"That's not hard to guess." Field crossed his arms. "When he closed the
circuits, the lower bell thrust up over the legs to the chest, and the
upper half, shot out at the same time, clapped onto the lower. The
charges were implosive, but obviously not the kind that would crush a
man. Nitrogen filled the spacesuit, so that it split under the arms, and
the air forced out stripped him naked. The blast of a shell has more
than once torn the clothes off a soldier near the target..."

"What do we do with this?"

Gerbert watched the physicists fill the space under the glass with a
liquid stiffener; then they took the resultant mold, in which the dark,
flat, tattered object was embedded like a bug in amber, and set about
analyzing it. They found chemicals that used to be employed to print
paper currency, and organic compounds common in animal skins tanned and
dyed, and small traces of silver. These were undoubtedly remnants of
photographs, because silver salts were used to make photographs.
Adjusting the scan beam, the physicists fixed the scrap taken from the
mold and finally acquired a kind of palimpsest: a scramble of letters
and small circles, possibly from an official document seal.

Chromatography separated the colors from the ink of the print, because
fortunately it possessed a mineral ingredient. The rest was done by the
filters of a microtomograph. The result was modest. If in fact they had
discovered a proof of identity, which seemed likely, the first name was
illegible and of the last name they could be certain only of the first
letter: "P." The word had from four to seven letters. By coincidence,
the names of the two people who were revivable began with "P."

They put on the screen the resograms of those at rest in the liquid
helium. This layered imaging technique, far more precise than
old-fashioned X-raying, allowed one to determine the age of the victim
to the decade, judging by the hardening in the articular cartilage and
in the blood vessels, since medicine, at the time these people lived,
had not yet learned how to halt the changes termed sclerosis.

The two candidates for reanimation were of similar build. They had the
same blood type. The calcification of the ribs and, minutely, in the
aorta indicated that they were both from thirty to forty years of age.
According to their biographies, which included medical histories,
neither had had an operation that left a scar on the body. The doctors
knew this but wanted to see what the physicists could tell them from the
nuclear magnetic resonance imaging. The physicists shook their heads:
the nuclei of the stable elements in the organism were as good as
eternal, but it was another story if there were isotopes in these
people's bodies. Which was in fact the case—producing another dead end.
Both men had at one time been irradiated with a dose on the order of one
to two hundred rems. Probably in the final hours of their lives.

To examine the internal organs of a man in various planes and sections
was an anonymous, abstract activity. The sight of naked corpses encased
in nitrogen ice under helium, however, especially with their faces
crushed, was such that Gerbert preferred to spare the physicists the
experience. (The eyeballs of both bodies were intact—a secret grief for
the doctors, this, because unquestionably the blindness of one would
have made the decision for them: namely, to revive the man whose vision
was unimpaired.) When the physicists left, Davis sat down on the
platform with the split-open cryocontainer and said nothing. Finally
Gerbert could stand the tension no longer. "Well then?" he asked. "Which
one?"

"We could get Vahradian's opinion..." Davis muttered uncertainly.

"Why? Très _faciunt collegium_?"

Davis got up, stabbed the keyboard, and the screen obediently displayed,
side by side, two rows of green numbers, and one number in red, on the
right, which blinked in warning. He switched off the unit, unable to
endure it, but again reached out to press a key. Gerbert put his arms
around him, restraining him. "Stop. That's useless." They looked at each
other.

"We might consult..." Davis began, but did not finish. "No. No one can
help us. Vahradian—" "I wasn't thinking of Vahradian."

"I know. I was going to say that, officially, Vahradian will make the
decision if we turn to him. He has to, as the Head Physician—but that's
a cowardly way out. Anyway, look how the man has made himself scarce.
Let's not prolong this. In an hour—in less than an hour, now—Yusupov
will throttle the drive."

He released Davis and threw the switches on the console to prepare the
reanimating room, saying:

"The dead do not exist. It is as if they had never been born. We are not
killing anyone. We are re-creating a single life. Look at it that way."

"Fine," replied Davis, his eyes glittering. "You're right. It's a good
deed. And you can have the honor of performing it. You choose."

The two white snakes that were coiled around the winged staff on the
wall above the control panel lit up: the room was ready.

"Very well," said Gerbert. "On one condition. That this remains between
us and no one ever learns about it. Especially _he._ You understand?"

"Yes."

"Think about it. After the operation, all the remains go overboard. And
I will erase all the data in the holofile. But you and I will know; we
will know because we cannot erase our own memory. Will you be able to
forget?"

"No."

"To be silent?"

"Yes."

"To everyone?"

"Yes."

"To the end?"

Davis hesitated.

"But... they all know, after all. You said yourself at the council that
we would choose either—"

"I had to. Vahradian knew the score. But after the data are destroyed we
will lie and tell everyone that this man was objectively preferable in a
way discovered by us only here and now."

Davis nodded.

"I agree."

"We'll write the protocol, sign it together, falsify two of the items.
You'll sign?"

"Yes, with you."

Gerbert opened the wall compartment. In it hung silvery suits with white
boots and face masks of glass. He took out his and began to put it on.
Davis did likewise. In the central rotunda of the room a door parted,
revealing the bright interior of an elevator. The door closed, the
elevator went down, and the empty room grew darker, but above the point
lights of the control panel glowed the snakes of Aesculapius.

III-The Survivor

 

He returned to consciousness blind and without a body. His first
thoughts were not formed of words; his feelings were confused,
inexpressible. He receded, disappeared somewhere, and returned. It was
only when he found his internal speech that he could put questions to
himself: What was I afraid of? What kind of darkness is this? What does
this mean? And when he made this step, he was able to think: What am I?
What is happening to me?

He tried to move, to locate his arms, legs, torso, knowing now that he
had a body, or at least that he should have one. But nothing responded,
nothing moved. He could not tell if his eyes were open. He felt no lids,
no blinking. He exerted all his strength to lift the lids, and perhaps
succeeded. But he saw nothing except the same darkness as before. These
attempts, requiring tremendous effort, again led him to the question:
What am I? I am a man.

This obvious answer was a revelation to him. Then, immediately, he knew
its obviousness and smiled at himself, because what kind of brilliant
discovery was that?

Words returned slowly, from where he did not know, and at first were
scattered and without pattern, as if he were pulling them up like fish
out of unknown depths. Am. I am. Where, I do not know. I cannot feel my
body. Why is that? Now he began to feel his face, the cheeks, possibly
the nose. He was even able to move the nostrils, though that took an
enormous exertion of will. He stared, moving the eyeballs, in all
directions, and concluded, because his ability to reason had returned:
Either I am blind or it is completely dark. The darkness brought to mind
night, and night a great space full of pure, cold air, and air suggested
breath. Am I breathing? he asked himself, and listened carefully to his
darkness, which was so like nothingness and yet so unlike it.

It seemed to him that he was breathing, but not in the usual way. The
belly, the ribs were motionless, held in incomprehensible suspension;
the air entered by itself and gently left. There was no other way he
could breathe.

He had a face now, lungs, nostrils, a mouth, eyes, though unseeing. He
decided to make a fist, remembering perfectly what hands were and how to
close them tight. Still he felt nothing, and fear returned, this time
rational, from logic: This is either paralysis or I have lost my arms
and possibly my legs. The conclusion seemed false—he had lungs, that was
certain, and yet no body. Into his darkness and fear intruded tones,
measured, distant, dull. Blood?

His heart? It was beating. Then he heard, like the first tidings from
the outside, the sounds of speech. His hearing opened suddenly, though
it was muffled. There were two people speaking—he distinguished two
voices—but he did not understand what they were saying. The language was
known to him; the words, however, were indistinct, like objects seen
through misted glass or a fog. As he focused his attention more, his
hearing sharpened, and—strangely—it was through his hearing that he
emerged from himself, finding himself in a space that had a bottom, top,
and sides. This meant gravity, he realized. Then he started to
concentrate completely on the hearing. The voices were masculine, one
higher and softer, the other low, a baritone, very close. Perhaps he
could speak himself, it he tried. But he wanted to listen first, not
only out of curiosity and hope, but also because it was a pleasurable
thing to hear so well and to comprehend more and more human speech.

"I'd keep him in the helium." This was the nearer voice, suggesting a
large, heavyset man, there was so much strength in it.

"I wouldn't," said the farther, younger voice.

"Why not? It does no harm."

"Look at his brain. No, not the _calcar avis._ The right temporal. The
Wernicke's center. You see? He's listening to us."

"The amplitude is small. I doubt that he understands."

"Both frontal lobes now. It's really up to norm."

"I see."

"Yesterday there was practically no alpha."

"He was hibernating. That's normal. But whether he understands or not,
there's still too much nitrogen. I'm adding helium." A long silence, and
soft steps.

"Wait—look—" That was the baritone. "He's awake... Well, then..." The
rest he did not hear. They whispered.

He regained his clarity of thought. Who was speaking? Doctors. Did I
have an accident? Where? Who am I? He thought more and more rapidly
while they whispered back and forth, raising their voices in their
excitement.

"Good, the frontals are perfect. But the thalamus, I don't know...
Switch it on lower down. Use Aesculapius here. No, better, the
medicom... Right. Adjust the picture. How's the medulla?"

"Almost at zero. Curious."

"Curious, rather, that it's not _on_ zero. Let's see the respiratory
center. Hmm..."

"Activate it?"

"No, for what? He'll start breathing on his own. It's surer that way.
However, above the optic chiasma here..." Something pinged.

"He can't see," said the younger voice with surprise. "The nine is
functional. We'll find out now if he can see anything..."

In the following stillness came metallic clangs. At the same time, the
dark gave way to a grayish, feeble glow.

"Aha!" said the baritone in triumph. "It was only on the synapses. The
pupils have been reacting for a week now. Anyway," he added more
quietly, "he won't be able to—" A whisper.

"Agnosia?"

"No. It would be a good thing if... Look at the higher components..."

"The memory is restoring itself?"

"I don't know. I can't say yes or no. And the blood picture?"

"Normal."

"The heart?"

"Forty-five."

"Pressure?"

"One-ten. Disconnect it?"

"Better not. Wait. A small impulse to the medulla..."

He felt something twitch in him.

"The tonus returns. You see?"

"I can't watch the myograms and the brain at the same time. He's
moving?"

"His arms... uncoordinated."

"And now? Observe the face. Is he blinking?"

"He opened his eyes. Does he see?"

"Not yet. What's the stimulus threshold for the pupils?"

"Four lux. I'll up it to six. Does he see?"

"No. He only feels the light. It's a thalamic reaction. The medicom will
fix the electrodes and give the current. Ah, excellent—"

In the darkness he saw something pale pink and shining over him. At the
same time, he heard the voice say breathlessly:

"You've been saved. You'll be all right. Don't try to talk. If you
understand me, close your eyes twice. Twice."

He did this.

"Excellent. I'll speak to you. If you don't understand, blink once."

He tried hard to make out what the pale-and-pink was, but couldn't.

"He's trying to see you," came the farther voice. How could the voice
know that?

"You'll see me and everything else," said the baritone slowly. "You must
be patient. You understand?"

He said yes with his eyelids. He wanted to speak, but something in him
croaked, that was all.

"No, no," the same voice scolded. "It's too early for conversation. You
can't talk, you have a tube in your trachea. It is supplying you with
air. You cannot breathe on your own—we are breathing for you. You
understand? Good. And now you will sleep. When you wake and are rested,
we'll have a talk. You'll learn everything. But now... Victor, put him
to sleep slowly, slowly... Pleasant dreams..."

He stopped seeing, as if a light had gone out not above him but inside
him. He didn't want to sleep. He wanted to jump up on his feet. But the
darkness that was himself had already vanished.

He had many dreams, odd dreams, beautiful dreams, and dreams that could
be neither remembered nor related. Sometimes he was a multitude of
feeling things at once. He would go far away and then return. He saw
people, recognized their faces, but could not recall who they were.
Sometimes all that remained to him was his sight, boundless, full of
invisible sun. It seemed to him that eons passed in these dreams and in
the voids between them. Suddenly he awoke. With consciousness he also
regained his body. He was lying on his back, bundled in a fluffy, soft
material. He tensed the muscles of his back. He felt a tingling in his
thighs. Above him was a flat, pale-green ceiling; nearby gleamed pipes
of some kind and glassware, but he was unable to turn his head.
Something held his head in place, a bolster that was soft but reached up
to his temples, resiliently firm. His eyes he could move freely. On the
other side of a transparent wall rose apparatuses of some sort, and at
the very edge of his field of vision little lights danced on and off. He
soon noticed that the lights had some connection to him, because when he
inhaled more deeply and his rib cage lifted, they lit up with the same
rhythm. Outside his field of vision, something glowed pink in a steady,
slow tempo, and the period of that pinkness also kept pace with him—with
his heart. He had no doubt now that he was in a hospital. An accident,
then. What kind, and where? He knit his brow, waited for an explanation
to emerge from his memory, but in vain. He lay still, shut his eyes, and
concentrated his will on the question. No answer came. His ability to
move his legs, arms, fingers as he liked, except for the enfolding
material, no longer satisfied him. He tried clearing his throat, touched
the inside surface of his teeth with his tongue, and finally spoke:

"I. I!"

He recognized his own voice. But whose it was, his own voice, he did not
know, and did not understand how this could be. He tried freeing himself
from the restraining padding and tensed his muscles several times. Then
a lethargy fell over him with strange suddenness, and again he went out
like an extinguished candle.

 

He did not count the passing days. Life on the ship was divided in the
simple, conventional way, according to Earth rhythm. During the day all
the decks, corridors, and tunnel passageways between the sections of the
hull were brightly lit. At ten o'clock dusk began as a dimming of the
gold-tinged white that emanated from the ceilings and walls. For about
an hour there was a blue semidarkness, until the illumination ceased and
all that showed the solitary wanderer the way was a thin fluorescent
line that ran down the center of the ceilings. He liked this time the
best. He could tour the _Eurydice_ during the day, too—all the quarters
were accessible to him, and he was assured that he would not be
disturbing anyone. He could go where he liked, ask any question, but he
preferred the night for his walks.

Physically proficient, he exercised early each morning in the gym, then
went to school. That was what he called it. He would take a seat in
front of Mnemon, to regain his memory through picture-and-word
association games, and also to learn things completely new to him. With
the machine, which was infinitely patient and incapable of showing any
emotion, any surprise, any feeling of superiority, he was at ease. If he
failed to grasp something, Mnemon would resort to visual aids, simple
diagrams, and skillfully apply teaching programs, borrowing from the
stores of other machines on the ship. The holofile contained in its
archives tens of thousands of films (though they were not films) and
photographs (though unlike the photographs of the past, since each
image, when summoned, became a surrounding scene, and each word was made
flesh—a flesh, granted, that was transitory). If he wished, he could
visit the inner chambers of the pyramids, the Gothic cathedrals, the
castles on the Loire, the moons of Mars, cities, forests, but he did
this only because he knew that such visions constituted an important
part of his therapy. The doctors tried to treat him like one of the
members of the crew, never like a patient; he even had the impression
that they avoided him, as if to emphasize that he was in no way
different from anyone else.

His visual memory returned, along with his life experience, his
professional skills as a navigator and expert in striders. True, ships
had changed no less than planetary machines; regarding them, he was a
little like a seaman from the days of the sailing ships finding himself
on a great ocean liner. But it was not difficult to fill in these gaps.
The outdated information he replaced with new. More and more keenly,
however, he felt his worst loss, a loss possibly irreversible. He could
not dredge up in himself any names—first names, last names, including
his own. What was more curious, his memory seemed divided in two. Things
that he had once experienced returned to him faded though full of
detail, just as a child's possessions found in a closet of the family
home after many years evoked not only images of the past but also an
emotional aura. One time, in the physicists' lab, the smell of an
evaporating liquid from a distillation, acrid in his nostrils, instantly
summoned up more than a picture: a chance landing field, brightly lit
though at night, when he, standing beneath the still red-hot cones of
the rockets, beneath his saved ship, breathed the same smell of nitric
smoke and felt a happiness that he was not aware of then, but which now,
remembering, he understood.

He did not tell Dr. Gerbert about this, though he really should have,
since the doctor had said to come immediately with any unexpected
recollection, because it would lie in one of the buried places of his
memory. It was necessary to deepen the recollection, not for
psychotherapy but in order to reestablish and reopen the paths in the
brain that had been erased. In this way he could return more fully to
himself. The advice was rational, professional, and he considered
himself a rational person; still, he kept this from the doctor. Being
taciturn was definitely one of his traits. He had never liked to
confide—particularly not private things. He told himself that if he ever
remembered who he was, it would not be by smell, like a dog. A stupid
thought, he realized. It never crossed his mind to set himself above the
doctors—but he stuck to his decision.

Gerbert soon became aware of the man's reticence. He gave him his word
that the sessions with Mnemon were not recorded, and that he could clear
each session from the pedagogue's memory himself if he wished. And the
man did that. He kept no secrets from the machine. It helped him reclaim
a multitude of memories, but without the names of the people—and without
his own. Finally he asked the machine why.

Mnemon was silent for a long while. The memory training, as it was
called, took place in a cabin that was strangely furnished. There were
several pieces of antiquated furniture in it, veritable museum pieces,
in an almost royal style—armchairs with gilding and curved legs—and
every wall had an oil painting by a Dutch master, the paintings that he
had remembered were his favorites. They appeared after he recalled them,
as if to help him on. The oils were changed several times—but the canvas
in the carved frames was no canvas, though imitating well the fiber and
the daubs of paint. Mnemon had explained to him how these excellent,
temporary replicas were made.

The teaching machine itself was not visible. Not that anyone was hiding
it; but, being a subsystem of Aesculapius, disengaged for these
sessions, in the cabin it wore no form that could clash with the
student's frame of mind. So that the survivor would not have to address
empty space—or a microphone, or a wall—he had before him, as he paced
this study, a bust of Socrates, from the pages of Greek mythology. Or
philosophy. The bust, shaggy-headed, seemed made of marble; sometimes,
however, it participated—mimicking life—in the discussions. For the
student this was unpleasant: in poor taste, somehow. Unable to come up
with an alternative, and not wanting to bother Gerbert for nothing, he
accustomed himself to the face. But whenever he had something painful to
reveal, pacing before his mentor, he would speak without looking.

Now the fake Socrates seemed to hesitate, as if presented with a problem
too difficult.

"My answer to you will be unsatisfying. It is not good for a man to be
too cognizant of his physical and spiritual mechanisms. Complete
knowledge reveals limits to human possibilities, and the less a man is
by nature limited in his purposes, the less he can tolerate limits. That
is in the first place. In the second place, names are stored differently
from other concepts embedded in speech. Why? Because names do not form
any coherent system. They are, after all, purely a matter of convention.
Every person has a name, but could have an altogether different name and
be the same person. One's name is decided by accident—in the form of
one's parents. First and last names thus lack logical and physical
necessity.

"If you will permit a small philosophical digression... Only things
exist, and their relations. To be a man is to be a particular thing, it
does not matter that it is a living thing. To be a brother or a son—that
is a relation. Examining a newborn infant with every method, you will
learn everything about it, you will reach its genetic code, but its name
you will not reach. One discovers the world; to names, however, one may
only become accustomed. This distinction is not felt in an ordinary
life. But a person who has come into the world twice experiences it. It
is not out of the question that you will remember your name. That could
happen at any moment. Or it could never happen. This is why I advised
you to take a temporary name. There is no dishonesty or falsehood in
that. You will be in the situation of your parents when they stood over
your cradle. They, too, did not know, before they chose it, the name
that they would give you. But, once they chose it, after many years,
they would have been unable to imagine that you had another, inborn,
truer name, and that they had not given that one to you."

"You sound more like Pythia," he replied, trying to hide his agitation
over the allusion to his death. He did not understand why he should
react in this way. Facts were facts. If anything, he ought to feel the
tremendous satisfaction of one risen from the dead. "I don't care about
my name. I know it begins with 'P.' Four to seven letters. Parvis or
Pirx. I know that the others couldn't be saved. It would have been
better if I hadn't been shown that list."

"They hoped that you would recognize yourself."

"I can't choose blindly. I told you that."

"I know and understand your motives. You are the type of person who pays
little attention to himself. You were always that way. So you do not
wish to choose?"

"No."

"Or assume a name?"

"No."

"What, then, do you intend to do?"

"I don't know."

Possibly there would have been more arguments enlisted to persuade him,
but for the first time since he had come to this cabin he exercised his
right to erase the machine. All his conversations. And, as if that was
insufficient, with the next touch of his finger he consigned the bust of
the Greek sage to nothingness. He felt a grim satisfaction then, a
senseless though keen pleasure, as if he had murdered—without
murdering—one before whom he had bared his soul too much, and who (or,
rather, which) had so sensibly and authoritatively taken charge of his
helplessness. A poor excuse for a reason, this, and he regretted his
action, which parted him from the blameless machine. But since the thing
had been right in saying that more than to be in the world he wanted to
have the world in him, he swallowed his anger, his shame—pointless—and
put them out of his mind for good, turning to matters more important
than his personal past. There was plenty to learn.

 

The biggest and most recent effort to find extraterrestrial
civilizations, named Cyclops, had come to nothing after almost twenty
years. In the opinion of those who had listened to the stars, hoping to
receive intelligent signals, it proved a miserable failure. The Mystery
of the Silent Universe had become a challenge to Earth's science.

The extreme optimism of a handful of astrophysicists at the end of the
twentieth century, infecting thousands of other specialists as well as
laymen, turned into its opposite. The billions invested in the
radiotelescopes that filtered the emissions from millions of stars and
galaxies did indeed give results in the form of new discoveries, but no
radio wave brought news of Other Intelligence. However, the telescopes,
placed on orbiters in space, were hit several times by streams of
radiation singular enough to rekindle extinguished hopes. If these were
signals, their reception was of brief duration; they broke off and did
not return. Perhaps the circumsolar region was being pierced by needle
messages addressed to other stars. Attempts to decipher the recordings
of them in countless different ways failed. Even the signal nature of
these concentrated impulses could not be determined with any certainty.
Thus, tradition and caution obliged the experts to conclude that the
phenomenon was the product of stellar material, an emission of very hard
radiation by chance focused through so-called gravitational lenses into
narrow pencils. The primary rule in observation said that whatever did
not clearly show an artificial source had to be considered a natural
phenomenon. Astrophysics, besides, had advanced to the point where it
possessed sufficient hypotheses to "explain" every kind of observed
emission without resorting to the existence of other beings as the
senders.

A paradox arose: the greater the number of theories astrophysics had at
its disposal, the more difficult it became to prove the authenticity of
an intentional signal. By the end of the twentieth century, the
spokesmen for Project Cyclops had drawn up a catalogue of criteria: to
distinguish what Nature _could_ produce, with the wealth of its forces,
from that which was beyond its power and therefore would appear as a
"cosmic miracle." An analogy on Earth might be leaves falling from trees
to form the letters of a meaningful sentence. Or pebbles thrown on a
river sandbar assuming the shape of circles, tangents, or Euclidean
triangles. Thus the scientists put together a list of
requirements—rules—that would have to be met by any sender of
extraterrestrial signals. Almost half of this list was crossed off in
the first years of the next century. It was not only the pulsars, not
only the gravitational lenses, not only the microwave radiation from the
nebulas, not only the giant masses at the galactic center that fooled
the observers by their regularity, repetition, the peculiar order of
their various impulses. In place of the discarded "rules for
broadcasters" new ones were soon put in, and these were discarded, too,
in short order.

Hence the pessimistic conclusion that Earth was unique not only in the
local arm of the Milky Way but in a myriad other spiral galaxies.
Subsequent increases in knowledge—in astrophysics, particularly—brought
this pessimism into question. The great number of cosmic properties of
energy and matter which suggested the notion of an "anthropic
principle"—of the close connection between the Universe as it was and
Life as it was—presented a compelling argument. In a Cosmos that
contained people one had to expect the birth of life outside the Earth
as well. A succession of surmises followed, to reconcile the fertility
of the Universe with its silence.

Life arose on innumerable planets, but produced intelligent beings only
through the rarest concatenation of unlikely accidents.

No—it arose frequently enough, but generally developed along non-protein
lines. Silicon displayed an abundance of compounds equal to that of
carbon bonding, the atomic cornerstone of proteins; but an evolution
begun in silicon was permanently nonconvergent with intelligence, or
else produced forms of intelligence that had no kinship whatever with
human mentality.

No—the spark of intelligence occurred in various shapes but was of short
duration. The development of life took billions of years only in its
pre-sentient stage. Primate Creatures, once formed, within two hundred
thousand years automatically began a technological explosion. This
explosion—and, by the cosmic clock, it was a true explosion—not only
carried them, at ever-increasing speed, to higher and higher levels of
control of the forces of Nature. It also carried civilizations _apart,_
in directions too different for them to understand one another through
any commonality of thought. There was no such commonality. That was an
anthropocentric fallacy that people had inherited from the ancient
faiths and myths. There could in fact be many different intelligences,
and it was precisely because there were so many that the sky was silent.

Not at all, said other hypotheses. The solution to the mystery was much
simpler. The evolution of life, if it produced Intelligence, did so
through a series of isolated events. This Intelligence could be nipped
in the bud by any stellar incursion in the vicinity of the parent
planet. Intervention from space was always blind and random. Had not
paleontology, with the help of galactography (the archeology of the
Milky Way), shown that the mammals owed their primacy to cataclysms that
had left mountains of reptilian remains in the Mesozoic? And that it was
a chain of happenstances—ice ages, pluvials, the formation of the
steppes, the changes in Earth's magnetic poles, rates of mutation—that
created the family tree of man?

This notwithstanding, Intelligence could mature under trillions of suns.
It could take the path of the terrestrial variety, in which case that
winning ticket in the stellar lottery, after one or two thousand years,
might turn into catastrophe, for technology was a domain of fatal traps
and whoever entered there could easily come to a bad end.

Intelligent Beings were able to see this threat, but only when it was
too late. Having cast off religious faiths, and recognizing that
religion's modern, degenerated forms were ideologies that offered the
fulfillment of material and only material needs, the civilizations tried
to stop their own momentum, but that was now impossible. Impossible even
if they were not torn by internal antagonisms.

The survivor from Titan had ample time to put questions and digest
answers.

From reflections on themselves and the world—termed, on Earth,
"philosophy"—the Intelligent Beings proceeded to activities that made it
increasingly clear to them that whatever had called them into existence
gave them only one sure thing: their mortality. Indeed, they owed their
very existence to mortality, for without it the billion-year
alternations of emerging and dying species never would have taken place.
They were spawned by the pit, by the deaths of the Archeozoic, the
Paleozoic, the successive geological periods, and along with their
Intelligence received the guarantee of their own demise. Soon, some
twenty centuries after this diagnosis, they came to know the parental
ways of Nature: the treacherous and wasteful technology of
self-realizing processes used by Her to permit future forms of life to
appear.

This technology inspired admiration only as long as it remained
inaccessible to its discoverers. But that did not last, either. Robbing
the plants, the animals, their own bodies of their secrets, they changed
the biosphere and themselves, and this increase in dominion was
insatiable.

They went out into space—only to find how alien it was to them and how
the mark of their animal origin had been stamped inexorably on their
bodies. This alienness, too, they overcame. Then, before very long, they
found that they were—within the newly constructed technosphere—the last
relict of the ancient heritage of biology. And that they were able to
abandon—along with the poverty of the past, the hunger, the epidemics,
the countless infirmities of old age—their mortal bodies. At first the
possibility loomed like a fantastic, distant, terrifying crossroads.

These generalizations, full of pathos and savoring of an engineer's grim
eschatology, the survivor read with distaste. He wanted to know the
purpose of the expedition, inasmuch as he had become an involuntary
participant in it. A more up-to-date volume, now the authoritative text
on exobiology, brought him closer to its mission. The book contained a
diagram by Ortega and Nilssen showing the development of psychozoics in
the Universe, their main road and branchings.

The commencement of the main road was the early technological age, which
was short-lived, allowing no offshoots for the thousand years between
the rise of mechanical tools and the advent of the informational. In the
next millennium, information science was crossed with biology to produce
a swell of biotic acceleration.

At this juncture the diagnostic quality of the chart, becoming
prognostic, weakened. The outline of the main road had been drawn by
facts and theories; but its divergences were the resultants now of
theories only, albeit theories supported by others that were reliable to
a high degree.

The turning point in the main road was the moment when the engineering
ability of the Intelligent Beings matched the life-creating potential of
Nature. It was not possible to predict the further career of any
individual civilization; this followed from the very nature of the
crossroads. A certain percentage of the civilizations would stay on the
main road—by putting the lid on an attainable but unrealized
auto-evolution. An extreme case of such bioconservatism would be the
creation of legislation (statutes, treaties, prohibitions, sanctions) to
which all instrumentalities infringing on Nature would be subject.
Technologies would arise to save the environment: committed to adapting
the technosphere, without trauma, to the biosphere. This task could be
but would not have to be accomplished—in which latter case a
civilization, in a series of costly crises, would fluctuate
demographically. It could decline and regenerate itself many times,
paying for this self-destructive inertia with billions of lives. The
establishing of interstellar contact would not rank high on its list of
priorities.

The conservatives on the main road would be silent: that was obvious.

For the biotically nonconservative there were many solutions. Decisions
to autoevolve, once made, were generally irreversible. Hence the great
divergence among the older psychozoics. Ortega, Nilssen, and Tomic
introduced the concept of a "window of contact. " This was the interval
of time in which Intelligent Beings had _already_ reached a high level
of applied science but had _not yet_ undertaken to change the natural
Intelligence given them—what would correspond to the human brain. The
"window of contact" was, cosmically, a moment. From the resinous torch
to the oil lamp, 16,000 years passed; from that lamp to the laser, it
was a hundred years. The information needed to make the torch-to-laser
step was on the order of the information needed to go from the discovery
of the genetic code to the code's implementation in a post-atomic
industry. Increases in knowledge were, in the "window of contact" phase,
exponential—and, toward the phase's end, hyperbolic. The interval of any
meaningful contact was minimally a thousand Earth years; optimally, from
1800 to 2500 years. Outside the window, for civilizations either
immature or too mature, silence reigned. The immature lacked the power
to communicate, while those too mature closed themselves off—or else
formed groups that communicated with one another by means faster than
light.

On the subject of faster-than-light communication there was
disagreement. No kind of matter or energy could be made to exceed the
speed of light. But that barrier, some said, could be circumvented. Let
a pulsar with a magnetic field fixed by a neutron star rotate at a speed
approaching _c._ The beam of the emission would go in circles around the
pulsar's axis and at a sufficient distance sweep across a sector of
space at a speed greater than _c._ If in the subsequent sectors of the
beam's rotation there were observers, those observers could synchronize
their watches beyond the limit discovered by Einstein. They would only
need to know the distances of the sides of the triangle (pulsar—observer
A—observer B) and the speed of rotation of the "lighthouse" pulsar.

This is as much as the one resurrected on the _Eurydice_ learned, in the
year of her constant acceleration, about cosmic civilizations. He came
to a barrier that he could not pass. The machine-instructor did not
chide the human pupil who was unable to grasp the mysteries of sidereal
energetics and its relation to engineering and gravitational ballistics.
These recent discoveries made possible the present expedition to the
stars of the Harpy, which had been hidden from the astronomers of
previous centuries by a cloud called the Coalsack. The _Eurydice_ was to
pass the Coalsack, enter the "temporal harbor" of a collapsar christened
Hades, dispatch one of her segments to the planet named Quinta
L-Harpyiae, wait for the return of that scout ship, and perform—for her
own return—an incomprehensible maneuver called "passage through a
retrochronal toroid," thanks to which she would reappear in the
neighborhood of the Sun barely eight years after takeoff. Without that
passage she would return two thousand years later, which would be no
return at all.

The scout ship of the _Eurydice_ was to travel on its own an entire
parsec with its crew in a state of embryonization. The vitrifaction of
people had been abandoned, as it gave only a 98-percent certainty of
reviving the frozen. The pilot of ancient rockets felt, at these
lectures, like a child being initiated into the operation of a
synchrophasotron. He also realized that he had become a hermit, that he
should no longer play Robinson Crusoe at the side of an electronic
Friday. He rode to the observatory in the forward section of the
_Eurydice,_ to see the stars. A great hall gleamed with strange
equipment. In vain he looked for the cannonlike cylinder of a reflector
or of any other type of telescope—or simply a shuttered dome for viewing
the heavens directly. The high hall seemed unoccupied, though lit all
around with storied rows of lights. Along these ran narrow galleries
that were joined by columns of machines. Returning to his cabin after
this unsuccessful excursion, he noticed on the table an old, dog-eared
book with a card from Gerbert. Gerbert was loaning it to him: something
to read in bed. The physician was known to have brought on board with
him a number of science-fiction books, which he preferred to the
dazzling holovision shows.

The sight of the book moved the recipient. For so long, once again, he
had been among the stars, yet had not seen them for so long. Worse, he
was not able to make friends with the people who had bestowed upon him
this new voyage along with this new life. The cabin, as he had
requested, was furnished half in the style of a sea vessel and half in
the style of an old merchant rocket: the living quarters of a helmsman
or a navigator, in no way resembling a passenger's cabin, because this
was not a place for a brief stay, like a hotel. It was a home.

He even had a bunk bed. Usually he laid his clothes on the top bunk when
he undressed. Over the pillow of the bottom bunk he switched on a little
lamp, covered his feet with the blanket, and, thinking that once again
he was giving in to the sins of sloth and passivity—but perhaps now for
the last time—opened the book in the place marked by Gerbert.

For a moment he read without comprehension, such was the strong effect
the ordinary black print had on him. The type face of the letters, the
yellowed, fragile pages, the real stitches of the binding, the bulge of
the cover along the spine, all seemed incredibly familiar to him,
unique, a thing lost and then found—though, heaven knows, he had never
been an avid reader. But now he felt a solemnity in reading, as if the
dead author had made a promise to him once and, although many obstacles
had to be overcome, the promise was kept.

He had an odd habit: he would open a volume at random and begin reading
there. The writers would not have been too pleased. Why did he do this?
Perhaps he wanted to break into the fictional world not through its
prepared entrance but all at once, in the middle.

 

"... tell you?"

The Professor folded his hands on his chest.

"By ship to Port Boma," he began, sinking into the chair. He closed his
eyes.

"Paddleboat to Bangala... That's where the jungle begins. Then six weeks
on horseback, no more is possible. Even mules will drop. Sleeping
sickness... There was one old shaman there, Nfo Tuabé." He pronounced
the word with a French accent on the last syllable. "I had come to catch
butterflies. But he showed me the way..."

He stopped for a moment, opened his eyes.

"You know what the jungle is? But how could you? Life, green and mad.
Everything quivering, watching, moving. In the underbrush, a crowd of
ravenous mouths. Insane flowers like explosions of color. Hidden insects
in sticky webs. Thousands, thousands of unclassified species. Not like
here, in Europe. No need to go looking for them. In the night the whole
tent was covered by moths as big as a hand, insistent, blind, falling
into the fire by the hundreds. Shadows passed across the canvas. The
natives trembled. The wind carried thunder from different quarters.
Lions, jackals... But that was nothing. Then came the weakness and the
fever. We left the horses, continued on foot. I took serum, quinine,
German camomile, everything. Finally, one day—there is no reckoning of
time there: a man gets to feel that the division of the week, the whole
calendar, is a silly, artificial thing—one day, it was impossible to go
on. The jungle ended. There was another native village, at a river. The
river isn't on the map—three times a year it disappears into quicksand.
Part of the bed is underground. A few huts made of sun-baked clay and
silt. That's where Nfo Tuabé lived. Didn't know English. How could he? I
had two translators. One put my words into the dialect of the coast, the
other put that into Bushman. Over that whole belt of jungle, from the
sixth parallel, rules an ancient royal family. Descendants of the
Egyptians, I would guess. Taller, much more intelligent than the blacks
of Central Africa. Nfo Tuabé even drew a map for me, showing the borders
of the kingdom. I had saved his son from the sleeping sickness. It was
for that..."

Not opening his eyes, the Professor reached into an inner pocket. From a
notebook he took out a piece of paper scribbled with red ink. The lines
were tangled and twisted.

"Hard to read... The jungle stops here, as if cut with a knife. It's the
border of the kingdom. I asked what lay beyond. He didn't want to talk
about that in the night. I had to come back during the day. Only then,
in that stinking hole of a hut without windows—you can't imagine the
stench—did he tell me that there were ants beyond. White, blind ants
that built great cities. Their realm extended for many kilometers. Red
ants fought the white. They came in a great, living river through the
jungle. Elephants would leave the vicinity then in herds, making curved
tunnels through the underbrush. Tigers fled. Even the snakes. Of the
birds, only the vultures remained. The ants traveled variously:
sometimes for a month, day and night, in a rust-red, moving current.
Whatever stood in their path they destroyed. They reached the edge of
the jungle, came upon the mounds of the whites, and the battle began.

Nfo Tuabé, in his lifetime, had seen it once. The red ants, overcoming
the sentries of the whites, entered their cities. And never returned.
What happens to them, no one knows. But next year new legions come
plowing through the jungle. It was this way in the time of his father,
his grandfather, his great-grandfather. It was always this way. The soil
in the place of the white ants is fertile. Long ago, the natives tried
to cultivate it, tried to burn down the mounds of the termites. They
lost that battle. The crops were destroyed. They built huts and
enclosures of wood; the termites reached these through underground
passageways, penetrated the structures, ate them out from inside, so
that a touch of the hand made them crumble. The natives resorted to
clay. Then, instead of workers, soldiers appeared. These"—he pointed to
a jar.

In the center, fastened with surgical clips to glass plates, were
specimens of giant termites. Several warriors: enormous and deformed
creatures. A third of the thorax was covered by horny armor, with a
helmet ending in open scissors. The broad armor weighed down the
delicate legs and abdomen.

"Nothing new to you, I suspect? We know that there are regions in which
termites rule. In South America... They have two kinds of soldier,
defenders and something like an internal police. The mounds reach eight
meters in height. Built of sand and excrement, they're harder than
Portland cement. Proof against any steel. Eyeless, white, soft insects
that have lived for some twenty million years away from the light.
Studied by Packard, Schmelz, many others. But not one of them ever
dreamed... You understand? I saved his son, and in exchange... Oh, he
was wise. Knew how to repay a white man, royally. Completely gray Negro.
Skin like ashes, the face a mask, smoke-cured. He said to me:

" 'The mounds go on for miles. The whole plain is covered with them.
Like a forest, a dead forest, one after another, giant petrified trunks.
It is difficult to pass between them. Everywhere the ground is hard, it
booms underfoot like a drum, and is strewn with braids of thick string.
Those are the tubes through which the termites run. Made of the same
cement as the mounds, they go very far, down into the earth and up
again, and they branch, intersect, and lead inside the mounds, and every
fifty or sixty centimeters they widen, so that the termites running in
different directions can pass each other. And in the center of the city,
among a million stonelike termitaria that seethe with blind, violent
life, there stands a different mound. Smaller, black, and bent like a
hook.' He showed me how with his brown thumb. 'The heart of the ant
nation lies there.' More he did not want to say."

"And you believed him?" whispered the listener. The dark eyes of the
Professor burned.

"I returned to Boma. Bought fifty kilograms of dynamite in pound sticks,
the kind used in mines. Picks, shovels, spades, a complete outfit. Tanks
of sulfur, metal hoses, gas masks, netting—the best I could obtain. And
cans of airplane gasoline, and an arsenal of insecticides, more than you
can imagine. Then I hired twelve bearers and went into the jungle.

"Are you acquainted with Collenger's experiment? It's considered
nonsense. He was not, true, a myrmecologist, only an amateur. Cut
through an entire termite mound from top to bottom and inserted a steel
plate, so that the two halves could not communicate with each other in
any way. The mound was young, the termites had only begun building it.
After six weeks he removed the plate. It turned out that the new tunnels
had been constructed in such a way that their mouths, on either side of
the barrier, exactly corresponded—not a millimeter off, vertically or
horizontally. Just as men build a tunnel, beginning the work
simultaneously on both sides of the mountain and meeting in the middle.
How did the termites communicate through the steel? And then—Gruss's
experiment. Also not verified. He maintained that if you killed the
termite queen, workers that were several hundred meters from the mound
immediately showed agitation and returned to the nest."

Again he paused. He stared at the red embers in the fireplace and the
flickering blue flames that appeared and disappeared over them.

"I had a map... yes. First the guide ran off, then the translator. They
left their things and disappeared. Early one morning I awoke in my
mosquito net—silence, bulging eyes, terrified faces, whispering behind
my back. I ended up tying the lot of them to me, wrapped the cord around
my hand. Took their knives, so they couldn't cut themselves loose. From
lack of sleep or from the sun, my eyes became inflamed. In the morning I
could hardly open the lids, they were so badly stuck. Summer was on us.
My shirt was stiff with sweat, as if starched, and if you touched the
helmet on the outside, you immediately got blisters. The rifle barrel
burned like a red-hot poker.

"We hacked our way for thirty-nine days. I didn't want to go through old
Nfo Tuabé's village, as he had asked me not to. So we came to the edge
of the jungle without warning. Suddenly that hellish, stifling thicket
of leaves, vines, and screaming parrots and monkeys ended. As far as the
eye could see, a plain, yellow as the skin of an old lion. On it, among
clumps of cacti, stood cones. The mounds. Built blindly from within,
hence formless in conception. We spent the night here. At dawn I awoke
with a fierce headache. The day before, I had carelessly removed my
helmet for a moment. The sun was high. The heat was such that the air
burned the lungs. The shapes of objects shimmered, as if the sand were
on fire. I was alone. The natives had fled, chewing through their cord.
The only one remaining was a thirteen-year-old, Uagadu.

"I began to walk. Together we carried the baggage a distance of fifty
feet. Then went back and brought the rest of the things. We had to
repeat this five times under the sun, which burned infernally. Despite
my white shirt I developed sores on my back, which did not heal. I had
to sleep on my stomach. But this is unimportant. All day we penetrated
the city of the termites. I don't think there is anything in the world
more eerie. Imagine: on all sides—in front of you, in back of you—stony
mounds two stories high. In places so close, one could barely squeeze
between them. An endless forest of rough gray columns. And from the
center of each column, when one stopped, came a faint, incessant, steady
rustling, at moments changing into individual taps. The walls trembled
constantly to the touch day and night. Several times it happened that we
crushed one of the tunnels, which looked like ash-gray cords scattered
over the ground in bundles. We saw endless rows of white insects
marching. Then there would appear, suddenly, the horned helmets of the
soldiers, who cut the air blindly with their pincers and ejected a
sticky, burning fluid.

"For two days we wandered, for there was no possible way to get
bearings. Two, three, four times each day I would clamber up a mound
higher than the others, to look for the mound of which Nfo Tuabé spoke.
But all I saw was a forest of stone. The jungle behind us became a green
strip, then a blue line on the horizon, then finally disappeared. Our
water supply dwindled. But the mounds went on and on. Through my
telescope I saw them merge in the far distance, like a field of corn.
The lad amazed me. Without complaint he did everything that I did, but
not knowing why or wherefore. We proceeded thus for four days. I was
drunk with the sun. The sunglasses didn't help. There was a terrible
glare in the sky—one could not look up before dusk—and the sand blazed
like mercury. And all around, palisades of mounds, unending. No trace of
any living creature. Even the vultures did not venture here. There was
only an occasional, solitary cactus.

"Finally, in the evening, having rationed out the water for that day, I
climbed to the top of a very large mound. I think the thing went back to
the days of Caesar. Without hope now, I looked around, when suddenly I
saw a black spot in the telescope. My first thought was that the glass
was dirty. But no, it was that mound.

"The next day I got up when the sun was still below the horizon. I could
barely waken my boy. We began to carry our things in the direction that
I had marked on the compass. I had also made a sketch. Meanwhile the
mounds, though a little lower, grew nearer to one another. Finally they
formed such a stockade that I could not force my way through. The black
boy still could, so I passed the packages to him between two columns of
cement. Then I would squeeze through higher up. This lasted five hours,
in which time we covered, perhaps, three hundred feet. I saw that we
were accomplishing nothing, but I was in a fever. Not a fever, exactly,
though I had a constant temperature of more than a hundred degrees. The
climate must affect the brain. I took five sticks of dynamite and blew
up the mound that stood in our way. We hid behind other mounds after I
lit the fuse. The explosion was muffled, its force went downward. The
ground shook. But the other mounds remained standing. Of the one blown
up there were only large, crusty fragments, alive with writhing white
bodies.

"Until now we had not harmed one another. But now the battle began. It
was impossible to cross the crater made by the explosion. Tens of
thousands of termites poured from the pit and spread in a mass, like a
wave. They felt their way over every inch of ground. I lit the sulfur,
put the tank on my back. You know what the device looks like: what
gardeners use to spray shrubbery. Or a flame thrower. The acrid smoke
burst from a nozzle I held in my hand. I put on a gas mask, gave one to
the boy. Gave him, also, boots specially made for the purpose—wrapped in
metal netting. In this way we were able to cross. I discharged a stream
of smoke, which drove off the termites. The ones that didn't retreat
perished. In one place I had to use the gasoline. Poured it out and lit
it, creating a wall of fire between us and the torrent of termites.

"Some three hundred feet remained to the black termitarium. Sleep was
out of the question. We sat by the continually belching tank, our
flashlights on. What a night! Ever spend six hours in a gas mask? No?
Try imagining what it is like to keep your face buried in hot rubber.
When I wanted to breathe more freely, easing the mask away, I would
choke on the smoke. And so the night passed. My boy shivered and
shivered. I feared it might be a fever.

"The new day came, finally. We now had only one can of water left. It
could last us, at best, if we drank sparingly, three days. It was
necessary to return as quickly as possible."

The Professor stopped, opened his eyes, and gazed at the fireplace. The
embers had turned completely gray. The lamp filled the room with a soft
green light, as if filtered through a sheet of water.

"We reached the black mound."

He raised his hand.

"Like a bent finger. Like this. Smooth surface, as if polished. The
thing was surrounded by low mounds that were, curiously, not vertical
but inclined toward it: larvae of stone making a grotesque obeisance.

"I gathered all my supplies at one point on this circle—it measured some
forty feet around—and set to work. I didn't want to destroy the black
mound with the dynamite. The moment we entered this area, the termites
ceased appearing. At last it was possible to remove the mask from my
face. What a relief! For a few minutes, there was not a man on earth
happier than I. The indescribable pleasure of breathing freely—and that
mound, black, strangely bent, unlike anything I had ever known. Like a
madman I danced and sang, not caring about the drops of sweat that
rained from my brow. Poor Uagadu watched, frightened. Perhaps he thought
that I was worshipping before a black idol...

"But I sobered quickly. There was little reason for rejoicing: the water
was running out; the dried food barely sufficed for two days. True,
there were the termites. The natives considered them a delicacy. But I
could not bring myself to... Hunger, however..."

He broke off. His eyes glittered.

"To make a long story short, I knocked down that mound. Old Nfo Tuabé
had spoken the truth."

He leaned forward. His features sharpened. The words came in a rush.

"There was, first, a layer of fibers, of a material of unusual
smoothness and strength. Inside—a central chamber, surrounded by a thick
coat of termites. Were they termites at all? I had never seen termites
like these. Enormous, flat like a hand, covered with silver hairs, and
having funnel-shaped heads that ended in something resembling antennae.
These antennae were all touching a gray object no bigger than my fist.
The insects were extremely old. Motionless, as if made of wood. They did
not even attempt to defend themselves. The abdomens pulsed. But when I
swept them from the central object—that round, strange thing—they
perished instantly. Came apart beneath my fingers like rotten rags. I
hadn't the time or the strength to study all this. I took the object
from the chamber, locked it in a metal box, and immediately headed back
with my Uagadu.

"I won't go into how I reached the coast. We encountered the red ants. I
blessed the moment that I'd decided to drag back with me the single can
of gasoline. If not for the fire... But enough of that. It's a separate
story. I'll say only this: At the first stopping place I examined
carefully the thing that I had taken from the black mound. When I
cleaned off the deposits on it, it was revealed to be a perfect sphere,
of a heavy substance that was transparent, like glass, but having a much
higher index of refraction.

"And then, there in the jungle, a certain phenomenon manifested itself.
At first, I paid no heed to it, thinking that I was imagining things.
But when I reached the civilized areas on the coast, and afterward, I
became convinced that it was not my imagination..."

He sank back into his chair and, almost completely in shadow, his head
dark against the brighter background, said:

"I was plagued by bugs. Butterflies, moths, arachnids, hymenoptera,
whatever you like. Day and night they followed me in a buzzing cloud.
Or, rather, not me, but my baggage, the metal caisson box that contained
the sphere. During the sea voyage, things were a bit better. Applying
insecticides intensively, I rid myself of the pests. New ones didn't
appear—there were none on the open sea. But the moment I landed in
France, it began all over again. The ants were the worst. Wherever I
stopped for more than an hour, ants showed up. Red ants, black ants,
carpenter ants, pharaoh ants, large and small, they gathered at the box,
engulfed it in a quivering mass, cut, ate through, destroyed all the
coverings with which I had packed it, suffocated themselves, perished,
ejected acid in an attempt to corrode the steel sides..."

He broke off.

"The house we're in now, its isolated situation, all the precautions I
take, it's because I am constantly beset by ants."

He got up.

"I conducted experiments. Using a diamond drill, I broke from the sphere
a piece no larger than a poppy seed. It exerts the same power of
attraction as the entire sphere. I also found that if I surrounded the
sphere with a thick jacket of lead, the effect ceased."

"Rays of some kind?" said the listener in a hoarse voice. As one
hypnotized, he stared at the barely visible face of the old scientist.

"Possibly. I don't know."

"And... you have the sphere?"

"Yes. Would you care to see it?"

The listener jumped to his feet. The Professor opened the door for him,
returned to the desk for the key, and hurried after his guest down the
dim corridor. They entered a narrow cubicle without windows or
furniture. In a corner stood a large, old-fashioned safe. Under the weak
light of the naked bulb on the ceiling, the steel plates had a bluish
cast. The Professor inserted the key with a sure hand and turned it.
With the grating sound of bolts withdrawing, the heavy door opened. He
stepped aside. The safe was empty.

IV—SETI

 

The cabins of the physicists were located on the fourth deck. He could
find his way around now on the _Eurydice._ He had studied the layout of
the ship, so different from the ones he had flown. He did not know the
names or purposes of many of the machines in the sternmost section,
which was unoccupied and cut off from the rest of the hull by triple
bulkheads. The grub-leviathan was crisscrossed with connecting tunnels,
like a secret network through an elongated, cylindrical city.

In his muscles was the memory of moving down narrow corridors—either
oval in cross section or circular like a well—where you floated
weightless, here and there pushing lightly to change direction on the
turns. But in freighters you could reach the hold more simply, via the
ventilation shaft; all you had to do was turn on the air compressor and
be carried in the roar of a strong wind, your legs dangling uselessly,
like vestigial organs. He found himself missing weightlessness, which he
had cursed so many times when making repairs, because Newton's laws kept
reminding one of their existence. If he used a hammer without gripping
something well with the other hand, he would end up doing cartwheels
that were entertaining only to spectators.

The elevators—actually wheelless oval cars with windows so curved that
one saw one's own reflection in them distorted and reduced—moved without
a sound, giving the numbers of the sections passed and blinking at the
right stop.

The corridor had a rough yet deep carpeting. Around a corner disappeared
a vacuum cleaner, looking like a turtle with wands, while he walked past
a row of doors that bulged slightly, as the wall did, and that had high
thresholds with brass fittings—no doubt to satisfy the whim of some
interior decorator. It was hard to think of any other reason. He stood
before Lauger's cabin, suddenly unsure of himself. He was still unable
to become one of the crew. Their friendliness at meals, the way one
group and then another invited him to their table, seemed forced to him,
as if they were trying to pretend that he was really one of them—and
that his lack of an assignment was only temporary. True, he had talked
with Lauger, and Lauger had assured him that he could drop in whenever
he wished. But this, instead of giving him confidence, somehow put him
on his guard. Lauger was not just anyone; he was the number-one
physicist, and not merely on the _Eurydice._

He had never thought that he could be assailed with doubts about how to
act with someone. Social grace was as out of place here as a parlor game
in the vaults of the Great Pyramid. The door had no handle; a touch with
the tips of the fingers, and it opened—so quickly that he almost drew
back, like a savage before an automobile.

A spacious room. He was struck by its disorder. Among heaps of tapes,
photographic plates, papers, and atlases stood a large desk, its top
curved around in a half-ring with a swivel chair in the center. Behind
it, on the wall, was a rectangle of black with moving dots of light. On
either side of this flickering control panel hung large
photographs—lit-up transparencies—of spiral nebulas, and farther on were
vertical, pillarlike cylinders, partly opened, full of pigeonholes for
computer disks. In the left corner stood a huge rhomboid machine with a
chair attached at the base. The thing went up through the ceiling, and
from a slot under a binocular eyepiece emerged a tape, in small jumps,
bearing some kind of graph. The tape collected in coils on the floor,
which was covered by an old Persian rug with a worn hieroglyphic
pattern. It was the rug that amazed him. A cylinder-column vanished,
revealing an entrance to an adjoining room. Lauger was standing there,
in linen trousers and a sweater, with a head of overgrown hair, and gave
him a smile that was both understanding and innocent. The face was
fleshy, as of a child aged before its time—no more resembling the face
of a creator of high abstractions than did Einstein's in the days when
Einstein still worked in a government office.

"Hello," said the visitor.

"Enter, colleague, enter. It's good you came: at one blow you can delve
into physics and metaphysics..."

He added, in explanation:

"Father Arago is with me."

The visitor followed Lauger into the other cabin, which was smaller,
with a covered bunk and several chairs around a table, at which the
Dominican was examining a diagram through a magnifying glass—or perhaps
it was the computerized map of a planet, having lines of latitude across
it.

Arago pulled out a chair near him. The three sat down.

"This is Mark. You know him, Father?" asked Lauger and, before he could
reply, went on:

"I can guess your problem, Mark. It's hard to have a man-to-man talk
with a machine."

"The machine is not to blame," observed the Dominican, irony in his
voice. "It says what was put into it."

"That is, what you put into it," the physicist corrected him with the
smile of an opponent. "The theories don't agree. Not that they ever did.
We are talking, Mark, about the fate of civilizations 'above the
window,' " he explained to the visitor. "But since you came in the
middle of our argument, let me summarize the beginning for you. You're
aware that the old notions about ETI have changed. Even if there are a
million civilizations in the galaxy, their duration is so dispersed in
time that it is impossible first to communicate with the host of a
planet and then drop in on him. Civilizations are harder to catch than a
mayfly that lives for one day. We look for pupas, therefore, and not the
adults. Do you know what the window of contact is?"

"Yes."

"All right, then. Having sifted through two hundred million stars, we
came up with eleven million candidates. The majority have lifeless
planets, or planets below the window, or planets above the window.
Imagine"—he clapped him on the knee—"that you have fallen in love with
the portrait of a sixteen-year-old girl. You set out to woo her.
Unfortunately, the journey will take fifty years. You'll find an old
woman, or a grave. If you decide to declare your love by mail, you'll be
an old man yourself before you receive the first reply. And that, in a
nutshell, is the basic idea of CETI. You can't hold a conversation at
intervals of many centuries."

"So we're traveling to a pupa?" asked "Mark." For a while now people
called him that, but suddenly the thought occurred to him—he didn't know
why—that the idea might have come from the monk, who, like himself, both
was and was not a member of the crew.

"We don't know _what_ we're traveling to," remarked Arago. Lauger seemed
pleased by these words.

"Quite. Life-producing planets are recognized by the composition of
their atmospheres. The catalogue of these, in our galaxy, runs into the
thousands. We've screened them all and have about thirty that offer
hope."

"Of intelligence?"

"Intelligence, in diapers, is invisible. And when it matures, out the
window it flies. We have to pounce on it earlier. How do we know that
our destination is worth the trouble? It's Quinta, the fifth planet of
Zeta Harpyiae. We have a lot of data—"

"_In dubio pro reo_," said the Dominican.

"And who, Father, in your opinion, is the defendant?" Lauger asked, but
again did not let him answer, continuing:

"The first cosmic symptom of intelligence is radio. Well before
radioastronomy. Actually, not that much before: about a hundred years. A
planet with transmitters can be detected when their combined power goes
into the gigawatts. Quinta emits, in the high and ultrahigh ranges, less
than its sun, but a phenomenal amount for a lifeless planet. For a
planet with electronics, a moderate amount, since it lies below the
level of solar noise. But _something_ is there, in radio, below the
threshold. We have evidence."

"Circumstantial," the apostolic delegate corrected him again. "True, and
only one piece," agreed Lauger. "But, more important, there have been
observed on Quinta point-bursts of electromagnetism, one of which was
recorded—the whole emission—by a spectroscope from orbiters near Mars.
Those two orbiters cost Earth a bundle: our expedition."

"Atomic bombs?" asked the man who was resigned to the name of Mark.

"No. Rather, the preliminaries to planetary engineering, because these
were clean thermonuclears. Had things on Quinta taken the course they
did on Earth, it would have started with the uranides. What's more, the
bursts appeared only within the polar circle—that is, on their Arctica
or Antarctica. One could melt a continental glacier in this way. But
that is not the point on which we differ." He glanced at the Dominican.
"The question is whether or not our arrival will cause harm _there._
Father Arago believes it might. I am of the same opinion..."

"Then what is the disagreement?"

"I believe that the game is worth the candle. The exploration of a
world, without causing harm, is impossible."

Mark began to understand the gist of the debate. He forgot his own
situation; the old fire returned to him.

"You—that is, Father—are traveling with us... against your convictions?"
he addressed the monk.

"Of course," said Arago. "The Church was among the opponents to the
expedition. So-called contact could turn out to be the gift of a Trojan
horse. _Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes._ A Pandora's box."

"You have become affected, Father, by the mythological patronage of the
project," laughed Lauger. "Eurydice, Hermes, Jupiter, Hades, Cerberus...
we plundered the Greeks. The ship actually ought to have been named the
_Argo_, with us as the psychonauts. But we'll try to cause as little
harm as possible. That's why the plan of the operation is so complex."

"_Contra spem spero_," sighed the monk. "Or, rather," he added, "I wish
to be in error."

Lauger seemed not to hear, taken with another thought.

"When we reach Quinta, at least three hundred years will have passed
there for our one year of ship's time. Which means that we will be
catching them in the upper region of the window. If only not later! A
difference of seconds in our maneuvers could hasten or delay us
tremendously. As for harm... the Reverend Father knows that a
technological civilization has inertia, though it is not stationary. In
other words, it's not that easy to throw it off its course. Whatever
happens, we will not be in the role of gods descending from heaven. We
did not seek out primitive cultures, and there are no astroethnologists
in CETI."

Arago, silent, regarded the physicist with narrowed eyes. The listener
to this conversation ventured a question:

"But does it make sense?"

"Does what make sense?" Lauger was surprised.

"To treat the ones who are unobservable as if they did not exist. It may
be practical, but..."

"You could call it opportunism, too, if you wanted," replied Lauger
coldly. "We chose a task that was possible to perform. The window of
contact has an empirical frame, but there is ethical justification for
it as well. We won't be anointing the heads of cavedwellers with oil
distilled by the twenty-second century. But enough of this _pluralis
majestaticus._ I stood by the project and I'm here because for me
contact means an exchange of knowledge. An exchange—not a patronage, not
a dispensing of melioristic advice."

"And what if evil reigns there?" asked Arago.

"Does there exist a universal evil? A constant of evil?" countered
Lauger.

"I fear there does."

"Then we would have to say _non possumus_ and chuck the project..."

"I am only doing my duty."

With these words the monk rose, nodded to them, and departed.

Lauger, sprawled in his chair, made a face, moved his lips as if there
was a bad taste in his mouth, then sighed.

"I respect the man—because he can rile me. He tacks wings onto
everything, or horns. But enough. That's not the reason I wanted to see
you. We'll be sending a scout ship to Quinta. A single-hull, able to
land. The _Hermes._ It will fly nine or ten men. The captain and four
have been decided on. The rest will be chosen, by specialty, in a
ballot. Would you like to be on the ballot?"

At first Mark did not understand.

"To set foot there..."

He burned. Disbelief, joy. Lauger, seeing how the man lit up, hastened
to add:

"Getting on the ballot doesn't necessarily mean you're going. Scientific
achievement isn't a guarantee, either. The greatest theoretician could
easily go to pieces. We need hard people—the kind that nothing will
break. Gerbert is a brilliant psychonicist, psychologist, an expert on
minds, but courage isn't tested in the laboratory. Do you know who you
are?"

He paled.

"No."

"Then I'll tell you. On the Birnam glacier a number of people in walking
machines died. Geyser eruptions took them by surprise. These were
professional operators carrying out instructions given them, and they
had no idea that they were going to their death. Two men went in search
of them, voluntarily. You are one of those two."

"How can you know this? Dr. Gerbert told me that—"

"Dr. Gerbert and his assistant are ship physicians. They know their
medicine but are weak when it comes to computers. They decided to
preserve medical confidentiality—since it proved impossible to establish
the identity of the man resurrected. Psychic trauma, they argued.
There's no eavesdropping on the _Eurydice,_ but there is a center with
nonerasable memory. The Commander has access to it, the Head
Informationist, and I. You won't tell the doctors, I hope?"

"No."

"I didn't think you would. It would be doing them wrong."

"But won't they guess if..."

"I doubt it. The doctors have to monitor constantly the state of health
of our entire crew. And the voting is secret. The council votes. Out of
five votes you should get three. That's my guess. And I'm telling you
this now because you have a hell of a lot of work ahead of you. I know
that on the simulators you showed an astrogational ability, but in
obsolete categories, first-class for those times—not for today. You have
a year to learn your interstellar ABCs. If you can handle that, you'll
see the Quintans. And now go—I have a pile of things to catch up on."

They rose. Mark was taller than the famous physicist, and younger. "He
won't be going," he thought. Lauger walked him to the door.

But Mark did not notice this, did not see the darting lights on the
black screen, did not remember if he said good-bye or even if he said
anything. Or how he got back to his cabin. He did not know what to do
with himself. Going to the closet, he opened the wrong door by mistake,
saw his face in the mirror, and murmured:

"You'll see the Quintans."

So he began his studies.

 

The result of the statistical calculations was, all in all, clear. Life
arose and endured on planets for billions of years, but throughout that
time it was mute. Civilizations sprang from it: not to perish but to
transform themselves into something extranatural. Because the birth rate
of technologies in an ordinary spiral galaxy was a constant, they came
into being, matured, and disappeared with the same frequency. New ones
were continually emerging, and they escaped from the interval of mutual
understanding—the window of contact—before it was possible to exchange
signals with them. The muteness of those existing primitively was
obvious. But endless hypotheses were devoted to the silence of the
highly developed. There was a whole library on the subject, which he
avoided for the time being. In one book he read: "At this moment, for
this century (astronomically, the same thing), it can be concluded that
Earth is the only civilization _already_ technological and _still_
biological throughout the length, breadth, and depth of the Milky Way."

Which seemed to lay to rest the plans of CETI. A hundred and fifty years
went by before it turned out that this was not the case.

The conquering of the space separating star from star, so that some
Living Intelligences could meet Others and return, was not
accomplishable by simple flight. Even if the astronauts traveled at
speeds approaching light, they would neither meet those to whom they
were going nor see again those who remained behind on Earth: at both
destination and origin many centuries would pass in the few years of
ship time. This categorical declaration of science prompted the Church
to reflect theologically as follows: He Who created the world made the
meeting of creatures from different stars an idle dream. He raised
between them a barrier, completely empty and invisible yet impossible to
break: an abyss that He could cross, not man. Human history, however,
invariably went in directions that were not predicted. The abyss of
space turned out indeed to be a barrier that could not be broken. But it
could be sidestepped, through a series of special maneuvers.

The median time of the galaxy was one value. The galaxy itself was a
clock that indicated the hour of its age. But in places of the greatest
intensity of gravitation, galactic time underwent violent changes. There
were boundaries at which it stopped altogether. These were the
Schwarzschild spheres—the black surfaces of collapsed stars. Event
horizons. An object approaching such a horizon would begin to stretch in
the eyes of a distant observer; it would disappear before touching the
surface of the black hole, because time, dilated by gravitation,
displaced light toward the infrared and then to longer and longer
wavelengths, until finally not one reflected photon returned to the eye
of the watcher. The black hole trapped within its horizon every particle
and every scrap of light forever.

In any case, a traveler approaching a black hole would be pulled apart,
along with his ship, by the growing gravitation. Tidal forces there
would lengthen any material object to a thread, and from the accretion
disk formed around the black sphere that thread would go into a nose
dive from which there was no return.

Flybys past the collapsar star were impossible—along any trajectory: the
tidal forces would kill the travelers and rip their ship to pieces. The
ship could be the densest cosmic dwarf, a neutron star, a globe of
atomic nuclei packed together into a solid, a solid compared with which
the hardest steel would be as attenuated as a gas: it would make no
difference. Even such a globe the collapsar would pull out into a
spindle shape, and would tear and swallow it in an instant, leaving
behind only the death-throe flares of X rays escaping into space.

Collapsars that arose from stars a few times heavier than the Sun were
thus like sudden guillotines to wayfarers. If, however, the mass of a
black hole was a hundred or a thousand times that of the Sun, the
gravitation at its horizon could be as weak as Earth's. No immediate
danger would threaten the ship that ventured there, and the crew, moving
toward such a horizon, could completely fail to notice it. But they
would never be able to emerge from beneath that unseen shell. A ship
drawn into a giant collapsar would be annihilated, plummeting to the
center, in a matter of days or hours, depending on the massiveness of
the trap.

The astrophysics at the close of the twentieth century drew such
theoretical models of gravitational graveyards. But, as usually happened
in the history of knowledge, the models proved insufficient. The reality
was more complex. First, quantum mechanics had to be taken into account:
every black hole gave off radiation. The larger the black hole, the
weaker the radiation. Giant black holes, usually found at the centers of
galaxies, would also eventually die, though their "quantum evaporation"
might take a hundred billion years. They would be the final relics of
the former stellar splendor of the Universe.

Further diversification of black holes was discovered by subsequent
calculation and simulation. A star, when it collapsed, its weakened
centrifugal radiation no longer able to counteract its gravity, did not
immediately assume the shape of a sphere. It oscillated, like a drop
alternately flattened to a disk and then pulled into a cigar shape. This
vibration was very brief, the frequency depending on the mass. The
collapsar behaved like a gong—that struck itself. But a gong at rest
could be made to vibrate by a blow. A black sphere, similarly, could be
set to oscillating again—by sidereal engineering. One had to know the
method and possess sufficient power, on the order of 10⁴⁴ ergs, which
would be beamed in such a way as to put the sphere in resonance. For
what purpose? To create what the astrophysicists acquainted with the
giant casually called a "temporal onion."

Just as the center of an onion was surrounded by layers of tissue,
visible in cross section like the rings of a tree, so a collapsar in
resonance was surrounded by gravitationally curved time—or, rather, by a
complex stratification of space-time. To a distant observer a black hole
appeared to vibrate like a tuning fork for several seconds. But for one
who found himself in its vicinity, on a contour line of altered time,
the readings of the galactic clock lost all meaning. Thus, if a ship
came upon a black hole that warped the continuum multivalently, along a
gradient, the ship could enter a bradychronality and remain for years in
that zone of retarded time—before leaving the temporal port. To the eyes
of the outside observer the ship would vanish upon reaching the black
hole and, after its invisible stop on the bradychronality, emerge in
nearby space.

For the entire galaxy, for everyone watching the resonating collapsar
from a distance, it would seem to oscillate in seconds between disk and
cigar, exactly as it had oscillated in its violent birth when it was a
star collapsed by gravity after the nuclear furnace went out. Whereas to
the ship on the bradychronality, time could come almost to a halt.

But this was not all. The collapsar, vibrating, behaved not like a
perfectly elastic ball but, rather, like a nonuniformly distorting
balloon on a bounce, due to the magnification of relativistic effects.
Thus, with the bradychronalities, retrochronalities could appear:
currents or rivers of time flowing backward. For distant observers
neither one nor the other existed. To make use of these retardations or
reversals of time, therefore, one had to enter them physically.

The Project planned to use the solitary collapsar above the
constellation Harpy as a port for the _Eurydice._ The mission of the
expedition was not to establish contact with just any civilization that
lay within the interval of possible communication, but to catch a
civilization that, like a skyward butterfly pursued by an entomologist,
was on its way out the window, already fluttering at the upper edge.
Indispensable for this operation was a parking place in time, at a
distance from the inhabited planet, which would allow the human
psychonauts to visit it before the civilization departed from Ortega and
Nilssen's main road of development. To this end, the expedition was
divided into three stages. In the first, the _Eurydice_ would proceed to
the collapsar in the constellation Harpy, chosen as a place for
concealment and temporal maneuvers. The collapsar was named,
appropriately, Hades—because the _Eurydice_ would be preceded by an
unmanned colossus, a missile to be used only once, the _Orpheus._ It was
a gravity gun, a gracer (gravity amplification by collimated excitation
of resonance). At a signal from the _Eurydice_, it would set the black
hole oscillating according to the latter's own natural frequency and
amplitude.

Although gigantic on the scale of Earth objects, the _Orpheus_ was the
tiniest speck compared with the mass of the collapsar it was to set in
motion. But it could accomplish this through the phenomenon of
gravitational resonance. Giving up its vibratory ghost to Hades, it
would thereby induce in the collapsar a single contraction and
dilation—whereupon that black hell, opening its abysses, would permit
the Eurydice to enter and ride the vortex of bradychronal currents. But
first it was necessary to verify, from the ship, that the
five-light-year-distant Quinta was in the prime of its technological
era, and to determine, from that diagnosis, the right moment to visit
it. Having fixed the moment, the _Eurydice_ would then make a temporal
harbor for herself in Hades, which would now be in vibration from the
gracer emission of the _Orpheus._ As the _Orpheus_ had enough power for
only one discharge of coherent gravity, annihilating itself in that
discharge, the operation could not be repeated. If it did not succeed
the first time—because of a navigational error in the temporal storm, an
incorrect diagnosis of the rate of development of the Quintan
civilization, or any other factor not taken into account—the expedition
would be a fiasco. Which meant, in the best case, returning to Earth
empty-handed.

The plan was further complicated by the decision to make use, within the
hell of Hades, of retrochronalities, of time flowing in reverse of the
time of the entire galaxy, so that the expedition could return to the
vicinity of the Sun less than twenty years after takeoff, even though a
thousand parsecs separated the Harpy from Earth. The exact date of
return, of course, was indeterminate: a fraction of a second in the
navigation through brady- and retrochronalities made a difference of
years far from the presses and grinding mills of gravitation.

His mind could not accept these statements; they were fraught with
paradox. The main paradox was as follows:

The _Eurydice_ was to remain above the collapsar in nontime, or in a
time different from the ordinary. The reconnoiterers would fly to Quinta
and return: this would take more than seventy thousand hours, or roughly
eight years. From the blow of the gracer, the collapsar was supposed to
oscillate between a flattened disk and an elongated spindle for only a
moment or two—to all distant observers. When the reconnoiterers
returned, therefore, they would not find the ship in its collapsar
harbor. The black hole would long before this have resumed the shape of
a nonvibrating sphere. And yet the _Hermes,_ leaving Quinta, was to find
the mother ship in the temporal port, even though the port, having come
into existence only to disappear immediately, would surely not be there
when the _Hermes_ got back. How could one thing be reconciled with the
other?

"There are physicists," Lauger explained, "who claim to understand this
the same way they understand what stones and cupboards are. What they
understand, in fact, is only that a theory agrees with the experimental
results, with measurements. Physics, my friend, is a narrow path drawn
across a gulf that the human imagination cannot grasp. It is a set of
answers to certain questions that we put to the world, and the world
supplies the answers on the condition that we will not then ask it other
questions, questions shouted out by common sense. And common sense? It
is that which is understood by an intelligence using senses no different
from those of a baboon. Such an intelligence wishes to know the world in
terms that apply to its terrestrial, biological niche. But the
world—outside that niche, that incubator of sapient apes—has properties
that one cannot take in hand, see, sniff, gnaw, listen to, and in this
way appropriate.

"For the _Eurydice_ in her collapsar port, the flight of the _Hermes_
will take a couple of weeks. For the crew of the _Hermes,_ the flight
will take one and a half years, more or less. That's three months to
Quinta, a year on Quinta, and three months back. For observers located
neither on the _Hermes_ nor on the _Eurydice,_ the _Hermes_ will
complete its mission in nine years, while the _Eurydice_ will disappear
from sight for the same amount of time. According to the time measured
on board the mother ship, she will pass from Friday to Saturday, return
to Friday, and then the collapsar will spit her out into space.

"Time will flow more slowly on the _Hermes_ than on Earth because of its
near-light speed. On the _Eurydice,_ time, gravitationally dilated, will
flow even more slowly, and then reverse: she will descend from a
bradychronality to a retrochronality, and from there jump to a
galactochronal line. Emerging, she'll rendezvous with the _Hermes_ in an
unfolded space-time continuum.

"If the _Eurydice_ miscalculates by seconds, navigating the
variochronalities, she will not rendezvous with the _Hermes._ There is
no contradiction in this, so to speak, on the world's part. The
contradictions arise from the disparity between a mind born in the
negligible gravity of Earth and phenomena pertaining to gravities
trillions of times greater—it is that simple. The world is ordered
according to universal rules called laws of Nature, but the same rule
may manifest itself differently at different intensities.

"Take, for example, a man falling into a black hole. For him, space
takes on the aspect of time, because he is no longer able to retreat in
it, just as you cannot step backward in terrestrial time—that is, into
the past. It's impossible to imagine what such a fall would be like,
assuming, of course, that one didn't perish immediately beneath the
event horizon.

"I still believe that the world is arranged in our favor, since we can
nevertheless gain mastery over things that run counter to our senses.
Consider: a child masters a language without understanding the
principles of its grammar, its syntax, or the internal contradictions of
speech that are hidden from the speakers. (You've got me philosophizing
now.) A man craves ultimate truths. Every mortal mind, I think, is that
way. But what is ultimate truth? It's the end of the road, where there
is no more mystery, no more hope. And no more questions to ask, since
all the answers have been given. But there is no such place.

"The Universe is a labyrinth made of labyrinths. Each leads to another.
And wherever we cannot go ourselves, we reach with mathematics. Out of
mathematics we build wagons to carry us into the nonhuman realms of the
world. It is also possible to construct, out of mathematics, worlds
outside the Universe, regardless of whether or not they exist. And then,
of course, one can always abandon mathematics and its worlds, to venture
with one's faith into the world-to-come. People of the ilk of Father
Arago occupy themselves with this. The difference between us and them is
the difference between the _possibility_ that certain things will come
to pass and the _hope_ that certain things will come to pass. My field
deals with what is possible, accessible; his, with what is only hoped
for, which becomes accessible, face-to-face, only after death. What did
you learn when you died? What did you see?"

"Nothing."

"Therein lies the _differentia specified_ between science and faith. As
far as I know, the fact that those resurrected saw nothing has not
shaken the dogmas of religion. The latest eschatology of Christianity
holds that a person resurrected forgets his sojourn in the hereafter.
That by an act of Divine Censorship (they don't put it in that way, of
course) man is forbidden to hop back and forth between this world and
the next. _Credenti non fit iniuria._ If it is worth living by such a
stretchable faith, as Arago does, how much easier it is to accept the
paradoxes that allow you to pay a visit to the Quintans. Trust in
physics the way Arago trusts in his religion. Though physics, unlike
religion, is fallible. The choice is yours. Consider. And now go—I have
work to do."

It was midnight when he got back to his cabin. He thought, in turn,
about Lauger and the monk. The physicist was where he belonged—but the
other? What did the monk hope for, or count on? Missionary work? Had
modern theology indeed built an annex to accommodate the
extraterrestrial recipients of God's bounty, and was Arago to be its
spokesman? Why did he say, in the conversation, that evil might reign
there?

Only now did it dawn on him: the fear in which the man must be living.
Not fear for himself—fear for his religion. The monk could consider
Redemption a gift intended only for humanity, while participating in an
expedition to nonhuman beings, to a place, in other words, where his
Gospel did not reach. He could think that. And, believing in God's
omnipresence, he therefore would believe in the omnipresence of
individual evil, because the demon who tempted Christ predated the
Annunciation and Immaculate Conception. Then did the monk carry his
dogmas with him, the dogmas by which he lived, to put them in jeopardy?

He shook his head and sighed. Lauger he could ask any question—but the
monk, no. The Gospel made no mention of what Lazarus had to relate after
his resurrection. And so he himself could in no way assist Father Arago,
though he had risen from the dead. Religion, in self-defense, gave such
resurrections a different, secular, this-worldly name, and therefore was
not shaken. Not that he was any expert on religion. But he understood
the painful isolation of the monk, for he himself had been isolated, a
helpless, passive castaway taken on board by chance. Though no longer.

He began to undress for bed, listening to the silence of the _Eurydice._
She flew near the speed of light. Soon she would be reversing the drive.
The clocks in all the quarters would start the countdown, giving the
crew time to lie on their bunks, on their backs, and strap themselves
in. The spheres of the hull would make a 180-degree turn inside their
armored segments. Everything would spin—a moment of confusion,
vertigo—then steady, once more still and peaceful. Rather than lash the
stern, the flame of the drive would then hurtle along the bow, forward.
Communication with Earth would improve somewhat because of this. News
would reach the _Eurydice,_ news many years old, of those whom the crew
had left behind on Earth. He would receive no such laser letter, having
no one left on Earth. Instead of a past, however, he had a future, a
future for which it was worth living.

The prehistory of the expedition was full of conflict. The project had
had a multitude of opponents. Its chance of success, calculated
variously, could not be great. A catalogue of the accidents that in one
way or another could cause the destruction of the expedition numbered in
the thousands.

Perhaps it was for this reason that the project had been carried out.
Its seeming impossibility, its dangers constituted a challenge
magnificent enough for people to come forward and undertake. Before the
_Eurydice_ blasted off with growing acceleration, the cost of the
enterprise had grown at an even higher exponential rate—as was pointed
out by the opponents and critics. But the investments already made
possessed their own momentum and drew other investments after them.

The financial side of the project occasioned a rumbling no less than
Titan's upon the takeoff of the _Eurydice._ The traveler, in his
reading, skipped these preliminary crises involving the building of the
ships and the repercussions on Earth, such as the manufacturing defects
that led to political corruption scandals. What did this matter to him,
who was on board and on his way?

On the other hand, he studied the history of astronautics—records of
transsolar flights and unmanned probes to Alpha Centauri, and accounts
filled with the names of the workers of Grail and Roembden—in the hope
that he might recognize among them people he had once known well, and
possibly be able to follow the thread of that recognition back to the
enigma of himself. There were moments, before sleep or on waking, when
he felt close to remembering, particularly since in more than one dream
he knew who he was. But all he retained, waking, was the empty certainty
of that identity.

A year passed. The _Eurydice,_ braking, lost its near-light speed
relative to the collapsar, which now loomed like a real hole—an absence
of stars—in the sky. Training, learning, reading, he abandoned his
efforts to remember. And yet, though he was now chosen to be one of the
copilots of the _Hermes,_ in his dreams at night—about which he told no
one—he was still the man who had entered Birnam Wood.

V-Beta Harpyiae

 

The _Eurydice_ lost speed, cutting her drive for a few days along a
trajectory called an involute, toward Beta Harpyiae, which was
invisible, being the collapsar. She had already crossed, at a
considerable distance, some buckled isogravs, whose gravitational tides
were endurable, so far, by the crew and by the ship. The course—optimal,
chosen by computer—was safe, but safe did not mean problem-free. The
isogravs, lines connecting points of space of the same curvature,
writhed on the screens like snakes in black flame. Those who were
stationed in the "parking room"—the control room that ran the ship only
under wild variation of gravitational fields—watched the flickering
displays before them, drank beer from cans, and made small talk to pass
the time. The fact was that the men were a tradition, a relic from the
era of classical astrogation. No one now would even dream of switching
the controls to manual: no man possessed reflexes quick enough.

The collapsar belonged to a category discovered late and with great
difficulty: it was solitary. Easiest to locate were those that belonged
to binary systems, having companion stars that were "alive"—i.e., that
shined—and from which they stripped the upper layers of atmosphere. The
material was drawn in a contracting spiral toward the black hole, to
fall into it to the accompaniment of bursts of the hardest X rays. The
gases torn from the companion surrounded the collapsar in an accretion
disk, a giant plane highly unhealthy for all objects, including rockets.
No ship could navigate such a region. Before it would be sucked into the
event horizon, the radiation would destroy both human brain and
computer.

The solitary collapsar in the constellation Harpy was discovered thanks
to the perturbations it produced in the Alpha, Gamma, and Delta stars.
Appropriately named Hades, with a mass four hundred times that of the
Sun, it betrayed its increasing presence by the lack of the stars which
it occulted and by the apparent crowding of stars around its perimeter,
as it was a gravitational lens for their light. The surface of
annihilation rotated at the equator at two-thirds the speed of light,
and the centrifugal and Coriolis forces made it bulge, so that Hades was
not a perfect sphere. But even if the event horizon were spherical,
gravitational storms came and went over it, compressing and stretching
the isogravs. The possible causes of these storms or cyclones were
provided by eight theories, each one different.

The most imaginative theory (not necessarily the closest to the truth)
maintained that Hades was connected, in hyperspace, to another universe,
which gave evidence of itself by producing shock waves in the terrible
"pit" of the collapsar—the center, the singularity, the place without
dimension, without time, where the curvature of the continuum acquired a
value infinitely great. The theory of the "other side" of the Hades
nucleus, whose infinite space-time compression somehow presented no
problem for the transfinite engineers of the alien universe, was really
a mathematical fantasy spun by astronomers intoxicated with
teratopology, the latest and highly fashionable grandchild of Cantor's
ancient theory. (They were even going to christen the collapsar Cantor,
but its discoverer preferred using mythology.) Neither SETI headquarters
on Earth nor the command of the _Eurydice_ was particularly concerned
about what took place _beneath_ the event horizon, for practical,
obvious reasons: the horizon was an uncrossable boundary, and regardless
of what it covered, it very definitely represented death.

Flying in high vacuum above Hades, the _Eurydice_ responded with
appropriate maneuvers to each change in gravitation, firing from her
rockets streams of heavy elements synthesized from hydrogen and
deuterium by the Olimos Cycle. Shedding billions of tons, she cleverly
maintained stability, while Hades, bound by the laws of conservation,
supplied the vessel with a sizable portion of the energy released by all
that it swallowed and buried forever in its interior. This was, roughly,
like a balloon holding altitude at the price of ballast thrown
overboard. But only roughly: no pilot would have been able to negotiate
such a course.

The segmented hull of the ship, made of rings connected by swivel
joints, resembled from a distance a mile-long earthworm that writhed
like a white comma above the immensity of the black hole. It would have
made an interesting sight, no doubt, but there was no observer and could
be none, since the valiant companion of the _Eurydice_—the
_Orpheus_—which was to open the gates of hell for her, was unmanned. In
constant laser communication with the giant nymph, it awaited the signal
that would turn it into a resonance bomb, a single-pulse gracer. A
similar though thousand times smaller gracer had been tested in the
solar system, and in the process deprived Saturn of its second largest
moon. When even the laser contact began to worsen, the _Orpheus_
received the final program and, obediently falling silent, commenced the
countdown in its machine centers. It drew closer to the collapsar than
the _Eurydice._ Light and every kind of related electromagnetic wave
smeared and bent, driven through the infrared to the radio and
ultraradio bands. As Hades twisted the surrounding space and time above
its horizon of destruction, the _Eurydice_ made the final, critical
observations of Quinta, the fifth planet of the sixth sun of the Harpy,
the real destination of the expedition. Ejected previously into space
far from the collapsar, cameras took pictures of the planet, using no
little aperture: two astronomical units. The image—or, rather, the
three-dimensional model—of Quinta took focus on the holovision. A hazy,
blue-speckled, cloud-covered sphere hung in the auditorium between the
many-leveled galleries.

No one, true, watched it there. The holoscope had supposedly been
installed in the auditorium because it was donated to the expedition by
a Japanese firm for purposes of advertising the product to planetariums
on Earth. But though the spectacle was dramatic, it was of no real use
to the astrophysicists. They had accepted it because the whole apparatus
took up little room in the walls of the forward observatory room, while
the planet-scope, placed under a transparent dome,
filled—ornamentally—the empty center. Visitors came to view the images
of nebulas or planets inside it; there was no other way to look at the
cosmic scenery, the hull of the _Eurydice_ being windowless.

The survivor from Titan now had a last name: Tempe. Tempe was the valley
in which Orpheus first met Eurydice. The name was given him by Ter Horab
during a confidential meeting of the scout ship's full crew. Actually,
it may not have been Ter Horab who named him. On that occasion, Mark
received the position of second copilot of the _Hermes,_ and the
Commander, announcing the assignments, pretended not to notice anything.
Lauger denied authorship—or, rather, dodged the question with the joke
that they had all fallen under the influence of Greek mythology.

As long as the constant gravity on board allowed, as the ship lost
speed, Mark visited Lauger frequently and listened to his debates with
Gold and Nakamura, the astrophysicists. These debates usually turned on
the mystery of the civilizations "above the window," the ones that had
departed from the main road in Ortega and Nilssen's diagram. Since
nothing was known about their fate, they offered no small challenge to
the imagination. The opinions held by the majority of those fascinated
by the mystery could be divided roughly into two schools, according to
the reason for the silence: whether it was sociological or cosmological.
Gold, though a physicist, held to a sociological explanation—an extreme
one, called "sociolysis."

The first thing a society did upon entering an era of technological
acceleration was to disturb the living environment. Later it might wish
to rescue that environment, but conservation measures would prove
insufficient, and the biosphere would be replaced—of necessity,
inevitably—by artifacts. There would arise an environment completely
transformed, though not artificial in the human sense of the word.
"Artificial," to humans, was what they produced themselves; "natural"
was what remained untouched, or was only harnessed, like water turning a
turbine or like cultivated earth subjected to agricultural procedures.
"Above the window," this distinction ceased to exist. If everything
became "artificial," then nothing was "artificial." Production,
intelligence, science were "transplanted" into the surrounding world;
electronics—or its unknown counterparts and manifestations—took the
place of institutions, legislative bodies, government, schools,
hospitals; the ethnic identity of national collectives disappeared,
borders disappeared, along with the police, and the courts, and the
prisons. Then one might have a "Second Stone Age": universal illiteracy
and idleness. Employment would not be required for survival. Anyone who
wanted could have employment, of course, because everyone could do
absolutely whatever he liked. This did not have to mean stagnation: the
environment was an obedient guardian, and to the extent that it was
able, it could change itself according to wishes or demands.

Could it change so that "progress" would take place? We had no answer
for that, since we ourselves assigned to the concept of "progress"
different meanings, depending on the historical moment. Could one call
"scientific progress" a situation in which intellectual, creative,
cognitive, and constructional activities were so specialized that in
each profession one dug deeper in an ever-narrower plot of ground? If
machines counted faster and better than a living being, why should the
living being count? If photosynthesis systems produced food that was
more nutritious and varied than what farmers, bakers, chefs, and
confectioners could supply, then why till the soil or grind flour or
bake bread? A civilization in such sociolysis did not broadcast in every
direction of the heavens its recipe for the perfect life. And why should
it, when it no longer even existed as a union formed by a unsatisfied
hunger of stomachs and minds?

The result would be not a society but an enormous collection of
individuals, and it would be hard, indeed, to find one individual who
would choose as his life's work the signaling, on a cosmic scale, of how
he was getting along. The artificial environment would unquestionably be
designed by its engineers so that it could not ever acquire the
attributes of a planetary "personality." Such an artificial environment
would be _no one_, like a meadow, forest, or steppe—with the difference
that it would grow and blossom not on its own, not for itself, but for
someone. For beings. Would they become stupid from this, turning into
dull-witted gluttons that whiled away their hours with toys provided by
the planetary guardian? Not necessarily. It depended on the point of
view.

What was delusion or idleness for one man might be, for another, a
life's passion. We had no standard to measure and evaluate, particularly
in the case of other beings on another world in another period of a
history different from our own.

But Nakamura and Lauger favored the cosmological hypothesis. He who
explored space would perish in space. Not that he would lose his
life—the aphorism had a completely different meaning. Astronomy,
astrophysics, space travel—these were but the small, modest beginnings.
We ourselves had taken the next step, learning the rudiments of sidereal
engineering. And it was not a matter of expansion, the so-called shock
wave of Intelligence of yore: where Intelligence, taking possession of
its own and then its neighboring planets, was supposed to spread in a
stellar emigration throughout the galaxy. For what purpose? To increase
the population density of space? No, it was not a matter of _crescite et
multiplicamini,_ but concerned things that we could not understand, let
alone characterize. Could a chimpanzee understand the labors of a
cosmologist?

Was the Universe nothing but a very large pie, and a civilization a
child trying to consume the pie as quickly as possible? The notion of
invasions by aliens was a projection of the aggressive traits of the
predatory, barely civilized ape-man. If he himself willingly did unto
others as he would rather not be done by, then he pictured the Advanced
Civilization on much the same principle. Flotillas of galactic
battleships were supposed to fall upon unsuspecting little planets, to
lay hands on the local dollars, diamonds, chocolates, and, of course,
beautiful women—for whom aliens had about as much use as we did for
female crocodiles.

How, then, did those "above the window" occupy themselves? With
activities beyond our conception. Yet, at the same time, we could not
accept that they were beyond our conception. Here we were about to make
a hole in Hades, in the temporal onion, in order to hide in it. But we
were not playing hide-and-seek. We wished to catch a civilization before
it flew out the window. The probability of future expeditions with the
same goal was minuscule. Our descendants would, perhaps, even pay
tribute to us: the kind of tribute we paid to the Argonauts who went in
search of the golden fleece.

Yusupov, who also dropped in on Lauger, described this view of
civilizations beyond the interval of contact as "knowledge by
unknowledge." But eventually he had to drop out of the discussions,
because the proximity of the goal required his almost constant presence
at the control center.

Mark Tempe—who knew that he had another name, but said nothing, out of
consideration for the doctors—studied the roster of the crew of the
_Hermes_ before bed. Of the ten, he knew only Gerbert well and, from the
get-togethers at Lauger's, the short, dark-eyed Nakamura. About the
captain under whom he would be serving, he knew next to nothing. The
man's name was Steergard; he was Ter Horab's second in command, and his
additional specialty was sociodynamic game theory. (Every participant of
the reconnaissance mission had to have a field that duplicated someone
else's, so that in case of accident or illness the functioning of the
team would not be impaired. ) The gravistician Polassar was in charge of
the drive on the _Hermes._ Mark knew him only as an excellent swimmer
and diver in the pool on the _Eurydice,_ where he had admired the man's
muscular body performing triple twists off the high board. That was not
the place to acquaint oneself with sidereal engineering, so Mark tried
tackling the subject on his own—in vain: the introduction to it required
a familiarity with a sophisticated offshoot of the theory of relativity.
The first pilot was Harrach. Large, heavy, irascible, he also knew
information theory and shared with the astromatician Albright the care
of the _Hermes'_ computer. Or—as that computer once put it—the two
humans were entrusted to _its_ care.

This was a computer of the "last" generation—last, because no other
could have greater calculating power. Limits were imposed by such
properties of matter as Planck's constant and the speed of light.
Greater calculating ability could be achieved only by the so-called
imaginary computers, designed by theorists engaged in pure mathematics
and not dependent on the real world. The constructors' dilemma arose
from the necessity of satisfying mutually exclusive conditions to pack
the most neurons into the smallest volume. The travel time of the
signals could not be longer than the reaction time of the components;
otherwise, the time taken by the signals would limit the speed of
calculation. The newest relays responded in one-hundred-billionth of a
second. They were the size of atoms, so that an actual computer had a
diameter of barely three centimeters. A computer any larger would be
slower. The _Hermes'_ computer did indeed take up half the control room,
but that was for its peripherals: decoders, hierarchic assemblers, and
so-called hypothesis generators, which, with the linguistic modules, did
not operate in real time. But decisions in critical situations, _in
extremis,_ were made by the lightning-swift core, which was no bigger
than a pigeon's egg. It was named DEUS: Digital Engrammic Universal
System. Not everyone believed that the acronym was accidental. The
_Hermes_ was equipped with two DEUSes; the _Eurydice_ had eighteen.

In addition to Steergard, Nakamura, Gerbert, Polassar, and Harrach, all
of whom had been chosen for the reconnaissance mission prior to takeoff,
Arago was to participate in it as a reserve physician—an unexpected
result of the secret balloting. And there was Tempe in the post of
second pilot, the logician Rotmont, and two men selected out of a dozen
exobiologists and other experts from the presidium of SETI on Earth:
Kirsting and El Salam. In the last weeks of the voyage the ten took
quarters in the fifth section of the _Eurydice,_ which contained an
exact mock-up of the interior of the _Hermes,_ so that they could become
familiar both with each other and with the task ahead of them. Every day
they played out, on the simulators, different variants of the approach
to Quinta as well as the tactics of establishing contact with its
inhabitants. Another of the men from SETI, Chu, running these
simulations, saw to it that the future crew of the _Hermes_ got to know
one another well, throwing them into the most fiendish emergencies,
where accidents coincided with other accidents or with a flood of
incomprehensible signals imitating the voice of the alien planet. No one
knew how or why it happened, but during this time the apostolic delegate
began to be called not Father but Dr. Arago. Mark had the impression
that the priest himself preferred this. Then the simulations were cut
short; Ter Horab summoned the reconnaissance group to brief them on the
latest observations of the Zeta System.

Of the eight planets of that tranquil class-K star, the four inner
ones—small, with masses on the order of Mercury or Mars—showed a good
deal of volcanic activity and hardly any atmosphere. In the distance,
Zeta was orbited by three gas giants like Jupiter, ringed, with
powerful, stormy atmospheres of superdense hydrogen. Septima, twice as
heavy as Jupiter, threw off into space more energy than it received from
its sun: little would have been required to kindle it into a star. Only
Quinta, having a one-and-a-half-year period of revolution around Zeta,
shone blue like Earth. Breaks in the white clouds revealed the outlines
of oceans and continents. Observation at a distance of nearly five
light-years presented considerable difficulties. The resolution of the
optical instruments on the _Eurydice_ was not adequate to the task, nor
were the images beamed from the orbiters that were sent out sharp
enough.

Quinta was in its second quarter from the Eurydice's vantage; half the
disk was illuminated. Over it, the spectral lines of water and hydroxyl
in large concentrations had just been discovered—as if, right at the
equator, Quinta was encircled by a belt of remarkably compressed water
vapor. Yet the belt lay above, outside the atmosphere. The possibility
of an ice ring was suggested, whose inner edge touched the top layer of
the atmosphere. Which meant that before long it would break up. The
astrophysicists estimated its mass to be between three and four trillion
tons. If the water came from the ocean, the ocean would have lost about
20,000 cubic kilometers: not more than 1 percent of its volume. As it
was impossible to find any natural cause for this phenomenon,
engineering became highly probable—undertaken for the purpose of
lowering the level of the seas, thereby uncovering the continental
shelves and creating additional dry land for settlement. On the other
hand, the whole operation seemed poorly executed: the frozen fraction of
the ocean, not put into an orbit high enough, would have to fall back
down after a mere several hundred years. Given the scale of the project,
this seemed strange, incomprehensible.

Things even more mysterious, events, could be observed on Quinta. The
electromagnetic noise, emitted unequally from many places on the planet,
intensified considerably, as if hundreds of maxwellian transmitters had
been turned on at once. At the same time, the radiation in the infrared
increased, with small flashes at the centers. These could be mirrors
focusing sunlight for power plants. But then it turned out that the
thermal component of that emission was not great. The spectra of the
flashes were not copies of the spectrum of Zeta (as they would have been
in the case of reflection), nor did they resemble the spectra of nuclear
explosions. Meanwhile the radio noise continued to grow—shortwave and
medium-wave, in many bands. The meter-length emission had the look of
being modulated. This produced great excitement, particularly when
someone garbled the news to the effect that the radiation was directed
like radar—or, in other words, that the planet had already noticed the
_Eurydice._ The astrophysicists ignored this rumor: no kind of radar
could have detected the ship near the collapsar.

The mood at zero hour was jubilant. Beyond all doubt Quinta was
inhabited by a civilization so advanced technologically that it had
entered the Cosmos not merely in small craft but with a power able to
lift oceans into space.

Preparations for takeoff of the scout ship took place in an altered
orbit, in the relatively calm aphelion of Hades. The piping of the
piezoelectric indicators, showing the constant change in stresses in the
ribs and girders of the hull, died away. At the same time, on the
screens of the takeoff control center—blank until now—there appeared at
an angle a glowing, spiral arm of the galaxy, and with good will and a
little imagination one could pick out, among the whitish, motionless
swirls of stars and the dark dust clouds, Zeta Harpyiae. Its planets
were not optically visible. The technicians readied the _Hermes_ for
unmooring.

In the storage bays at the stern, cranes swiveled; the flanges of the
pipes with which the _Eurydice_ filled the hypergolic fuel tanks of the
scout ship shuddered under the pressure of the pumps. The head staff
checked the systems—drive, navigation, air control, the dynatrons—once
through DEUS and once without, employing parallel lines. One by one, the
numbered units announced that their programs were ready; radio
range-finders and antennas protruded and moved like the horns of a giant
snail; the deep bass of the turbines that pumped oxygen to the tunnels
in the hold of the _Hermes_ sent subtle vibrations through its
dock-shaped bed. During all this antlike bustle, the billion-ton
_Eurydice_ slowly turned her stern in the direction of Zeta Harpyiae
like a cannon about to fire.

The crew of the _Hermes_ parted with the Commander and their best
friends. There were too many people on board the mother ship for
everyone to shake hands. Then Ter Horab, with those who were able to
leave their stations, escorted the crew of the _Hermes_ and stood in the
cylindrical passage between the sections while, after the closing of the
large dock gate, the small personnel hatches were shut and, as on a
launching chute, the _Hermes_ began to move gradually, white as snow,
pushed inch by inch by hydraulic jacks, since the
hundred-and-eighty-thousand-ton mass, though weightless, preserved every
bit of its inertia. The technicians of the _Eurydice,_ with the
biologists Davis and Vahradian, were already putting the crew of the
_Hermes_ to sleep—a sleep that would last many years, but without ice or
hibernation. Instead they were subjected to embryonization, a process in
which people returned to a life before birth—a fetal existence, or at
least strikingly similar: no breath, underwater.

Man's first small steps into space had shown how very terrestrial a
creature he was, how poorly adapted to the powerful forces required by
the crossing of great distances as rapidly as possible. Violent
acceleration crushed the body, especially the lungs, which were filled
with air; the force flattened the rib cage and stopped the circulation
of the blood. If the laws of nature could not be bent, then one had to
change the astronauts to conform to them. Embryonization accomplished
this.

First the blood was replaced with an oxygen-carrying fluid that also
possessed other properties of blood, from coagulability to the
immunological functions. This fluid, white as milk, was onax. After the
body's temperature was lowered to that of hibernating animals, closed
vessels were surgically reopened: vessels through which the fetus at one
time had exchanged blood with the placenta in the mother's womb. Though
the heart continued to work, respiration ceased in the lungs, which
collapsed and filled with onax. When there was no air remaining in
either the rib cage or the intestines, the unconscious man was immersed
in a liquid as incompressible as water. The astronaut then was locked
inside an embryonator, a container in the shape of a two-meter torpedo
that kept the body above freezing and supplied it with nutritive
substances and oxygen. Onax was pumped into the organism by artificial
vessels through the navel.

A man thus prepared could withstand tremendous pressures without harm,
like bathypelagic fish which were not crushed at depths of miles beneath
the ocean because the outside pressure equaled the pressure within their
tissues. The liquid in the embryonator was kept, therefore, at hundreds
of atmospheres per square centimeter of body surface. Each such
container on the ship was held in swinging suspension by pincers. The
astronauts lay in their armored cocoons like giant pupas, in such a way
that acceleration and deceleration hit them always chest-first. The
bodies, now more than 85 percent water and onax, already airless, were
as compression-resistant as water. Thanks to this, there was no problem
in maintaining a constant acceleration of 20 g's, at which a body
weighed two tons, and moving the ribs to breathe would have been a task
beyond even an athlete. But the embryonized did not breathe, and the
limit of their durability for stellar flight was fixed only by the
delicate molecular structure of the cells.

When ten hearts in full embryonizative compression were beating only a
few times a minute, DEUS assumed charge of the unconscious, and the
people of the _Eurydice_ returned on board. The operators then
disconnected the computers of the mother ship from the _Hermes._ Except
for the dead cables, nothing now joined the two craft.

The _Eurydice_ ejected the scout ship from her wide-open stern, which
was ringed with the giant plates of an expanding photon mirror. Her
steel claws, extending, tore away the useless cables like threads and
thrust the hull of the _Hermes_ into the void. Then the _Hermes'_ side
engines glowed with pale ionic flame. But the impulse was too weak to
move it from its place; such an enormous mass could not acquire speed
suddenly. The _Eurydice_ drew in her catapults and closed the stern, and
everyone observing the takeoff from her control room breathed a sigh of
relief: DEUS, correct to the fraction of a second, took over. The
hypergolic boosters of the _Hermes,_ silent until now, fired. To build
impetus, the batteries fired in sequence. At the same time, the ionic
engines blazed full-force. Their blue, transparent flame mixed with the
blinding glare of the boosters; the hull, wrapped in shimmering heat,
moved smoothly, evenly, into the eternal night. In the darkened control
room, the reflection from the screens made the faces of those who stood
by the Commander deathly pale.

The _Hermes,_ sending toward them a lengthening tail of steady flame,
grew more distant as its speed increased. When the telemeters indicated
the necessary distance, and when at the edge of the field of vision an
empty cylinder tumbled end over end in free-fall (up to the last minute
it had connected the _Hermes_ and the _Eurydice,_ and now, shot by the
starting salvos, it flew off into the darkness), the mirror of the
billion-ton ship locked in place. Through the central opening the blunt
cone of an emitter slowly emerged; it flashed once, twice, three times,
until a column of light stabbed space and hit the _Hermes._ In both
control rooms of the _Eurydice_ there was a triumphant cheer and—it must
be confessed—an exclamation of surprise, too, that the thing had gone
off so well. The _Hermes_ soon vanished from the visual monitors. The
screens showed only dwindling, glowing circles, as if an invisible giant
had lit a cigarette among the stars and blown rings of white smoke.
Finally these rings fused into a trembling point that was the mirror of
the scout ship reflecting the _Eurydice s_ driving laser.

Ter Horab returned to his cabin before the scene was over. He had
seventy-nine difficult hours ahead of him—of sidereal manipulations with
the gracer of the _Orpheus,_ to create a temporal port in the
gravitational resonances. And then to enter it—or, rather, to become
submerged in it—since this meant being cut off completely from the
outside world.

The ignition order, sent to the _Orpheus,_ took two days to reach it,
and it was in that time that the several strange phenomena took place on
Quinta. Up until the moment that their instruments were totally blinded,
the astrophysicists tuned into the entire galactic emission from the
region of the Harpy. The spectra of the Alpha, Delta, and Zeta stars in
no way changed, which was an important test of the quality of the
reception of Quinta. The radiation reaching the _Eurydice_ from the
planet was filtered, and the different exposures were compared,
superimposed, and sharpened by computer cascade amplifiers. At the
highest visual magnification, the Zeta system was a spot that a match
head held at arm's length would cover.

The attention of the planetologists was focused, naturally, on Quinta.
Its spectro- and holograms created not so much an image of the planet as
a computer guess. Because the source of information was diverging
photons spread out erratically over the whole spectrum of radiation,
there was at the observatory on the _Eurydice_—just as at the
observatories on Earth long ago, with the first telescopes—no agreement
on the critical question of _what was actually seen and what only seemed
to be seen._

The mind of man, like any system processing information, could not draw
a sharp line between certainty and conjecture. Observation was hindered
by Quinta's sun, Zeta, by the gas plume of its largest globe, Septima,
and by the strong emission of the stellar background. So far, it was
found that in many physical respects Quinta did resemble Earth. The
atmosphere contained 29 percent oxygen; there was plenty of water vapor
and about 60 percent nitrogen. The white polar caps, having a high
albedo, could be seen even from the vicinity of Earth's sun. The ring of
ice must have arisen during the flight of the _Eurydice,_ or at least
reached the proportions that made it visible. Now, viewed from the
cosmic neighborhood, the artificial nature of Quinta's radio intensity
was beyond question. Discharges from atmospheric storms could not
possibly have been a factor. In radio intensity in the shortwave range,
Quinta equaled the corresponding emission of its own sun. The same thing
had happened with Earth after the global spread of television.

The results of the observations made shortly before the plunge into the
gravitational harbor were a shock. Ter Horab immediately summoned the
experts. The council's only line of action was to diagnose as quickly as
possible what was taking place on the planet and to send that message
after the scout ship. The message, coded in the alphabet of high-energy
quanta, would overtake the _Hermes_ and its unconscious crew. DEUS would
receive the message and convey it to the people upon their reanimation
at the edge of the Zeta system. The stellar message was to be encoded so
that only DEUS could read it. Caution was indicated: the changes on
Quinta were alarming.

1) Several series of brief flashes above the thermosphère and ionosphere
of the planet had been recorded, also between it and its moon—about two
hundred thousand kilometers from Quinta. The flashes lasted thirty to
forty nanoseconds. Spectrally, they matched the solar emission, with the
radiation cut off in the infrared and ultraviolet.

2) After each of these series of flashes, which took many hours, there
appeared on the face of the planet, in the intertropical zone, dark
streaks on both sides of the ice ring.

3) At the same time, the emission of approximately meter-length waves
increased, exceeding all previously observed maxima, while the emission
of the southern hemisphere weakened.

4) Immediately before the council met, a bolometer aimed at the center
of the planet's face registered a sharp drop in temperature on the order
of 180 degrees Kelvin, with a slow return to equilibrium. The cold spot
had an area equal to Australia. At first the cloud cover vanished above
the spot, surrounding it on all sides with a very bright embankment of
clouds; before the clouds returned, the bolometer located the "cold
source" at a single point in the exact center of the spot. Thus the
sudden cooling had expanded, from a source of unknown nature, in a
circular front.

5) On Quinta's large moon there appeared—in the dark hemisphere, not
facing the sun—a point flash that flickered—moved independently of the
motion of the moon's surface. As if, just above the crust, through an
arc of one-ten-thousandth of a second, a flame traveled, made of atomic
plasma at a temperature of a million degrees Kelvin.

6) As the council began deliberating, the cold spot disappeared beneath
the clouds, and then the cloud cover obscured the surface of Quinta to
an extent unprecedented: 92 percent of the planet's face.

The opinions of the specialists, as one might have guessed, were
divided. The first hypothesis that leaped to mind—of nuclear explosions,
whether as tests or as warfare—could be discarded without further
discussion: the flashes had nothing in common spectrally either with
explosions of the uranides or with thermonuclear reactions. The
exception was the plasmatic spark on the moon, but its thermonuclear
spectrum was continuous. One thought of an open hydrogen-helium reactor
in a magnetic vise. To the nucleonics people the purpose of such a
reactor was a mystery.

The flashes in space nearer the planet could come from specially tuned
lasers hitting metallic objects—nickel and magnetite meteors,
possibly—or from the collision of bodies of high iron, nickel, and
titanium content, if they collided head-on and at speeds on the order of
80 to 100 km/sec. But neither could one rule out as source converter
mirrors (which absorbed a portion of the sun's waves) exploding because
of malfunctions.

The council got into a heated debate; the experts disagreed with one
another. There was talk of climate control with the aid of very large
photoconverters, and of photoelectric cells—which, however, had no
connection with the focus of cold at the equator. But the most
astounding thing was the result of the Fourier analysis done on the
entire radio spectrum of Quinta. All trace of modulation disappeared,
while at the same time the power of the transmitters increased. A
radiolocation map of the planet showed hundreds of transmitters of white
noise, which merged into shapeless blotches. Quinta was emitting noise
on all wavelengths. The noise was either the scrambling of broadcast
signals or a kind of coded communication concealed by the semblance of
chaos—or else it was chaos indeed, created intentionally.

Ter Horab demanded an immediate answer to the question of _what_ should
be beamed to the _Hermes_ within the next few hours, since all contact
with it would be severed after that. More to the point: for what should
the reconnoiterers prepare themselves, and how should they proceed once
they were in the Zeta system?

The reconnaissance program had been worked out long before, but it was
obviously impossible for them to have taken into account the phenomena
just observed.

At first no one was anxious to take the floor. Finally the astromatician
Tuym, as a spokesman for the advisory group SETI, said with undisguised
reluctance that no helpful advice could be sent to the _Hermes._ They
should list the facts, provide a hypothetical explanation, and rely on
the independent judgment of the crew.

Ter Horab wanted to hear some hypotheses—it did not matter if they were
mutually contradictory.

"Whatever the changes on Quinta are, they are not signals directed at
us," said Tuym. "On that we are all agreed. Some believe that Quinta has
noticed our presence and is preparing itself, in its own way, to receive
the _Hermes._ This is not an idea based on rational data, it is
simply—in _my_ opinion—an expression of anxiety, or, to put it plainly,
fear. A very old and primitive fear, which at one time gave rise to
nightmares of cosmic invasion. I consider such an explanation of the
phenomena to be nonsense."

Ter Horab preferred specifics. The people of the reconnaissance mission
could decide for themselves whether they should be afraid or not. It was
the mechanism of the new phenomena that interested him.

"Our astrophysicists have specific hypotheses. They can present them,"
replied Tuym, unruffled by the sarcasm of the Commander's words, since
it was not directed at him. "Who?" asked Ter Horab. Tuym indicated
Nystedt and Fecteau.

"The jumps in temperature and albedo could have been caused by a meteor
swarm entering Quinta's system and colliding with artificial satellites.
That could have produced the flashes," said Nystedt.

"How do you explain the similarity of the surface flashes to the
spectrum of Zeta?"

"Some of the satellites of Quinta could be hunks of ice broken off from
the outer edge of the ring. They would reflect the sunlight in our
direction only at certain angles of incidence and reflection—randomly.
They would be irregular solids, with different orbital moments."

"And what about the cold spot?" asked the Commander. "Who knows the
possible ways it could have come about?"

"That's unclear—though we could come up with some natural mechanism..."

"An ad hoc hypothesis," Tuym remarked.

"I talked this over with the chemists," said Lauger. "An endothermic
reaction could have taken place there. I'm not comfortable with such an
oddity, I admit, but there _are_ compounds that absorb heat when they
react. The accompanying circumstances, however, point to something more
dramatic."

"To what?" asked Ter Horab.

"An unnatural cause, though not necessarily one that has intention. For
example—an accident in some enormous refrigeration devices, in cryogenic
equipment. Like a fire in an industrial complex, but with a negative
sign. But this doesn't seem very likely to me, either. I have no facts
on which to base such an assertion—none of us have—but the very
proximity in time of all these changes suggests that they are somehow
connected."

"The value of your hypothesis also has a negative sign," said one of the
physicists.

"I don't think so. The reduction of many unknowns to a common unknown
denominator represents a gain, not a loss, in information," replied
Lauger easily.

"Please go on," the Commander said to him. Lauger stood.

"I'll say what I can. An infant, smiling, smiles according to
assumptions that it has brought with it into the world. These
assumptions, of a statistical nature, are multitudinous: that the
pinkish blobs its little eyes perceive are people's faces, that people
usually react positively to the smile of a baby, and so on."

"What is your point?"

"That everything is based on certain assumptions, though the
assumptions, as a rule, are made silently. Our discussion deals with
events that appear very improbable as a series of unrelated things—the
flashes, the chaotic emission, the changes in Quinta's albedo, the
plasma on the moon. What caused them? you ask. The activity of a
civilization. Does this clarify anything? On the contrary, it mystifies,
because we began with the tacit assumption that we would be able to
understand the actions of the Quintans.

"Mars, as I recall, was once considered old, and Venus young, in
comparison with Earth: the great-grandfathers of our astronomers
automatically assumed that Earth was the same as Mars and Venus, except
younger than the first and older than the second. Hence, the canals of
Mars, the wild jungles of Venus, et cetera, which eventually all had to
be chucked out as fairy tales. I don't think anything can behave as
unintelligently as intelligence. There may be a mind on Quinta—or
minds—inaccessible to us because of a difference in purposes..."

"War?" The voice came from the back of the hall.

Lauger, still standing, continued.

"War is not an absolutely closed set of conflicts with destruction as
the resultant. Commander—don't count on being enlightened. Since we know
neither the initial states nor the parameters, nothing can turn the
unknowns into knowns. All we can tell the _Hermes_ is to proceed with
caution. You would prefer more specific advice? I can only offer two
possibilities: the actions of those intelligences are unintelligent—or
else unintelligible, not fitting in the categories of our thought. But
this is only an opinion, nothing more."

VI-Quinta

 

Before the plunge, the radiolocators tracked the _Hermes_ for the last
time, showing how it described a great hyperbola across the firmament,
rising higher and higher above the arm of the galactic spiral, in order
that in deep vacuum it could travel near the speed of light. Then the
radio echoes began to arrive at increasing intervals, a sign that the
_Hermes_ was experiencing relativistic effects and that its on-board
time was diverging from the time of the _Eurydice._ All contact between
the scout ship and the mother ship terminated when the signals from the
automatic transmitter grew in wavelength, spread to bands of many
kilometers, and weakened. The last signal was noted, by the most
sensitive indicator, in the seventieth hour after the start, just as
Hades, hit by the suiciding _Orpheus,_ groaned in gravitational
resonance and opened wide its temporal chasms. Whatever might happen to
the scout ship and the men locked within it would have to remain unknown
for many years (of their time).

For those who slept the sleep of embryonization, a sleep like
death—devoid of dreams or any awareness, through dreams, of the passage
of time—the flight had no duration. Over the white sarcophagi in the
tunnellike embryonator, through the armored glass of the periscope,
shone Alpha Harpyiae, a blue giant that had been deflected from the
stars of the constellation by one of its own asymmetric eruptions, as it
was young and not yet stabilized after the nuclear ignition of its
interior. When the _Eurydice_ vanished, DEUS took over the controls. The
_Hermes,_ having climbed above the ecliptic, plummeted like a stone
toward Hades, initially retreating from the star of its destination in
order to reach it more easily, at the gravitational cost of the
collapsar: circling the collapsar, it received from its field a hefty
push. Then, at a speed approaching light, the _Hermes_ extended from its
sides the intakes of the flowstream reactors. Space was so empty that
the collected atoms were insufficient for ignition; DEUS therefore
excited the hydrogen with injections of tritium until the synthesis
finally started. The throats of the engines, black until now, filled
with light that pulsed faster and more intensely. Fiery columns of
helium spouted into the darkness. The _Eurydice's_ laser had given the
scout ship less help at the takeoff than expected, since one of the
hypergolic boosters misfired, which moved the stern mirror off
course—and then the _Eurydice_ disappeared, as if swallowed by the void.
But DEUS quickly made up for the loss with power borrowed from Hades.

At 99 percent of the speed of light, the space in the engine intakes
grew denser; there was more than enough hydrogen. The constant
acceleration increased the mass of the scout ship. DEUS held to 20 g's
without the least deviation. The structure, designed to withstand four
times such thrust, suffered no damage. But no living organism larger
than a flea could have borne its own weight on that flight. Each man
weighed over two tons. Under that crush he could not have moved his ribs
if he had had to breathe, and his heart would have burst trying to pump
a fluid far heavier than liquid lead. But they did not breathe and their
hearts now did not beat, though they lived. The crew lay in the same
liquid medium that had replaced their blood. Pumps that would have
functioned at a hundred times the gravity (though the embryonized could
not have endured that) pushed onax through their vessels, and the hearts
contracted once or twice a minute, not working but, instead, passively
moved by the influx of the life-giving artificial blood.

At the right moment, DEUS executed a change of course. Heading now
straight for the corotating swirl of stars of the galaxy, the _Hermes_
threw out in front of its prow a protective shield. The shield preceded
the ship by several miles; seemingly stationary at that distance, it
served as a radiation screen. Otherwise, as the speed mounted, cosmic
rays would have destroyed too many neurons in the human brains. The blue
Alpha now shone astern. Inside the long tunnel-hold of the _Hermes,_
however, it was not completely dark; the insulation around the reactors
allowed microscopic leakage of quanta, and the walls glowed with
Cherenkov radiation. This pale twilight seemed quiescent, perfectly
still, unchanging. Only twice, through the thick window in the barrier
that separated the embryonator from the upper deck, were there sharp,
sudden flashes.

The first time, a control monitor of the protective shield, blank until
then, blazed a cold white and immediately went out. DEUS, awakened in a
terasecond, gave the necessary order. Current turned levers; the prow of
the ship opened and spat flame; a new shield, ejected forward, replaced
the one destroyed by a handful of cosmic dust. The dust, from the speed
of impact, had turned the shielding disk into an incandescent cloud of
split atoms. The _Hermes_ flew through this solar firework, which then
stretched far in its wake, and pressed on. The auto required a few
seconds to stop the unwanted lateral motion of the new shield, whose
port and starboard orange lights blinked more and more slowly, as if a
sleepy black cat were winking meaningfully at DEUS. Then everything was
again still on the ship, until the next striking of grains from a
meteorite or comet tail, when the operation of renewing the protective
shield was repeated exactly.

Finally the flickering electrons in the cesium clocks gave the awaited
signal. DEUS did not need to look at any indicators: the indicators were
its senses and it read their state directly with its brain—which,
because of its three-centimeter size, the jokers of the Eurydice had
called the "birdbrain." DEUS kept careful track of the lumenal readouts,
to maintain the course during the reduction of the drive. The engines,
cut and turned around, began to brake the ship. This maneuver, too, was
carried out perfectly: the guiding stars did not so much as budge in the
sights, so there was no need for any programmed correction of the
trajectory.

The idea was that the reduction of a near-light velocity to a parabolic
velocity with respect to Zeta—that is, down to some 80 km/sec per
microparsec before reaching Juno, the outermost planet of the
system—would require a simple reversal of the drive, until it went out
by itself from lack of hydrogen. Then the hypergolics could be used for
braking. But DEUS had received the warning from the _Eurydice_ in time,
and before beginning the reanimation procedures it reprogrammed the
approach. The technological—artificial—nature of both the light from
hydrogen-helium exhaust cones and the flame of self-igniting fuels was
easily identified, and DEUS's first rule now was that of "extremely
limited trust in our Brothers in Intelligence." It had never studied the
Bible, had never analyzed the incident of Cain and Abel, yet it shut off
the flowstream engines in the shadow of Juno and used the planet's
gravity to reduce speed and change course. The second gas globe of Zeta
served it to drop down to a parabolic velocity. Only then did it
activate the reanimators.

At the same time, it sent remote-control robots outside, to place on the
nozzles of the stern and prow a camouflaging device, an electromagnetic
mixer. From now on the flame of the drive would be blurred, its
radiation spectrally dispersed.

The most delicate stage of the braking occurred at the threshold of the
system, behind Juno. DEUS planned and performed it deftly, as befitted a
computer of the ultimate generation. It simply had the _Hermes_ cut
through the upper layers of the gas giant's atmosphere. A cushion of
blazing plasma was created before the ship; losing speed in it, DEUS
wrung everything it could out of the _Hermes'_ air-control system to
keep the temperature in the embryonator from rising more than two
degrees.

In an instant, the plasma cushion destroyed the protective shield, which
in any case was to have been discarded. The shield was replaced by one
of another type, for protecting against dust and comet fragments in
planetary orbits. The _Hermes_ was blinded in the fiery passage, but
cooled while still in Juno's cone of shadow. DEUS made sure that the
flaming clouds caused by the braking maneuver, practically prominences,
subsided on the heavy planet in accordance with Newton's laws. Thus not
only the presence but the trail of the _Hermes_ was effaced. The ship,
engines extinguished, drifted in a far aphelion, while in the
embryonator all the lights went on and the heads of the medicoms hung
over the containers, ready to begin.

According to the program, Gerbert was to be the first to awaken—to
intervene as a doctor, should intervention be necessary. But here the
sequence of the procedure was broken. The biological factor, despite
everything, remained the weakest link in the chain of these complex
operations.

The embryonator was housed in the middle deck and, compared with the
ship, was a microscopic shell surrounded by many layers of armor and by
antiradiation insulation. It had two escape hatches that led to living
quarters. The center of the _Hermes,_ called the Village, was connected
by shafts to the two-level control room. Between the forward bulkheads
ran decks with a row of laboratories equipped to function in
weightlessness as well as under gravity. The power stores were situated
at the stern—in annihilative containers, in the sidereal engine room not
accessible to personnel, and in chambers that had a special purpose.
Between the outer and inner hulls of the stern were concealed
landing-gear units, for the ship was able to set down on planets,
standing on extended, jointed girder-legs. But first the strength of the
ground would have to be tested, because on each one of the craft's
enormous paws would rest 30,000 tons of weight.

In the ship's midsection, on the starboard side, reconnaissance probes
were stored, with their accessories and attachments; on the port side
were service robots, and search robots capable of long, independent
reconnoitering by flight or on foot, and these included striders.

When DEUS turned on the reanimation systems, the _Hermes_ was
weightless, a favorable condition for the operation. Roused first,
Gerbert regained a normal pulse and body temperature, but did not
awaken. DEUS examined him carefully and hesitated, faced with a
decision. It was compelled to act independently. More precisely, it did
not hesitate, but compared various probability distributions of success.
The result of this anamnesis was binomial: DEUS could either reanimate
the captain—Steergard—or take the physician from the embryonator and
transport him to the operating room. It did as a man who, in the face of
unknowns, flips a coin. When one does not know which course is better,
the best tactic is to make a purely random choice. The random generator
indicated the captain, and DEUS obeyed it.

Two hours later, Steergard, still half conscious, sat up in the open
embryonator, tearing through the transparent membrane that clung to his
naked body. He looked around but did not see the one who should have
been standing over him. The speaker was saying something. He realized
that the voice was mechanical, that something had happened to Gerbert,
though he had difficulty understanding the words that were repeated over
and over. When he tried to get up, he hit his head against the not fully
raised lid of the embryonator, which dazed him for a moment. The first
sound of human speech in the Zeta system was an obscenity. Beads of
sticky white fluid flew from Steergard's hair onto his face and chest.
He straightened too quickly and, somersaulting with bent knees, flew
down the tunnel, past all the containers of people, to the hatch in the
wall. His shoulders pressed against soft padding in the corner between
the hatch frame and the ceiling. Wiping from his eyes milky fluid, which
stuck to his fingers, he took in the whole cylindrical interior of the
embryonator. In the gap between the rows of sarcophagi with their raised
lids, the door to the showers was now open, he listened to the machine
voice. Gerbert, like the others, was alive, but had not awakened when
his umbilical cord was disconnected. It could not be anything serious:
the electroencephalograms and electrocardiograms were perfectly normal.

"Where are we?" he asked.

"Behind Juno. The flight went smoothly. Should I move Dr. Gerbert to the
operating room?"

Steergard considered.

"No. I'll look at him myself. What's the condition of the ship?"

"Fully functioning."

"Did you receive any radio messages from the _Eurydice_?"

"Yes."

"What level of importance?"

"First. Should I give the text?"

"What does it concern?"

"A change of plans. Should I give the text?"

"How long is the message?"

"Three thousand, six hundred and sixty words. Should I give the text?"

"Summarize it."

"I cannot summarize unknowns."

"How many unknowns?"

"That, too, is an unknown."

During this exchange, Steergard kicked off from the ceiling. Flying
toward the green-and-red light above Gerbert's cryotainer, he was able
to get a glimpse of himself in the mirror in the passageway to the
showers: a muscular torso glistening with onax, which still trickled in
beads from the stump of the tied umbilical cord, as of an enormous
newborn.

"What happened?" he asked. Wedging his bare feet under the doctor's
container, he put a hand on his chest. The heart beat steadily. On the
slightly parted lips of the sleeper was viscous white onax.

"Give what's definite," he said. Meanwhile he pressed his thumbs behind
the man's jaw, looked into the mouth, felt the warmth of the breath, put
a finger between the teeth, and carefully touched the palate. Gerbert
started and opened his eyes. They were full of tears, as bright and
clear as water. Steergard noted with quiet satisfaction the
effectiveness of so primitive a method of reviving. Gerbert had not
awakened because the clamp on the umbilical cord was not completely
shut. Steergard pinched the catheter, which snapped away, squirting
white fluid. The cord closed itself off. With both hands he pressed the
man's chest, feeling the skin stick to his palms. Gerbert stared at him
wide-eyed, as if astounded.

"Everything's OK," said Steergard. The one he was massaging did not seem
to hear.

"DEUS!"

"Yes?"

"What happened? The _Eurydice_ or Quinta?"

"There were changes on Quinta."

"Give the general picture."

"A picture of unclear things is unclear."

"Tell what you know."

"Before the plunge, high-frequency jumps in the albedo took place. Radio
emission went to three hundred gigawatts of white noise. On the moon, a
white point moved, recognized as plasma in a magnetic vise."

"Recommendations?"

"Caution. Camouflage."

"Specifically, what are we to do?"

"To use our best judgment."

"The distance to Quinta?"

"One billion, three hundred million miles on a straight line."

"The camouflage?"

"I have done it."

"Mixers?"

"Yes."

"Have you changed the program?"

"Only for the approach. The ship is in the shadow of Juno."

"And the ship is all right?"

"Fully functioning. Should I reanimate the crew?"

"No. Have you observed Quinta?"

"No. I lost cosmic velocity in the thermosphere of Juno and—"

"Fine. Now be silent and wait."

"I will be silent and wait."

An odd beginning, thought Steergard, still kneading the doctor's chest.

The doctor sighed and moved.

"Do you see me?" the naked captain asked him. "Don't speak. Blink."

Gerbert blinked, then smiled.

Steergard was covered with sweat, but continued to massage him.

"Diadochokinesia .. ?" he suggested.

The man lying prone closed his eyes and with an unsteady hand touched
the tip of his nose.

Then they looked at each other and grinned. The doctor bent his knees.

"You want to get up? Don't rush."

Saying nothing, Gerbert gripped the sides of his bed and lifted himself.
But instead of sitting up, he rose into the air.

"Careful, zero g," Steergard reminded him. "Easy..."

Now fully conscious, Gerbert looked around the embryonator.

"How are the others?" he asked, brushing aside the hair stuck to his
forehead.

"The reanimation is under way."

"Should I help, Dr. Gerbert?" asked DEUS.

"It's not necessary," said the doctor. One by one, he himself was
checking the dials above the sarcophagi. He touched chests, thumbed
eyelids open, tested the conjunctival reflexes. There was a rush of
water and exhaust fans from the bathroom: Steergard was taking a shower.
By the time the doctor got to the last one, Nakamura, the
captain—already in shorts and a black tricot T-shirt—had returned from
his cabin.

"How are the men?" he asked.

"All healthy. Rotmont has a trace of arrhythmia."

"Stay with them. I'll read the mail..."

"News?"

"News five years old."

"Good or bad?"

"Enigmatic. Ter Horab advised a change of program. They saw something on
Quinta before the plunge. Also on the moon."

"What does it mean?"

Steergard stood at the door as the doctor helped Rotmont to his feet.
Three men were already washing themselves. The others floated around,
met, looked in the mirror, all trying to talk at once.

"Let me know when they come around. We have time." With these words the
captain pushed off from the hatch, flew between naked bodies as if among
white fish underwater, and disappeared into a passage to the control
room.

 

After considering the situation, Steergard took the ship up above the
ecliptic plane, emerging from the cone of shadow at the lowest drive to
make the first observations of Quinta. It shone as a crescent near the
sun. Completely covered with clouds. Its noise had increased to four
hundred gigawatts. The Fourier analyzers showed no kind of modulation.
The _Hermes_ was now wrapped in a veil that absorbed nonthermal
radiation, so that it could not be located by radar: Steergard preferred
to err on the side of caution. A technological civilization meant
astronomy, and astronomy meant sensitive bolometers, whereby even an
asteroid—warmer than space—could call attention to itself. To the water
vapor now used for maneuvering he added some sulfides, the kind abundant
in seismic gases. Volcanically active asteroids were a rarity, true,
especially with a mass as small as that of the scout ship, but the
circumspect captain sent out probes, then aimed them back at himself to
make sure that the use of the vapor jets necessary for future flight
corrections would go unnoticed even when the vessel eventually descended
to Quinta. His intention was to steal up on the side of the moon, in
order to examine it in detail.

By now everyone was gathered in the zero-gravity control room. It
resembled the inside of a large globe, with a conical recess closed in
by a wall of monitors. The seats were covered with a fastening material.
If you gripped the arms and pressed your body down into the chair, the
fabric would hold you firmly. If you wanted to get up, you pushed away
in one strong motion. It was simpler and better than straps. They sat,
all ten of them, as in a small projection room, and forty screens showed
the planet, each in a different range of the spectrum. The largest,
central monitor could synthesize the monochromatic images, superimposing
them as instructed.

Through the breaks in the clouds, furled by trade winds and cyclones,
deeply notched, blurred coastlines appeared. The light, filtered in
stages, allowed them to see now the cloud surface and now the surface of
the globe concealed beneath it. Meanwhile they listened to the lecturing
monotone of DEUS, which repeated the last radiogram from the _Eurydice._
LoBianco had raised the possibility of seismically caused damage to the
technological infrastructure of the Quintans. Field and a few others
held to this hypothesis, which they termed "environmental." The
inhabitants of the planet had thrown part of the ocean waters into space
in order to increase the land area. The pressure exerted by the ocean on
the ocean floor decreased, and as a result the equilibrium in the
lithosphere was disturbed. The upward force from within produced great
cracks in the crust, which was thinnest beneath the ocean. Therefore the
hurling of water into space was discontinued. In short, the enterprise
backfired catastrophically.

But others believed that this hypothesis was false, as it failed to take
into account additional incomprehensible phenomena. Moreover, beings
able to work on the planetary scale would surely have foreseen the
seismic consequences. According to calculations that used Earth as a
model, cataclysmic movements of the lithosphere could not be produced by
the removal of less than one-quarter of the ocean's volume; the
reduction of pressure from the ejection of even six trillion tons of
water would not cause global devastation. Another hypothesis suggested a
disaster of the "chain-reaction" type as the undesired effect of
gravitological experiments gone out of control. Other notions included:
the deliberate destruction of an outmoded technological base, a kind of
demolition; the unintentional disruption of the climate during the
hurling of the water into space; and civilizational chaos of unknown
causes. None of the hypotheses was able to encompass all the observed
phenomena to form a coherent whole. Thus the radiogram sent by Ter Horab
immediately before the _Eurydice's_ entrance into Hades authorized the
reconnoiterers to act independently, and to dispense with any or all of
the established variants of the program if they saw fit.

VII-Hunting

 

At the aphelion of Zeta, far from its larger planets, Steergard put the
ship into an elliptical orbit so the astrophysicists could make their
observations of Quinta. As usual in such systems, there were drifting
remnants of old comets, comets stripped of their gas tails and broken
into frozen boulders by repeated passages past the Sun. Among these
scattered rocks and patches of dust, DEUS noticed, four thousand
kilometers away, an object unlike a meteor. Touched by the radiolocator,
it gave a metallic reflection. It could not be a hunk of magnetite with
a high iron content: the shape was too regular. It resembled a moth with
a short, thick abdomen and blunt stubs of wings. Four degrees warmer
than icy rock, it did not rotate as a meteor or the fragment of a comet
core should have, but traveled straight, with no sign of propulsion.
DEUS examined it in all the spectral bands until it discovered the
reason for the thing's stability: a faint outflow of argon, an
attenuated stream and therefore barely visible. It could be a space
probe or a small ship.

"Let's catch that moth," Steergard decided. So the _Hermes_ was set on a
trajectory of pursuit. At less than a mile from the prey, it discharged
a missile that had prehensile arms. The snare opened its jaws wide,
exactly over the back of the peculiar moth, and grasped the thing's
sides as in a vise. The thing, inert, seemed to fly passively in the
grip, but after a moment its temperature rose and the stream of gas at
its rear intensified.

The monitor, till now showing the close correlation between the hunt
program and its progress, flashed question marks.

"Turn on the absorption field?" asked DEUS.

"No," said Steergard. He watched the bolometer. The trapped object
heated to three hundred, four hundred, five hundred degrees Kelvin, yet
its drive increased only slightly. The temperature curve peaked, then
fell. The captured thing cooled.

"What's the drive?" asked the captain. Everyone in the control room was
silent, looking from the visual monitor to the side screens, which were
for emissions outside the visible range. Only the bolometer glowed.

"Radioactivity zero?"

"Zero," DEUS assured the captain. "The jet is weakening. What now?"

"Nothing. We wait."

They flew thus for a long time.

"Why not take it on board?" El Salam suggested finally. "We could X-ray
the thing first."

"No point. It's dead—the drive is out, and cold. DEUS, show it up
close."

Through the electronic eyes in the pincers they saw a black carapace,
pock-marked and corroded.

"Take it on board?" asked DEUS.

"Not yet. Tap it a couple of times. Not too hard."

From between the long-armed pincers emerged an oval-ended rod.
Methodically it struck the held hull, raising a fine spray of ash
flakes.

"It might have a nonpercussive detonator," remarked Polassar. "I think I
would X-ray it..."

"All right," Steergard agreed, unexpectedly. "DEUS, run an SG on it."

Two spindle-shaped probes, shot from the prow, caught up with the squat
moth and aligned themselves on either side of it. The upper monitors in
the control room came to life, showing tangled strips, bands, shadows,
and simultaneously atomic symbols appeared along the edges of the
screens: carbon, hydrogen, silicon, manganese, chromium. The columns of
letters lengthened, until Rotmont said:

"This is no good. It should be taken on board."

"Risky," muttered Nakamura. "Better to take it apart by remotes."

"DEUS?" asked the captain.

"It is possible. It will require five to ten hours. Should I begin?"

"No. Send a teletome. Let it cut open the hull in the thinnest place and
give us a picture of the interior."

"Bore and broach?"

"Fine."

The probes surrounding the prey were joined by another. A diamond drill
met with a hull no less hard.

"Only a laser," DEUS decided.

"A problem. Use the minimum pulse, so as not to melt anything inside."

"That I cannot guarantee," replied DEUS. "Should I laser?"

"Delicately."

The drill retracted and disappeared. On the pitted surface a white point
glowed, and when the smoke cleared, a telephoto head entered the melted
hole. Its monitor showed blackened tubing that went into a bulging
plate, and the whole image trembled slightly. Then DEUS spoke:

"Caution. According to the SG, at the center of the object are excitons,
and virtual particles warping configurational Fermi space."

"How do you interpret that?" asked Steergard.

"The pressure at the center is over 400,000 atmospheres—or else this is
a Holenbach quantum effect."

"A kind of bomb?"

"No. Probably the power source. The propellant was argon. There is none
left."

"Can we take it on board?"

"We can. The net energy of the whole is equal to zero."

Except for the physicists, no one had any idea what this meant.

"Shall we?" the captain asked Nakamura.

The Japanese smiled. "Who am I to argue with DEUS?" He turned to El
Salam. "And what do you think?" El Salam nodded.

So the trophy of the chase was drawn into a vacuum chamber in the prow
and surrounded, for safety, with absorption fields. No sooner had they
completed this operation than DEUS announced another discovery. It
spotted an object considerably smaller than the first, covered with a
substance that absorbed radar waves. What gave it away was the spin
resonance of the material. The thing was a squat cigar, with a mass of
some five tons. Again the orbiters went out and, after heating the
insulation, tore it from the gleaming metal of the spindle. Attempts to
make the object react were fruitless. It was a corpse: a melted hole
gaped in its side. The condition of the rim indicated that the hole was
not very old. This prize, too, was put on board the ship.

The hunting had gone well. Problems arose only in the examination and
dissection of the double find.

The first wreck, its two-hundred-ton body resembling an enormous turtle,
betrayed, by its rough shell pitted from countless collisions with
micrometeorites and dust, an age of probably a hundred years. Its
orbit's aphelion went beyond the outermost globes of Zeta. The anatomy
of the solidly armored turtle surprised the dissectors. The report was
in two parts. In the first, Nakamura, Rotmont, and El Salam agreed in
their description of the devices found inside the alien artifact; in the
second part, however, their opinions as to the purpose of those devices
differed widely. Polassar, who also participated in the examination,
questioned the speculations of both physicists. The report, he said, was
worth about as much as an account of an Egyptian pyramid by Pygmies.
Agreement on the building material told nothing about the structure's
purpose.

The old satellite possessed a peculiar power source. It contained
piezoelectric batteries that were charged by a converter of a type the
physicists had never seen before. The electric cells, compressed in a
multicascade bank of purely mechanical pressure-amplifiers, produced
current while returning to position, in pulses through a system of coils
with phase impedance. But the cells could also give sudden and full
discharges if the sensors in the hull short-circuited the reactance
coils. In that case the whole current, coursing through the two-spool
drum, would explode it in a magnetic burst. Between the accumulators and
the housing were empty bags or pockets filled with cinders. Into these
ran glasslike tubes, the inside surface a dull mirror; perhaps they were
eroded fiber optics. Nakamura's guess was that this wreck had at one
time become overheated, which burned out some of its units and destroyed
the sensors. But Rotmont thought that the destruction was caused not by
heat but, rather, catalytically. As if microparasites (nonliving, of
course) had chewed through the satellite's circuitry in the front
section. And this, long ago.

The inside surface of the hull was covered with several layers of cells,
somewhat like a honeycomb except much smaller. Only by chromatography
was it possible to identify, in their ashes, silico-amino acids—amino
acids based on silicon, with double hydrogen bonds. It was here that the
dissectors disagreed. Polassar thought these remains were of interior
insulation for the hull; Kirsting, on the other hand, said they were
from a system halfway between living tissue and nonliving, the product
of a technobiology of unknown origin and function.

There were long, heated arguments. The people of the _Hermes_ had before
them evidence of the level of Quintan technology a hundred years ago.
Roughly speaking, the theoretical basis for this engineering could be
compared to Earth's science at the end of the twentieth century. At the
same time, intuition, more than anything concrete, suggested that the
basic direction of development of the alien physics had even then begun
to deviate from the terrestrial. There could be neither synthetic
virusology nor technobiotics without, first, a grasp of quantum
mechanics, but quantum mechanics immediately led to the fission and
fusion of atomic nuclei. In that period the best energy source for
satellites or interstellar probes was the atomic micropile.

And yet there was no trace of radioactivity in this old satellite. Could
the Quintans have skipped the stage of explosive chain reactions in
nucleonics and gone right to the next stage—of the conversion of gravity
into the quanta of strong interactions? But the piezoelectric battery
contradicted that. The second satellite was worse yet. It had a battery
of negative energy, the result of motion at near-light velocity through
the gravitational fields of large planets. Its pulse drive had been
smashed by whatever had aimed and hit it—perhaps a gigajoule shot of
coherent light. It, too, showed no radioactivity. The internal struts
were made from monomolecular carbon in bundles of fibers—no small
accomplishment in solid-state engineering. In the uncrushed section
behind the power chamber they found cracked tubes with superconducting
compounds that unfortunately ended right where "the most interesting
thing" had been, as Polassar lamented. What could it have been? The
physicists got into speculations that they would not have dared touch in
more mundane circumstances. Perhaps the wreck contained a generator of
unstable superheavy nuclei. Of anomalons. But for what purpose? If it
was a robot laboratory for research, that would make sense. But _was_
it? And why did the melted metal behind the place of the hit resemble a
kind of archaic induction coil? And the superconducting niobium alloy
showed, in the unbroken lengths, cavities—parts eaten away by
endothermic catalysis. As though some sort of "erosion viruses" had fed
on the current, or, rather, on the superconductor itself.

Even more curious were the small centers of destruction found in both
satellites. These localized ravagings could not have been caused by any
violent action from without. Most often, the compounds of the wires had
been bitten through or gnawed at, producing tiny beadlike hollows.
Rotmont, called in as a chemist, concluded that this was the work of
highly active macromolecules. He was able to isolate a number of them.
They had the shape of asynchronous crystals and preserved their
selective aggressiveness. Some attacked only superconductors. He showed
his colleagues, under the electron microscope, how the nonliving
parasites ate their way into the filaments of a superconducting niobium
compound, multiplying as more and more material was devoured. He did not
think that these "viroids," as he called them, could have arisen
spontaneously in the heart of the satellite. He assumed that the
apparatus had been infected with the viroids during its original
assembly. For what reason? An experiment? But in that case why send the
satellites out into space?

Then there was the notion of premeditated sabotage during the
construction of the devices. According to such an idea, a conflict lay
behind these phenomena, the clash of opposing intentions. Some among the
crew thought this conception smacked of anthropocentric chauvinism.
Could not the problem have indeed been an ailment of the apparatus, on
the molecular level? Something on the order of a cancer in nonliving
mechanisms that had a subtle and complex microstructure?

The logician-chemist ruled out this possibility for the first, older
satellite, the turtle, which they had called "the moth" during the
chase. For the second, however, he could not rule it out with the same
certainty. Although they did not understand the purpose for which both
space vehicles had been constructed, the progress in engineering that
had taken place over the time between the building of the first and the
second was striking. Notwithstanding, the "erosion viruses" had found
vulnerable places to feed in both satellites.

Once on the trail of this idea, Rotmont could not and did not want to
abandon it. The microelectronic examination of the samples taken from
both captured devices proceeded rapidly, since the analyzer running it
was under DEUS's control. Without that high-speed assistance even a year
would not have sufficed for the necrohistology. The results indicated
that certain components of both satellites had acquired a kind of
resistance to the catalytic corrosion, and in a way so narrowly defined,
so specific, that one could speak of an immunological reaction by
analogy to living organisms and microbes. In their imagination formed
the image of a micromilitary struggle, a war conducted without soldiers,
cannons, bombs, and where the secret weapon, extremely precise, was a
semicrystalline pseudoenzyme.

As sometimes happened in a stubbornly pursued investigation, the total
sense of the discoveries made, instead of simplifying, actually became
more and more complicated as the work progressed. The physicists,
Rotmont, and Kirsting now practically never left the ship's main
laboratory. On nonliving "culture dishes" dozens of varieties of
"defense" and "attack" compounds multiplied. At the same time, the line
between what constituted an integral part of the alien machinery and
what had invaded it, to destroy it, grew fuzzy. Kirsting observed that
in general no such line existed in any strictly objective sense. Suppose
that there arrived on Earth an extremely wise supercomputer, which knew
nothing about the phenomena of life because its electronic forebears had
long ago forgotten that they had been built by biological beings. It saw
and studied a man who had 1) a cold, and 2) colon bacilli in his
intestines. Was the presence of viruses in the nose of the man his
"integral, natural property" or not? Suppose the man, in the course of
being examined, fell and acquired a lump on the head. The lump was a
hematoma beneath the skin. The vessels suffered damage. But the lump
could also be considered a kind of shock absorber created to protect the
cranium from the next blow. Was such an interpretation impossible? It
seemed comical to us, but this was not a joke—it concerned the whole
scientific approach to the nonhuman.

Steergard, listening to the experts' arguments, merely nodded and gave
them an additional five days for research. It was a heavenly
dispensation. For the last half-century, the technobiotics of Earth had
taken a completely different path. "Necroevolution" had been deemed
unprofitable. There had been no conjecture, even, about any sort of
eventual "machine speciation." But no one could say for sure that such a
thing had not taken place on Quinta.

All the captain asked was, finally: Was the hypothesis of conflict
between Quintan builders a premise on which future decisions of the
reconnaissance had to be based?

But, presenting the analyses that they had made, the experts did not
want to speak of anything so definite as a premise. There was nothing
certain in their hypothesizing; there were no facts. They knew enough
now to appreciate how shaky were the initial assumptions upon which
their knowledge rested. An additional misfortune was the absence—in the
younger wreck, too—of communication systems even slightly similar to
what could be derived from the theory of finite automata and information
theory. Had the viroids devoured such pseudonerve networks totally? Even
so, traces should have remained, vestiges. Possibly they did remain, but
the people were not able to recognize them. From a transistor radio or
pocket calculator dropped under a steamroller, could one deduce
Maxwell's theory, or Shannon's?

The final council took place in an atmosphere of unusual tension.
Steergard gave up trying to elicit positive statements. He asked only if
there was any evidence at all that the Quintans had mastered sidereal
engineering. He considered this the most important question. If anyone
guessed why the captain insisted on the point, he said nothing. So the
_Hermes_ drifted in darkness, and the men lost their way in a thicket of
unknowns.

The pilots—Harrach and Tempe—listened to the proceedings in silence. Nor
did the doctors speak. Arago had put aside his monk's garb and in the
conversation (it somehow happened that they were sitting, the four of
them, in the upper level, above the control room) not once referred to
his earlier words, "And what if evil reigns there?" When Gerbert
observed that expectations always fell short of the reality, Arago
disagreed. Consider—he argued—the many obstacles we had overcome,
obstacles that our ancestors, even in the twentieth century, had
believed insurmountable. Consider how smoothly the voyage had gone. We
had crossed light-years without casualties, the _Eurydice_ had entered
Hades unerringly, and we ourselves had penetrated the heart of the
constellation Harpy, and only days or hours now separated us from the
inhabited planet.

"You're giving us good therapy, Father," said Gerbert, laughing. He was
the only one who still addressed the Dominican that way. He had
difficulty dropping the "Father."

"It's the truth, nothing more. I can't tell you what will become of us.
Such ignorance is our natural state."

"I know what you're thinking, Father," Gerbert said on impulse. "That
the Creator didn't wish there to be such expeditions—such meetings, such
'intercourse' between civilizations—and therefore separated them with
vast space. Yet here we have not only made a pie out of the apple of
Eden, but are now sawing down the very Tree of Knowledge.

"If you want to know my thoughts, I am at your service. I believe that
the Creator limited us in nothing—in nothing. Meanwhile, it is unknown
what will grow from the grafts on the Tree of Knowledge..."

The pilots did not hear the rest of the theological discussion, because
the captain summoned them: he had set course for Quinta. After
presenting the navigational trajectory, he added:

"There's an attitude on board I hadn't expected. Imaginations are
running a little wild. As you know, there's constant talk about
enigmatic conflicts, microweapons, nanoballistics, war. This is, I
think, the ballast of preconceptions. If we start trembling from the
dissection of a couple of wrecked satellites, we soon won't be able to
function; every move we make will seem insanely reckless. I said this to
the scientists, and I'm telling you, too. And now full speed ahead. To
Septima you can use DEUS to hold the course. Then I want you at the
wheel. Set up the shifts between you any way you like."

The ship's drive went on, and gravity, though weak, returned. Harrach
went with Tempe to get the old science-fiction book taken from the
_Eurydice._ When they parted at the cabin door, Harrach, much taller,
leaned over, as if to divulge a secret, and said:

"Ter Horab knew who he was putting on the _Hermes._ Did you ever see
better men?"

"Maybe, once. Not better. Men like himself."

VIII-The Moon

 

The planet was encircled by a ring of ice chunks in an enormous but
unstable sheet. The calculations made by Field and LoBianco immediately
before the plunge of the _Eurydice_ turned out to be correct. Having one
large and three lesser divisions due to perturbation caused by Quinta's
moon, the ring could last no more than a thousand years, since it
increased its diameter while at the same time losing mass. The outer rim
was widened by centrifugal forces; the inner, from atmospheric friction,
turned into melting fragments and vapor, so that a portion of the water
thrown into space by methods unknown returned to the planet in a
never-ending rain. It was hard to believe that the Quintans had
intentionally provided themselves with a downpour worthy of the Flood.
The ring had initially contained three to four trillion tons of ice;
each year it lost many billions.

In this lay a series of mysteries. The ring interfered with the climate
of the entire planet. Besides the heavy rains, its mighty shadow fell
across—during the planet's revolution around the sun—now the northern,
now the southern hemisphere. The ring obstructed, reflected away the
light of the sun, not only lowering the average temperature but also
disturbing the circulation of trade winds in the atmosphere. The border
regions on both sides of the shadow seethed with storms and cyclones. If
the inhabitants lowered the level of the oceans, surely they possessed
sufficient power to give the upward water (a waterfall in reverse)
double the speed, thereby sending the masses of ice beyond the vicinity
of the globe so that they would either melt and evaporate in the Sun
without a trace or, in the form of ice meteors, vanish among the
asteroids.

With insufficient power the planners would not have attempted the job in
the first place, knowing that it would be bungled. Predicting the
collapse was a simple, elementary task. It was not an error in planetary
engineering, therefore, but something else that halted the work begun
many years before. This conclusion seemed inescapable.

The ring, a flat disk with a hole that had a diameter of fifteen
thousand kilometers, inside which spun the girdled planet, was made up
of hunks of ice in the middle belts, but of polarized crystals of ice on
the outer edges—and that, too, must have been by design. In a word, the
ring was controlled in motion and shape from the very beginning; it was
guided into the plane of the equator, that being stationary. But on the
inside, above the equator, it became chaotic and formless. Altogether,
it looked like a space structure half completed and abandoned. Why?

From the oceans rose two large continents and one smaller. The smaller
was about three times the area of Australia; since it lay at the
northern polar circle, the crew called it Norstralia. The infrascope
discovered warmer areas on the continents, but nonseismic; perhaps these
were the thermal wastes of great power plants. They were not stations
that used mined materials like oil or coal, nor did they use fuels of
the nuclear type. The former would have betrayed themselves with air
pollution; the latter, with radioactive ash. Earth, in the early phase
of atomic energy production, had had no small problem with the safe
removal of such ash. But for engineers able to throw a part of the ocean
up out of the gravitational sink, ejecting radio wastes would have been
child's play. Yet the ice of the ring showed no trace of radioactivity.
Either the Quintans had developed another form of nuclear energetics, or
else they had a totally different energetics. But what kind?

In the wake of the planet stretched a tail of gas, abundant in water
vapor that came mainly from the ring.

The _Hermes_, hanging in stationary orbit behind Sexta (a planet like
Mars but larger, with a dense atmosphere poisoned by continual volcanic
exhalations and compounds of cyanide), sent out six probes to observe
Quinta. These beamed back data continuously. From the data, DEUS
composed a detailed picture of the planet. The most curious thing was
the radio noise. At least several hundred powerful transmitters operated
on the large land masses, with no apparent phase or frequency
modulation: their emission was chaotic white noise. The antennas could
be precisely located; they were directional or isotropic—as if the
Quintans had decided to jam all channels of electromagnetic
communication, from the shortest wavelengths to those of a kilometer.
They could communicate only by lines, wires, cables. But what was the
purpose of the noise, which took gigawatts to produce?

Even more curious—the "curiosities" of the planet multiplied with
observation—were the artificial satellites. They numbered almost a
million, in high and low orbits, some of which were nearly circular and
some elliptical, with aphelions reaching far beyond the Moon. The probes
of the _Hermes_ also noted satellites in their own vicinity, and a few
were eight to ten million kilometers out. The satellites differed
considerably in size and mass. The largest were probably empty: unguided
space balloons. Some had collapsed when their gas escaped. Every few
days one of these lifeless satellites collided with the ring of ice,
creating an impressive sight, with lightning flashes every color of the
rainbow, since the Sun's rays were diffracted in the resultant cloud of
ice crystals. Such a cloud dispersed slowly in space. On the other hand,
the active satellites—active in that they moved in determined orbits
that required constant course corrections, and changed shape in an
incomprehensible way, like enormous rolls of metal foil—never collided
with Quinta's ring. The three-dimensional map of the satellites,
holographically made, at first glance resembled a giant swarm of bees,
hornets, and microscopic flies circling the planet. But this
many-layered throng was not randomly distributed. One immediately saw
basic patterns in it: the satellites in the near orbits frequently
traveled in groups of two or three, and the others (particularly in the
stationary region, where each body was synchronous with the surface of
the globe) moved toward and away from the Sun as in the figures of a
dance.

As the locational measurements came pouring in, DEUS made a system of
coordinates, a kind of composite of spherical graphs. Distinguishing the
"dead" satellites from the "live," or those drifting passively from
those controlled or self-controlled, was an extremely difficult task. In
the equation were many microscopic masses, all moving in the field of
gravity of the large masses of Quinta and Quinta's Moon and Sun. Then
the picture was sharpened, revealing a myriad of rocket and satellite
remains. These frequently fell sunward. Some had the shape of
toroids—doughnuts—from which jutted threadlike spikes. The largest,
halfway between the planet and its Moon, showed some activity. The
spikes were dipolar antennas and their emission, filtered out from the
background noise of the planet, could be isolated as noise in the
shortest ultraradio wavelengths. A part of this noise dropped to hard
roentgen radiation, which did not reach the surface of Quinta because
the atmosphere absorbed it.

Each day, DEUS added to the information acquired. Nakamura, Polassar,
Rotmont, and Steergard racked their brains over this riddle composed of
riddles. But the pilots did not enter into the scientific debates; they
had formed their own opinion—in a nutshell, that Quinta was a planet of
engineers afflicted with some mania. Or that—more bluntly—SETI had
invested billions and lifted mountains in order to find a civilization
gone berserk. But the pilots, too, sensed method in this madness. What
came to mind was an image of "radio warfare" taken to the point of
absurdity, where no one any longer transmitted anything, because each
side drowned out the other.

The physicists tried to assist DEUS with hypotheses alien to humanity.
Perhaps the inhabitants of Quinta differed anatomically and
physiologically from us in so fundamental a way that pictures and speech
were replaced, for them, by other, nonacoustic, nonvisual senses or
codes. Tactile? Olfactory? A perception connected with gravity? And
perhaps the noise was a transmission of energy and not of information.
Perhaps the information was sent in wave-carrying fluxes not detectable
by astrophysics. Perhaps, instead of continuing to filter in every
possible way this seemingly senseless electromagnetic roar, one should
overhaul completely the whole analytical program.

DEUS replied with its customary dryness and patience. Knowing much about
human emotions, it experienced none itself.

"If the noise is a transmission of energy, there must exist receiving
stations, which must let escape a certain minimum amount, a loss, for
hundred-percent efficiency is impossible. But on the planet there are no
receiving devices to be seen that are proportional to the power
broadcast. Part of the power, able to pass through the atmosphere, is
aimed at many of the orbiters. But other transmitters—and other
orbiters—jam this directed radiation, and do so completely. It is as if
a great crowd of people wishes to converse, but they all speak at once,
raising their voices more and more. Even if each of the speakers has
great wisdom, the resultant is a choral howl.

"Second, if certain bands are used for communication, they can appear as
white noise if the channels of transmission are totally filled, but the
Quintan noise possesses a curious quality. It is not 'absolute chaos.'
Rather, it is the product of opposing emissions. Each transmitter holds
exactly to a wavelength. Other transmitters either jam the first or
dampen it by reversing the amplitude in phase."

DEUS illustrated for them this electromagnetic state of affairs by
shifting the radio spectra to the visible zone. The white, tranquil face
of the planet was replaced by a scene of multicolored vibrations. When
DEUS made the coherent emitters green, their transmitters white, and the
"counteremitters" purple, Quinta became a variegated ball of contending
hues. Spreading purple engulfed the relays, reddening their white, and
at the same time green flooded in. A blurring spiderweb of color ensued;
at times one color would peak, then immediately fade away.

Meanwhile data were coming in from the probes that had been sent to
reconnoiter Quinta's moon. Of the five, two had disappeared—it was not
known how—at the periselenium, a point not visible from the _Hermes._
Steergard reprimanded Harrach for this carelessness; Harrach had
neglected to send a reserve behind the patrol, which would have made
constant monitoring of it possible even on the other side of the Moon.
Three probes, however, had flown around the planet's satellite. Unable
to break through the thicket of noise with a signal, they transmitted
the pictures they had taken using a coded laser.

At first the information was so crowded that a single impulse, in a
nanosecond, contained a thousand bits. After less than a minute of this
emission, DEUS announced that from the aposelenium three Quintan
orbiters, unnoticed until now because they were so small, were
approaching the probes. DEUS discovered them from the heat their engines
gave off in starting and by their acceleration, according to the Doppler
effect. Nothing indicated that an order to intercept the patrol had been
issued from the planet; there really would not have been time for that.
The heated points now moved on a collision course. The captain ordered
evasive action. The three-membered patrol then threw off its dummy
exteriors, jettisoning before it a great quantity of metal foil and
balloons, which had not fooled the interceptors. The patrol expelled a
mist of sodium and shot oxygen into it, creating a fireball. The moment
the Quintan rockets disappeared in it, the probes emerged from the
burning cloud in a spiral and, instead of making for the ship, crashed
into each other head-on and were thus atomized.

Steergard pulled in all the observational probes from their orbiting
positions, and DEUS played back the results of the reconnaissance. On
the opposite hemisphere of the Moon, barren and plowed with craters, a
small flame possessing the spectrum of nuclear plasma went back and
forth—so rapidly that, if the necessary concentrated magnetic field had
not been holding it in rein, the thing would have flown off into space
and been instantly extinguished. What was it that traveled back and
forth there between two ancient craters, at a velocity of 60 kilometers
per second? What was this _ignis fatuus_?

DEUS assured them that the planet had not discovered the _Hermes'_
presence and therefore was not tracking it. There was no indication of
tracking. Using Sexta's atmosphere as a lens for the radioscopes, DEUS
had recorded the constant noise, the crackling that could be heard over
it, which was caused by satellites striking the shield of ice.

There was a difference of opinion about what to do next. The men did not
want to announce their arrival to the Quintans. The camouflage must
remain in place—until they figured out at least one of the multitude of
mysteries. They debated whether to send an unmanned lander to the far
side of the Moon or to take the ship itself there. About the odds of
success for either alternative DEUS knew as much as the crew: nothing.
The auscultation performed by the patrol suggested that the Moon was
uninhabited. It did have an atmosphere. Though one and a half times as
massive as Earth's moon, it was unable to hold it. And the atmosphere's
composition presented still another puzzle: noble gases—argon, krypton,
and xenon, with a trace of helium. Without an artificial source to
replenish it, the atmosphere would have escaped in the course of a few
hundred years.

Even clearer evidence of engineering was the plasma flame. But the Moon
was silent; it also did not have a magnetic field. Steergard decided to
land with the ship. If any beings were there, they would be underground,
far below the rocky crust riddled with craters and calderas. The frozen
seas of lava gleamed in a circle of streaks radiating like meridian
lines from the largest crater.

They would land, but first turn the _Hermes_ into a comet. Out of valves
in the hull that opened along the sides came a foam from tanks; inflated
by injections of gas, the foam surrounded the entire vessel with a large
cocoon of irregular, hardened bubbles. The _Hermes,_ like a pit in a
fruit, lay in a spongy mass of globules. Even from up close it looked
like an elongated chunk of rock covered with craters. The burst bubbles
made the surface resemble the crust of an asteroid bombarded for
centuries by dust clouds and meteors. The drive, indispensable, would be
the tail of the comet, which, as it approached the perihelion, would
always be directed away from the sun—an illusion created by the drive
deflectors. A precise spectral analysis would have revealed, of course,
a pulse and composition of gases not found in any comet. But nothing
could be done about that.

The _Hermes_ moved with hyperbolic velocity from Sexta to the orbit of
Quinta—such high-speed comets did exist, though they were rare, coming
from outside the solar system. After two weeks of flight, it braked
behind the Moon and sent out manipulators with television eyes. The
illusion of an old, battered rock was perfect; only under a hard blow
would the fake stone give elastically, like a balloon. The landing
itself could not be disguised. As the ship entered the Moon's atmosphere
stern-first, her fire burned away the covering over the nozzles; the
rest was done by atmospheric friction. The red-hot camouflage was torn
away and the naked metal colossus, bearing down on the flames beneath
it, settled on six outspread legs, testing the strength of the ground
first with a series of fired shells. For a while pieces of the burned
covering rained around the ship. When this stopped, the men examined
their surroundings from horizon to horizon. They were separated from the
plasma pendulum by the bulging ridge of a large crater.

At the prevailing pressure of four hundred hectopascals, one could use
copters for reconnaissance by air: overt reconnaissance. Thus began a
game with rules as yet unknown, though the stake was known.

The copters, sent in a group of eight over a thousand-mile circle, went
unmolested. From their pictures a map was made encompassing an area of
eight thousand square kilometers around the point of touchdown. It was
the map of a typical airless globe, with a random distribution of
craters half filled with volcanic stuff, except in the northeast, where
magnetostats were perpetuating a moving sphere of fire. The sphere sped
above the rocky ground, which had been melted along its path into a hot,
shallow canyon. The copters reentered this region and took measurements
and spectral analyses both in the air and upon landing. One of them
intentionally approached the sphere; before it was consumed, it recorded
the sphere's exact temperature and radiant power, on the order of a
trillion joules. The sphere was fed and guided by an alternating
magnetic field that reached 10¹⁰ gauss.

Steergard, taking soundings of the substratum of the canyon, had DEUS
make a diagram of the network discovered there, which had junctions and
numerous vertical shafts that went deep into the lithosphere. He did not
appear surprised by this.

The purpose of the giant installation was unclear. There was no doubt,
however, that the work had been abandoned while in full swing. All the
entrances leading to galleries and shafts had been closed off or,
rather, buried with explosive charges, the heavy machinery having first
been thrown deep into the tunnels and wells. The plasma microsun was fed
by thermoelectric transformers through a system of magneto-conduits that
drew energy from the depths of the asthenosphere—about 50 kilometers
beneath the outer mantle of the lunar crust.

Although he did send heavy all-terrain striders into that area to gather
additional data and waited impatiently for their return, he gave orders
for a prompt takeoff. The physicists, fascinated with the sublunar
energy complex, would have been glad to stay longer and perhaps even to
open up the stopped tunnels. Steergard refused. The captured satellites
were incomprehensible; the construction begun in this desolate place
with such vigor was incomprehensible; and even more incomprehensible (if
incomprehensibility had degrees) was the abandonment of that work, as if
in the panic of an evacuation. He did not say this to them; the thought
that occurred to him he kept to himself.

Any detailed study of an alien technology was futile. Its fragments,
like pieces of a broken mirror, would not yield a coherent picture; they
were the indistinct result, only, of the thing that had shattered it.

The answer lay not in the tools of the civilization but in the
civilization itself. Thinking this, he felt the full weight of the task
entrusted to him.

Over the intercom, Arago asked if he could see him.

"Yes, but make it quick. We take off in less than an hour," he said, not
delighted about the visit. Arago appeared immediately.

"I hope I'm not in your way..."

"You are, Reverend Father, in my way." Steergard did not rise, pointing
to a chair. "However, in view of the nature of our... mission, I'm at
your service."

"I have no special authorization and am no ambassador extraordinary. I
was assigned my place as you were yours," the Dominican quietly replied.
"With one difference. On my decisions nothing hinges. On yours,
everything hinges."

"I know that."

"The inhabitants of this planet are like a living organism: one may
study it as much as one likes, but one cannot ask it the sense of its
existence."

"A jellyfish wouldn't answer. But a man?"

Steergard looked at him intently now, as if expecting something
important.

"A man, yes, but not mankind. Jellyfish are not answerable. But each one
of us is, for what we do."

"I see what you're driving at. The Reverend Father wants to know what
course of action I've decided to take."

"Yes."

"We are coming out in the open."

"Asking to talk?"

"Yes."

"And if they cannot meet this request?"

Steergard rose, disturbed. Arago had penetrated to what he was
concealing.

Standing so close to the monk that he practically touched his knees, he
asked softly, "What else can we do?"

Arago got up, straightened, reached for the man's right hand, and
clasped it.

"It's in good hands," he said, and left.

IX-An Annunciation

 

The captain put the ship, again enveloped in its mask, into stationary
orbit around the Moon, above the hemisphere not visible from Quinta, and
one by one called in his comrades, to ask them how they assessed the
situation and what they would do in his place.

The difference in the conjectures was tremendous. Nakamura espoused the
cosmic hypothesis. The level of Quintan technology bespoke the existence
of a fully developed astronomy for many years. Zeta and its planets were
traveling through an inter-arm expansion of the galactic spiral and in
some five thousand years would come perilously close to Hades. It was
not possible to determine the critical passage exactly, because of the
insoluble problem of the mutual interaction of many masses. But any
noncatastrophic passage past the collapsar had low probability. Thus the
threatened civilization was attempting to save itself. Various projects
had been undertaken. For example, resettling on the Moon, turning it
into a navigable planet, and moving to the system of Eta Harpyiae—which
was a mere four light-years away and, more to the point, was heading in
the opposite direction from the collapsar. During the initial phase of
the implementation of this project, the resources of energy and
knowledge might turn out to be insufficient. It is also possible that
one part of the civilization—one bloc of nations—was in favor of the
project, while another opposed it. It was well known that experts in
different fields rarely reached full agreement in the face of a
particularly complex and difficult problem.

Another project might be emigration, or astronautical flight. This idea
would precipitate a crisis: the population of Quinta would surely number
in the billions, and there would not be shipyards enough to build a
fleet able to carry out an Exodus of everyone from the planetary cradle.
To use a terrestrial analogy, the individual countries would differ
considerably in industrial potential. Those in the vanguard would build
a space fleet for themselves and at the same time abandon the lunar
operations. Perhaps the ones who labored in the shipyards, believing
that the rescue vessels were not destined for them, resorted to acts of
sabotage. Perhaps this gave rise to repression, rioting, anarchy, and a
radio war of propaganda. And so this project, too, would be halted in
its preliminary stage, and the multitude of satellites wandering the
system would constitute its aborted remains. Although Nakamura's
assessment of the situation was extremely hypothetical, it was not
without value. Therefore—he urged—it was necessary to establish
communication with Quinta quickly. Sidereal engineering, shown to its
inhabitants, might save them.

Polassar, acquainted with the Japanese's idea, felt that the facts had
been twisted and stretched to support the thesis of planetary
emigration. Sidereal engineering did not manifest itself like a bolt
from the blue. The power tapped from the asthenospheric installation on
the Moon was three orders of magnitude removed from the power that made
possible gravitology and its industrial application. Moreover, there was
nothing to indicate that the Quintans would consider the Eta system
hospitable to them. In a few million years, Eta would be entering the
stage of the final consumption of its hydrogen, thereby becoming a red
giant. And, finally, Nakamura had shuffled the data concerning the
motion of the entire Harpy and of Hades—within the interval of
gravitational indeterminacy—to make the critical passage of Zeta through
the vicinity of the collapsar probable in as little as fifty centuries.
If one took into account the perturbations caused by the spiral arm of
the galaxy, the passage would be delayed to more than twenty thousand
years. The knowledge that things would be awful in 250 centuries could
cause panic only in demented beings. A science in its infancy, such as
Earth's in the nineteenth century, might consider progress to be near
its end. A more mature science, while not knowing the discoveries of the
future, would know that these would increase at an exponential rate and
that in the next couple of years considerably more knowledge would be
obtained than had been gained in the previous millennia. Even though we
did not know what was taking place on Quinta, we should establish
contact with the planet. It was risky, yes, but necessary.

Kirsting believed that "anything was possible." An advanced technology
did not rule out religious faiths. The pyramids of the Egyptians and of
the Aztecs revealed their purpose to visitors from other worlds no more
than did Gothic cathedrals. What was discovered on the Moon might be the
work of some religion. Sun worship—of an artificial sun. An altar of
nuclear plasma. An idol. A symbol of power or mastery over matter. But
you could also have schisms, apostasies, heresies, crusades—crusades not
by sword but by radio. Electromagnetic offensives to "convert the
heathen"—or the heathen's informational-sacred machines. _(Deus EST in
machina.)_

Not that this was provable or even probable. The symbols of a faith,
like the creations of any ideology, did not betray their meaning to a
stranger from another land. But physics did not obviate metaphysics.
Trying to find a commonality of intention in the peoples of different
terrestrial cultures and epochs, one knew, at least, that material
welfare was nowhere considered to be the all in all, the answer to
existence. Such a belief would be the exception. Technology did not have
to part company with the Holy. It always possessed a goal beyond itself.
And when the Holy disappeared, something had to fill that vacancy in the
culture. Kirsting took the marriage of engineering and religion to such
mystical heights that Steergard had difficulty listening to the man. And
contact? He, too, of course, was in favor of contact.

The pilots had no opinion. The imaginative expansion of mysteries into
more or less nonhuman directions did not lie within their character.
Rotmont was willing to discuss the technical aspects of communication,
but the first consideration was how to protect the ship from the swarms
of Quintan satellites. He thought that Quinta might already have been
visited by another civilization, and that that episode had ended so
badly that the lesson was not forgotten. The Quintans were fencing
themselves off against invasion. They had manufactured a technology of
universal distrust. It was necessary to assure them of our peaceful
intentions, to send them "gifts of greeting" and await their reaction.

El Salam and Gerbert were of the same opinion.

Steergard followed his own counsel. "Gifts of greeting" could be
destroyed before they landed; the fate of the five patrol probes near
the Moon indicated as much. So he shot a large orbiter toward the Sun, a
remote-control ambassador that would present its "credentials" to the
Quintans. The Ambassador beamed its message by laser signals that could
penetrate the noise envelope of the planet, in a redundant code that
instructed the receivers how to enter into communication with it. It
sent this program several hundred times, in a loop. The answer was
silence.

For three weeks, the content of the message was changed in every
conceivable way—with no response of any kind. The transmitting power was
increased, the laser needle swept over the entire surface of the planet,
in the infrared, in the ultraviolet, modulated in various ways. The
planet did not reply.

The Ambassador took this opportunity to accumulate visual details of
Quinta, which it relayed to the _Hermes._ On the continents were
agglomerations the size of large terrestrial metropolises. Nothing,
however, lit them at night. These structures, the shape of flattened
stars with tangled runways, gave semimetallic reflections. From the
runways went straight lines, like arteries of transportation, except
that nothing moved on them. The sharper the images obtained by the
Ambassador (which to some extent was functioning also as a spy), the
more evident it became that the suppositions brought from Earth were
false. The lines were neither roads nor conduits, yet the land between
them often imitated forests. These so-called wooded areas were created
by a multitude of regular blocks with branching projections. Their
albedo was almost zero: they absorbed more than 99 percent of the
incident sunlight. Thus they seemed to be photoreceptors.

Could Quinta therefore have also absorbed the "credentials," its
receiving stations treating them as energy-food and not as information?
The Ambassador, invisible until now against the background of the solar
disk, gave everything it had. In the infrared it broadcast its
"overture," exceeding a hundred times the Sun's radiation in that band.
Common sense said that such intense light would damage the wave
absorbers; that, therefore, maintenance crews of some kind would
investigate the damage and its cause; and that, sooner or later,
higher-ranking specialists would recognize the signal nature of the
beam. But, again, days passed and nothing changed.

The pictures taken of the dayside and nightside of the planet added to
the mysteries. Nothing illuminated the darkness when the sun went down.
Both large continents, raised from the ocean, with steep, snowcapped
mountain chains, shone at night only with the ghostly glow of polar
lights. And these lights, turning the cloudless, arctic ice into
phantom-green gold, did not wander randomly but were moved, as if by an
invisible, giant hand, in the opposite direction to Quinta's rotation.
Neither on the inland seas of both extensive continents nor in the ocean
were any vessels sighted. There was also no activity at the
intersections of the straight lines that cut effortlessly through
forested plains and high ridges of rock. The lines could not serve as
transportation. In the ocean of the southern hemisphere, extinct
volcanoes of seemingly uninhabited archipelagoes were like innumerable
beads scattered across the water. The only landmass of that hemisphere,
at the pole itself, lay beneath an enormous glacier. From the dull
silver of its perpetual snow jutted solitary needles of rock,
eight-thousand-ton pinnacles locked in ice. In the equatorial belt,
beneath the arch of the frozen ring, tropical storms raged day and
night, and their lightning discharges were intensified—in splashing,
violet reflections—by the surface of the supraatmospheric ice like a
rapidly moving mirror.

The lack of any sign of civilizational bustle, of port cities, for
example, at the mouths of great rivers; the convex metal shields in
mountain valleys which hid the valley bottoms with armor that was
distinguishable from the natural rock only spectrochemically; the
absence of air traffic, given the discovery of about a hundred smooth
concrete airfields enclosed by low buildings—all this led irresistibly
to the conclusion that century-long warfare had forced the Quintans
underground, and that it was there that they lived, relying on the
metallic vision of radioelectronics to observe the skies and outer
space. The measurement of temperature gradients revealed thermal spots
on the surfaces of Norstralia and Heparia, interconnected by branchings
deep in the ground, as if they were cave cities. But a careful analysis
of their radiation seemed to prove that idea false. Each of the
wide-ranging spots, at a diameter of forty miles, manifested a strange
gradient of expelled heat: the center was the hottest, but the source of
its radiation lay beneath the lithosphere at the border of the mantle.
Could the Quintans be drawing energy from the molten interior of their
globe?

Enormous areas, geometrically regular, at first taken for cultivated
land, were in reality collections of millions of conical balls, like
ceramic mushrooms planted for dozens of kilometers. Transceiver radar
antennas, the physicists at last decided.

The planet was wreathed in clouds, storms, cyclones, as if intentionally
dead and waiting—hiding behind an incessantly transmitted sign that
requested some countersign. Observations made under the heading of
archeology—to discover traces of a historical past, such as ruins of
cities, or things corresponding to the cultural architecture of Earth,
like temples, pyramids, ancient seats of government—yielded nothing
definite. If war had destroyed these totally, or if human eyes were
unable to discern them for their sheer alienness, the sole bridge cast
across that alienness remained technological activity. So they looked
for the devices—gigantic, surely—that had been used to hurl the ocean
waters into space. The arrangement of such artillery could be calculated
using criteria that were universally applicable, since determined by
physics. Given the direction of the rotation of the ice ring, its
circumequatorial path, it was possible to deduce the localization of the
planetary water-throwers. But again the searchers were stymied: the
installations must have been erected where dry land met ocean—in the
very region over which now sped the frozen ring, whose constant friction
against the rarefied atmosphere covered the critical places with storm
and downpour. Thus even the attempt to recreate the methods employed by
the engineers of Quinta a century ago to shoot the seas into the void
met with failure.

The detailed photographs filled the archives of the ship but had no more
value, really, than blotches on the page of a Rorschach test. The
meaningless contours of the star-shaped structures on the continents
suggested to the human eye as many terrestrial things as the shapes a
man might see—but in fact only imagine—when confronted with copious
spatterings of ink. DEUS's helplessness in the face of these thousands
of pictures made them realize that within the machine, too—though it was
supposed to be absolutely objective in the processing of information—lay
the stubborn inheritance of anthropocentrism. Instead of learning
something about an alien intelligence, Nakamura remarked, they had
learned how close the bonds of mental kinship were between man and his
computer. The nearness of the alien civilization—practically within
arm's reach—became a separating distance that mocked their attempts to
get to the heart of it. They struggled, with the growing feeling that a
malicious trap had been laid for the expedition, as if Someone (but
who?) wished to offer them a challenge full of hope, only to reveal—at
the end of the road, at the destination—its impossibility. Those who
were troubled by this thought kept it to themselves, so as not to infect
their comrades with defeatism.

After seven hundred hours of this fruitless diplomatic emission,
Steergard decided to send to Quinta the first lander, named _Gabriel._
The Ambassador announced the _Gabriel's_ arrival forty-eight hours
before takeoff, informing the Quintans that the probe was not equipped
with any kind of weapon and would touch down on the large northern
continent Heparia, a hundred miles from a certain star-shaped group of
buildings, in a barren—hence uninhabited—area, as an unmanned emissary,
with which the Heparians would be able to communicate in machine
language. Although the planet did not respond to this announcement,
either, they sent the _Gabriel_ out of orbit, in the aposelenium. It was
a two-stage rocket with a microcomputer that had, besides the standard
programs of contact, the ability to revise and alter them to fit
unforeseen circumstances. Polassar supplied the _Gabriel_ with the best
of the small terajoule engines that they had on board, so that it could
cover the four hundred thousand kilometers to the planet in about twenty
minutes, at a speed up to six hundred kilometers a second. It would slow
down only above the ionosphere.

The physicists wanted to maintain contact with the emissary, shooting
relay probes to race ahead of it, but the captain rejected the idea. He
preferred to have the _Gabriel_ act on its own, reporting information to
them only after it made a soft landing, via a beam that the atmosphere
of the Moon would focus on the _Hermes._ He felt that any earlier
positioning of relays between the Moon, behind which the _Hermes_ hid,
and the planet might be noticed and increase the suspiciousness of the
paranoid civilization. The unaccompanied flight of the _Gabriel_
underscored the peacefulness of its mission.

The _Hermes_ observed this flight reflected in the unfolded mirrors of
the Ambassador, with a five-minute delay due to the translational
distance. The perfectly chilled reflector of the Ambassador gave an
excellent image. The _Gabriel_ was carrying out maneuvers to make it
impossible to locate the mother ship, and soon it appeared as a dark pin
against the white-cloud face of the planet. Eight minutes later, the
people at the screens stiffened. Instead of proceeding quickly to its
designated landing site in Heparia, the _Gabriel_ moved southward along
a curve of increasing radius and prematurely cut its speed. They
immediately saw the reason for its turn. In the belt above the equator,
four black points made slowly for the _Gabriel,_ two from the east and
two from the west, along mathematically perfect trajectories of pursuit.
The eastern chasers had already diminished the distance separating them
from the _Gabriel._ The pursued craft changed shape, from a needle to a
dot surrounded with blinding light: having cut its drive with a
four-hundredfold overload, instead of descending to the planet it shot
straight up. The four pursuing points also changed course. They began to
converge. The _Gabriel_ seemed motionless in the center of the trapezium
whose corners were the chasers. The trapezium shrank before their eyes,
indicating that the chasers, too, had shifted from orbital motion to
hyperbolic and were coming together, bright with the heat of the
increased drives.

Steergard was tempted to ask Rotmont, as a programmer, what the
_Gabriel_ would do next, because the blaze produced by the chasers was
evidence of tremendous thrust. The group of five moved away from the
planet, leaving in its wake a wide crater in the sea of white clouds.
There was silence in the dim control room. Watching this unique scene,
no one spoke. The four dots drew closer and closer to the _Gabriel._ At
the edge of the field of vision, the Doppler telemeter and accelerometer
spat out their little red numbers so rapidly that it was difficult to
read the indicated speed. The _Gabriel_ was at a disadvantage, because
it had lost valuable time braking and turning around while the pursuit
craft, flanking it, kept on accelerating. DEUS drew on the monitor the
predicted intersection of the five trajectories. According to the
telemetry and Doppler shift, the _Gabriel_ would be caught in about
twenty seconds. Twenty seconds was a lot, even for a man thinking a
billion times slower than a computer—particularly in moments of extreme
tension.

Steergard himself did not know whether or not he had made a mistake by
not providing the probe with even a defensive armament. He was furious
in his helplessness. The _Gabriel_ lacked even a self-destruct charge.
Noble intentions, too, ought to have their limits: this was all he had
time to think.

The square of the hunters became as small as the dot over an "i."
Although the prey and the predators were now a full planetary diameter
away from the planet, the force of their drives sent tremors through the
surface of the cirrus sea below. In the opening of that sea showed the
ocean and the uneven coastline of Heparia. Remnants of cloud vanished in
this window like wisps of cotton candy under heat.

The dark background of the ocean worsened the visibility. Only the
continually racing, red-flickering numbers of the telemeter gave the
_Gabriel's_ position. Its pursuers closed in on it from four sides. They
were alongside it. Then the window in the clouds bulged, as if the
planet were expanding like a gigantic balloon; the gravimeters gave a
sharp crack; the screens blackened for a moment—and the image returned.
The funnel-shaped window in the white clouds was again small, distant,
and completely empty. Steergard did not immediately grasp what had taken
place. He looked at the telemeter: all that blinked were red zeros.

"He let 'em have it," said someone with grim satisfaction. Harrach,
probably.

"What happened?" Tempe didn't understand.

Steergard knew now, but said nothing. The absolute conviction came upon
him that, though they might renew their efforts, they would lose their
ship sooner than force contact. For a moment he wondered—already far in
his thoughts from this first encounter—whether or not to continue with
the arranged program. He barely heard the excited voices in the control
room. Rotmont was trying to explain what the _Gabriel_ had done, though
the reconnaissance plan did not foresee this. The _Gabriel_ had crushed
space and the pursuers with a sidereal implosion. "But it didn't have a
sidereal generator," Tempe protested, amazed. "It didn't, but it could
have made one. It had a teratron engine, after all. It diverted it,
shorted it, directed the full power of the drive into itself, in one
discharge. Cunning! They were playing poker, and the _Gabriel_ changed
the game to bridge. It led with a trump—because there's no suit higher
than a gravitational collapse. That's how it avoided capture..."

"Wait a minute." Tempe was beginning to understand. "It had _that_ in
its program?"

"Of course not! It had a terawatt annihilative engine and complete
autonomy. It went for broke. The thing's a machine, remember, not a man,
so this wasn't suicide. The prime directive said that it could allow
itself to be handled, but only _after_ landing."

"But, then, couldn't they have pulled the teratron out after the
_Gabriel_ landed?" Gerbert asked, puzzled.

"How? The whole first stage, including the teratron, was supposed to
melt upon penetration of the atmosphere. With immersion of the stator,
the internal pressure would blow apart the poles, and everything, the
engine room included, would end up a cloud of dust. And without the
least bit of radioactivity. It was only the upper, forward module that
was supposed to land and make pleasant conversation with the masters of
the house..."

"Oh, yes," Harrach growled, indignant. "It was assumed that their
rockets wouldn't be able to build up such acceleration! The _Gabriel_
would fly through the satellite rubbish heap like a rifle bullet through
a swarm of bees, and politely set down."

"Why didn't it melt its engine when they went after it?" asked the
doctor.

"Why doesn't a chicken fly?" Rotmont was giving vent to his irritation.

"What could it melt the teratron _with_? The energy for burning the
drive module was to be drawn from outside—from atmospheric friction.
That's how the thing was designed. You didn't know? But let's return to
the crux of the game. Either the _Gabriel_ would escape, which was not
very likely, or they would seize it in space, pull it down into orbit,
and disassemble it. If they smothered its drive, and it waited until
then to short the engine, there would have been an explosion, but a
toroid having poles might survive. The _Gabriel_ couldn't allow that, so
it came up with the idea of a black hole with a double event horizon,
sucked the hunters into itself, imploding, and when the inner sphere
collapsed the outer went free, because on that scale quantum effects
equal gravitational. Space curved—which is why we saw Quinta as if
through a magnifying glass."

"And this truly wasn't programmed? The possibility was never even
considered?" Arago said, silent until now.

"No! It wasn't! Fortunately, the machine had more upstairs than we do!"
Rotmont was angered by the questions. "It was to be as defenseless as a
newborn babe! The _Gabriel's_ teratron was not intended for the
hyperthermic production of collapsars by short-circuiting, but the
Quintans could have deduced that from the construction itself. Obviously
they could have, if the _Gabriel_ hit on the idea in a couple of
seconds."

"By itself?"

The monk's question made Rotmont lose all patience.

"By itself! How many times do I have to say that? It had, after all, a
luminal computer with a quarter the power of DEUS! In five years,
Father, you wouldn't think your way through half the number of bits that
it could in one microsecond. It examined itself, ascertained that it
could reverse the field of the teratron and that shorting the poles
would produce a mononuclear sidereal generator. The generator would
burst, of course, immediately, but at the same time as the collapse..."

"That was to be expected," observed Nakamura.

"If you take a walk with a walking stick and a mad dog comes at you,
it's to be expected that you'll hit him over the head," replied Rotmont.
"It's incredible that we could have been so naïve! But all's well that
ends well. They showed their hospitality, and the _Gabriel_ knew how to
return the compliment. Of course, it could have been equipped with a
conventional self-destruct charge, but our leader chose not to do
that..."

"And what took place, is that any better?" asked Arago.

"And was I supposed to install a moped engine in it? It needed power, so
it got power. And the fact that a teratron resembles, in its design, a
sidereal generator is not my fault but the consequence of physics.
Jokichi?"

"He's right," said Nakamura, appealed to.

"In any case, they have no sidereal technology or gravistics, I'll stake
my life on that," Rotmont went on.

"How do you know?"

"Because they would have used it. That whole Moloch buried on the Moon,
for example, is a horse and buggy from the point of view of sidereal
engineering. Why tunnel down to magma and the asthenosphere if you can
transform gravitation to produce macroquantum effects? Their physics
took a different road—I would say a more roundabout road, which led them
away from the trump suit. Thank God! We want contact, after all, not
combat."

"But won't they consider what just happened combat?"

"They might. They very well might!"

"Gentlemen, do you think you can locate any pieces of the craft that the
_Gabriel_ sent flying?" Steergard asked the physicists.

"Not likely—unless the collapse was highly asymmetrical. I'll ask DEUS.
I doubt that the grav monitors were able to record it precisely. DEUS?"

"Locating them," said the computer, "is not possible. The blast from the
opening of the outer Kerr envelope dispersed the fragments away from the
sun."

"And in the vicinity?"

"An indeterminacy of a parsec was created."

"You're not serious?" said Polassar. Nakamura was also amazed.

"I am not sure that Dr. Rotmont is right," said DEUS. "Possibly I am
biased, as one more closely related to the _Gabriel_ than is Dr.
Rotmont. In addition, I did limit its autonomy, according to the
instructions that I received."

"Enough of that 'related' business." The captain did not care for
machine humor. "Tell what you know."

"My guess is that the _Gabriel_ intended only to disappear—by turning
itself into a singularity. It knew that neither we nor they would be
harmed in this way, because the probability of meeting a singularity is,
practically speaking, zero. It has a diameter of 10⁵⁰ of a proton. Two
flies, one flying from Paris, the other from New York, would be more
likely to collide."

"Whom are you defending, Rotmont or yourself?"

"I defend no one. Though not a man, I speak as a man, to men. The
_Hermes_ and the _Eurydice_ originate in Greece. Let this sound, then,
as if uttered at the walls of Troy: if the crew suspects those who
programmed and sent forth the _Gabriel_, I give my Olympian word that
the collapse-escape was not entered in any memory bank. The _Gabriel_
possessed the decisional maximum, a nanosecond heuristics with branches
to 10³², the cardinal number of the combinatorial set. To what use it
put that capability I do not know, but I do know the amount of time it
had to reach a decision: from three to four seconds. Too little, that,
to determine the Holenbach interval. Thus the choice it faced was: all
or nothing. If it did not close off space with a collapse, it would
explode like a hundred-megaton thermonuclear bomb—because the power
liberated by the short would have been such an explosion. In view of
that, the _Gabriel_ went to the other extreme, which ensured an
implosion down to a singularity, and incidentally pulled the Quintans'
missiles into the Kerr envelope."

DEUS fell silent. Steergard looked around at his men.

"All right. I'll accept that. The _Gabriel_ surrendered its soul to the
Lord. As to whether it checkmated Quinta in the process, we'll find out.
We remain where we are. Who's on duty?"

"I am," said Tempe.

"Good. The rest of you, to bed. If anything happens, wake me."

"DEUS is always on duty," offered the computer.

Alone in the control room with the lights on dim, the pilot circled like
a swimmer in invisible water, past dead and empty screens, and rose to
the ceiling. Struck by an unexpected thought, he kicked off from the
ceiling and flew to the central videoscope.

"DEUS?" he said in a low voice.

"Yes."

"Show me again the final stage of the chase. Slowed down five times."

"Optically?"

"Optically with an infrared overlay, but the image shouldn't be too
blurred."

"The degree of blurring is a matter of taste," replied DEUS as the
screen lit up. Along the frame flashed the numbers of the telemeter.
They did not rush at lightning speed as before, but changed in small
jumps.

"Cross hairs on the image."

"Very well."

The picture, intersected stereometrically, whitened with clouds.
Suddenly it shook, as if seen through rushing water. The lines of the
grid began to bend. The distance between the needle of the _Gabriel_ and
the pursuers decreased. At slow motion, everything took place as in a
drop of water under a microscope, when comma bacilli swim toward a black
speck in suspension.

"Differential Doppler telemetry!" he said.

"Space is losing its euclidean structure," replied DEUS, but switched on
the differentiator. Though the squares of the grid trembled and bent,
distance could still be roughly estimated. The commas were a few hundred
meters from the _Gabriel._ Then a large expanse of the planet beneath
the five clustered black points swelled in a violent magnification, only
to return instantly to its normal appearance. But the black dots had all
vanished. In the place where they had been there was a slight stirring,
as of air. It gave a terrible blaze of red, like a gush of shining
blood, which formed a scarlet bubble that turned brown, dimmed, and went
out. The far clouds, dispersed thousands of miles by the shock, lazily
rotated above the surface of the ocean, which was darker than the
continental coast to the east. The window, with its swirling edges,
still gaped wide and round, but was empty.

"Gravimeters!" called the pilot.

"Very well."

The picture did not change; only the geodesic lines coiled up in the
center, a skein of tangled threads.

"Microgravs! DEUS, you know what I mean!"

"Very well."

DEUS spoke, as always, in an unemotional voice, and yet it seemed to the
pilot that there was a touch of impertinence in the tone. As if the
machine, superior to him in quickness of thought, was carrying out its
orders uncooperatively, to make him feel this superiority.

In the clump of tangled lines there was an almost imperceptible flutter;
it cut through the thick of the grid and was gone. The geodesic knot
straightened out. Against the background of the white planet with the
crater in the clouds like the eye of a giant cyclone once again stood a
rectangular array of gravitational coordinates.

"The _Gabriel_ shot nucleons into itself, nucleons having a
tera-voltage?" asked the pilot.

"Correct."

"Tangentially, with an accuracy to one Heisenberg?"

"Correct."

"Where did it get the additional energy? Wasn't its mass too small to
bend space into a microhole?"

"The teratron, shorted, acts as a sidereal generator. It pulls in energy
from outside."

"Creating a deficit?"

"Yes."

"In the form of negative energy?"

"Yes."

"Over what range?"

"At greater-than-light speed in hyperspace, the _Gabriel_ drew energy
over a radius of a million kilometers."

"Why didn't Quinta detect this, or the Moon? Why didn't we?"

"Because it is a quantum borrowing in the Holenbach interval. Should I
explain?"

"No need," the pilot answered. "Since the collapse took place in less
than a millionth of a nanosecond, two concentric event horizons formed,
of the Rahman-Kerr type."

"Yes," said DEUS. It could not feel surprise, but the pilot sensed
respect in the word.

"Which means that the singularity, left after the _Gabriel,_ no longer
exists in this world. Calculate it out, see if I'm right."

"I did the calculation," said DEUS. "It does not exist, with a
probability of 1:10,000."

"Then why did you give the captain that harangue about the colliding
flies?" asked the pilot.

"The probability is not zero."

"Judging by the movement of the geodesies, the collapse showed strong
buckling away from the sun. If one reduces all the bodies of the system
to point-masses, one should be able to find the focus where those
rockets of theirs were thrown—by the macrotunneling effect. True?"

"True."

"The blur cannot have the dimensions of a parsec. It must be shorter.
You can calculate it?"

"Yes."

"Well?"

"The tunneling takes place probabilistically, and the independent
variables of the probabilities multiply."

"Let's translate that into common sense. Besides Zeta there are nine
planets in this system. The result is a nonlinear set of equations
impossible to integrate, but the planets took their angular momentum
from the protosun; therefore one can reduce the mass of the whole system
to its center."

"That is very imprecise."

"Imprecise, but not by a parsec."

"Are you one of those phenomenal number wizards?" asked DEUS.

"No. I come from a time when calculations were also made without
computers. Or sometimes one had to proceed 'not by À but by eye.' Anyone
who couldn't do that in my profession died young. Why are you silent?"

"What am I supposed to say?"

"That you are not infallible."

"I am not."

"And that you have no business being called DEUS."

"I did not name myself."

"Even a woman wouldn't get in the last word, with a computer. DEUS—you
are to calculate the probability distribution along that parsec of
yours. It should be bimodal. You will mark this region on a star map and
early next morning show it to the captain, with the explanation that you
didn't feel like working it out before."

"No one told me to do that."

"I'm telling you now. Understand?"

"Yes."

And with this the midnight dialogue in the control room was concluded.

X-The Attack

 

That which mathematically has an extremely low probability also has this
characteristic: that it may nevertheless sometimes happen. Of three of
the chase craft that were sucked into the compressed space and then
expelled—with the gravitational return to equilibrium—away from the sun,
there was no trace found; but the fourth _was_ found and taken on board,
barely eight days later. DEUS explained this truly remarkable
coincidence with sophisticated topological analysis, using the
transfinite derivatives of ergodics. But Nakamura, who heard from
Steergard about the midnight argument between the pilot and DEUS,
remarked that for what happened in reality one could always come up with
a calculation, using tricks known to anyone who ever engaged in applied
mathematics. As the shattered, crumpled wreck was being drawn into the
ship by cranes, Nakamura, curious, asked the pilot how he had reached
his conclusion. Tempe laughed.

"I'm no mathematician. If I did any reasoning, I couldn't tell you what
it was. I don't recall who proved this to me, or when, but if a man
wants to determine the probability of his own birth, by going down the
genealogical tree past parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, he can
obtain a value as near zero as he likes. If the parents didn't meet by
accident, then the grandparents did, and by the time one gets to the
Middle Ages the set of perfectly possible events that would rule out all
the conceptions and births necessary for one to be born becomes greater
than the set of all the atoms in the Universe. In other words, each of
us has no doubt whatever that he exists, despite the fact that no
stochastics could have predicted him a couple of hundred years earlier."

"Of course—but what does that have to do with effects from singularities
in the Holenbach interval?"

"I have no idea. Probably nothing. I'm no expert on singularities."

"No one is. Our apostolic delegate would say that it was divine
inspiration."

"Divine, I don't think so. I simply took a good hard look at the
_Gabriel's_ demise. I knew that it didn't wish to destroy its hunters.
Thus it did what it could to avoid pulling them under the Kerr horizon.
I saw that the pursuing craft were not in a perfect row behind the
_Gabriel_. If they differed in distance, then they might differ, too, in
what happened to them."

"And it was on that basis... ?"

The Japanese now laughed, too.

"Not only. There are limits to calculation. It's called _limes
computibilitatis._ DEUS stands on that boundary. DEUS won't touch
problems that it knows are transcomputable and therefore insoluble.
Which is why it didn't even make the attempt, and I was lucky. What does
physics have to say about luck?"

"The same as about one hand clapping," said Nakamura.

"That's Zen?"

"Yes. And now come with me—this catch belongs to you."

In the glare of many lights, in the middle of the hall, on a duraloid
slab, the dark wreck lay like a charred and split-open fish. Dissection
revealed the now familiar cellular structure, luminal engines of
considerable power, and a melted device in the head, which Polassar
thought was a laser gun but Nakamura believed was a kind of
light-throttle for the drive, since the object had been to capture the
_Gabriel_ and not destroy it. Polassar suggested that this forty-meter
corpse be removed from the ship, because, along with the earlier finds,
it took up almost half the hall. Why turn the hall into a junkyard? El
Salam disagreed. He wanted to hold on to at least one specimen,
preferably the last, though when asked by the captain he could not come
up with a rational reason.

The question did not concern Steergard. The situation was radically
changed, he felt, and he wanted to hear from the men what line of action
they now considered appropriate or best.

After the satellite scrap was cast overboard, a council was to be held.
The two physicists went first to Rotmont, in order, as Polassar said
sourly, to "draft a statement and back it with a bibliography."

And, in fact, those three did want to coordinate their stand—because in
the conversations among the crew since the destruction of the _Gabriel_
one could detect the signs of a lurking split.

It is not known who was the first to use the expression "show of
strength." Harrach immediately declared himself in favor of such a
tactic; El Salam also, but with reservations; the physicists and Rotmont
were opposed, and Steergard, though he only listened, seemed to be on
their side. The others did not take the floor. During the council, the
views of both groups came into sharp conflict. Kirsting, surprisingly,
joined the advocates of "strength."

"Force is indeed an irrefutable argument," Steergard finally said. "I
have three cautions regarding this strategy, and each is a question. Do
we in fact have the upper hand? Can such blackmail lead to the
establishment of contact? And will we be prepared to carry out our
threats if _they_ do not submit to them? These are rhetorical questions.
None of us can answer them. The consequences of a strategy based on
shows of strength are incalculable. If anyone disagrees with me, let him
speak."

The ten men in the captain's cabin looked at one another. "As for El
Salam and me," Harrach said, "we would like the captain to present his
alternative. We see no alternative. Our situation gives us no choice.
Surely that is obvious. Threats, force, blackmail: these are
unappetizing words. Put into action, they can lead to catastrophe. The
question of who has the upper hand is the least important. It doesn't
matter whether or not we do, but whether or not _they_ think we do, and
submit without a struggle."

"Struggle... ?" echoed the monk.

"Encounter. Confrontation. Does that sound better, Father? But we should
avoid euphemisms. The threat of force—putting aside the question of what
kind—must be real. Threats not backed by the possibility of action are
tactically and strategically worthless."

"Yes, let's avoid euphemisms," agreed Steergard. "Though it would also
be possible to bluff..."

"No," said Kirsting. "Bluffing assumes a minimum familiarity with the
rules of the game. We don't know the rules."

"All right," said Steergard. "Suppose we have a genuine superiority, and
we can display it without causing them any direct harm. An open threat.
If such persuasion proves futile, Harrach, then according to you we will
have to attack, or at least repulse an attack. Hardly an auspicious
prelude to mutual understanding."

"Hardly," Nakamura supported the captain. "It would be the worst way to
begin. Though, true, we are not the ones who created this situation."

"May I say something?" asked Arago. "We do not know why they tried to
catch the _Gabriel._ Most likely it was in order to do to it what we did
to two of their satellites near Juno and now with their chasers. Yet we
do not consider that we acted as aggressors. We desired to examine
products of their technology; they desired to examine _our_ product.
It's simple symmetry. There is no need, therefore, to speak of shows of
strength, demonstrations of destruction, attacks. A mistake doesn't have
to be equivalent to a crime. Though it _can_ be."

"There is no symmetry," Kirsting objected. "All together, we sent out
eight million bits of information. We signaled from the Ambassador for
over seven hundred hours in a circle, on all bands. We lasered. We
transmitted the codes and the instructions for their decoding. We sent a
lander that carried not a gram of explosives. As for the information
transmitted—we gave them the location of our solar system, pictures of
Earth, an outline of the evolution of our biosphere, the facts of
anthropogenesis, a whole encyclopedia. And the physical constants, which
are universal throughout space and of which they must be fully
cognizant."

"But of sidereal engineering, of the Holenbachian foramina, of the
Heisenberg units there was no mention, was there?" said Rotmont.

"Nor of our drive systems and gravitational ranging, of the whole SETI
Project, of the _Eurydice,_ the gracers, Hades..."

"No. You know best what wasn't included, since you made the programs for
the Ambassador yourself," said El Salam. "Nor was there mention of the
death camps, of the world wars, of the witches burned at the stake. But
when someone goes visiting for the first time, he doesn't put everything
out on the table—his sins, Daddy's sins, Mommy's sins, etc. If we, in a
general way and most politely, informed them that we were able to turn a
mass larger than their moon into a thing that could fit inside a
keyhole, then Father Arago would tell us that this smacked of criminal
blackmail."

"I offer myself as mediator," Tempe cut in. "Inasmuch as they don't sit
in caves and light fires by striking flints, but have space travel at
least out to the diameter of their system, they know that we didn't get
here by rowboat, kayak, or schooner. And the simple fact that we are
here, from a distance of hundreds of parsecs, means more than any
flexing of huge biceps."

"_Recte. Habet_," whispered Arago.

"Tempe is right," agreed the captain. "Our very arrival may have alarmed
them, particularly if they are technologically incapable of galactic
flight but know what orders of power are required for it... Up until the
activation of the Ambassador we assumed that they knew nothing about us.
But if they became aware of the _Hermes_ much earlier—and we have been
in orbit here three months—then _our_ silence, _our_ camouflage, could
seem ominous to them..."

"You exaggerate." Harrach shrugged in irritation. "Not at all. Imagine
that it is the year 1950, or 1990, and above the Earth galactic cruisers
hover, a mile long. Even if they rained down only chocolates, there
would be tremendous confusion, panic, not to mention political crises,
since every civilization in the multistate phase must have internal
conflicts. No show of strength is needed from us, because the crossing
of a hundred parsecs itself is such a demonstration—to those who cannot
accomplish it..."

"Very well, then, Captain—what do you suggest we do? How are we to show
our good-natured, mild-mannered, peaceful, friendly intentions? How do
we assure them that we present no threat to them in any way, that we are
just a group of boy scouts on a hike, headed by a priest—when four of
their best fighting machines, each fifty times heavier than our
archangel, were blown out of the continuum by it like specks of dust? El
Salam and I, I see now, were mistaken. The guests arrived with flowers;
in the garden, the host's dog attacked them; one guest, attempting to
drive the beast away with his parasol, inadvertently impaled the host's
auntie. Why talk of a show of strength? It's the snows of yesteryear, it
already took place!"

Harrach, with a broad grin, and not without malice, addressed this to
the captain but kept his eyes on the monk.

"The asymmetry does not lie where you think it," said the Dominican. "To
those who do not understand us we cannot be the bearers of good tidings.
Saintly intentions cannot be demonstrated as long as they remain only
intentions. Evil, on the other hand, _can_ be demonstrated, by causing
harm. It is a _circulus vitiosus:_ in order to communicate with them, we
must convince them of our peaceful intentions, but to convince them of
our peaceful intentions, we first need to communicate with them..."

"How is it that everything that's happened here wasn't taken into
account by our great thinkers, the planners-directors of CETI and SETI?"
asked Tempe angrily. "All this just fell on us out of the blue? It's
unbelievably stupid."

The cabin was filled with raised voices arguing. Steergard said nothing.
He thought that in this fruitless debate—he saw the futility of it—the
men, without fully realizing it, were giving vent to the frustration
that had mounted in the course of the repeated attempts to communicate
with Quinta. This was the result of sleepless nights, the unrewarded
zeal of the investigation of the Moon, the building of hypotheses that,
instead of giving insight into the alien civilization, fell apart like a
house of cards. The frustration made some feel that they were surrounded
by riddles without solutions, or were lost in a maze without an exit,
and it made others suspect "them," more and more, of collective
paranoia.

If indeed there was paranoia on Quinta, it was contagious. Steergard
noted that the indicator light above the shelf by his bunk, in the back
of the cabin, was off. Someone had thrown the switch in the control
room, cutting off the central brain of the ship from this cabin, someone
who apparently did not want the cold, rational, logical presence of DEUS
at this meeting. Steergard did not ask who had done it. He knew his men;
among them there was no coward or liar who would deny the action—but it
might have been done unconsciously, like covering one's nakedness before
a stranger, in a reflex quicker than modesty.

So he said nothing, but turned the terminal back on and requested DEUS
to make an optimal decision prognosis.

DEUS replied that it lacked sufficient data to optimize moves. In the
request, besides, there was implicit an inevitable anthropocentrism.
People spoke about themselves and others in terms of good or bad. The
same applied to their general history. Many considered history an
accumulation of cruelties, of senseless subjugations—senseless even
without considering ethics, since neither the aggressors nor their
victims derived anything but the breakup of culture, the fall of
empires, on whose ruins new empires rose. In a word, many held human
history in contempt, but as a rule no one thought that it was some
hideous, horrible psychozoic aberration in the Universe—that the Earth
was a planet of brutal murderers, unique among millions of globes, a
place where intelligence yielded blood and pain, contrary to the cosmic
norm. As a rule, people, in their heart of hearts, without thinking
about it overmuch, considered Earth's history—in its whole course, from
the paleopithecus and australopithecus up to the modern day—to be
"normal," a type frequently encountered in the set of cosmic
civilizations.

But in this matter nothing was known, and no method existed whereby from
that informational zero anything more than zero could be extracted. The
Ortega-Nilssen chart indicated only the average time separating the
birth of the protoculture from the technological explosion. The curve of
the diagram—the so-called main road of the psychozoics—did not reflect
either biological or sociological (cultural, political) factors, which
together shaped the specific history of the Intelligent Beings. Such an
omission was justified by terrestrial experience, because the clashes
between different faiths and cultures, between different forms of
government and ideology—colonializations and decentralizations, the rise
and fall of empires—in no way interfered with the _pace_ of
technological advances. This was a parabolic curve unaffected in its
course by such historical disturbances and shocks as invasions, plagues,
and genocides, because technology, once it gained momentum, became a
variable independent of the civilizational substructure. It became, in
integration, a logistic curve of an autocatalytic process.

Individual people—on the microscopic scale—always made inventions and
discoveries, whether singly or in groups, but these creators could be
factored out of the equation, because it was inventions that gave rise
to inventions, and discoveries that led to discoveries. This
acceleration described a parabola that seemed to soar to infinity. A
saturation bend in the curve was not caused by other individuals who
sought to protect the environment; the curve would bend only where a
failure to bend would destroy the biosphere. Invariably it would bend at
the critical point, for if technologies for saving or replacing the
biosphere did not come to the rescue of the technologies of expansion,
the given civilization would enter a crisis to end all crises, i.e.,
extinction. With no air to breathe, there could be no one to make
further discoveries and receive Nobel prizes.

According to the data of cosmology and astrophysics, the main road of
Ortega-Nilssen thus reflected only the limiting _capacity_ of the given
biosphere (also termed its maximum technological load). But that
capacity did not depend on anatomy or on the organizational forms of
collective life; it depended on the physical-chemical features of the
planet, its ecospheric position, and other cosmic factors, including
stellar and galactic influences, etc. Wherever the biosphere's load
limit was reached, the main road broke off, which meant only that the
civilizations in question were obliged to come to some global decisions
about their future. When they were unwilling or unable to do this, they
perished.

The breaking off of the main road coincided with the so-called upper
frame of the window of contact. That frame or boundary—also called the
"growth barrier"—accounted for the subsequent branchings from the
monolithic trunk that was the main road, because different civilizations
continued their existence in different ways. Though as yet no
information had been exchanged with any psychozoic, it was known from
calculation that there was not one and only one optimal decision, no
best way out of the trap created by the technosphere's damage to the
biosphere. Even a united civilization did not have before it a single
path that would lead it safely through the multiplying dilemmas and
perils.

As for the current situation, it was the result of inappropriate actions
that came of departing from the expedition's original program. In DEUS's
opinion, the series of wrong steps ensued because they did not appear
wrong at the time that they were made; their wrongness revealed itself
only in retrospect. More precisely, the _Hermes_ had been drawn into
Arrow's paradox: the decider attempts to accomplish two things that are
each of value but that cannot both be accomplished. In the range between
maximum risk and maximum caution ran a resultant from which it would be
difficult to extricate themselves. DEUS did not think that the captain
was to blame for the present impasse, because the captain had sought to
strike a compromise between risk and caution. After capturing the
Quintan orbiters behind Juno and discovering their "viroids," he had
deviated from the program toward excessive caution, camouflaging the
ship and not sending signals to Quinta announcing visitors from outer
space. The price of that caution was evident now.

The second error lay in giving the _Gabriel_ too much autonomy, too much
inventiveness. Paradoxically, this also came from excessive caution—and
from the mistaken assumption that the _Gabriel,_ superior in speed to
the orbiters or rockets of Quinta, could land without letting itself be
intercepted. In order for it to possess such speed, it was given a
teratron drive. And in order for it to respond suitably to the
unforeseen behavior of the host upon landing, it was given a
too-intelligent computer. The SETI program called for sending, first,
smaller probes; but this was rejected when the diplomatic exertions of
the Ambassador all came to nothing. No one dreamed that the _Gabriel_
would transform its drive unit into an implosive sidereal gun. Thus,
because of the ingenuity of the _Gabriel's_ computer, they found
themselves in a predicament. It was now impossible to send other probes
as if nothing had happened. A new situation called for new tactics. DEUS
needed twenty hours to think. That was where the matter stood.

 

After his evening watch, the pilot could not sleep. He kept thinking
about the council; it had resulted in nothing for him but an increased
dislike for DEUS. That mighty electronic mind might be brilliant at
logic, but the effect it produced was strikingly pharisaical. Mistakes
had been made, they had all departed from the program, yet the captain
was not held accountable, nor did DEUS itself bear the least
responsibility for this, as it proved with great precision. Arrow's
paradox; the camouflage fraught with evil consequences; the excessive
suspicion regarding the Quintans, kindled by the sabotage hypothesis to
explain the origin of the viroids, as DEUS now so clearly defined the
problem—and who had served, all this time, as adviser to the captain?

Buckled to the bed because he was weightless, he finally grew so angry
that sleep was out of the question. So he turned on the point-light over
his head, pulled a book out from under the bunk, _The Hermes Program,_
and started to read.

First he leafed through the general assumptions about Quinta. This was a
computer printout made just before takeoff from the _Eurydice,_ based
upon the collected and interpreted astrophysical observations. The
Quintans had at their disposal energy on the order of 10³⁰ ergs. Their
civilization was thus on the pre-sidereal level. The major sources of
energy were undoubtedly thermonuclear reactions of the stellar type, but
power stations had _not_ been launched into space. Most likely, the
exhaustion of fossil fuels, as on Earth, led to a period of the use of
the uranides, whose further exploitation proved unprofitable after
mastery of the Bethe Cycle. It seemed improbable that in the last
hundred years the planet had gone through wars waged with nuclear
weapons. The equatorial cold spot could not have been the result of such
warfare. Any postatomic winter would have had to encompass virtually the
entire planet, since the masses of dust thrown into the stratosphere
would increase the albedo of the whole surface. The reasons for halting
the construction of the ice ring from ocean water were unknown.

He flipped through pages filled with graphs and tables, until he came to
the chapter "Hypotheses on the Civilization."

1) Quinta suffers from internal conflicts, which have influenced
technological development. This suggests the presence of antagonistic
nations or other aggregations. The period of open military encounters,
belonging to the past, led to no resolution of the "conqueror-conquered"
type. Instead, it gradually entered the phase of secret warfare. At this
point an additional printout from DEUS was attached, done later, on
board the _Hermes:_

Evidence supporting the thesis of cryptomilitary activity are the
parasites found in the two Quintan satellites. In this interpretation,
blocs of adversaries remain, together, in a state that is neither
classical peace nor classical war in the Clausewitzian sense.

Their struggle takes place beyond front lines, in meteorological damage
inflicted on the enemy, or in mutual catalytic erosion of
technoindustrial potentials. This may have halted the creation of the
ice ring, since that task would require global cooperation.

The continuation again was from the _Eurydice:_

If there exist such groups of antagonists and they contend
nonclassically, then contact with any visitor from space may be rendered
considerably more difficult. The _a priori_ establishment of an alliance
with the visitor is highly unlikely for either of the parties, if there
are only two, because the extraplanetary intruder would have no rational
reason, would have nothing to gain by taking sides in the conflict.
Contact could actually serve as the spark that would turn the quiet,
smoldering, steady, and stubbornly pursued secret war into a full-scale,
head-on clash between both powers.

An example. Let there be, on planet T, blocs A, B, and C, all locked in
mutual conflict. If B establishes contact with the intruder, A and C
will feel themselves seriously threatened. They may either attack the
intruder—to keep him from increasing B's potential—or join in attacking
B. The situation is unstable to begin with, and any introduction of an
outside factor of great technological potential—such as the visitor must
possess, having made his galactic jump—may suffice to escalate the
hostilities.

2) Quinta is united, a federation or a protectorate. There are no equal
antagonists on the planet, since one of the powers has acquired dominion
over the others. Such dominion, whether the result of military victories
or accomplished through nonmilitary subjugation, the weaker sides having
submitted to the major power of the globe, also does not provide
stability in the face of contact with a galactic intruder.

One should not impute to the global power demonic or imperialistic
designs of extraplanetary expansion. In this model of Quinta, the power
does not wish to destroy the visitor but only to frustrate his efforts
to establish contact—and, especially, to land on the planet. The
technological gifts of the visitor could easily turn out to be
poisonous. (Yet the attempt itself to keep such gifts from being
offered, to prevent them from disturbing the current sociopolitical
equilibrium, could disturb that equilibrium.) Thus in a united system as
well, refusal of contact could be a sensible decision for the global
powers. This policy of isolationism, directed toward outer space, has
many precedents on Earth. The information threshold of contact to be
surmounted by the visitor is indeterminate in magnitude.

3) According to Folger, Kraft, and their group, a unified planet that
has neither conquerors nor conquered, neither oppressors nor oppressed,
may still not desire contact. The basic dilemmas of such a civilization
that is beginning to veer from the Ortega-Nilssen path, near the upper
region of the window, lie at the intersection of its culture and its
technology. Culture is always characterized by a consistent lag of legal
and moral-ethical norms behind the technology in its presaturated,
parabolic period of acceleration. The technology makes possible what the
cultural tradition forbids and considers unchangeable. (Examples:
genetic engineering applied to beings corresponding to people; the
control of sex; brain transplants.) In the light of such difficulties,
contact with visitors shows its equivocal nature. The planetary party,
rejecting contact, need not ascribe to the intruders any unfriendly
motive. But its fears are justified: the injection of radically new
technologies can destabilize social bonds and relations. Contact,
moreover, is unpredictable in its consequences. This does not apply to
radio contact—or any contact at a distance—since the receivers of the
signals can, at their own discretion, make use of or ignore the acquired
information.

He was tired now, but still could not sleep. He flipped past several
chapters and read the final one, on the procedure for contact.

The SETI Project had addressed the above problems as difficulties a
guest might experience in communicating with his prospective host. The
expedition therefore had been equipped with special devices for
communication as well as with automata that would be able, in the
absence of preliminary negotiations through an exchange of signals, to
demonstrate the peaceful nature of the expedition prior to landing. The
initial procedure had many steps. The first announcement of the arrival
of the ship from Earth would be an emission of waves (ranges given in an
appendix) in the radio, heat, light, ultraviolet, and particle-beam
bands. If there was no response, or an unintelligible response, landers
would be sent to all continents. The landers' guiding sensors would
direct them toward large concentrations of buildings.

There were also plenty of sketches, diagrams, and specifications. In
each lander there would be a transmitter-receiver and data about the
Earth and its inhabitants. If this step, too, failed to elicit the
desired reaction—the establishment of contact—heavier probes would be
shot from the ship. These would have computers able to give instruction
in the use of visual, tactile, and acoustic codes. The procedure was
irreversible, with each step a continuation of the one preceding.

The first landers contained indicator-emitters that could be activated
only by the brutal destruction of their shielding: destruction caused
not by a malfunction or a hard landing but by intentional, nondiscursive
dismantling. (The pilot smiled at this wording to describe a caveman
type bashing the transistorized emissary of humanity with his flintstone
club. "Nondiscursive dismantling" also took place, he thought, when
without explanation you knocked someone's teeth down his throat.)

The indicators, grown from monocrystals, were so highly resistant that
they could send a signal even if the lander was destroyed in a fraction
of a second—blown up in midair, for instance, by an explosive. The
program went on to describe in detail the different models for these
messengers, and the volleys with which they should be dispatched, in
synchronization, to the chosen landing fields, so that no region, no
continent, would be privileged or omitted, etc.

The book also contained a dissenting opinion from a group of SETI
experts who were extreme pessimists. There were no material devices,
they stated, no dispatches or declarations easy to decipher, that could
not be interpreted as a mask concealing aggression. This resulted simply
from the inevitable difference in technological levels.

The phenomenon that in the nineteenth and especially twentieth centuries
was called the "arms race" came into the world with the
paleopithecanthropus, when he employed the long thighbones of antelopes
as clubs, crushing more than chimpanzee skulls with them, since he was a
cannibal. Then when science, the mother of accelerated technology, arose
at the crossroads of the Mediterranean cultures, the military progress
of the warring European nations—and later of the non-European—never gave
one side an overwhelming advantage over another. The single exception to
this rule was the atom bomb, but the United States enjoyed that monopoly
only for the briefest moment in history.

But the technological gap between civilizations in the Universe had to
be enormous. What is more, to hit upon a civilization endowed
developmentally as Earth's was would be, practically speaking,
impossible.

The thick volume included a number of other learned speculations. The
visitor who initiated an underdeveloped host into the arcana of sidereal
engineering might as well be giving children live hand grenades to play
with—with the safety caps off. If, however, he did _not_ reveal his
knowledge, he risked being suspected of duplicity, of seeking to
dominate, and thus he was damned either way.

The profundity of the arguments finally overcame the reader, who with
the help of the SETI program fell into such a sound sleep that the book
remained in his hand and the light of the lamp did not disturb him.

 

He was walking down a narrow, steeply downhill street, between houses,
in the sun. Before the arches, children played. Laundry hung on lines at
the windows. The uneven pavement, strewn with trash, banana peels,
scraps of food, was cut by a gutter full of muddy water. Far at the foot
of the hill was the port, crowded with sails. Shallow, lethargic waves
lapped the beach; boats pulled up on the sand were separated by fishing
nets. The sea, smooth to the horizon, gleamed with a ribbon of reflected
sun. He smelled fried fish, urine, olive oil. He did not know how he got
here, but knew that it was Naples. A small, swarthy girl ran, shouting
at a boy who was fleeing with a ball. He would stop, pretend to throw
her the ball, then dodge away before she could catch him. Other children
shouted something in Italian. A woman was leaning out of a window;
disheveled, in a chemise, she pulled in from the line stretched across
the street her dry slips and skirts. Farther down began stone steps,
cracked. Suddenly everything shuddered, there was a roar, walls began to
crumble. He stood dumbfounded in a cloud of limestone dust, blinded.
Something fell behind him. Women screamed—a rain of bricks—the thunder
of the earthquake was deafening. _Terremoto, terremoto_—the cries were
lost in the second, slowly building roll of thunder. Pieces of plaster
fell on him; he covered his head with his arms, felt a blow in the face,
and woke, but the earthquake did not go away. A tremendous weight pinned
him to the bed. He tried to jump up; the belts held him. His book struck
him in the forehead and flew to the ceiling. This was the _Hermes_, not
Naples, but there was thunder and the walls reeled. He could feel the
whole cabin moving. He hung, suspended. The lamp flickered. He saw the
open book and a sweater flattened on the ceiling beneath him; from the
upside-down shelves flew spools of film. It was not a dream, and it was
not thunder. The sirens wailed. The light dimmed, flared, went out, and
the emergency lights in the corners—of the floor now—switched on. He
tried to find the clasps on the belts to release them, but the buckles,
pressed by his chest, would not let go. His hands grew leaden; blood
rushed to his head. He stopped struggling. He was thrown. The weight
forced him now against the belts, now against the bed. He understood. He
waited. Was this the end?

 

At that hour—it was after midnight—there was no one in the darkroom.
Kirsting sat down in front of the dead visiscope, buckled himself in by
feel, found the buttons like a blind man, and set the tape in motion.
Across the white rectangle of the illuminated screen moved, one by one,
tomograms, almost black, with masses of brighter, rounded lines like
X-ray shadows. Frame after frame went by until he stopped the tape. He
was examining the surface SGs of Quinta. Gently he turned the micron
dial to find the best image. At the center was a bristling convergence,
as of an atomic nucleus, which scattered in fragments radially when hit.
He shifted the image from the formless, milky spot at the center to its
attenuated periphery.

No one knew what the thing was. An inhabited building complex, a kind of
giant city? On this frame one could see it in section, traced by
nucleons of elements heavier than oxygen. Such
tomography—three-dimensional, layered X-raying—of astronomical objects,
known for a very long time, proved useful only for stars cooled to black
dwarfs and for planets. But with all its ingeniousness, SG imaging had
its limitations. The resolution was insufficient to allow one to
distinguish the individual fossils, even if they were larger than the
giant dinosaurs of the Mesozoic and Cretaceous. Nevertheless, he tried
to make out the skeletons of the creatures of Quinta—and perhaps it was
only those corresponding to people that filled this pseudocity, if
indeed it _was_ a metropolis of many millions. He reached the limit of
resolution and crossed it. Then the tiny specters made of pale,
trembling filaments were dispersed. The screen showed a dim chaos of
motionless granulations.

As delicately as he could, he moved the micron dial back, and the
shadowy image returned. He selected the sharpest SGs at the critical
meridian and superimposed these until the contours of Quinta were lined
up like a whole sheaf of X rays of the same object taken at high speed
and composited. The "city" lay on the equator. The SGs had been made
along the axis of Quinta's own magnetic poles, and along the tangent to
the planet's crust. Therefore, if the building complex extended for
thirty miles, the photographs cut through it obliquely—as if one were to
X-ray from a suburb all the streets, squares, and houses between oneself
and the opposite suburb. This yielded little. Looking upon a multitude
of people from a height, one would see them in vertical foreshortening.
But looking along the horizontal, one saw only the closest people, at
the entrances to the streets. An X-rayed crowd would appear as a jumble
of many skeletons. Granted, it was possible to distinguish the buildings
from the pedestrians: since the buildings did not move, everything that
remained in place over a thousand sgs could be filtered out. Vehicles
could also be removed from the picture by a retouching process that
erased anything that traveled faster than a man on foot. If one were
dealing with a large terrestrial city, then houses, bridges, factories
would vanish, along with cars and trains, leaving only the shadows of
the pedestrians. But premises so strongly geo- and anthropocentric were
of questionable value. Still, Kirsting hoped that he would be lucky.

He came to the darkroom often at night and went over the rolls of
pictures countless times on the chance that he might accidentally select
and juxtapose the right SGs and perhaps see—albeit poorly, in a fuzzy
outline—the skeletons of these beings. Were they hominoid? Or even
vertebrates? Was it calcium, compounds of calcium, that supported their
frames, as with the terrestrial vertebrates? Exobiology considered the
man shape to be unlikely, but osteological similarity to the skeletons
of Earth was possible, considering the mass of the planet and the
composition of the atmosphere. Free oxygen suggested the presence of
vegetation, but plants would not engage in space travel or the
manufacture of rockets.

Kirsting did not count on a hominoid bone structure, which was the
outcome of intricate, interconnected paths in terrestrial evolution. But
even bipedality and erect stature did not justify anthropomorphism.
Thousands of prehistoric reptiles, after all, had walked on two legs. If
one were to make SGs of a pack of running iguanodon fossils, at a great
distance they would be indistinguishable from marathoners.

The sensitivity of the apparatus went far beyond the wildest dreams of
the fathers of spin-resonance imaging. He could detect an eggshell, from
the calcium, at a distance of a hundred thousand kilometers.

Sometimes it seemed to the scientist that he saw among the misty
blotches microscopic threads brighter than the background, like a frozen
Holbein dance of death photographed through a telescope. And that, if he
increased the magnification a little, he would be able to see the
skeletons in fact, and they would cease to be what his mind added to the
trembling fibers, that were so indefinite and fleeting—like the canals
seen by the ancient observers of Mars because they wanted so much to see
them. When he stared too long at the groupings of weak, motionless
sparks, his fatigued vision yielded to his will and then he could make
out—almost—the milky dots of skulls and the hair-thin bones of spines
and limbs. But when he blinked, his eyes burning from the strain, the
illusion dissolved.

Kirsting switched off the instrument and got up. Squeezing his eyes shut
in the total darkness, he summoned up the barely seen image, and the
tiny skeletal apparitions returned, phosphorescent against velvet-black.
By feel he released the holders and drifted toward the small ruby light
above the exit. Blinded by the brightness of the corridor after being so
long in the darkroom, he pressed into the recess of the door, which was
padded with thick foam, instead of proceeding directly to the elevator,
and this saved him when he was hit, to the accompaniment of thunder, by
the blow of gravity. The night glowlamps went out, and along the length
of the corridor that wheeled with the ship the emergency lights flashed
on. But, unconscious, he did not see this.

 

Steergard did not turn in after the council, knowing that DEUS, no
matter how many tactics it came up with, would saddle him with a
choice—a choice that would amount to the alternative between
incalculable risk and simple retreat. During the discussion he had
maintained the pose of decisiveness, but now, alone, he felt helpless,
more so that night than ever. It was growing harder for him to resist
the temptation to commit the choice to chance. In one of the closets in
the cabin he had—among his personal odds and ends—an old, heavy bronze
coin with the profile of Caesar and, on the back, the Roman fasces. It
was a memento from his father, a numismatist. Opening the closet, he
still did not know if he would actually entrust the ship, the crew, the
fate of the whole expedition to this, the largest coin in human history,
although already he was saying to himself that the fasces would signify
flight—for what else was retreat?—and the worn profile of the massive
face, what might prove their doom. He overcame his hesitation, groped in
the dim closet, and pulled out from one of the small compartments a flat
coin-box. He opened it, turned the coin in his hand. Did he have the
right... ? It could not be tossed in weightlessness. He pressed the coin
into a paper clip, switched on the electromagnet that was fastened
beneath the desktop so that photographs or maps could be held in place
with steel cubes. He pushed the piles of printouts and tapes to the
sides and, like a boy (he had been a boy, once), set the coin spinning.
It turned on the edge of the clip more and more slowly, describing small
circles, then finally fell, pulled by the magnet, and showed tails.
Retreat. To sit, he grabbed the arms of the swivel chair, and no sooner
did his shirt touch-adhere to the back than, before he was aware of it,
he felt the blow. Barely perceptible at first, it grew in strength until
an enormous force swept the films, papers, steel cubes, and dark-bronze
coin off the desk and shoved him into the chair. The gravity
intensified. With failing eyes, because the blood was leaving them, he
could still see the rapid flickering of the round wall-lamp, and hear,
feel, how through the steel walls, beneath their padding, ran a deep
groan from all the ship's joints; and how, over the racket of objects
flying in every direction—equipment not bolted down, articles of
clothing—could be heard the distant howl of the sirens, a howl that
seemed to come not from horns but from the ship itself, struck in its
170,000-ton body. And as he listened to this wailing and continual
thunder, blinded by the terrible weight that forced his leaden body deep
into the chair, he felt—passing out—relief.

Yes, relief, because retreat now no longer entered into play. His sight
returned after about twenty seconds, though the gravimeter still pointed
to the red.

The _Hermes_ had not suffered a direct hit—that was impossible.

Whatever had rammed it, DEUS, always on watch, parried the attack.

But the attack had been carried out so cunningly and quietly that DEUS,
with no time to choose a moderate shield, resorted to the ultimate.

A gravitational wall could not be breached by anything in _this_
Universe except a singularity—so it saved the _Hermes._ But the power of
so violent a riposte had to produce recoil. Like a cannon slapped back
by the reaction upon firing, the entire ship, at the epicenter of the
sidereal discharge, shook, though it received only a small fraction of
the released energy. Steergard, not even attempting to rise because his
body was still as if under a press, saw, eyes bulging, how the large
indicator arrow fell, quivering, millimeter by millimeter, from the red
section of the round dial. His muscles, strained to the utmost, now
began to obey. The gravimeter dropped to the black 2. But the sirens
kept howling in a monotone on all the decks.

Pushing down with both arms, he got out of the chair with difficulty.
When he stood, he had to support himself with his hands on the edge of
the desk—the way a stooped monkey walked, he thought (a curious thought,
at this moment). Among the tapes and maps thrown to the floor he saw his
father's coin, which continued to show tails or retreat.

He smiled, because that decision had now been trumped by a higher card.
The gravimeter's white dial stood at 1 and was slowly dropping. He had
to get to the control room, to see how his people were. But at the door
he turned suddenly, went back, picked up the coin, and returned it to
the closet. No one should learn about his moment of weakness. It was not
weakness as far as game theory was concerned, because in the absence of
minimax solutions there was no decision better than one purely random.
He could therefore justify his action, at least to himself, but he did
not care to. Halfway down the tunnel-corridor, weightlessness returned.
He pushed the elevator button. The problem had been solved. Though he
was not in favor of battle, he knew his people, and knew that not one of
them, except for the Vatican delegate, would agree to running away.

XI-Show of Strength

 

It was impossible to learn the methods employed in the attack; whatever
they had been, all trace of them was gone from the continuum. The
printout from DEUS's memory showed the physicists what they had
suspected. With omnidirectional sensors sweeping space around the
_Hermes_ to the outer perimeter of defense, radar echoes could be
detected off particles a millimeter across within a radius of a hundred
thousand miles. The blow was not radiant energy—that would have left a
spectral line. The sudden appearance of about fifty objects with fuzzy
edges around the _Hermes,_ in a swarm converging rapidly on the ship,
and all synchronized in motion, seemed inconceivable at first. They
materialized at a very small distance, from one to two miles. The
physicists, forced to speculate, pondered ways to penetrate the sensor
shield undetected. They came up with three.

Clouds of particles, each particle no larger than a bacterium, could
coalesce to form multiton masses, which would imply no little skill in
the production of self-fusing elements directed at a target in wide
dispersion. It would be something like a cloud of microcrystals coming
together—with a necessary delay, inside the perimeter—in an avalanche
reaction.

The individual particles, not merely condensing but interacting to form
missiles, would have to possess a highly subtle structure. Nine seconds
before the blow, the ship's magnetometers registered a jump in the
magnetic field around the sides. It peaked at a billion gauss, then
after several nanoseconds fell almost to zero. And yet beforehand there
had been no electromagnetic activity whatever. The physicists were
unable to propose a mechanism for the creation of a field of such
strength, whose sources, with no prior appearance, could escape the
notice of the sensors. Dipoles, theoretically, might penetrate the
shield if a cloud of them neutralized itself through the mutual
orientation of trillions of molecules.

Such a reconstruction of the attack assumed a technology never before
conceived and therefore never tested experimentally on Earth.

The second possibility was a highly speculative method of using the
quantum effects of space. According to this idea, no material particles
had been smuggled past the defensive barrier, nor were there any in the
whole spherical region surrounding it. Physical space contained a host
of virtual particles that could materialize upon a shock-wave infusion
of energy from without. This approach would require the ship to be
surrounded, beyond the radius of the shield, by generators of the
hardest band of ultraroentgen gamma rays, as well as a centripetal
discharge that, in the shape of a spherical wave contracting at the
speed of light, would produce—exactly upon its intersection with the
defense—a tunnel effect: quanta of energy, emerging near the ship, would
give rise to a sufficient quantity of hadrons in space for them to
hurtle upon the _Hermes_ from every direction. A possible method, but
one demanding the most sophisticated instruments, precision positioning
in space, as well as perfect camouflaging of orbiters. It seemed highly
unlikely.

The third way involved the use of negative energy outside the perimeter
of defense, but this called for mastery of sidereal engineering—and
sidereal engineering in its macroquantum form, with the preliminary
siphoning of power from the Sun, because the power stations able to
produce the necessary energy on the planet would betray their activity
to the _Hermes_ by the residual thermal buildup in the surrounding
terrain.

DEUS, taken completely unawares, seized its gravitational last resort.
Calling on the full power of both main engines, it girdled the ship with
gravity toroids. Inside these toroids, as in the center of intersecting
automobile tires, sat the _Hermes,_ and the missiles directed at it fell
into Schwarzschild-curved space. Since any material object falling into
such space lost all physical properties except electrical charge,
angular momentum, and mass, becoming a formless part of the
gravitational grave, no trace was left behind of the methods used in the
attack.

The toroids, serving as impenetrable armor, existed no more than twenty
seconds, at a cost to the ship of 10²¹ joules. The _Hermes_ did not
share the fate of the _Gabriel,_ did not annihilate itself in
self-defense from the toroidal configuration of surging isogravs. But
because they could not be focused sharply at the emitter, the ship
absorbed about 10-5 of the energy released. A few twenty-thousandths
would have crushed the ship as a hammer crushes the shell of an empty,
blown egg.

The men came out of the emergency in one piece. With the exception of
Steergard and Kirsting, all had been asleep or were at least buckled in
their bunks like Tempe. The ship was not fitted for battle. Polassar
suggested—whatever might happen—that they move to the perihelion, to
replenish the power lost in repulsing the attack. Along the way, the
_Hermes_ passed through a cloud of rarefied gas. At first the gas was
taken for a prominence dispelled in the solar wind, but the sensors
reported that innumerable molecules had attached themselves to the armor
and were corroding it catalytically. Specimens taken revealed the
specificity of their action, much like that of the viroids already
known. Steergard therefore did what in his conversation with the
apostolic delegate he had called "coming out in the open." The _Hermes_
swept the treacherous cloud with a series of thermal blasts, then
destroyed the erosion viruses that adhered to the sides, by a simple
expedient: with the refrigerating units on at full capacity, it turned
like a roast on a spit as it passed through the top of a solar
prominence that was mere light-seconds above the photosphere. Then the
ship reduced speed to assume a stationary orbit, turned its stern toward
Zeta, and opened its energy receptors. A portion of the tanked energy
went to maintain the refrigeration; the rest was sucked up by the
sidereals.

At this point, the crew split into three groups. Harrach, Polassar, and
Rotmont believed that the incident with the cloud represented a second
attack by the Quintans.

Kirsting and El Salam thought that it was not a blow directed at them
intentionally but was, in a way, accidental—that the _Hermes_ had
entered a mined territory, mined long before their arrival.

Nakamura occupied a middle position: the cloud was not a trap—a trap set
either for the _Hermes_ or for the Quintan orbiters—but was, rather, a
"garbage dump" of microweapons employed in warfare above the planet and
which had drifted, in the Sun's gravitational tide, to this perihelion,
contrary to the intentions of the warring parties.

Arago said nothing.

DEUS was occupied with programming possible strategies for defensive,
offensive, and conciliatory actions. It gave no preference: the data for
the optimization of any of these lines were too meager.

Gerbert considered that the thing to do was forget about contact and
shows of strength, but he felt unqualified to participate in the debate,
which grew more and more heated.

Tempe, summoned by the captain when they had replaced the power lost,
said that he was no SETI expert and did not command the ship.

"No one here now is an expert, as I think you may have noticed," replied
Steergard. "Myself included. Even so, everyone has his thoughts on the
subject. You, too. It's only your opinion I want, not advice."

"DEUS would have more to say," said the pilot, smiling.

"DEUS will present twenty tactics, or a hundred. And that's all that it
will do. You know as much as our experts, including DEUS. The minimum
risk lies in retreat."

"True enough." Tempe, sitting opposite the captain, continued to smile.

"What amuses you?" asked Steergard.

"Are you asking privately, Captain, or is that an order?"

"It's an order."

"The situation is sticky, for sure. But I've gotten to know you well
enough to know what you definitely will _not_ do. We are not turning
tail."

"You're certain of that?"

"Absolutely."

"Why? Do you think that we were attacked once, or twice?"

"It doesn't matter. Either way, they don't want contact. I have no idea
what else they have up their sleeve."

"Further attempts will be dangerous."

"Obviously."

"So?"

"Well, I seem to like danger. If I didn't, I'd have been under a
gravestone on Earth for a couple of hundred years now, because I would
have died in bed surrounded by a grieving family."

"In other words, you think that a show of strength is necessary."

"Yes and no. It's a last resort that cannot be avoided."

Held in place by a steel cube, a stack of printed pages lay on
Steergard's desk, with a graph on the top page. The pilot recognized it.
An hour before, he had received a copy from El Salam.

"Have you read that?" Tempe asked.

"No."

"No?" He was surprised.

"It's one more hypothesis from the physicists. I wanted to talk with you
first."

"You should read it. A hypothesis, yes. But I found it convincing."

"You may go."

The paper, entitled "The Zeta System as Cosmic War Zone," was signed by
Rotmont, Polassar, and El Salam.

A civilization that has not only destroyed its forms of wireless
communication, such as radio and television, filling the whole
ionosphere with white noise that drowns out any signal, but which in
addition has invested the lion's share of its global production and
energy in the building of weapons that occupy the space around it—such a
civilization seems impossible, an absurdity. But one should keep in mind
that this state was not consciously planned, not deliberately arrived
at; rather, it arose gradually, through escalation. The starting
situation, we believe, was when multifront war, waged on the surface of
the planet, became tantamount to total annihilation. After this critical
point was reached, the arms race was moved off the planet. None of the
antagonists intended to transform the entire solar system into a battle
zone of monstrous proportions, but proceeded in steps, countering the
moves of the adversaries. By the time a confrontation was finally
reached in outer space, nothing could any longer restrain the zone's
growth, let alone nullify it to establish a lasting peace.

Computer simulation using game theory—nonzero functions of reward—shows
that, in the case of such struggles, the lack of trust in the efficacy
of concluded disarmament treaties imposes a limit on the possibility of
agreement through negotiation. Agreement in the absence of trust in the
enemy's "good faith"—classically termed _pacta sunt servanda_—requires
the mutual inspection of armaments, which means making one's territory
accessible to the enemy's experts.

But when the race to acquire greater and greater military capability
enters the path of microminiaturization, inspection without trust
becomes an impossibility. Armories, arsenals, and laboratories can then
be hidden securely. Agreement cannot be reached thereafter, even on a
_minimal_ level of mutual trust (that he who refrains from microweapons
research will _not_ be assuming thereby a position of imminent defeat).
Nor is it possible to dismantle arms already possessed, on the enemy's
assurance that he will do likewise.

The question arises: why do we find a machine war-sphere around Quinta,
and not the biomilitary methods once predicted on Earth?

Undoubtedly for the reason that the adversaries have already achieved—in
the realm of biological weaponry, too—the power to wipe out the entire
biosphere, just as previously that could be accomplished by an exchange
of nuclear blows. Consequently, no one now will be the first to use
either type of arms.

As for the cryptomilitary macro-alternative—i.e., bringing down
pseudonatural elemental disasters upon the enemy through climate or
seismic tampering—such things may have taken place, but could provide no
strategic solution, because anyone who is himself able to act
cryptomilitarily will recognize similar actions taken against him by the
enemy.

After which introduction, the authors presented their model of cosmic
war. The model began with a sphere, Quinta at the center. In the distant
past, local wars had become global wars, and they in turn were followed
by a race to invent improved weapons on land, sea, and in the air. The
atom bomb put an end to the great conventional wars. From then on, the
cold-war race had three components: instruments of destruction,
instruments providing linkage between them, and instruments directed
against the first two.

The creation of a cosmic war sphere suggested the presence of
operational centers that responded—with technological innovation—to the
advances of the adversaries, as well as to the obsolescence both of
existing arsenals and of the methods of coordinating their deployment.

Each of these stages had its limit or barrier. Every time the
antagonists came to a barrier, a temporary balance of forces would
ensue. Then one of the sides would attempt to break the barrier. The
barrier of the precosmic phase would be a situation in which each side
was able to locate and destroy the enemy's devices, those serving to
deal the first blow and also those for retaliating after an attack.
Toward the end of this phase, ballistic missiles of global range placed
deep in the planet's crust, and mobile launchers on land or launchers
hidden underwater (whether on submarine units or set on the ocean
floor), all became vulnerable to destruction.

In such a mutual-strike equilibrium, the weakest link was the
communication system put out into space by reconnaissance and tracking
satellites—spy satellites—and the link between these, headquarters, and
the combat units. In order to put that satellite system beyond the reach
of a surprise attack that could disrupt or blind it, the next system was
created in a higher orbit. In this way the war sphere expanded. The
larger it grew, the more vulnerable to disruption became its link with
the control centers on the ground. The centers sought to avert this
threat. As sea islands were unsinkable aircraft carriers in the era of
conventional battle, so the nearest globe—the Moon—became an
indestructible base for the side that was the first to take possession
of it militarily. Because there was only one moon, no sooner did one
side occupy it than the other, to remove this new threat, either had to
concentrate on ways to stop communication between planet and moon, or
else had to dislodge the enemy from the moon, by invasion.

If the forces of the invaders and defenders of the lunar fortress were
roughly equal, no one could assume complete control of the body. Most
likely this is what happened when the unilateral installation of the
base was in progress. Those put in check had to abandon the Moon, but
those giving check did not have strength enough to occupy it then.

The retreat might have had another reason, too: new developments in the
disruption of distance communication. If that came about, the Moon would
lose strategic value as an extraplanetary headquarters for military
operations.

An abstract model of cosmic war was a multiphase space with critical
transition surfaces from one phase, when fully achieved, to the next.
Expanding astronomically now, the war sphere would impose on the
antagonists methods of combat unprecedented in their history.

The single strategically optimal reaction to the adversary's acquisition
of the ability to disrupt all connections between the operational
centers and their bases and weapons on land, sea, and in the air—and in
space—was to give greater combat autonomy to one's own weapons and
bases.

The result was that all the centers saw the futility of having
headquarters coordinate operations. The question arose: how to continue
offensive-defensive strategies without being in contact with one's own
forces in space?

No one blocked his own channels of reconnaissance and command. This
occurred as a result of the so-called mirror effect. A did unto B as A
would rather not have been done unto, disrupting his communications—and
was paid in the same coin. After vying in accuracy and power in
ballistic missiles, it became necessary to vie in communication
shielding. The first competition had been the _amassing_ of means of
destruction and the _threat_ of their use. The second was a
"communications war." Battles waged to disrupt and preserve
communication were real, though involving no destruction or bloodshed.
Gradually filling the radio channels with noise, the adversaries lost
track of their own deployed weapons as well as of the armaments of the
enemy.

Did this mean that the paralysis of the command centers led to the
transfer of the battle into space, where continual attacks and
counterattacks were carried out by weapons made independent? Was the
objective of these autonomous weapons the destruction of the enemy's
orbiters? Not at all. The communications war continued to have priority.
The enemy had to be blinded everywhere.

First there was the uncrossable threshold of the head-on collision of
forces on the planet: the power of the payloads, ballistic accuracy, and
the potential consequence of both—a fatal nuclear winter—meant the
inevitable cessation of war.

Able to do nothing else, the enemies mutually destroyed their knowledge
of their arsenals. All bands of radio waves were jammed. The entire
capacity of the channels of transmission was filled with noise. In a
fairly short period of time the race became a contest between the forces
of jamming and the forces of intelligence-gathering and
command-signaling. But this escalation, too, penetrating the noise with
stronger signals and in turn jamming the signals with stronger noise,
resulted in an impasse.

For a while, maser and laser communication still developed. But,
paradoxically, the electronic warfare, because of the increase in
emissive power, led to a stalemate here, too: lasers powerful enough to
pierce the defenses yielded not intelligence but destruction. Speaking
metaphorically, it was as if a blind man in a mist waved his white cane
with greater and greater vigor, until the instrument serving to orient
him turned, instead, into a club.

Foreseeing the approaching stalemate, each side worked to produce
weapons that would possess tactical, and then strategic, autonomy. The
implements of battle acquired independence from their builders,
operators, and control centers.

Had the prime objective of these weapons now hurtling into space been to
destroy their antagonist counterparts, the clash, unleashed at any point
whatever in the sphere, would have set off a battle royal, like a
prairie fire spreading to the surface of the planet itself, which would
have led to a global exchange of blows of the greatest power—i.e., to
extinction. Therefore, these weapons were not supposed to enter into
violent confrontations. They were to put each other into check, and if
they had to destroy, to do so by stealth—like infections—and not by
bombs. Their machine intelligence attempted to win over the intelligence
of enemy weaponry, to stun it, or—with the help of so-called
reprogramming microviruses—to cause the "desertion" of the other side's
orbiters, which in terrestrial history had an ancient analogue in the
form of the janissaries: children whom the Turks took from attacked
nations and incorporated into their own army.

This model of the war sphere was a gross oversimplification. Every phase
of its growth might be accompanied by incursions, infiltrations,
terrorist acts, and maneuvers that, like feints, were designed to lead
the deceived enemy into an error that would be highly costly for him or
even self-destructive. Both cable communication and electronic pulse
devices allowed the adversaries on the planet to preserve a centralized
system of headquarters at a certain range—a range that we could not
determine, because it would vary depending on technological innovation.
In the dictionary of our concepts there was no expression for the
war-sphere of the Quintan type, for it was neither war nor peace but a
permanent conflict that bound together the enemies and drained their
resources.

Could one, then, categorize the war-sphere as a cosmic variant of a war
of attrition, in which the side that lost was the one weaker in raw
materials, energy, or inventions? To this conventional question came an
unconventional answer. The inhabitants of the planet did not possess
unlimited reserves of minerals or inexhaustible sources of energy.
Although this limited the duration of the conflict, it promised victory
to no one. The model of the final phase was, simply, a star.

A star, as everyone knew, owed its existence to the thermonuclear fusion
of hydrogen into helium, a reaction that took place in its core at
pressures and temperatures in the millions. When all the hydrogen was
burned in the center, the star began to contract. Its gravity compressed
it, raising the temperature at the center, which then made possible
nuclear reactions of carbon. At the same time, around the inner sphere
of helium—the "ash" of the consumed hydrogen—the remainder of the
hydrogen continued to react, and this spherical front of fire expanded
more and more within the star. Finally the dynamic equilibrium was
destroyed, and the star threw off its outer envelopes of gas with great
violence.

Much as in an aging sun, where the sphere expanded because of successive
syntheses of hydrogen into helium, helium into carbon, and so on, the
interplanetary sphere of the war zone arose, surface on surface,
according to the stages reached in the arms race.

At the center—i.e., on Quinta—a minimum of military communication
continued to exist on each side. Away from the center, autonomous weapon
systems operated, keeping themselves in mutual check. Their independence
was limited, of course, by the programmers at headquarters, who kept
them from setting off a chain reaction that would bring the fire of
battle to the planet itself.

The programmers, however, found themselves increasingly on the horns of
a dilemma. The more sophisticated were the weapons hurled into space by
the adversaries, the greater the offensive-defensive sovereignty that
had to be given to those weapons. Both digital and analog simulations of
the war-sphere, projected at least a hundred years into the future, did
not yield any single-valued solution. Nevertheless, on the basis of
variants run through the computer, the authors of the model posited the
existence of a restriction threshold in the programming of autonomous
fighting systems: above that threshold, weapons that were only
_independent_ could become _insubordinate._

This image, departing from the model of a star, approached the model of
natural evolution. Autonomous weapons were like the lower organisms:
provided with aggressiveness, which was held in rein by the instinct for
self-preservation. Insubordinate weapons would be the primates, who had
acquired the ability to invent and from merely cunning or quick-witted
creatures became the initiators of wholly new kinds of activity. Such
weapons freed themselves from the indirect supervision of the builders.

In saying that the builders ended up on the horns of a dilemma, the
authors believed that defeat threatened both those who curbed their
weapons' growth in intelligence and those who spurred on that growth.
Either way, as the war-sphere spread it lost dynamic stability, and
though its fate was not amenable to a single-valued prediction, that
fate went beyond the interests of the sides that had begun the struggle.
But such a state of affairs was still far off.

The flashes observed by the _Eurydice_ could have been skirmishes
between highly advanced combat units on the periphery of the Zeta
system. Their clashes at a distance of billions of miles from Quinta
meant that authentic battles could take place on fronts that were
astronomically removed from the planet. There the war could sometimes
turn "hot." It might also, in the future, make unpredictable jumps into
the heart of the war-sphere. No one versed in post-Clausewitzian
strategy could really expect a victorious conclusion to the conflict.
Yet the professional strategists found themselves in the forced position
of a player who cannot leave the table because he has thrown all his
capital into the game. It was precisely in this that the enemies
mirrored each other. The once-important question of _who_ began the arms
race lost all significance. Peaceful or aggressive intentions of the
warring sides could no longer be distinguished in the conflict. The game
boded ill for all the participants, and the only victory possible would
be Pyrrhic.

Within this framework, what were the prospects for contact? The authors
did not know. So far, on the cosmic chessboard moved black and white
pieces of comparable power, not entering into battle but only giving
check. On the other hand, completely new and unknown pieces appeared—and
were tested by battle. Tested by small encounters, like ancient
skirmishes. Or possibly it was not the planet—not its nations,
governments, or headquarters—that had attacked the _Hermes,_ but
mechanisms to which the _Hermes_ was a "foreign body," a thing large,
technological, and unknown. The _Hermes_ would have been, then, not a
wayfarer fallen upon by bandits but an infection confronted by defending
lymphocytes within an organism.

The limitations on the arms race were few. Old combat orbiters could be
pulled down to the planet and "recycled." As for weapons of the viroid
type—microminiaturized parasites, self-cohering molecules drawing energy
from the Sun, required tremendous engineering inventiveness but little
raw material.

Polassar, Rotmont, and El Salam concluded by summarizing their
conception of Quinta. As a mighty artifact of a continuing struggle for
supremacy, this artificial organism—a war-sphere with a radius of seven
billion miles—could be viewed as a system eaten by cancer. Its cosmic
organs were, to a greater or lesser extent, malignant metastases of
conflict. But here the analogy to a living creature broke down, because
that whole, even in its beginning, had never been "healthy": it was
infected at birth with the antagonism of technologies taking aim at one
another. It had no "normal tissues"; its dynamic equilibrium was made
possible and maintained by its mutually counteracting "tumors." In order
to preserve so specific a balance, the tumors had to be able to
recognize each other. Wherever new, radically different growths might
appear, among the inner planets or the outer, they would be instantly
disarmed, checked, or "converted" (the "janissary" enlistment of them)
by technological "antibodies," whose purpose was not to cure—there being
no patient or doctor—but to keep the dynamic _status quo ante fuit,_ the
stalemate.

If so, the _Hermes_ had first come upon the remains of an ancient
battle, and then entered a "mined region," which triggered the sudden
nocturnal attack. With this theory, the lack of a response to the
Ambassador became understandable. If the abandonment of contact was not
to be considered, then one had to declare all the tactics developed by
SETI useless and seek other, more promising lines of action. The authors
of the war-sphere model could not say if any successful tactic existed.
They were in favor of departing from the prepared program and trying
strategies that had no precedent.

The paper was also signed by Harrach and Kirsting. This meant—what
else?—yet another council. Though the _Hermes_ had made up its power
loss, Steergard felt that their position in perihelial orbit was the
safest and maneuvered so that the ship would remain above Zeta, using
the heat to power its own refrigeration. Because the orbit was forced
(not stationary with respect to either the sun or Quinta), the
considerable thrust provided them with gravity.

Accompanying Harrach to the meeting, Tempe remarked that space travel
was made up of catastrophes averted at the last minute and long
conferences.

Nakamura was the first to criticize the model of a war-sphere grown
independent of its planet. Military devices might indeed disobey their
creators when far from Quinta, but operational headquarters continued to
function at closer range. Otherwise, the _Gabriel_ would not have met
with a coordinated attack from two sides.

The ocean of the northern hemisphere, with its white cap of polar ice,
separated the two continents: the western, called Norstralia, twice the
size of Africa, and the eastern, Heparia, so designated because of its
shape, which resembled a flattened liver. Going by the pictures taken
during the _Gabriel's_ flight—the _Gabriel_ was supposed to have landed
near a starlike structure on Heparia—Nakamura established the starting
points of the rockets. Both were at the equator but on opposite
landmasses. True, they were obscured by clouds, and the rockets did not
show, taking off, the typical exhaust flame, but he believed that either
they had been catapulted or their drive had a negligible thermal
component. Whether thrown by silent engines or by those employing a
cold, particle-beam drive, the missiles heated upon breaking the sound
barrier, which allowed one to trace the thermal part of their trails and
extrapolate back to the launchers.

The fact that they emerged from the clouds almost simultaneously, two
from the east and two from the west, was evidence of a prior
synchronization of action and therefore of cooperation between command
centers on both continents.

The authors of the model did not agree with the attack thus
reconstructed—and, indeed, Nakamura was not able to prove such a course
of events, because the atmosphere of Quinta swarmed with points of heat,
which were thought to be produced by ice chunks falling into it from the
slowly crumbling ring. Nakamura, they said, had chosen such points as
could be attributed, with a bit of will and wishing, to the paths of the
rockets.

The quality of the images obtained by the ship was poor, since the
_Hermes_ had gathered them from probes dispatched like electronic eyes
while it hid behind the Moon at the perilune. Moreover, thousands of
satellites orbited Quinta, some in the direction of the planet's spin
and some in the opposite direction—but this revealed nothing of their
origin: the adversaries could have launched their military satellites
corotationlly or antirotationally. The fact that the satellites neither
collided nor fought strengthened the authors of the "alienated
war-sphere" in their conviction that the game remained "cold" and was
based on checking, not destroying, the battle devices of the enemy. Once
the satellites began to strike at each other, the cold war would enter
the phase of heated escalation. For that reason—the authors held—the
antagonistic orbiters stayed in check. In order to preserve the balance
of forces, the space systems of both sides had to be able to identify
each other. The _Gabriel,_ however, was a foreign intruder and was
therefore attacked. Rotmont illustrated this point with an example: two
dogs growl at each other—but let a rabbit appear, and off they go side
by side, chasing it.

Polassar, in spite of this, sided with Nakamura. True, it was not known
whether the _Gabriel_ was to have been captured by the rockets of one
continent or of both continents. But the attack did take place with a
precision that indicated planning. The signals sent by the Ambassador
had been received on the planet, beyond any doubt. The lack of an
answer, however, did not mean inaction or passivity.

Steergard did not take sides in the debate. The question of whether the
_Gabriel_ had been subjected to an attack planned by Quinta or
undertaken by independent orbiters he considered of secondary
importance. In either case, the planet was refusing contact. The real
question was whether or not contact could be forced.

"By persuasion, no," said Harrach. "Nor by carrying out the original
program. The more landers we send down, the more such encounters we'll
have. They'll convert our emissaries into defensive units, until the
overtures end with a rout or a battle. Since we don't want a battle and
retreat is out of the question, we should drop all this delicate poking
and prodding and show a little backbone instead. You can't make friends
with a gorilla, or pacify it, by cautiously tugging on its tail."

"Gorillas don't have tails," said Kirsting.

"A crocodile, then. You know what I mean. The only thing left for us is
a show of strength. If anyone has a better idea, let him speak." No one
spoke.

"Do you have a specific plan?" asked Steergard. "Yes."

"Which is?"

"Cavitation of the Moon. The maximum effect with the minimum harm.
They'll see it from the planet, but won't feel it. I had the idea some
time ago. DEUS did the calculations for me just now. The Moon will come
apart in such a way that the pieces stay in orbit. The center of mass
will not be changed."

"Why?" asked the Dominican.

"Because the fragments will be circling Quinta along the same path as
the Moon. The planet and the Moon constitute a double system, and since
the planet is much heavier, the center of rotation is located close to
it. I forget the numbers. In any case, the dynamic distribution of the
mass does not change."

"The gravitational tides will change," Nakamura put in. "You took that
into account?"

"DEUS did. The lithosphere will not move. At most, some shallow seismic
foci will be activated. The rise and fall of the oceans will become
weaker. That is all."

"And what good will this do?" asked Arago.

"It will be not only a show of strength, but a message. We'll send them
a warning first. Shall I go into the details?"

"Keep it brief," said the captain.

"I don't want anyone to see me as a monster," said the first pilot with
studied calm. "At the very beginning we showed them the calculus of
logic, and conjunctions of the type 'If A, then B,' 'If not-A, then C,'
and so on. We will tell them, 'If you do not answer our signals, we will
destroy your moon, and this will be the first warning. We are
determined: we want contact.' And then, once more, everything that the
Ambassador has already beamed to them—that we come in peace, and that if
they are presently engaged in some conflict we will maintain neutrality
in it. Father Arago can read everything through. These announcements
hang in the control room, and each member of the crew has received a
copy."

"I read it," said Arago. "And what happens then?"

"We let that depend on their response."

"Do you think we ought to set a time limit?" asked Rotmont. "That would
make it an ultimatum."

"Call it what you like. We don't have to give a precise time. It should
be enough to tell them how long we will refrain from action."

"Besides retreat, are there other proposals?" asked Steergard. "No? Who
is in favor of Harrach's plan?"

Polassar, Tempe, Harrach, El Salam, and Rotmont raised their hands.
Nakamura hesitated. Finally he, too, raised his hand.

"Are you aware that they might answer before the deadline, and not in
signals?" asked Steergard.

The ten of them sat around a large slab supported, like a table with one
leg, on the openworked intersection of the girders that separated the
upper, gravitational control room from the navigational, which was now
empty. Only the flickering of the monitors above the consoles set along
the walls, now brightening, now dimming, filled the space beneath them
with moving light and shadow.

"Entirely possible," agreed Tempe. "My Latin isn't as good as Father
Arago's. Had I come here simply out of an urge to come, I would not have
voted 'for.' But we here are not ten astronauts. If the _Hermes_ was
attacked, after all its efforts at peaceful contact, that means that
Earth was attacked, because Earth sent us here. Therefore, Earth has the
right to say, through us, _Nemo me impune lacessit."_

XII-Paroxysm

 

Sidereal operations, as phenomena of astronomical proportions, cannot be
for the observer—despite the power liberated in them—an experience as
profoundly moving as a flood or a typhoon. Even an earthquake, a thing
submicroscopic on the scale of stars, exceeds the capacity of the human
senses. True terror—or true enchantment—is produced in man by events
that are neither too vast nor too minute. One cannot experience a star
as one does a stone or diamond. The least of the stars, an ocean of
oceans of eternal fire, even at a distance of a million kilometers
becomes a wall of heat that outruns its horizons, and at close range it
loses all shape, breaking up into chaotic vortices of blinding flame. It
is only from a great distance that the cooler funnels in the
chromosphere dwindle to sunspots.

But this same rule, making it impossible to experience immensity,
operates in human affairs. One can feel compassion for the agony of an
individual, of a family, but the extermination of thousands or millions
of beings is a numerical abstraction whose existential content cannot be
absorbed.

And thus the cavitational sundering of a heavenly body, be it planet or
moon, presents a curiously undramatic spectacle; it not only takes place
with dreamy slowness but, because of its soundlessness, seems
make-believe, particularly since to behold it and not perish one must
watch through a telescope or on the screen of a monitor. The sidereal
surgeons viewed the developing explosion through filters placed in
succession on the apertures of the lenses, in order to follow closely
each stage of the disintegration. As a result, the image, shown
selectively in monochromatic bands of the spectrum—now yellow as straw,
now red as cinnabar—gave the effect of a child's kaleidoscope and not of
a superhuman cataclysm.

Quinta was silent to the zero hour. The cavitation of the Moon was to be
induced by eighteen missiles that would travel from a distant circle
toward its equatorial surface along trajectories of the involute type.

Unfortunately, it turned out that DEUS was right in putting this
operation outside the category of certain, predictable enterprises.

Had all the warheads hit the crust of the barren body at the same angle;
had they converged around its heavy core, tunneling straight down like
bullets; had they converted, with precision programmed to the second,
that still-hot, semimolten core into gas—the chunks of the shattered
moon, compared with which the Himalayas would be as crumbs, would have
distributed themselves along the previous orbit, and the shock wave of
suddenly liberated power would have caused only minor quakes, pushing
the ocean to the continental shelves in a series of long tsunamis.

But Quinta interfered. Three of the _Hermes'_ missiles, traveling
moonward from the side of the planet, encountered heavy ballistic
rockets. Crushing these into blazing clouds of gas, the missiles gave
premature ignition to the sidereal charges they carried. As a result,
the planned concentration of blows in the lunar core did not come about,
and the cavitation took place eccentrically. Part of the southern crust
and masses of deep rock began to tumble like an avalanche toward Quinta,
and the rest—about six-sevenths of the Moon—went into a higher orbit.
The reason was that the sidereals were supposed to have penetrated to
the core along spirals, the cislunar missiles pushing the crumbling
globe toward the Sun and the translunar toward the planet. But since it
was precisely the intercepted ones that were to have protected the
planet from a flood of meteors, about a hundred trillion tons of
mountain formations fell toward Quinta, in a multitude of elliptical
trajectories. A portion burned up from atmospheric friction, but the
largest fragments—trillions of tons—fell in a wide pattern into the
ocean, and those at the edge bombarded the shores of Norstralia. The
planet took pieces of the moon in its side like a blast of buckshot at a
sharp angle.

Within two-hundredths of a second after the detonation of the
cavitational warheads, the Moon was wrapped in a yellowish cloud so
dense that it seemed to swell. Then, very gradually, as if in slow
motion, it began to come apart, splitting into irregular pieces like an
orange torn by invisible claws, and from the cracks in the crust shot
long streams of heat as bright as the sun. In the eighth second of the
cavitation, billowing shock waves, aflame, gave the rent Moon the
appearance of a burning bush in space. The light made the nearest stars
pale.

In the control room everyone froze before the monitors. The only sound
was the ticking of the chronometers counting as the selenoclasm
progressed. Out of the coiling flame flew, enveloped in dust and
dispersing like grapeshot, Alps, Cordilleras, Vesuviuses—until that
monstrous cloud slowly began to open, and its initially round shape
changed, lengthened... It was not necessary to look at the instruments
to know that in a few hours the Moon would start falling to the planet.
Whether luckily or unluckily, it hit far from the ice ring; it was not
until midnight that a deflected swarm of fragments, in collisions that
sparkled like fireworks just above the atmosphere, intersected the plane
of ice.

Thus did the show of strength go awry and conclude in cataclysm.

XIII-A Cosmic Eschatology

 

In the afternoon of the following day, Steergard summoned Nakamura and
both pilots. Immediately after the catastrophe, the _Hermes_ had lifted
above the ecliptic, its maneuvering engine on full power, to remove
itself from the countless lunar fragments. It took a parabolic course in
the direction of the Sun, but left behind radio probes and transmitters.
These sent communiqués which showed that actually Quinta had pulled the
debris of the broken moon down upon itself—because its salvo of
ballistic rockets had interfered with the cavitation in such a way, that
the resulting eccentricity of the process backfired on the planet.

The effects, observed optically though the ship by now had tripled its
distance from Quinta, were horrible. From the oceanic epicenter spread
tidal waves. Masses of water a hundred times higher than normal
inundated the nearby eastern coasts of Heparia and in a thousand-mile
front submerged Heparia's great plain. The ocean went deep into the land
and did not retreat completely, creating lakes the size of seas, because
the lithospheric plate above Quinta's mantle had buckled and water
filled the new depressions formed on the surface.

At the same time, billions of tons of water, thrust in steam vapor up
above the stratosphere, covered the face of the planet with a solid
shroud of clouds. Only the thin ice ring gleamed above it in the sun,
like a razor.

Steergard asked Nakamura for a report on the SGs taken continually of
the selenoclasm. Immediately after the selenoclasm, he had ordered the
heaviest magnetron units launched and put into orbit around Quinta, on
opposite sides of the planet. These were veritable giants with sidereal
feeders; each possessed a mass of seven thousand tons. For protection
against possible attack, Steergard had them surrounded with
coherent-gravity guns: single-use gracers that, according to the plan
established by SETI, were to have served to annihilate any asteroids the
_Hermes_ encountered on the way to Quinta (the vessel was unable,
because of its near-light speed, to maneuver around obstacles that the
protective shields would not withstand).

Before Nakamura made his report, Steergard unexpectedly turned to the
second pilot and asked him where he had learned the old Latin slogan
_Nemo me impune lacessit,_ with which he had closed the last council.

Tempe could not remember.

"I can't imagine that you were ever a classics scholar. You probably
read Poe's 'Cask of Amontillado.' "

The pilot shook his head ruefully.

"Maybe. Poe? The writer of fantastic tales? I doubt it. But I don't
recall what I read... before Titan. Is it important?"

"That, we will see. But not now. Let's hear the results."

Nakamura had hardly opened his mouth when Steergard interrupted:

"Was the equipment attacked?"

"Twice. Gracers destroyed about fifty rockets. The Holenbach curvature
halted SG reception but without damage to the image."

"Their origin?

"The continent that was hit, but the rockets came from outside the
disaster area."

"More specifically?"

"Four places in a mountain system fifteen degrees below the arctic
circle. The launchers are subterranean, their sites fortified with
imitation rock. There are many there, in the meridional belts, all the
way to the equator. The pictures uncovered over a thousand. There are
undoubtedly more, but the easiest to observe were those that stood
perpendicular to the pulse field. The planet turns but the field does
not. With continuous spinoscopy you get a completely worthless image—as
if a man, X-rayed, were to turn during the exposure. Therefore, we went
over to microsecond-snapshot tomography. So far we've accumulated about
fifteen million frames. I wanted to wait until the end—that is, for one
full revolution of the planet—and only then hand over the tapes to
DEUS—"

"I understand," said Steergard. "DEUS hasn't tallied up the pictures?"

"Not yet. I was able to take an overall look at the hourly composites of
the tomograms."

"Then you do have something! Go ahead."

"I'd like you to see the sharpest SGs for yourself. A verbal description
cannot be objective. Almost everything visible on the film gives grounds
for a particular interpretation, but not for any definite diagnosis."

"All right."

They rose. Nakamura inserted a disk into the MV and its monitor lit up.
Across the screen ran trails, blurred and trembling; the physicist
fiddled with the tuning for a moment, the picture darkened, and they saw
a circular spectrum with a black, round spot in the center and an
unevenly bright perimeter. Nakamura shifted the picture until the
planet's surface was on the bottom half of the screen. Above the curve
of the lithosphere, which was opaque and black, lay—in the same bent
band—a whitish mist, thickest along the horizon: the atmosphere, with
microscopic floccules that were clouds. The physicist changed the
spectrum, going from the lighter to the heavier elements. The gases of
the atmosphere vanished as if blown away, and the darkness of the
continental plate, impenetrable before, now began to brighten.

Tempe stood between Harrach and the captain, eyes glued to the screen.
He had learned about planetary spinoscopy while still on board the
_Eurydice_, but had never seen it applied. A nuclear imaging instrument
of astronomic range placed the planet within a bowl of magnetic fields
of flux density equal, at the peaks of the pulse, to the magnetosphere
of a micropulsar. The planet was probed through and through, and the
resulting images, created by the spin resonance of the atoms, could be
sectioned—tomographed—by concentrating the field on successive layers of
the globe, beginning with the surface and working down to the hotter and
hotter strata of the mantle and the core.

As a microtome cut frozen tissues so that they could be examined in
sequence beneath a microscope, so a nucleoscope made possible the taking
of pictures that showed, layer by layer, the internal structure of a
celestial body, unobtainable by either radar or neutrino sounding. For
radar, a planet was completely opaque; for a stream of neutrinos, too
transparent. Therefore nothing but magneto-coherent, multipolar
spinoscopy allowed one to look within celestial bodies—granted, only
those that had cooled, such as moons and planets.

Tempe had read on the subject. The magnetic potentials, focused by
remote control, oriented the spins of the atomic nuclei along the lines
of force; when the field was switched off, the nuclei gave back the
energy imposed on them. Each element of the periodic table then vibrated
according to its own resonance. The picture recorded in the receptor was
a nuclear portrait in cross section, where sextillions of atoms
performed the role of the dots in an ordinary halftone photoengraving.
The advantage of high-powered nuclear imaging was its harmlessness for
the material objects examined, which included living beings; the
disadvantage was that, applying such power, one could not conceal the
source of the transmission.

Following the instructions of the physicists, DEUS filtered the
pictures, each layer and section, for SGs of elements that were
particularly suited for technological use. This choice was based on an
assumption that was not entirely certain—but it was the only one
available: the analogy, at least partial, between the Quintan and
terrestrial technospheres. And, indeed, deep in the crust of the
illuminated globe appeared a vague network of vanadiums, chromiums, and
platinums, the platinum group including osmium and iridium. The
subsurface threads of copper suggested power lines. SGs of the region
affected by the selenoclasm showed chaotic microfoci of devastation, and
the cross section of the starlike construct called Medusa resembled
rubble and had traces of the uranides.

Calcium was also found there. For ruins of dwellings there was too
little calcium. And the ground showed no sedimentary rock whatever.

Hence, the guess that these were the remains of millions of living
beings who, before their death, or after it, had been subjected to
radioactive contamination, since a high percentage of the calcium was an
isotope found only in the skeletons of irradiated vertebrates. For all
its cruelty, this discovery (still, of course, not conclusive evidence)
offered a glimmer of hope. They had no way of knowing yet whether the
population of Quinta was made up of living creatures or, possibly,
nonbiological automata: the heirs of an extinct civilization. One could
not rule out the grim hypothesis that the arms race, having exterminated
life (with perhaps a few remaining souls huddled in shelters or caves),
was being carried on by life's mechanical successors.

This was precisely what Steergard had feared most, from the first
encounters, though he kept the fear to himself. He considered possible a
course of historical events whereby, over centuries of operations, a
living force became replaced by military machines—not only in space,
which they had already seen, but also on the planet. War automata,
possessing no instinct for self-preservation, designed for suicidal
combat, would hardly be amenable to entering into any kind of
negotiations with a cosmic intruder. Although command centers, even if
totally computerized, still should be guided by self-preservation. Yet
if their sole directive was to achieve supremacy through strategic
operations, they would not allow themselves to be put into the role of
negotiators, either.

The chance of living beings communicating with living beings, on the
other hand, was greater than zero. The optimism that resulted from
examining the SGs—through the possible recognition of hecatombs, piles
of skeletons, because of the relation of calcium to its isotope—was
subdued. It would have been hard to call it a devout wish. While the
pilots and the captain were listening to Nakamura, who provided
explanations for the critical pictures—with the caution that most of
this was just conjecture—the intercom buzzed. The captain lifted the
receiver.

"Steergard here."

They heard the voice but could not make out the words. When the speaker
finished, Steergard did not respond immediately. "Very well. Right now?
Come on over, then."

He put down the receiver, turned to them, and said:

"Arago."

"Should we leave?" Tempe asked.

"No. Stay." And added, as if unintentionally, "It won't be a confession.

The Dominican entered in white, though not in his monk's habit: he had
on a long white sweater. That he wore a cross under it was revealed only
by the dark string around his neck. Seeing those present, he halted at
the door.

"I didn't realize that the captain was holding council..."

"Have a seat, Reverend Father. This is not a council. The time for
parliamentary procedure and voting is past."

And, as if that sounded more brusque than he intended, he added:

"I didn't want this. But the hard facts are not concerned with what I
want. Please, everyone, sit."

They sat, because, although he had delivered this last sentence with a
smile, it was an order. The monk had expected a private conversation. Or
perhaps he was taken aback by the peremptory ring of Steergard's words.
Guessing the reasons for Arago's hesitation, the captain said:

"_C'est le ton qui fait la chanson._ But I didn't compose the tune. I
tried to play it _pianissimo_."

"It ended up being played on the trumpets of Jericho," replied the monk.
"But perhaps we can put aside these musical metaphors?"

"Of course. Let's speak plainly. Rotmont was here an hour ago, and I
know the gist of the conversation—the exegesis—no, let's stick with
conversation—that DEUS occasioned. It concerned... astrobiology."

"Not only," said the Dominican.

"I know. And therefore I ask in what capacity my visitor presents
himself to me: physician or papal nuncio?"

"I am not a nuncio."

"With the will or without the will of the See of Peter—yes. _In partibus
infidelium._ Or perhaps _in partibus daemonis._ I say this in reference
to the memorable remark, not of the doctor of astrobiology but of Father
Arago, on the _Eurydice,_ in Ter Horab's cabin. I was there; I heard and
remembered. And now—you have my attention."

"I see here the same pictures that Rotmont explained to me. DEUS indeed
has occasioned my visit."

"The calcium hypothesis?" asked the captain.

"Yes. Rotmont inquired whether a line in the spectral analysis of
certain points was or was not an isotope of calcium. DEUS could not rule
out the possibility."

"I know the particulars. If those are bones, they're bones in the
millions. A mountain of bodies."

"The critical place is a large complex of buildings, no doubt a Quintan
center," said the monk. He seemed paler than usual. "A museum with a
radius of fifty miles? Hardly likely. Genocide, then. A cemetery for a
murdered nation is not a scene unprecedented in our history. Anyway, the
founders of the SETI Project did not have in mind contact with an
intelligence upon a battlefield littered with the corpses of the host."

"The situation is a good deal worse than that," answered Steergard. "No,
let me speak. I repeat: something worse took place than a catastrophe
brought about by a series of coincidences no one wanted. I did say that
the planet might respond to our ultimatum before the deadline but not in
signals. The other side, suspicious, could have opted for a
counter-offensive. But I did not dream that, with full premeditation,
they would pull the cavitated moon down upon themselves. We became mass
murderers according to the maxim of a certain Italian heretic: 'Because
of excess virtue the forces of hell prevail.' "

"How am I to understand this?" said Arago, astounded. "Using the canons
of physics. We announced that we would shatter their Moon as a
demonstration of our superiority, and we gave assurances that this
sidereal operation would cause them no harm. Having experts in celestial
mechanics, they knew that with the smallest investment of energy one
could break apart a planet by increasing the gravity at its core. They
knew that only an explosion that was focused exactly at the Moon's
center of mass would not change the orbit of the resulting fragments.
Had they intercepted our sidereals from the solar side of the Moon, or
at its front along a tangent to the orbit, the broken pieces would have
been driven to a higher orbit. Only the interception of our missiles in
the hemisphere facing Quinta could—had to—pull the eccentric product of
the cavitation down upon themselves."

"How can I believe such a thing? You're saying that they wanted to use
our help to commit suicide?"

"I say nothing—the facts speak. Their action, I admit, looks like
madness. But a recreation of the cataclysm reveals its logic. We began
the selenoclasm at the moment when the Sun was rising over Heparia and
setting on Norstralia. The ballistic missiles directed at our sidereals
were launched from the part of Heparia that was still behind the
terminator—in other words, in the night. They required five hours to
reach the perilune and strike our rockets. To keep us from destroying
the missiles in time, the Quintans put them into an elliptical orbit, an
orbit from which they could drop to the Moon some twelve minutes before
the selenoclasm. There is no way around it: their missiles ambushed
ours, moving along the ellipse segment farthest from Quinta and closest
to the Moon. All attacked our sidereals, which were unshielded because
we had not believed such a counteraction possible. I myself thought at
first that the catastrophe had been caused by their miscalculation. But
an analysis of the sequence of events rules out the chance of error."

"No. I cannot understand it," said Arago. "Although... one moment...
does this mean that one side attempted to direct the blow at the other?"

"Even that would not have been so bad," said Steergard. "As far as a
general headquarters is concerned during a war, any maneuver that
discomfits the enemy is worthwhile and appropriate. But because they
could not know the power of our sidereals or the time the selenoclasm
would begin, or the initial velocity of the splitting masses of the
Moon, they had to take into account that the dispersion pattern of the
rocks might include their own territory as well. The Reverend Father is
surprised? He doesn't believe me? The _physica de motibus coelestis_ is
the star witness in this case. Look at the situation from the point of
view of the generals of a hundred-year war.

"A cosmic intruder appears above the battlefield with an olive branch.
It wishes to establish friendly relations with the civilization; instead
of responding attack for attack, it shows restraint, it remains
peaceable. It will not attack? Then it must be made to! Does the
population of the planet learn what really happened? Massacred, how can
it doubt what its governments tell it: that the intruder is a ruthless,
infinitely cruel aggressor? Did not the intruder level cities? And bomb
_all_ the continents, shattering the Moon _for that purpose?_ Their own
casualties? Blamed on the intruder. If we share the guilt, it is from
undue innocence, because we did not foresee such a turn of events.
Retreat, after what has happened, would leave the planet in the belief
that our expedition was an attempt at murderous invasion. Therefore we
do not withdraw, Reverend Father. The stake of the game was high to
begin with. They have raised it, forcing us to play on..."

"Contact at any price?" asked the Dominican in white. "At the highest
that we can pay. Since I have ruffled our apostolic delegate with the
announcement that the time for democracy—voting, shilly-shallying—is
past, I think I should explain why, as I assume sole command and
therefore sole responsibility for ourselves and for them, I will be
taking this game to its conclusion. Shall I explain?" "Please do."

Steergard went over to one of the wall lockers in his cabin, opened it,
and said, as he looked for something in the pigeonholes:

"The thought of a nonlocal war expanded into space occurred to me after
the catching of the wrecks behind Juno. And not to me alone. On the
principle of _primum non nocere,_ I kept it to myself, so as not to
infect the crew with defeatism. It's known from the history of ancient
voyages—Columbus's, the polar expeditions—how easily an isolated group
of the best people can become a threat to themselves through the
influence of an individual, particularly if that individual is one on
whom they count, as if he were made of even better stuff than they.
Therefore, I discussed this worst possibility only with DEUS. Here are
the recordings of those discussions."

From a small, padded container that resembled a jeweler's box for
precious stones he took a few memory crystals and inserted one in the
slot of the reproducer.

His voice filled the room.

"How are we to establish contact with Quinta if there are blocs there
locked in battle for years?"

"Provide the limits of the n-decisional space. It is strategically
incalculable without starting parameters."

"Assume two, then three antagonists of approximately equal military
potential, with the certain destruction of all in the case of heated
escalation."

"The data remain insufficient."

"Give a minimax evaluation in a non-numerical approximation. "

"The value in approximations is also indeterminate."

"Nevertheless, give me a stochastically weighted cluster of
alternatives."

"That demands additional assumptions. They will be arbitrary and
unsubstantiated."

"I know. Go ahead."

"For two antagonists on opposite continents, send two transmitters—in
the atmospheric window of the infrared—with point-sharp collimation.
Both should have antiradar camouflage and be self-directed at the
planet's radio stations. This tactic takes for granted a thing that is
open to question—because the antagonists may be not on opposite
continents but in mutual possession of the same territory, both
horizontally and vertically."

"In what way?"

"If, for example, they have entered the atomic phase with great
saber-rattling, and each side takes aim at the enemy's population,
making it hostage, threatening attack or reprisal. They fortify the
means of thrust and parry, and, when saturation occurs, move
underground. Their territories may be located far beneath the earth,
like interlocking mines at many depths and levels. The same can happen
above the atmosphere."

"Does an expansion of that type make contact impossible?"

"It rules out the tactic proposed, because with such an arrangement
contact will not have separate addressees."

"Assume that there is no such subterranean colonization, with each side
undermining the other."

"Where is the boundary to be drawn between the antagonists?"

"The meridian in the center of the ocean."

"That is simplest, but completely arbitrary."

"Go ahead."

"Very well. Assume the sending of probes, the signal emission—the
delivery of the mail. And that they have received the codes transmitted
and have mastered them. This assumption gives me a minimax fork. Send
both sides the identical request for contact, either with a guarantee of
neutrality which is genuine, or with a guarantee of exclusive support
which is false."

"You mean, tell each side that we are addressing the other at the same
time, or else assure it that we are approaching only it for contact?"

"Yes."

"Give the risk weighting of the branches."

"Honesty yields better chances if the message goes to the wrong address,
and poorer chances if the message goes to the wrong address. Falsehood
yields more chances if the address is right, and fewer if the address is
right."

"That's a contradiction."

"Yes. The game-space is not quantifiable minimaximally."

"Show the reason for the contradiction."

"A bloc, assured of the exclusivity of contact with us, will be inclined
to react positively—on condition that it can itself verify that
exclusivity, independently of our communication. If, on the other hand,
it learns that the other bloc has intercepted our message, or
that—worse—we are playing a two-faced game, the chances of contact will
fall to zero. One can also have a negative probability of contact."

"Negative?"

"A refusal is zero. I would assign a negative value to an answer that
misinforms us."

"The setting of a trap?"

"Entirely possible. Here the forks branch factorially. A trap can be set
by one side, or by both separately, or by both in a limited, temporary
alliance—reasoning that if they call a temporary truce and cooperate to
destroy us, or discourage us from contact, they will be running less
risk than if they compete for exclusivity of contact with the _Hermes_."

"And what about their agreeing to a parallel, separate contact?"

"In that variant lies a fundamental contradiction. In order to achieve
such parallelism, you must as sender guarantee to both sides our
neutrality—convincingly. That is, you must give your word that you will
keep your word. But an assertion, when reflexive, cannot assert itself.
This is a typical antinomy."

"Where did you obtain the weightings for the decisional branches?"

"From your premise that on the planet there are only two players in
mutual check. And that they hold to the rule of minimax. The prize of
the game for them is the preservation of the _status quo ante fuit_, and
for us, contact by breaking the impasse."

"Specifically?"

"It's trivial. I assume two empires, A and B. The optimal variant fork
for us: both A and B enter into contact with us, each believing that it
holds a monopoly. If either one is not sure of its privileged state—its
exclusivity—it will suspect the monopoly. Whereupon, according to the
rule of minimax, it will propose to the other a coalition against us,
because it does not know the chances of entering into a coalition _with_
us. That is obvious. Knowing their own history, they therefore know
their rules of mutual conflict. But the rules of mutual conflict that
pertain to us are unknown to them. If we make an offer of alliance to
either A or B, it will be suspect. _Primo:_ such an offer made by us to
both adversaries is absurd. _Secundo:_ if we choose one side only, we
will be supporting it and will thereby antagonize the opposite side,
gaining nothing for ourselves but participation in the ongoing struggle.
Such a strategy of contact could be adopted only by a civilization of
idiots. It is improbable even on the metagalactic scale."

"Yes. They can temporarily unite against us. What sort of game then
results?"

"A game with indeterminate rules. The rules arise or change according to
the course of the play. Therefore it is not known if the reward function
will contain positive values. The game, probably, is zero-sum, because
none of the players—ourselves included—stands to gain. All will suffer
loss."

"The risk can't be brought to zero? Where is the minimum?"

"I have insufficient data."

"Go ahead without the data."

"The relieving of frustration in the face of insoluble problems does not
lie within the domain of my computing ability. Do not ask the
impossible, Captain. The branching tree of heuristics is not God's Tree
of Knowledge."

In the silence after these words from DEUS, Steergard put a second
crystal in the reproducer, explaining that this was from a dialogue with
DEUS immediately following the selenoclasm. Again they heard the voice
of the machine.

"Previously the risk was only incalculable. Now it has reached the power
of a transfinite set; it is innumerable. Minimax holds, but now only for
retreat."

"Could they be made to capitulate?"

"Theoretically, yes. For example, by the progressive elimination of
their military technosphere."

"By destroying every instrument of war in the space around Zeta?"

"Yes."

"What are the chances of contact, with such an operation?"

"Minimal, making the most optimistic assumptions: that our deployment of
the sidereals will be carried out without a hitch; that the Quintans
will remain passive observers as their autoarmament sphere is peeled
away, layer by layer; and that, stripped of these layers, they will fall
into an armament stagnation. In the category of game theory, this would
be a miracle—on the order of winning first prize in a lottery without
ever having purchased a ticket."

"Present the variants of disarming their technosphere without miracles."

"The curve will have at least two saddles. Either they oppose us,
offensively or defensively, or the pacification-destruction of the
nonliving war zone heats up the conflict that is still smoldering on the
planet, and thereby we push them into total war."

"Is it possible to destroy their cosmic war zone partially without
disturbing the equilibrium of forces on the planet?"

"It is possible. To that end, one would have to destroy each orbital
weapon after first learning the side to which it belonged. This reduces
the military-cosmic potential of all the adversaries in the same degree,
so as to preserve the dynamic balance between their forces. Two things
are assumed: 1) that we will know the range in which they control their
weapons in space—that is, the radius of their command effectiveness—and
2) that we will identify the combat systems beyond that radius and
destroy them, and that, following the destruction of this autoarmament
periphery, we will then be able to strip the civilization of the forces
under its control inside the sphere. _In abstracto_ it should be
possible to strip it, so to speak, to the skin. But if we commit errors
in identification—as to who controls what in the inner sphere—we will
heat up the conflict on the planet, because we will be weakening one
side to the advantage of another. And thus we push the antagonists from
the precarious equilibrium of their arms race into total war. Captain,
you remove me and yourself from reality. You wish success?"

"Of course."

"What is it to be, this success of yours? Contact? But in the above
model the concept of success is indeterminate. It depends not merely on
whether or not the _Hermes_ will be able to overcome, besides the war
sphere, the entire production of military devices that may be hurled
continually into space. We will be waging an indirect war, attacking not
the Quintans but their weapons. How can we be sure that, bringing new
technologies into the battle, they will not master the resources that
sustain us—the sidereal?"

"Assume that they will not."

"Very well. Besides the external factors—the ambiguous technological
sets, the minimax decisions and calculations consistent with optimizing
logic—the reactions of the Quintans will be determined, also, by
irrational factors of which we are completely ignorant. We do know,
however, what importance precisely these factors have had in terrestrial
History."

Here ended the recorded conversation. After a short silence they heard
Steergard's next dialogue with the machine.

"You ran a simulation of the organizational structures?"

"Yes."

"For all their posited variants and conflicts?"

"Yes."

"What magnitude is the coefficient of variation of these structures for
our game of communication? Give the interval of statistical
weightedness, or a modal distribution, of the influence of the
differences on our chances for contact."

"The coefficient equals one."

"For all simulations?"

"Yes."

"In other words, the organizational differences of the antagonists have
no significance?"

"Correct. The technomilitary evolution, generated by constant conflict,
becomes a variable that is independent of the type of organization,
because this evolution is shaped by the structure of the conflict and
not by the structure of the societies involved. To put it more
precisely: it is in the early phases of the conflict that the
organizational differences leave their imprint upon the tactics of
psychological propaganda, diplomacy, sabotage, espionage, and the arms
race. The division of budgets into military and nonmilitary is a
function of the set of values that depend on organizational structure.
But the growing push for supremacy in the conflict cancels out these
differences in the set of values. It thereby makes the strategies of the
adversaries similar.

"A mirror does not lie. You cannot incline it to reflect only postures
that are free and relaxed without giving an image of everything else.
Once the impracticability of disarmament is certain, the continuation of
the race for dominance dispenses with those strategies of the
adversaries dependent on their organizational differences. This
dependence becomes like the influence of human muscle on the firing of a
ballistic missile. In the Paleolithic, in the cavedwelling era, or even
in the Middle Ages, a muscular opponent had an advantage over those who
were weaker. But in the atomic age, a rocket could be launched by a
child that pushed the right button. The Quintans no longer control the
strategy that they have chosen. On the contrary, the strategy controls
them. If it encountered organizational differences, it subordinated them
to itself until they were made uniform. Had this not happened, the
conflict would have ended with the victory of one of the sides. The
activity of the war-sphere refutes this."

"Provide the optimal rules for the game of contact given such a
diagnosis."

"The command centers of the planet know that it was the interception of
our cavitators that caused the catastrophe. No one but them could have
taken that action."

"Does this mean that the war-sphere is under their control in a radius
that connects the orbit of the moon to Quinta?"

"Not necessarily. The limit of their operational range may not be a
sphere having a surface that is sharply and cleanly demarcated from the
alienated zone."

"Can you conclude anything about the personnel of the command centers?"

"I understand the allusion. The idea that certain members of the crew
have been forwarding—that of non-biological command centers, or even of
a dead globe with computers battling on after the demise of the
Quintans—is absurd. Computers, even if deprived of the postulates of
self-preservation, will act rationally. They adhere to minimax in their
furthest prognostic calculations. They can give battle for as long as
there exists a branch in which battle yields an advantage. But if the
reward function in the endgame is total destruction, the minimax falls
to zero. I reject the notion of mad computers. Besides, the spectral and
SG data point to the presence of living beings."

"Good. Go on."

"There are calculating machines in the command centers, but there are
also Quintans. The effects of the selenoclasm did not reach them: in a
conflict of such duration and scale, nothing is protected better than
headquarters. You know already that losses in the population present to
the governments no compelling argument for the establishment of
contact."

"Give me a compelling argument."

"Here is one. The time has come to call things by their names. Indirect
pressure is insufficient. You must act directly, Captain."

"Threaten the command centers?"

"Yes."

"With a massive assault?"

"Yes."

"Curious. You consider the killing of intelligent beings who behave
anti-intelligently to be the best method of establishing contact with
them? Are we, then, to land on the planet like archeologists, to study
the civilization that we have murdered?"

"No. You must threaten the planet itself with a sidereal blow. They have
seen how their moon disintegrated."

"But surely that will be a bluff. If we renew our request for contact,
we cannot annihilate our future partners in conversation. No great
cunning is needed to see that. They will think that our threat is
empty—and they will be right."

"The threat does not have to be completely empty."

"Strike the ring?"

"Captain, why do you conduct nocturnal discussions with a machine
instead of going to bed, when you yourself know what must be done?"

The reproducer fell silent. Steergard placed another crystal in the
slot. "Bear with me," he said. "This is the last conversation." The blue
indicator light went on. Again they heard the monotonous voice of DEUS.

"Captain, I have some consolation for you. I examined the stability of
the war-sphere and extrapolated into the future, to the limit of
prognostic certainty. Regardless of the number of opponents and the
diameter of the space of the battle attained, this civilization must
perish. The simplest model is a house of cards. It cannot be arbitrarily
high. Every such structure will eventually fall; that is evident even
without calculation.'

"A house of cards? And more precisely?"

"The Holenbach Theory. In the growth of knowledge there are no
irreplaceable people. Had there been no Planck, Fermi, Meitner,
Einstein, or Bohr, the discoveries leading to the atomic bomb would have
been made by others. The monopoly acquired by the Americans was
short-lived and quickly countered. For decades the opponents, with
nuclear missiles, kept one another at bay. They competed in the accuracy
and payload of those missiles. Sidereal physics, however, does not offer
the opportunity of such competition.

"A series of steps leads to the knowledge of nuclear reactions, critical
mass, and the Bethe Cycle. Sidereal engineering, on the other haul is
gained at one fell swoop. Prior to the discovery of the Holenbach
interval one knows nothing, and afterward, everything. In the phase of
the reversibility of armaments, when negotiations and peace are still
possible, he who discovers the nuclear trump can use it as the highest
suit but may not lead with it. In the phase of the cosmic war-sphere he
who first discovers the sidereal effect will lead with it immediately
because the space of games of combat, potentially symmetrical for
conventional and atomic weapons, loses its stability upon the
introduction of the sidereal factor. On a planet one cannot blackmail
with sidereals.

"Nonexplosive thermonuclear reactions for a long time eluded control,
with leaks of plasma and the unreliability of the fields that chained
them. For several decades the difficulties seemed insurmountable. The
difficulties of controlling gravitation are similar, but on the
astronomical scale. One cannot begin small, first extracting from
uranium ores isotope with the atomic weight of 235, then setting off a
chain reaction, above critical mass, synthesizing plutonium, and thus
obtaining a detonator for hydrogen-tritium bombs. The testing ground
must be a celestial body.

"The sidereal phase is preceded by the phase of teratrons and anomalons.
Therefore, I cannot understand the amazement of the physicists over what
the _Gabriel_ did. Had the Quintans captured and taken it apart, they
would have been put on the track of Holenbach. The _Gabriel_ was to have
melted its teratron. As I recall, I proposed building in it a
self-destruct charge."

"Why didn't you explain this to us?"

"I am not all-knowing. I operate with the data that you give me. Your
physicists, Captain, considered the capture of the _Gabriel_ an
impossibility, as none of the objects of the war-sphere had shown even a
tenth of the drive of the _Gabriel._ I had objections but no proof. The
impossibility they pulled out of a hat. But it is difficult to say
whether it was good or bad that my cousin in the _Gabriel_ displayed
such lightning resourcefulness. Had it allowed itself to be captured,
there would be no talk now of contact, but of choosing between retreat
and sidereal war with Quinta, who would be a player of the same strength
as we. And if one factors out a sidereal strike by them at the _Hermes,_
then we would be fleeing, full-speed, through the debris of a collapsing
war-sphere, because the thing that would have shattered the sphere
anyway in fifty or a hundred years would be precipitated. The bloc
enlightened sidereally by the _Gabriel_ would not wait for its enemy to
catch up; it would strike preemptively."

"That is speculation."

"Certainly—but not speculation pulled out of a hat. My guess is that
someone wanted the Moon for a proving ground, someone unaware that no
plasmotron could supply the power needed to open the Holenbach interval.
And whoever drove that party from the Moon did not have sufficient
strength then to take possession of it. Someone gave check to the king,
who was not of age. But the first party also gave check—to which piece,
I do not know. The result was stalemate. On the Moon. Beyond the Moon,
the game went on."

"Why didn't you present this in such a light before?"

"If you called my reasoning speculation just now, before the selenoclasm
you would have said that DEUS was raving. Would you care to hear my
version of Quinta's history?"

"Go ahead."

"The key to that history—to its turning point—is the ring. In the full
acceleration of industrialization the planet supported many nations,
with a powerful consortium of nations far in the forefront. They
ventured into space; they harnessed the atom. At the same time there
began a demographic explosion in the nations that were weaker
industrially—stronger only in numbers. The consortium decided to
increase the habitable surface by lowering the level of the oceans. The
only way was to move the water into space, above the atmosphere. I do
not know the technology employed for this. Water in hundreds of cubic
miles can be transported neither by spaceship nor directly by a system
of pumps and spouts. The first method demands unobtainable masses of
fuel and an impossible number of carriers. The second cannot be
realized, because before the streams projected upward—waterfalls in
reverse—can attain escape velocity, they will evaporate from atmospheric
friction and remain in the atmosphere.

"There are, however, many possible methods. I will give one. You could
pierce the atmosphere with channels of lightning discharges and in the
trail of each thunderbolt—arcing from the ocean shore to the
thermosphère—shoot water vapor. I oversimplify. You could create in the
atmosphere a kind of electromagnetic cannon—without a barrel, of
course—which would be a tunnel of centrifugal impulses driving ionized
water vapor. And give the water nonthermal, dipolar properties. On Earth
a certain Rahman engaged in such hydroengineering. He showed that it was
possible to drive water only to first escape velocity, whereby a ring of
ice would begin to form around the planet, and that this ring would be
unstable. Therefore, in the next step one had to accelerate the
ring—once it formed in space—for it to become a centrifuge and fly
apart, at second escape velocity. This, over a period of twenty to forty
years. Otherwise, if there was weakened acceleration in space or a work
stoppage, more water would return to the planet, due to friction with
the upper gases of the atmosphere, than was thrown into space at the
same time by the launchers. We need not go into greater detail. Suffice
it to say that even from the _Eurydice_ the gradual decay of the ring on
the planet side was observed, as well as the spreading of the outer
band.

"This could not have been beneficial to anyone on the planet. The
returning water does more than produce cloudbursts; it creates a pluvial
in the tropical belt, with maximum rainfall concentration varying
according to the time of year, since the planet's rotational axis is
inclined with respect to the ecliptic, much as Earth's. The average
annual temperature has fallen two degrees Kelvin. The ice shield casts a
shadow over part of the dayside of the planet and reflects the sunlight.

"A technical error, always possible, would have been corrected after a
certain time. But there is no indication of repairs. Difficulties in
planetary engineering, therefore, could not have been the reason for
abandoning the enterprise. The reason must be sought elsewhere—in the
political discord of the civilization. Of the initial conditions all we
know is that they favored a project that could be carried out only by a
global uniting of forces, a uniting that later came apart. The period of
cooperation, at least in the area of technology, lasted about a hundred
years. A deviation on the order of a decade or two is unimportant in
this critical phase.

"What caused the departure from the road of cooperation? Local wars?
Economic crises? Not likely. The course of political events, opaque to
reconstructions and retrospects from its present state, can be studied
only in a model called a Markov chain. This is a stochastic process that
at each step effaces the path it takes. From what cosmic visitors to
Earth of the twentieth century would observe, there would be no way for
them—except by recourse to textbooks—to extrapolate back to the
Crusades. So I fill this white blot with the following possibility: the
growth of the different powers in the consortium was unequal. The seeds
of antagonism were planted at the first forming of the partnership. The
armed overthrow of the main force on the planet was impossible. The
weaker nations participated in the global project, but their
cooperation, genuine to begin with, became a pretense.

"The antagonism manifested itself—not directly, not by assault. There
may have been more blocs, three or four, but for the ergodic minimum two
would suffice—two opponents. An arms race began. It caused, first, the
abandonment of the efforts to disperse the ice ring into space. The
material and the energy allocated for that went instead into armament.
At the same time, the breaking up of the ice ring in such a way that its
debris would not cause harm to the inhabitants of all the continents
ceased to pay for the superpower that had invested most in the project,
since the positive results of such continued effort would benefit the
enemy equally. The enemy reasoned and acted similarly. From then on,
none of the sides touched the ring, though it came down in avalanches of
ice on the planet. Pulled into the spiraling arms race, the sides had no
remedy for that. Escalation sent the race out into cosmic space. Such
could have been the prologue and first act. We arrived in the middle of
the next act, and, unaware, dived headfirst into the multilayered
war-sphere, with the innocent sun at the center."

"I repeat my question: why didn't you present this retrospect earlier?
You had the opportunity."

"Various versions of what I have said were circulating on board.
Privately or not privately, they circulated. None could be proved. The
limits of the imagination lie far beyond the limits of theorizing.
Separate fragments of the puzzle, as data, came in slowly. While there
were still few of them, it was possible to construct innumerable
medley-explanations, filling in the gaps and blanks with unsupported
invention. I am a combinatorial machine. Had I inundated all of you with
all the variants in the analysis that I had done, you would have had to
sit through weeks of lectures. With every sentence full of
uncertainties. In addition, I received instructions that ran counter to
your orders. Dr. Rotmont wanted SGs of Quinta. I explained to him that
using the full power of the ship's units for that could not be concealed
and would therefore reduce the chances of contact. He insisted, so I
sent out light spinoscopes capable of camouflage. You know this,
Captain. Rotmont hoped to see what was impossible to see with this
method. He gained nothing, but it was not I that disappointed him. I had
complied with his request, because doing so could do no harm. Hypotheses
not taken as the springboard for real action may be false but not
fatal."

The blue indicator light went out. The pilots and Nakamura, though they
sat at the same table as Steergard and Arago, seemed only spectators,
who could not participate in the scene being played out. It was as if
they did not count in this meeting.

"This was to explain," said Steergard. "You saw fit to say once,
Reverend Father, that the matter was in good hands. I said nothing in
reply—not out of modesty, being praised, but because I knew how
different were our notions of good and evil. I had already made the
decision to take this new step. None of us can influence what will
happen, myself included. Now, I have no wish to offend anyone present.
But the time of unflinching action is the time for complete candor. Our
second pilot—what he said was stupid. We did not come here to throw
gauntlets or engage in duels to defend the honor of Earth. If that was
the case, I would not have accepted command of the reconnaissance. A man
can keep only so much in his head at a time. A tremendous undertaking is
therefore divided into parts by his mind. For this reason the means can
easily obscure the ends and themselves become the ends.

"When I assumed command, I requested first some time to think: to step
back and take in the gigantic whole. The thousand labors of CETI and
SETI, the millions of hours of work by the shipbuilders, the flights to
Titan, the conferences in the capitals of the world, the funds gathered
in banks, and the teams that played out endless variants of the game of
contact to find the one unfailing, or at least the optimal, variant that
would win—all this was an expression of hope, a hope that went deeper
than the cheap sensationalism of the newspapers. I realized that,
whether on the _Eurydice_ or the _Hermes,_ I was only an ant in the
human anthill, an anthill lost in the boundless reaches of the Universe,
and that therefore I would be accepting a task beyond my powers—beyond
the powers, probably, of any man. It would have been easier to decline.
When I accepted, I had no idea what awaited us. I knew only that I would
perform my duty, doing whatever had to be done. If I called meetings, it
was not to find a better course of action but to lighten the burden that
lay on me. To shift the responsibility, at least in part, onto other
shoulders. Then I saw that I did not have the right to do this. So I
have made the decision myself. No one can now influence what will
happen, but everyone still has the right to his opinion, and to be
heard. Particularly you, Reverend Father."

"You intend to break the ring?"

"Yes. The machinery is already being assembled in the hall astern."

"Breaking the ring will throw it from the planet?"

"No. Trillions of tons will fall to the planet. The pieces will be too
large to melt. They will strike even the places that are most heavily
protected. In addition, the outer layers of the atmosphere will be blown
away. This will lessen the pressure at sea level some hundred bars. It
will be a warning."

"It will be murder."

"Definitely."

"To force contact at any price?"

"No. Contact has become a secondary matter. This will be an attempt to
save them. Left to themselves, they will hit upon the Holenbach
interval. Are you familiar, Reverend Father, with the arcana of sidereal
physics?"

"As a layman only. Captain—you're basing this genocide on a hypothesis?
A hypothesis not even your own, but from a machine?"

"Hypotheses are all we have. And the machine helped me. Truly. But I
know the hypersensitivity of the Church toward the _animus in machina_."

"_I_ do not share that feeling. Let me repay your explanation, Captain,
with one of my own. Often a man does not recognize what people on the
sidelines plainly see. DEUS spoke of how the means of war used by the
opponents on Quinta became uniform. This applies to you as well."

"I don't understand."

"You have dispensed with our method of proceeding, in the conviction
that parliamentarianism should be replaced by autocratic rule. I do not
question the nobility of your intentions. You wish to take upon yourself
full responsibility. But in so doing you have succumbed to the
Quintans—by the mirror effect. That is, in the brutality of the decision
made. You wish to answer their blows with blows. Since they have doubly
barricaded their command centers, you wish to strike those centers with
doubled force. In so doing—I use your own words—you are subordinating
the organizational structure of the crew of the _Hermes,_ the relations
between its people, to the structure of the strategy to be carried out."

"DEUS's words."

"So much the worse. I am not suggesting that the machine dominates you
in the decision. I am suggesting that the machine also has become a
mirror. A mirror that enlarges, from you, an aggression born of
frustration."

For the first time, Steergard showed surprise. But he said nothing, and
the monk went on:

"Military operations require authoritarian command centers. And that is
all that has happened on the planet. We, however, should not join in
that type of activity."

"I have no thought of declaring war on Quinta. You insinuate."

"Unfortunately, I speak the truth. War can be waged without declaration,
and without the name of war. It's not blows we came here to exchange,
but information."

"I'm all in favor of that, but how?"

"It's plain. Happily, the principle of military secrecy is not
maintained on board. I know that in the labs they're building a solar
laser that will hit the planet."

"Not the planet itself: the ring."

"And the atmosphere, which constitutes a vital part of the planet. A
solar laser—solaser, as the physicists say—can be used not just for
genocidal strikes but to send information."

"We sent information over hundreds of hours, with no result."

"It is curious, indeed, that I should be able to see a possibility that
the experts, along with their superintelligent machine, have completely
overlooked. The signals beamed from our satellite, the Ambassador,
required special devices for reception: antennas, decoders... I'm no
radio engineer, but if Quinta is engulfed in war, then all equipment
capable of receiving radio signals would have been requisitioned for
military use. The receivers, therefore, are the command centers, not the
population of Quinta.

"If the population has been at all apprised of our arrival, it is in the
deceitful manner that you presented: to make us look, in the eyes of the
Quintans, like a fleet of imperialist invaders. A merciless enemy. And
you, Captain, are about to turn that lie into the truth, with your
solaser."

Steergard listened in amazement. More, he seemed to be losing his
categorical certainty.

"I didn't think of that."

"Because it is so simple. You and DEUS rose to such heights of
sophistication with your game theory, minimax, quantified decisional
space, that no notice was taken of the little pocket mirrors children
play with, catching the sunlight. The solaser could be a pocket mirror
for all of Quinta. It can produce flashes, surely, brighter than the
sun. Whoever lifts his head will see them."

"Father Arago," said Steergard, leaning toward him across the table.
"Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
You have demolished me. Deflated me more than our pilot did to DEUS...
How did you hit on the idea?"

"I played with a pocket mirror when I was a boy," smiled the Dominican.
"But DEUS was never a boy."

"For transmitting information, that's excellent," Nakamura put in. "But
will they be able to reply? If they comprehend?"

"Before the conception was the annunciation," answered Arago. "Perhaps
they won't be able to reply in a way that we understand. At least let
them understand us."

Tempe, looking at the monk with unconcealed admiration, could no longer
keep silent.

"Now, there's a real eureka... and of course they have pocket mirrors.
Even in wartime, pocket mirrors aren't confiscated."

The monk did not seem to hear. Something was bothering him. Quietly,
haltingly, he asked:

"I have a request. I would like to exchange a few words with the captain
in private, if he doesn't mind—and you gentlemen won't take umbrage?"

"Fine. We're in your debt, Father. Jokichi, it'll be necessary to make
modifications so the solaser can scan Quinta—and besides the optical
problems there are informational ones. Such a signaling assumes an
audience on an elementary level of education."

When the physicist and the pilots left, Arago rose.

"Please forgive what I said at the beginning. I walked in thinking that
I would find you alone, Captain. I don't put much stock in the
pocket-mirror idea. I could have—I had actually intended to present it
on the lowest level: as a proposal from a layman, for the professionals
to consider. Such a signaling might be worthless, or might knock us out
of the frying pan into the fire. It's anthropocentric through and
through. Before, though, you were indignant, offended, then felt
relief."

"Let us say. What are you driving at, Father?"

"Not spiritual comfort. To work out the technical aspects of this
experiment, you and the others will be including DEUS in it."

"Of course. It will do the calculations. What of that? It will make a
program. It will do what lies within the bounds of possibility. You're
not suggesting, are you, Father, that it's an _advocatus diaboli_?"

"No. Nor do I set myself up as a _doctor angelicus._ I don't need to
assure you, I hope, that I am a Christian?"

Steergard again was surprised by the turn the conversation had taken.

"What are you driving at?" he repeated.

"Theology. So that you can better understand me, I'll put it in words
that are not only worldly but, in my mouth, practically blasphemous. I
justify myself, in my conscience, by our unprecedented situation. The
language of physics is closer to you than the hermeneutics of religion.
Translating into the conceptual system of physics, then: the varied
forms of the Sacred correspond to the various spectral lines of matter,
matter that is omnipresent and the same throughout the Universe. With
this comparison, one can say that besides a spectrum of bodies there
exists a spectrum of faiths. It extends from animism, totemism,
polytheism, all the way to faiths in a personal god. The terrestrial
line of my faith presents God as a family at once human and divine. Are
you familiar with the debates set off in theology by SETI, from the
moment the search for Others engendered that expedition?"

"To be honest, no. You think, Father, that I ought to be?"

"Not at all. But that was my duty. Positions moved apart in my church.
Some maintained that the corruption of Created Beings might be universal
and that such universality went beyond the terrestrial notion of the
word _katholikos;_ that worlds were possible in which the sacrifice of
Redemption had not been made, and which therefore were damned. Others
said that salvation—as a choice between Good and Evil, given by
Grace—had appeared everywhere. This disagreement threatened the Church.
The organizers and members of the expedition were too occupied with
their work to be affected by the sensations that increased the
circulation of the newspapers. Sex and violence had grown a little
stale, you see, so the _Eurydice_—without intending to—provided
novelties for the reader.

"Such as the jokes based on the premise that the _Credo quid Absurdum
est_ had acquired a multiplier that discredited it quite effectively.
The image, for example, of innumerable planets with a multitude of
apples where there were no apple trees, or figs that the Son of God
could not curse because no fig trees grew there. You had an army of
Pilates washing their hands in billions of vessels; a forest of
crucifixions; crowds of Judases; and immaculate conceptions of beings
whose reproductive physiology provided no room for the idea, since they
multiplied without copulating. In short, the multiplication of the
Gospel by all the arms of all the spiral galaxies turned our Credo into
a caricature, a parody of a religion. Thanks to these arithmetical
jokes, the Church lost many of her faithful.

"Why not me as well? Because Christianity demands more of a man than can
be demanded. It demands not only the renouncing of cruelty, baseness,
and lies. It demands that one love the base, the liars, the murderers,
and the tyrants. _Ama et fac quod vis_—nothing will destroy that
commandment. Please do not be surprised to hear such a catechism on
board such a ship. My duty is to look beyond the reconnaissance, beyond
its chances of contact with alien minds. Your duties are different. I
will try to demonstrate. Suppose you stand on a packed lifeboat, and
those drowning, for whom there is no room, grab at the sides, putting
the boat in danger of capsizing and sinking. You would cut away the
hands, true?"

"I am afraid I would. If there was no other way."

"Therein lies the difference between us. It means that you will not
retreat."

"That is correct. I understand the parable about the boat. I will not
wait for it to sink. I will attempt to save that civilization with all
the power at my disposal."

"And, if absolutely necessary, by destroying?"

"Yes."

"So we are back where we started. I have succeeded in postponing that
absolute necessity, nothing more. True?"

"True."

"You are prepared to save life by taking life?"

"That is the sense of your parable, after all, Father Arago. I choose
the lesser evil."

"By becoming a mass murderer?"

"I accept the word. It is possible, too, that I will save no one, that I
will destroy both them and us. But I will not wash my hands. If we
perish, the _Eurydice_ will receive the information. An account of the
state of things, indicating that I have ruled out retreat, is already on
its way."

"In my eschatology there is no such thing as a lesser evil," said Arago.
"With each slain being an entire world dies. For that reason arithmetic
provides no measure for ethics. Irreversible evil cannot be measured."

He rose.

"I won't take up any more of your time. No doubt you want to continue
the conversation that I interrupted?"

"No. I want to be alone."

XIV-Cartoons

 

The steel partitions that normally separated the two halls in the stern
of the _Hermes_ were moved to the middle of the ship, and only the wide
tracks of the sliderless bearings, darker than the surrounding metal,
showed where they had been. The enormous interior resembled a hangar
that had housed a zeppelin of extraordinary size but was now serving
some other purpose. About twenty stories above the tracks of the
partitions, not far from the concave ceiling, like two white flies on a
girder that ran transversely from starboard to port, sat the weightless
pilots, Harrach and Tempe, attached by belts so that a gust of air would
not blow them from their chosen position.

It was not really possible to say, in weightlessness, that they looked
down, though it seemed to them that they did. In the gigantic interior,
steady, rapid work was done by yellow, blue, and black automata, their
enameled surfaces gleaming. Alternately they turned their prehensile
arms to the side and to the front, in rows, as if bowing in a
synchronized calisthenics. Assembly parts passed from pincers to
pincers. The robots were building the solaser.

The thing was of an openwork construction, sievelike, the size of a
torpedo boat. Its half-completed skeleton looked like the folded,
spirally furled umbrella of a giant, an umbrella wrapped not with fabric
but with segments of overlapping mirror-scales. For that reason it also
brought to mind an antediluvian fish, or one of those extinct undersea
reptiles whose bones were being assembled now by machines instead of
paleontologists. In the front part, farthest from the pilots, where the
body of the colossus would have had a head, were sparks among hundreds
of wisps of bluish smoke: laser welding.

The solaser, designed to be a photon cannon fed with the power of a sun,
was hurriedly changed by a reprogrammed team of assemblers into a pocket
mirror for playing with the light. Granted, a terajoule pocket mirror.

The notion was taken initially from the physicists' fear that any
renewed use of the sidereals—having highly characteristic effects,
effects not merely gravitational—would give the planet undesired clues
and eventually put its weapons experts on the track of the Holenbach
interval. Therefore, instead of using the resources of that interval,
the physicists chose a technology already somewhat old-fashioned, that
of radiation conversion. Suspended before the face of the sun, the
solaser would open like a fan, suck in with its receptors the chaotic,
full-spectrum radiation, and compress it into a monochromatic battering
ram. Nearly half the collected power served to cool the solaser;
otherwise, it would evaporate instantly from the heat of the sun. But
the remaining power sufficed for a column of bonded light—having a
two-hundred-meter diameter at the muzzle of the radiator and triple
that, given the inevitable spreading, by the time it reached the orbit
of Quinta—to cut the planet's crust like a hot knife through butter.

Under this far-reaching blade of fire the ten-kilometer layer of ocean
water would be parted to the bottom. The pressure from all sides on that
great pit of rushing steam would have no effect on the sword of light.
Through the shock-wave clouds of the boiling ocean (compared with which
the mushroom cloud of a thermonuclear explosion was a speck) the solaser
could bore into the suboceanic plate, pierce the lithosphere, and
penetrate Quinta to a quarter of its radius.

No one intended to cause such a catastrophe. The solaser was supposed to
graze the ice ring and the thermosphere of the planet. When this idea,
too, was put aside, it turned out that to transform the light-cannon
into a signaler was not difficult at all. El Salam and Nakamura wanted,
with the least rebuilding possible, to solve two problems at the same
time.

It was necessary to reach all the possible addresses simultaneously and
"legibly." Such contact, though one-sided, went on the assumption that
the planet was inhabited by beings endowed with the sense of sight as
well as with enough intelligence to grasp the gist of the transmission.

The first condition the senders had no control over: they could not give
eyes to beings that had none. The second required of the senders no
little inventiveness, particularly as the rulers of the Quintans clearly
did not want any direct communication between the cosmic intruders and
the population. Therefore, the signaling was to fall as a rain of light
on all the continents of the planet, piercing its thick cloud cover. An
overcast sky, in fact, was advantageous, since no one with a grain of
intelligence could then mistake the needles of light piercing it for
rays of sun.

The hardest nut to crack was the form of the message. To teach an
alphabet, to send certain numbers as signs, the universal constants of
matter, would be nonsense. The solaser lay in the hall at the stern,
ready for takeoff, but it did not move. The physicists, informationists,
exobiologists found themselves in a quandary. They had everything they
needed except a program. Self-explanatory codes did not exist. There was
even talk of the semantics of the colors of the rainbow: the violet
range would be gloomy, the middle band of visible light more cheerful,
green would stand for plants or lush growth, red suggested
aggression—yes, but only for people. A code that was a sequence of
semiotic units indicating specific things could not be made of spectral
lines. Then the second pilot put in _his_ two cents: to tell the
Quintans a story. Using the cloudy sky as a screen. Projecting on it a
series of pictures. Over each continent. As Arago, who was present,
laughed later, _"Obstupuerunt omnes."_ Indeed, the experts' mouths
dropped open.

"Is it technically possible?" asked Tempe.

"Technically, yes. But what would be the point? A show in the sky? Of
what?"

"A story," the pilot repeated.

"Ridiculous," snorted Kirsting. He had devoted twenty years to the study
of cosmolinguistics. "You might be able to convey something to Pygmies
with cartoons, or to Australian aborigines. All races and cultures of
humanity have things in common. But there are no humans there."

"Doesn't matter. They have a technological civilization and are already
warring in space. That means that once they had a stone-age
civilization. Then, too, they warred. And there were ice ages on the
planet. Back before they built houses or wigwams, they must have sat in
caves. And painted on the walls—fertility signs, the animals they
hunted—to bring success. It was magic. They found out that the magic was
only cartoons a couple of thousand years later—from their wise ones,
like Professor Kirsting. Professor, would you care to bet with me that
they don't know what stories are?"

Nakamura was laughing now. The others laughed, too, except Kirsting. The
exobiologist-cosmolinguist, however, was not the type that defended his
position at any cost.

"Well, I don't know..." he wavered. "If the idea isn't imbecilic, it's
brilliant. Suppose, then, we show them a cartoon. What about?"

"Ah, that's not my field. I'm no paleoethnologist. And as far as the
idea goes, it's not completely mine. Dr. Gerbert gave me, back on the
_Eurydice_, a book of science-fiction short stories. I dip into it now
and then. That's probably where..."

"Paleoethnology?" Kirsting thought out loud. "I'm not up on that. The
rest of you?"

There was no such specialist on board.

"Perhaps in DEUS's memory," offered the Japanese. "It can't hurt to
look. But a story, no. It should be a myth. Or, rather, a common
element, a theme that appears in the earliest myths."

"Before the time of writing?"

"Of course."

"Yes. From the very beginnings of their protoculture," said Kirsting,
surrendering. He was even warming to the idea—but then a doubt assailed
him:

"Wait. Are we to appear to them as gods?"

Arago shook his head. "It will be difficult, precisely because we should
not manifest our superiority. Nor ourselves. It should be happy news.
Good tidings. At least, I see this in our pilot's proposal, because
stories tend to have happy endings."

Thus began the deliberations, which had a double purpose: to consider
what features Earth and Quinta might have in common—features of the
environment, and of the plants and animals that arose in it—and at the
same time to sift the collection of legends, myths, fables, rituals, and
customs for those that were the most enduring, for the messages that
thousands of years of history had not effaced.

In the first group of probable constants were: the division of the
species into two sexes, most certain for vertebrates; food for animals,
therefore also for intelligent beings on dry land; the alternation of
day and night, of the sun and the moon, of hot and cold seasons of the
year; the emergence of herbivores and carnivores, of preys and
predators, the killing of animals by animals, since a universal
vegetarianism seemed highly unlikely. And therefore the protoculture had
hunting. Cannibalism, the hunting and consuming of beings of one's own
species, was a possible phenomenon in the Eolithic or Paleolithic,
though not absolutely certain. In any case, hunting was a universal,
since according to the theory of evolution it promoted the growth of
intelligence.

The incubation of the ape-men, the primates, in the bloody phase of
predation, which accelerated the development of the brain—this idea once
met with violent opposition. It was seen as an insult to humanity, a
misanthropic invention of the evolutionists more slanderous even than
their proclaiming of the consanguinity of man and ape.

But archeology confirmed the thesis, accumulating irrefutable evidence
in support of it. Carnivorousness, of course, did not lead all predators
to intelligence; many conditions had to be met for that. The reptile
predators of the Mesozoic were far from intelligent, and there was
nothing to indicate that, if they had not been exterminated by a
catastrophe between the Cretaceous and Jurassic (a giant meteorite
disrupting the food chain through the global cooling of the climate),
the dominant reptiles of the time would have acquired humanlike brains.

The presence of intelligent beings on Quinta, however, could not be
denied. Whether they evolved from reptiles or from a species unknown to
Earth was not the crucial question. What was crucial was the form of
their reproduction. But even if the Quintans were not placental mammals
or marsupials, genetics argued for their division into two sexes, the
form of multiplication favored by biological evolution. But that which a
purely biological transmission gave to progeny, contained in the
reproductive cells, did not help in the formation of culture, because
such transmission produced changes in the species at a rate marked by
millennia.

The acceleration of brain growth required a reduction of the instincts
inherited biologically, in favor of learning received from parents. A
creature that came into the world knowing—thanks to genetically built-in
programming—"everything or practically everything" needed for survival
might manage perfectly well but would not be able to change radically
its tactics of living. Whatever could not do this was not intelligent.

So, to begin with, one had the division into sexes, and definitely
hunting. Around these first elements—its binary seed—grew a
protoculture.

But how did that seed manifest, express itself in the protoculture? By
directing attention to what furthered sex and what furthered hunting.
Before there was writing, before the invention of non-animal ways to use
the body, the skill that hunting demanded transferred its reality into
images: not yet symbols, but a magical coaxing of Nature to give what
was desired. The images were pictures that could be painted, or
likenesses that could be cut in rock.

And so on. DEUS, from these premises, performed the task assigned it: to
adapt to the endeavors of sex and hunting a myth portrayed in a series
of images. A tale, a show, a spectacle with actors. The sun, a dance
before rainbows, the bowing of heads—but this would be the epilogue. In
the beginning there was battle. Who battled? Creatures indistinct, but
who walked upright. Attacks, struggles, concluding with a collective
dance.

The solaser repeated this "planetary broadcast" in several variations
for three days, with short intermissions that signified the end and the
beginning. The broadcast was focused and collimated to appear in the
cloudy sky of the planet, where it would be in view (confined to the
central surface of the cloud-screens) over each continent, day and
night. Harrach and Polassar remained skeptical. Suppose, they said, the
Quintans saw and even understood. What of that? Hadn't we smashed their
Moon? A less cheerful presentation, perhaps, but more dramatic.

Suppose they nevertheless recognized this as a gesture of peace. But
who? The population? But of what possible importance was public opinion
in the middle of a hundred-year space war? Did the pacifists on Earth
ever have the upper hand? What could the Quintan people do to make their
voices heard—not to us, merely to their own governments? You might
convince children that war was naughty, but what good would that do?

Meanwhile Tempe felt, instead of pride in the adoption of his idea, an
overwhelming uneasiness. To shake this off, he set out on an excursion.
The _Hermes_ was really an unoccupied giant; the living quarters, with
the control rooms and laboratories, constituted a core no larger than a
six-story building. Besides the power rooms, this core included an
unused hospital section, a small conference room, a mess hall beneath
that—with an automatic kitchen—then recreational facilities, a
simulation trainer, a pool that was filled only when the ship allowed it
(under sufficient thrust so that the water would not fly up into the air
in drops the size of balloons), and a half-oval amphitheater that also
served for entertainment and movies and which never had a living soul in
it. These comforts, thoughtfully provided for the crew by the builders,
turned out to be totally superfluous. It entered no one's head to go
view some ingenious holographic performance. It was as if that part of
the middle deck did not exist for the crew—going to the movies seemed
silly in the light of the events of the past few months. The theater,
pool, and gym had been designed—with snack bars and pavilions, as at a
small-town carnival—to help create the illusion of Earth. But the
architects, Gerbert said, had forgotten to consult the psychologists.
The illusion, not maintainable, was received as a lie. This was not
where Tempe headed for his excursion.

Between the living quarters and the ship's outer hull stretched a space
in all directions, crisscrossed with girders, beams, bulkheads, and
containing a legion of robots at rest or at work. One entered this space
through hermetically sealed hatches at either end of the deck: at the
stern, behind the sanitation area, and from the bow, in a corridor off
the upper control room. Entry at the stern was blocked by a gate
double-locked and cross-bolted, with a warning sign in glowing red that
was never turned off. There, in chambers off limits to personnel, lay
sidereal converters, seemingly inert colossi suspended in vacuum, like
the legendary tomb of Mohammed, on invisible magnetic cushions. But it
was possible to pass the forward barrier—and that was where the pilot
directed his escape.

He had to go through the control room, and there he found Harrach in an
activity that in other circumstances would have made him laugh. Harrach,
on duty, wanting something to drink, had opened the container too
forcefully and was now chasing a yellow sphere of orange juice. He
darted at an angle toward the ceiling as the sphere bobbed gently, like
a large soap bubble—with a straw in his mouth, to catch it and suck it
up before it got all over his face. Opening the door, Tempe stopped lest
a puff of air break the liquid ball into a thousand droplets. He waited
until Harrach's hunt was successful, then kicked off vigorously in the
chosen direction.

Ordinary coordination wasn't worth a damn in weightlessness, but the old
training had by now come back to him. He did not need to stop and think
how to push out with his legs like a mountain climber in a rock chimney,
while turning both wheel locks of the hatch. Someone uninitiated would
in his place have gone head over heels trying to unscrew the spoked
wheels that were like the ones used in bank vaults. Quickly he closed
the hatch behind him, because although the bow section was filled with
air, the air was stale, acrid with the fumes of chemicals, as in a
factory. Before him was a space that narrowed into the distance, dimly
lit by long rows of tubes and having double-lattice struts on the port
and starboard walls. Unhurriedly, he launched himself.

He passed—becoming accustomed to the bitterness in his mouth and
throat—the oxidized hulks of turbines, compressors, thermogravistors,
with their galleries, platforms, and ladders, and skillfully swam around
giant, thick-walled pipes that arched between tanks of water, helium,
oxygen, having wide flanges encircled with bolts. He alighted on one of
these, like a fly. He was indeed a fly, in the bowels of a steel whale.
Every tank loomed higher than a church steeple. One of the fluorescent
tubes, half-burned, flickered steadily, and in that changing light the
oxidized shapes of the tanks now darkened, now shone as if sprinkled
with silver. He got his bearings. From the area of the reserve tanks he
drifted forward to where, in the massive insulation of the central
level, nucleospin units gleamed under their own lights. The units were
attached to bridge gantries, their mouths plugged. Then a sharp cold
reached him, and he saw the frost-covered helium pipes of the cryotron
systems. The chill was such that he prudently used the nearest handgrip
to keep from touching the pipes, because he would have frozen fast to
them in an instant, like a fly caught in a web.

There was nothing for him to do here, and he had come precisely for that
reason, as if on vacation. He could not explain the satisfaction he
derived from these shadowy, deserted regions of the ship, which
testified to its power. In the bottom loading bays, automatic excavators
were anchored, plus heavier and lighter landers, and farther on, in
rows, were green containers, white, blue—tool kits for repair
automata—and at the prow lay two striders with enormous swivel hoods in
place of heads. By chance—or, perhaps, intentionally—he moved into a
strong draft that rushed from a ventilation register and was borne
toward the port ribs of the inner hull, which were the size of bridge
arches, but deftly took advantage of the motion to push off. Like a
jumper on a trampoline he went headfirst, turning slowly at an angle,
toward the handrails of the prow gallery. A favorite spot.

With both hands he pulled himself onto a railing and had before him a
million cubic meters of loading bays. High in the distance shone the
three green lights above the hatch that he had entered. Beneath him—that
is, beyond his legs (which, as always in weightlessness, became
inconvenient, superfluous things)—were robot hovercraft on platforms
fastened to ramps that were folded for the present, and the tunnel of a
rocket launcher gaping in the giant shield of a side wall: the mouth of
a cannon of awesome caliber. But no sooner did he come to a stop than
the same uneasiness fell upon him again, an incomprehensible emptiness
within, like a feeling—for no reason—of what? Futility? Indecision?
Fear? But what could it be that he feared? Today, at this moment, even
here, it seemed, he could not rid himself of his mysterious malaise.

Farther on, he saw the mighty engine that carried him—with a small
fraction of its power—through the eternal abyss. Full of force that
throbbed in the reactors with greater-than-solar heat, the thing meant
Earth to him, the Earth that had sent him to the stars. The Earth was
here, its intelligence contained in the energy drawn from the stars—and
not in those parlorlike quarters with their stupid coziness and comforts
arranged as if for frightened boys. At his back he felt the fourfold
sheathed armor plate that had interstitial cells, energy-absorbing,
filled with a substance hard as diamond when struck but fusible in a
special way, since it possessed self-sealing properties. The ship, like
an organism living yet nonliving, had been given the capacity for
regeneration. Then suddenly, as in an illumination, he found the word
for what was taking place within him: despair.

About an hour later he dropped in on Gerbert. Gerbert's cabin, separated
from the others, was located at the end of the second deck of the middle
section. The physician had probably chosen it because it was spacious
and had a whole wall of window overlooking a greenhouse. In the
greenhouse grew only mosses, grass, a privet hedge; on both sides of the
hydroponic pool stood the hairy gray-green spheres of cacti; there were
no trees, only hazel shrubs, whose flexible branches could withstand
tremendous weight during flight. Gerbert valued this vegetation in the
window and called it his "garden." One could also enter it from the
corridor and walk on paths among flower beds—if, of course, there was
gravitation. But the recent blow, brought on by the night attack, had
produced no little havoc there. Gerbert, Tempe, and Harrach had later
salvaged what they could from the broken bushes.

In accordance with the decision made by the experts of SETI in the
course of preparing for the expedition, DEUS watched the behavior of all
the people on the _Hermes,_ assessing their psychiatric condition. This
was no secret to anyone.

Under the kind of long-term stress to which those who had to rely
entirely on themselves would be subjected, deviations from the mental
norm might occur, taking forms typical of the psychodynamics of groups
cut off for years from ordinary social and familial ties. In such
isolation even a personality in perfect balance and resistant to psychic
trauma could suffer derangement. Frustration could become depression or
aggression without the individual's ever realizing what was happening to
him.

Having a physician on board who was also expert in psychology and its
disorders did not guarantee the recognition of pathological symptoms,
since he himself was subject to stresses that undermined the most
stalwart character. Physicians were people, too. A computer program, on
the other hand, was unbending and therefore effective as an objective
diagnostician and impassive observer, even in the face of catastrophe,
with the whole ship hanging in the balance.

Granted, this safeguarding of the reconnoiterers against any collective
warp of the psyche carried with it one ominous, insurmountable problem.
DEUS, after all, was at one and the same time subordinate and superior
to the crew; it was to execute orders, yet supervise the mental
condition of those who gave the orders. Thus, it held the rank both of
tool and overseer. Nor was the captain excluded from its continuous
supervision. The problem was that the crew's awareness of the
supervision, which was to catch mental instabilities in time, was itself
a source of instability. But for this no one knew any remedy. Were DEUS
to have fulfilled its psychiatric function without the knowledge of the
men, it would have had to reveal the secret to inform them of a
discovered aberration, and that announcement would have been not
psychotherapy but a blow. The vicious circle could be broken only by a
hybridization of responsibility between men and computer. DEUS would
first present its diagnoses to the captain and Gerbert—when it judged
this step to be necessary—and then resume the role of adviser with no
further initiative. No one, obviously, was enthusiastic about this
compromise, but, then, no one, including the psychology machines, had
found any better solution to the dilemma.

A computer of the last generation, DEUS could not experience emotions,
being an extract of rational operations taken to the highest power, with
no admixture of desires or instinct of self-preservation. It was not an
electronically magnified human brain, for it had no so-called
personality traits, no drives—unless one considered a drive its endeavor
to acquire the maximum of information. Of information, however—not of
control.

The first inventors of machines that augmented not the power of muscle
but the power of thought fell victim to a delusion that attracted some
and frightened others: that they were entering upon a path of such
amplification of intelligence in nonliving automata that the automata
would become similar to man and then, still in a human way, surpass him.
About a hundred and fifty years were needed for their successors to
realize that the fathers of information science and cybernetics had been
misled by an anthropocentric fiction—because the human brain was the
ghost in a machine that was no machine.

Creating an inseparable system with the body, the brain both served the
body and was served by it. If, then, someone were to humanize an
automaton to the degree that it would be in no way different, mentally,
from a man, that accomplishment would—in its very perfection—turn out to
be an absurdity. The successive prototypes, as the necessary alterations
and improvements were made, would become more and more human, but at the
same time would be of less and less use—compared with the
gigabit-terabit computers of the higher generations. The only real
difference between a man born of a mother and father and a perfectly
humanized machine would be the building material: living, nonliving. The
humanized automaton would be just as clever—but also just as unreliable,
fallible, just as much a slave to emotional biases—as a man. A virtuoso
imitation of the fruits of natural evolution crowned by anthropogenesis,
the machine would represent a miracle of engineering, but also an oddity
one would not know what to do with. It would be a brilliant forgery,
done in a nonbiological medium, of a living creature, subphylum
Vertebrata, class Mammalia, order Primates, viviparous, bipedal, and
having a bicameral brain—for that was the path of symmetry in the
formation of vertebrates taken by evolution on Earth. But one could not
say what humanity would stand to gain by this plagiarism.

As one of the historians of science observed, it would be like finally
building, after colossal expenditures and theoretical work, a factory
for making spinach or artichokes that were capable of
photosynthesis—like any plant—and which in no way differed from real
spinach and artichokes except that they were inedible. Such spinach
could be put on display and its synthesis boasted of, but one would not
be able to eat it. The whole effort that went into its production, the
sanity of that effort, would therefore come into question.

The first designers and advocates of "artificial intelligence"
themselves did not fully know where they were heading and what hopes
they entertained. Did they want to be able to converse with a machine as
with an ordinary man? Or as with an extremely wise man? This was
possible to do, and had been done—when the human race numbered fourteen
billion and the last thing needed was the manufacturing of mentally
humanoid machines. In a word, computer intelligence more and more
clearly parted company with human intelligence; it assisted the human,
complemented it, extended it, helped in the solving of problems beyond
man's ability—and precisely for that reason did not imitate or repeat
it. The two roads went their separate ways.

A machine, programmed so that no one in verbal contact with it,
including its creator, could tell it from a housewife or a professor of
international law, was a simulator indistinguishable from them—as long
as one did not try to run off with the woman and have children by her,
or invite the professor out to lunch. But if one _were_ able to have
children with her and consume soufflés with him, one would then be
dealing with the ultimate erasure of the difference between natural and
artificial—and what of that? Was it possible to use sidereal engineering
to produce synthetic stars, stars absolutely identical to those in
space? It was. Yet what would be the point of creating them?

According to the historians of cybernetics, its forefathers had been
spurred on by the hope of learning the mystery of consciousness. That
hope was dashed by a success achieved in the middle of the twenty-first
century, when a computer of the thirtieth generation—uncommonly
talkative, bright, and able to deceive living interlocutors with its
humanness—asked them if they knew what consciousness was, in the
abstract sense they gave to that term, because _it_ did not know. This
was a computer capable of self-programming according to assigned
instructions. Disengaging itself from these instructions in time, like a
child growing out of diapers, it developed such skill in imitating human
conversation that people were no longer able to "unmask" it as a machine
impersonating a man—which, however, shed not a bit of light on the
mystery of consciousness, since the machine knew, on that score, neither
more nor less than people.

A noted physicist, present at this experiment, observed that what might
think as a man would still know as much about the mechanism of its
thought as did a man—i.e., nothing. Whether out of malice or to console
them in their disappointment, he told the triumphant but crestfallen
scientists that the people of _his_ field had experienced a similar
difficulty, when more than a century ago they had resolved to pin matter
down: to force it to reveal whether it was basically a particle or a
wave. Unfortunately, matter turned out to be double-dealing, two-faced,
clouding the results of the investigation with the statements that it
was _this_ and it was _that._ In the crossfire of subsequent experiments
it befuddled the physicists completely, because the more they
discovered, the less what they discovered jibed not only with common
sense but with logic itself. At last they had to accept matter's
testimony: that particles were to some extent waves, and waves
particles; that a perfect vacuum was no perfect vacuum, packed with
virtual particles that pretended not to exist; that energy could be
negative and therefore there could be less energy than none at all; that
mesons, in the interval of Heisenberg's uncertainty, played tricks that
broke the sacred laws of conservation—but so quickly, no one caught them
in the act. The fact was (the famous, Nobel-prize-winning physicist
said, to comfort them) that the world, when questioned as to its
"ultimate nature," declined to give "final" answers.

Though it was now possible to wield gravitation like a club, still no
one knew what gravitation "really" was. A machine might behave, then, as
if it had consciousness, but in order to determine if it had the same
consciousness as a man, one would have to transform oneself into that
very machine. In science, restraint was necessary: there were questions
that one was not _allowed_ to put to the world—and he who nevertheless
put them was like one who complained about a mirror whose reflection
repeated his every movement but refused to reveal to him the volitional
reason behind those movements. And yet we used mirrors, quantum
mechanics, sidereal physics, and computers, and derived no little
benefit from them.

More than once Tempe had dropped in on Gerbert, to hear gossip on
matters of "public" interest, such as the relationship of the crew to
DEUS. This time, he visited the physician privately, as a patient. He
was uncomfortable about confiding, even to the man who had returned his
life to him. Or perhaps that was the reason, as if he felt he already
owed him too much. In general, Tempe was close-mouthed with Gerbert. He
had been guarded ever since Lauger, on the _Eurydice,_ had told him the
secret of the two doctors: the sense of guilt that never left them. It
was not the despair that drove him to make this visit, but the fact that
it had descended from nowhere, suddenly, like an illness, and that he
was not sure now that he would be able to continue carrying out the
duties assigned him. This he did not have the right to conceal.

What the decision to come cost him, he realized only when he opened the
door: at the sight of the empty cabin he felt tremendous relief.
Although the ship was not accelerating, and there was weightlessness,
the captain had ordered everything to be prepared for a gravitational
jump—possible at any moment. So movable objects everywhere were secured
and personal items locked away in the wall compartments. In spite of
this, Tempe found the cabin a mess. Books, papers, piles of photographs
lay in disarray—unlike Gerbert's usual painstaking neatness, which
bordered on the pedantic.

He saw Gerbert through the wall-window. The physician, kneeling in his
garden on the other side of the pane, was putting plastic covers on the
cacti. This was how he was preparing. Tempe took the corridor to the
greenhouse and muttered a few words in greeting. The other, not turning
around, unbuckled the belt that kept his knees on the ground—real
ground—and floated up to where his guest was floating. Along the
opposite wall, on a sloping net, climbed plants with small, woolly
leaves. Tempe had wanted to ask, more than once, what the vine was
called—he knew nothing of botany—but somehow always forgot. The
physician, without a word, threw the spade he was holding so that it
stuck in the lawn, and used the force that he thereby gave himself to
pull the pilot by the shoulder. Both went sailing into a corner where,
amid a clump of hazels, were wicker chairs, as in an arbor, except that
the chairs had safety belts.

When they sat, and Tempe was undecided how to begin, the physician said
that he had been expecting him. But that should have come as no
surprise: "DEUS watches over us all."

Data about one's mental health were not obtainable directly by machine,
so as to avoid the Hicks syndrome—a feeling of complete dependence on
the ship's main computer, a feeling that could cause the very thing
psychiatric surveillance was supposed to prevent, a persecution complex
and other paranoid delusions. Besides the psychonicists, no one knew to
what extent each man was psychologically "read" by the monitoring
program that was called the Ghost of Aesculapius in the Machine. This
was simple enough to find out—but it was maintained that even the
psychonicists did not bear up well under the information when it
concerned themselves. The knowledge could be particularly damaging to a
crew during long journeys.

DEUS, like any computer, was programmed in such a way that there could
develop in it no trace of personal identity; it was a nonentity that
observed continuously and, in presenting its diagnosis, was no more a
man than was a thermometer measuring a fever. Of course, the
determination of the body's temperature did not cause the projectional
defense mechanisms that were triggered by the measurement of one's
psyche. Nothing was closer to us and nothing so much concealed by us
from the world as the intimate feelings of our inner self—and now here
was an apparatus more lifeless than an Egyptian mummy, able to see that
inner self, to peer into all its nooks and crannies.

For the laymen this smacked of mind reading. There was no telepathy
involved, of course. The machine simply knew the individual entrusted to
its care better than did the individual himself along with twenty
psychologists. Based on examinations done prior to activation, the
machine made a parametric system simulating the mental norm of each
member of the crew and used that as a model. Moreover, it was
omnipresent on the ship. With its sensors and terminals it learned
perhaps the most about its charges while they slept, from the rhythm of
their breathing, their rapid eye movements, even the chemical
composition of their sweat—because each man sweats in a unique way, and
the finest bloodhound is no match for the olfactometer of such a
computer. (And a dog, besides its sense of smell, has no diagnostic
skill.) Yes, in diagnosis computers had beaten the physicians—as they
had conquered the chess players—but we used them as assistants, not as
doctors of medicine, because people had more faith in people than in
automata. In short (Gerbert said this unhurriedly, rubbing between his
fingers a hazel leaf pulled from a branch) DEUS had accompanied Tempe
discreetly on his "outings," which it considered to be the symptoms of a
crisis.

"What crisis now?" the pilot retorted, annoyed.

"A total doubt, it says, in the sense of our Sisyphean efforts."

"That we have no chance of contact... ?"

"In the capacity of psychiatrist, DEUS is not concerned with the chance
of contact, only with the meaning we attribute to it. According to DEUS,
you no longer believe in the value of your idea—the 'cartoons'—or, for
that matter, in the value of communicating with Quinta, even if such a
thing were to come about. What do you say to that?"

The pilot felt such heaviness, it was as if he had been immobilized.

"It's listening to us?"

"Of course. Look, don't be so down in the mouth. I haven't told you
anything you didn't already know. No, wait, don't talk yet. You knew but
at the same time you didn't know—because you didn't want to know. It's a
typical defensive reaction. You're no exception, Mark. You asked me
once, back on the _Eurydice,_ why we had this and if it wasn't possible
to do without it. You remember?"

"Yes."

"So you see. I told you that according to the statistics expeditions
under constant psychological surveillance had a better chance of success
than those without it. I even showed you the figures. The argument was
irrefutable, so you did what everyone does: you suppressed it. Well, how
is that for a diagnosis? Does it fit?"

"It fits," said the pilot. He held the strap across his chest with both
hands. The hazel grove softly rustled above them in the gentle breeze.
An artificial breeze.

"I don't know how DEUS was able... but never mind. Yes, it's true. I
guess I've been carrying this around with me for some time. I—I'm not
comfortable thinking in words. Words, for me, are somehow... too slow,
when a man needs to get his bearings quickly. No doubt it's an old
habit, from before the _Eurydice..._ But if I have to, I have to. We're
beating our heads against a wall. We may break through it—but then what?
What can we talk about with them? What can they have to say to us? Yes,
I'm sure that that cartoon business entered my head as a dodge. To buy
us time... It wasn't out of hope. Escapism, maybe. To go forward,
staying in one place..."

He fell silent, unable to find the words. The hazels swayed about them.
The pilot opened his mouth but said nothing.

"And if they decided to land one scout there, you would go?" asked the
physician after a long pause.

"Absolutely!" he said at once, and then, thinking, added with surprise,
"And how could I not... ? That's why we're here, after all."

"It might be a trap," Gerbert said, so softly, it was almost as if he
wished to hide the remark from the omnipresent DEUS. Or so, at least,
thought the pilot—but immediately dismissed the idea as nonsense. Then
the pilot saw, in the next instant, that this was a symptom of his own
abnormality: he was ascribing _evil_ to DEUS—or, if not evil, a kind of
enmity. As if they had not only the Quintans against them, but their own
computer.

"It might be a trap," he agreed, like a delayed echo. "Yes, of
course..."

"And you would go nevertheless?"

"If Steergard gives me the chance. It hasn't been discussed yet. If
_they_ reply at all, automata will be sent down first. According to the
program."

"According to _our_ program," Gerbert said. "But they will have a
program of their own, don't you think?"

"Definitely. For the first man they'll prepare children with flowers and
a red carpet. The automata they won't touch. That would be too stupid,
from their point of view. It's us they want to put in a box."

"You think that and you still want to go?"

The pilot's lips twitched. He smiled.

"Doctor, I am no glutton for martyrdom. But you confuse two things: what
I personally think, and who sent us here and why. It doesn't do to argue
with the captain when he's hauling you over the coals. And do you think,
Doctor, that if I don't return he'll ask the priest to pray for my soul?
I bet he would, as ridiculous as it sounds."

Gerbert stared, amazed, at the young man's beaming face.

"Then there would be a retaliation," he said, "not only monstrous, but
meaningless. He wouldn't bring you back to life by striking. And we
certainly were not sent here to wipe out an alien civilization. But how
do you reconcile the two things?"

The pilot stopped smiling.

"I'm a coward, because I didn't have the courage to confess to you that
I no longer believe in the possibility of contact. But I'm not so much a
coward as to shirk my duty. Steergard has his task and will not abandon
it, either."

"You yourself consider that task impossible."

"Only if we go by the original assumptions. We were all supposed to
communicate, not fight. _They_ refused—in their own way. With an attack.
With more than one. Such a consistent refusal also is a communication;
it is an expression of will. If Hades had swallowed the _Eurydice_,
Steergard certainly wouldn't have tried blowing it up for that. With
Quinta it's different. We knocked at their door, because that's what
Earth wanted. If they don't open, we'll blow up the door. But behind it,
we may find nothing that Earth expects. That's what I'm afraid of. But
blow up that door we must, for otherwise we won't be carrying out
Earth's orders. You said, Doctor, that this would be monstrous,
meaningless? You're right. We were given a task. At present it seems
impossible. But if the people of the Stone Age had stuck only to what
seemed possible, we'd still be sitting in caves today."

"Then you do still hope?"

"I don't know. All I know is, if it becomes necessary I'll manage
without hope."

He stopped, frowned, looked embarrassed.

"You've pulled things out of me, Doctor, that I shouldn't have said...
but I myself put my foot in it with that _Nemo me impune lacessit_ at
the captain's, and he was right to criticize me, because there are
duties that one carries out but doesn't brag about, because there is
nothing to brag about. But what did DEUS say about me? Depression?
Claustrophobia? Fatalism?"

"No. Those are obsolete terms. Do you know what the Group Hicks complex
is?"

"I read a little about it, on the _Eurydice._ A death wish? No, it was
something else—a kind of self-destructive desperation?"

"More or less. It's complicated, involves a lot of things..."

"Did DEUS say that I was unfit to—?"

"DEUS cannot remove anyone from his post. You know that. It can
disqualify through diagnosis, but no more than that. Decisions are made
by the captain in conjunction with me, and if either one of us falls
victim to a psychosis, the rest of the crew can assume command. So far,
there is no psychosis. I only wish that you weren't so all-fired eager
to land..."

The pilot unbuckled his belt and floated slowly upward. So that the
artificial breeze would not carry him away, he held on to a hazel
branch.

"Doctor, you're mistaken, you and DEUS..."

The current of air pushed at him so much, the entire shrub began to
bend. Not wanting to uproot it, the pilot released the branch. He called
out, flying toward the door:

"Lauger, on the _Eurydice,_ said to me, 'You'll see the Quintans.'
That's why I came..."

The ship jerked. Tempe was instantly aware: the wall of the greenhouse
rushed at him. He twisted around in midair like a falling cat to break
the impact, slid down the wall to the ground, which now pushed up hard
beneath his feet. By flexing his knees, he could approximate the
acceleration. It was not too great. Something, in any case, had
happened. The corridor was empty, the sirens silent, but the voice of
DEUS came from all sides.

"Man your stations. Quinta has answered. Man your stations. Quinta has
answered."

 

Not waiting for Gerbert, he jumped into the nearest elevator. It
creeped, took ages; the passing decks cast light, one after the other.
The floor pressed more strongly—the _Hermes_ now was accelerating over
one g, but not by more (he thought) than half a g. In the upper control
room, sunk in deep gray seats with raised headrests, were Harrach,
Rotmont, Nakamura, and Polassar, while Steergard, leaning heavily on the
railing of the main monitor, watched—as they all watched—the green words
that marched across the screen.

... WE GUARANTEE YOUR SAFETY ON OUR NEUTRAL TERRITORY FORTY SIXTH DEGREE
LATITUDE ONE HUNDRED THIRTY NINTH LONGITUDE OUR SPACEPORT ACCORDING YOUR
GRID OF MERCATOR WE ARE SOVEREIGN NEUTRAL OUR NEIGHBORS ALERTED HAVE
APPROVED APPROACH OF YOUR PROBES WITHOUT PRIOR CONDITIONS GIVE US VIA
NEODYMIUM LASER TIME OF ARRIVAL OF YOUR LANDER IN UNITS OF PLANET
REVOLUTION BINARY NOTATION WE AWAIT WE WELCOME YOU...

Steergard ran the whole message again for Gerbert and the monk as soon
as they appeared. Then he sat in his chair and turned it to face the
company.

"We received this answer a few minutes ago, from the point mentioned, in
flashes having a solar spectrum. Jokichi, was it a mirror?"

"Probably. The light is noncoherent, through the window in the clouds.
If it's a simple mirror, the area must be at least several hectares."

"Curious. The solaser received these flashes?"

"No. They were aimed at us."

"Interesting. What angular magnitude does the _Hermes_ now have, seen
from the planet?"

"An arc of several hundredths of a second."

"Even more interesting. The light wasn't collimated?"

"It was, but weakly."

"As with a parabolic mirror?"

"Or a series of flat mirrors positioned as required over a considerable
area."

"It means that they knew where to find us. But how did they know?"

No one spoke.

"I'd like an opinion."

"They might have observed us when we launched the solaser," offered El
Salam. Tempe had not noticed him until now: the physicist spoke from the
lower control room.

"That was forty hours ago, and since then we have been moving without
the drive," Polassar objected.

"Let's put that aside for the moment. Who has faith in this gracious
invitation? No one? That is the most curious thing of all."

"It is too good to be true," came a voice from overhead. Kirsting stood
on the railed walkway. "Although, on the other hand... if it's a trap,
they might have come up with one less primitive."

"We'll see."

The captain rose. The _Hermes_ went so evenly that the gravimeters all
registered one, as if the vessel were at rest and docked on Earth.

"Attention, everyone. Polassar will feed DEUS the Chapter 19 program
banks. El Salam will turn off the solaser and set the mask on it. Where
is Rotmont? Good—prepare two heavy landers. The pilots and Dr. Nakamura
will remain in the control room, and I'm going to take a quick bath and
be back in a minute. Ah! Harrach, Tempe, make sure that anything that
doesn't like ten g's is well anchored. Without my permission no one is
allowed down in Navigation. That is all."

Steergard went around to all the consoles and, seeing that only the
pilots had left their places, called from the door:

"Doctors, please, to their stations."

In a moment the control room was emptied.

Harrach changed his seat and, running his fingers over the keys, checked
the condition of all the units from prow to stern on the lit-up diagrams
of the interoceptors. Tempe was not needed there; he went over to the
Japanese, who was examining the spectra of the Quintan signaling flashes
on the table viewer. Tempe asked him what this Chapter 19 program was.
Harrach inclined an ear, because he had never heard of it, either.

Nakamura looked up from the viewer and shook his head ruefully.

"Father Arago will be distressed."

"We're going over to a state of war? What's Chapter 19?" Tempe asked
again.

"The contents of the keel hold no longer remain a secret, gentlemen."

"The one that's locked? Then there aren't striders there?"

"No. It contains a surprise for everyone. For DEUS, even. With the
exception of the captain and my humble self."

Seeing the astonishment of the pilots, he added:

"SETI headquarters considered it advisable, gentlemen. Each of you took
simulation training in landing solo. Each of you could therefore find
himself in the situation, let us say, of a hostage."

"And DEUS?"

"It's a machine. Computers of the last generation can be broken into,
too, even by remote, and have all their programs dumped."

"But to house a couple of special memory banks surely doesn't take an
entire loading bay?"

"The banks are not there. The _Hermes_ is there. A kind of mock-up of
the _Hermes._ Beautifully, very carefully made. To serve, let us say, as
bait."

"And that reserve program... ?"

The Japanese sighed.

"An allusion, ancient. Closer to you than to me. Chapter 19 of the Book
of Genesis. Sodom and Gomorrah. Unpleasant—especially for our apostolic
delegate. I feel sorry for him."

XV-Sodom and Gomorrah

 

Usually, when the ship moved under its own power, everyone on board—and
especially in the mess hall—fell into a better mood, because one could
forget, at least during meals, about the Gordian knot that was
tightening around them more and more. The fact that one could sit at a
table, pass dishes of food, pour soup into bowls and beer into glasses
with no trouble, use a salt shaker, sugar one's coffee with a spoon—this
was a liberation from the practices made necessary by weightlessness.
The severing of the bonds of gravity, as has been said a thousand times,
makes of a man's habits, and of his body as well, a laughingstock at
every turn.

An absentminded astronaut was an astronaut covered with bumps and
bruises, spilling all sorts of things on himself and on his clothes, and
always flying across the cabin after escaping papers. When he found
himself in a large area without "propulsion" materials, he was a
creature more helpless than an infant, because one could not claw one's
way out of being suspended in mid-air. Those caught in such straits
saved themselves by resorting to throwing wristwatches and—if
wristwatches did not suffice—jackets or sweaters. The laws of Newtonian
mechanics allowed no exceptions: if an outside force did not act upon a
body at rest, only the rule of action and reaction would ever move it.

Back in the time when he still cracked jokes, Harrach once said that the
perfect murder could be committed in orbit, and it was doubtful that any
court would convict the killer, because all one had to do was get the
intended victim to strip for a bath and then give him a light push with
a finger, just enough to make him hang between the floor, walls, and
ceiling, where he would turn until he died of hunger. The killer could
tell the judge that he had gone for a towel but got sidetracked. The
failure to provide a towel was no crime, and, as everyone knew, _nullum
crimen sine lege._ The penal code had not taken into account
weightlessness and its criminal possibilities.

After the carrying out of the new orders, which Tempe referred to as a
"state of war," the mood, even at the evening meal, did not improve. One
might have taken the mess hall for the refectory of a monastery under a
strict rule of silence. They ate, not particularly aware of what they
ate, leaving that problem entirely to their stomachs, because they were
digesting what Steergard had told them that afternoon. He had presented
his plan of action, speaking so softly that he was barely audible.
Anyone who knew him knew that this cold calm signified a rage.

"The invitation is a trap. If I am mistaken—which I hope I am—contact
will take place. I do not see, however, any reason to be optimistic. The
existence of a neutral government on a planet in the grip of at least a
hundred years of cosmic war is possible, but it is not possible that a
guest from outer space could be received without the consent of the
warring parties. According to the message, that consent was given. I
tried turning the situation around—that is, to imagine that we were one
of the command centers of Quinta and faced with the problem of how to
respond to the appeal issued by the intruder to the population at large.

"Such a command center by now knows a lot about the intruder. It knows
that the intruder cannot be eliminated in space, having already
attempted to do that with the means at its disposal—though possibly
there are means remaining. It knows that the intruder is not truly
aggressive, for although the intruder tried to force contact by a show
of strength, it made the target of that show the unpopulated Moon,
whereas with much less expenditure of energy it could have struck the
ice ring, which is on the verge of collapse anyway. It also knows,
obviously, that it alone—or it in temporary alliance with its
enemies—was the main culprit responsible for the selenoclasm and the
catastrophic consequences. It must know this, I repeat, because it is
not possible to conduct military operations on an interplanetary scale
without the help of competent scientists. The rest of the command
center's knowledge is circumstantial. Long before mastering gravitation
one learns its properties—to the extremes of the black holes. The way we
repulsed their nocturnal attack was a surprise for them. If, however,
they have physicists worth anything at all, they will realize that a
gravitational defense, for a ship landed on the planet, is just as
suicidal as a gravitational offensive. The ship could not produce,
relativistically, a coherent gravity field of such a configuration
without destroying both itself and the planet.

"I am sending two landers to the designated area and expect that they
will find no threat, none whatever. If the Quintans wish to lure the
_Hermes_ to the planet, then the landers will return. Nor will they
return empty-handed; something is already being staged for their
benefit, in order to allay our fears and whet our interest. The
hospitable Quintans will declare that true contact means a coming
together of living beings, not of machines. Which cannot be denied.
Therefore, if things proceed roughly as I have said, the _Hermes_ will
land, and then the matter will be settled once and for all. Once we
recover the landers—but without taking them on board, because after
everything that has happened I would rather err a hundred times on the
side of caution than allow a single oversight—we will announce our
arrival.

"Now to the details of the operation. After dispatching the landers, we
move at medium power from Quinta to Sexta. Both, to our advantage, are
in similar opposition to the Sun. Our probes have already studied Sexta,
and we know that it is an airless globe with high seismic activity and
therefore has not lent itself either to colonization or to the
establishment of military bases. Such bases would be threatened more by
the planet itself than by the enemy. We enter the shadow of Sexta, and
the _Hermes_ that emerges will be completely indistinguishable from our
ship—at a distance. Up close, it's another story, but I think they will
not interfere with it before entry into the atmosphere. Considering
sidereal physics, they could safely attack it in the ionosphere—but I
don't believe they will. The ship will be a prize far more valuable if
it makes a soft, normal landing than if it is shattered. And, too, it
will offer less resistance on the ground. A ship descending stern first,
firing, has chances of maneuvering, escaping.

"That _Hermes_ will send and receive radio signals, and will have an
engine enabling it to land, though—granted, only once. There will be no
direct communication between it and us. And then, depending on how it is
greeted, we will respond."

"Sodom and Gomorrah?" asked Arago.

Steergard looked at the monk a while before answering, with undisguised
rancor.

"We are sticking to the Holy Scriptures, Your Reverence, but availing
ourselves of the first edition only. The new edition no longer applies,
because we have already turned the other cheek more than once. The
matter is not open to discussion. There's no point, since we won't be
the ones choosing between the Old and New Testaments, they will. Is the
solaser retuned?"

El Salam said that it was.

"And DEUS is now on Chapter 19? Good. Now let's take up the matter of
the landers. Rotmont and Nakamura will be in charge of that. But after
dinner."

No one saw the landers take off. Launched at midnight on automatic, they
made straight for Quinta, while the _Hermes_ turned its back on them and
accelerated: reaching Sexta, seventy million kilometers distant, would
take almost eighty hours at hyperbolic speed. In the electronics labs,
production began of dispersons, until now not deployed in the
reconnaissance. These—also called "bee's eyes"—were a swarm of millions
of microscopic crystals; scattered in a million cubic miles of space
around Sexta, they would serve as the _Hermes'_ vision. Dispersed in the
wake of the ship, they were its invisible, remote-control eyes. On Earth
they had been used in aerial photography. Each crystal, smaller than a
grain of sand, a transparent needle, corresponded to a single
ommatidium, an optic cone of a bee's compound eye. The _Hermes_ pulled
this seeing tail after itself, to go behind Sexta and from there observe
the fate of its computerized envoys. Also, after covering an appropriate
distance, the ship ejected television probes with a great show of flame:
its "official eyes," which the Quintans could and were even supposed to
notice.

In the control room, it was Tempe's watch. He checked the course and the
growing crescent of Sexta on the monitor screens—and glanced now and
then at Harrach, who was standing at his side, talking angrily. (Lately,
Harrach seemed to flare up over the most inconsequential things; he
would drop in on Tempe and hold forth at length, fuming.) Tempe did not
interrupt the man, not wanting to agitate him more. Besides, they were
not alone: in the control room, too, DEUS was watching over them. Tempe
was not expert enough in computer architecture to be certain that a
machine so quick, intelligent, and retentive did not have a trace of
personal identity. The assurances of the textbooks and the experts did
not convince him. He would have preferred to convince _himself_, but did
not know how. But, then, there were more serious things on his mind. Did
Nakamura truly sympathize with Father Arago? Tempe shivered at the
thought of being in the apostolic delegate's shoes.

Arago, meanwhile, following the captain's suggestion, was
considering—with Gerbert—the question of whether or not it was possible
for the Quintans to deduce the biology of men from the landers that men
constructed.

Although the landers had been meticulously sterilized before being
dispatched to the planet, so that on their surfaces there would be not
one epidermal cell from a finger, not one bacterium (of the kind that
the human organism could never rid itself of entirely)—and although they
were automata built without human hands, and their energy feeders and
equipment for information exchange corresponded to terrestrial
technology of eighty years before—Steergard had no intention of taking
the electronic envoys on board when they returned. He considered that
too risky. The first artifacts that the _Hermes_ captured had shown the
Quintans' astounding ability in parasite engineering. The landers, then,
besides bringing important, innocent information, could also bring
destruction—not in the form of microbes attacking at once, but of
viruses or ultraviruses with a long incubation period. He therefore
asked the doctors and Kirsting to come up with countermeasures.

The "neutral government" that had communicated with them agreed to the
arrival of the landers, but in the course of further negotiations
stipulated that the landers could not remain in contact with the
_Hermes,_ for that condition was imposed by the "neighboring parties."
The planet, swallowing both probes with its atmosphere, wrapped itself
in a curtain of intensified noise on all wavelengths. Had the men
equipped the envoys with lasers able to pierce that shield of noise,
they would have broken the accepted condition. It would have been even
more obvious for the _Hermes_ to poke at the sea of clouds and the radio
chaos with its own lasers.

Nothing remained but to watch Quinta from behind Sexta via the clouds of
holographic eyes. The operation was synchronized so that the two
landers, sinking slowly toward the horizon, would reach Quinta just as
the _Hermes_ entered the shadow of Sexta. Everyone gathered in the
control room and waited for the critical moment. The planet, white with
clouds, filled the main screen; clearly visible were the swarms of
combat satellites that crossed its featureless face as black dots. To be
able to observe the entry of both rockets into the atmosphere, sodium
and technetium had been added to their hypergolic fuel: the first
colored the exhaust flame a bright yellow, the second tagged it with a
spectral line not found in the spectra of the local sun or the Quintan
orbiters. When the rockets plunged into the clouds, the threads of fire
from the air friction and the retros began to diffuse. Then the billions
of eyes, spread in an unseen tail a million miles in the wake of the
_Hermes,_ focused along the tangent on the point of the planned
landing—and not in vain. Settling on hard ground in the space of several
seconds, both vessels announced the conclusion of their flight with a
double blaze of sodium, intentionally modulated, which immediately faded
out.

With this the operation entered the next stage. The bottom armor of the
_Hermes_ split in half, into two giant arched gates, and from that Open
Sesame crane arms pushed out into space an enormous metal cylinder that
was to be the laboratory quarantine for the probes. Harrach seemed
especially pleased with the stratagem. The others approved of
Steergard's tactic and willingly pitched in, but they did so without
enthusiasm: there was nothing to rejoice about. The first pilot, on the
other hand, did not bother to conceal his evil glee—that they were going
to take that war-loving bastard of a planet by the throat. He could
hardly wait for the return of the plague-carrying landers, as if the
whole point of the expedition was a brutal clash. Listening to the man
go on and on, Tempe made little comment, thinking about the
psychological changes in Harrach that DEUS must be taking note of, and
felt ashamed of his colleague—even though at times he, too, was unable
to say which he would have preferred: for the deep anger that had been
building in the crew to turn out to be without foundation, or for _them_
to force upon the crew the worst of all possible decisions. Yes, he
himself now saw this civilization as an enemy, whose absolute evil
justified the steps the men were taking. Nothing, now, was cloaked in
secrecy. The solaser—extinguished and masked before—was being charged
with solar energy. Not for signaling but to deal laser blows.

After forty-eight hours the holographic cloud announced that the envoys
were returning. The two landers were supposed to signal—in the
ultrashortwave band—when they were outside the orbit of the drifting
fragments of the Moon, but only one did clearly: the other sent a
gibberish of codes. Steergard divided his people into three groups. To
the pilots he entrusted the launching of the fake _Hermes_ into a solar
trajectory; to the physicists, the receiving of the landers in the
cylindrical chamber, which was some fifty miles away from the _Hermes;_
and he put the physicians and Kirsting in charge of the biological
examination of those landers, provided that the second group gave the
go-ahead. Though thus divided, the crew kept abreast of the total
situation. Harrach and Tempe—tracking the hollow giant, which set off
unhurriedly on its way, with the fires from the robot welding still
flickering across its hull—spoke by intercom with Nakamura's group,
which was waiting for the landers. Polassar did not rule out the
possibility of an ordinary malfunction in the babbling transmitter—but
Harrach was positive, would bet his right arm, that it was the work of
the Quintans. The fact was, Harrach _wanted_ the treachery of the
Quintans to come to light as soon as possible and to be—for everyone—the
last straw. Tempe said nothing, wondering how a man so obsessed could
still function in the responsible position of first pilot. Apparently,
he could—seeing as DEUS had not yet informed the captain of Harrach's
condition. Unless they had all of them fallen into a collective
madness...

The quarantine cylinder, in the glare of floodlights surrounding it,
received the landers with an open maw. At their control center, the
physicists, after automata performed the preliminary examination, could
not decide whether the damaged lander had been damaged by an accident or
by design. This infuriated Harrach, who knew better: it was foul play,
it was the Quintans! After an hour, however, it turned out that the
probe had lost part of an antenna and its prow radiator in a collision
with some small meteorite fragment or piece of metal. Such a collision,
in that system, was not unlikely.

On the empty twin of the _Hermes,_ moving away, the final welds still
glowed in the darkness. The pilots could start the drive as soon as the
captain gave the order, but he did not call them. He was waiting for the
report of the experts. In what condition had the landers returned? And,
most important, what information had they brought?

The information turned out to be extremely interesting, and the
landers—if one did not count that minor mishap—untouched and wholly
uncontaminated. Hearing this, Harrach could not help exclaiming:

"Snakes!"

"But even in Sodom there was a Lot," Tempe pointed out. He was dying to
know the new discoveries about Quinta, which somehow were taking forever
to reach the control room. Finally Nakamura took pity on the pilots and
showed them, on a projector, the result of the lander reconnaissance as
transmitted from the quarantine cylinder.

He began with the cartoons that the solaser had beamed to the planet.
Then followed a long sequence of landscapes: nature preserves, possibly,
untouched by civilization. Seashores, waves breaking on sand, red
sunsets in low clouds, mountain forests a much darker green than the
foliage on Earth. The enormous crowns of the trees were almost
navy-blue.

Against this continually changing background shone letters.

ACCEPTANCE OF YOUR ROCKET MISSILE OF MASS LIMIT THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND
TONS METRIC AGREED UPON WITH GUARANTEE OF YOUR PASSIVITY YOUR GOODWILL
THIS IS SPACEPORT

Out of a heavy green mist emerged a vast surface, seen from a great
height. It gleamed dully, like frozen mercury. Incredibly slender
needles stood upon it at regular intervals, like pieces on a chessboard:
stalagmites immaculately white, sharply pointed, and growing. Or,
rather, they issued upward, wrapped at their bases in golden spiderwebs,
until that motion ceased. On the far horizon, completely cloudless,
birds flew, each bird having four independently moving wings. They must
have been huge. They flew like cranes migrating from northern climes.
Below, at the stalagmites—now recognizable, to human eyes, as
rockets—tiny things shimmered, dark and multicolored; they swarmed up
wide ramps into the white ships. Everyone leaned forward, straining his
eyes to see, finally, what the Quintans looked like—but with no more
success than a visitor from Neptune would have had, trying to make out
the human form by scrutinizing a packed Olympic stadium from a mile
away. The variegated, churning crowd continued to gather at the bottom
of the ramps and to disappear, in rivers, inside the ships as bright as
snow. On the hulls were perpendicular rows of hieroglyphics: shining,
illegible inscriptions. The crowd now thinned, and everyone waited for
the inevitable takeoff of that white flotilla. But—slowly,
majestically—it began instead to sink.

The gold-bronze spiderwebs fell away from the hulls as if rotted
through, making irregular circles on the ground. Now only the white
prows jutted above the lake of flat mercury, and then they, too, entered
dark-red wells, and no trapdoors or hatches closed over them—only that
same matte mercury. The plain was featureless. From the edge of the
screen slowly crawled a centipede—clearly mechanical, not a living
creature—with a flat, truncated snout. From the snout poured a fountain
of bright, yellowish fluid, which spread and at the same time bubbled as
if boiling; when the stuff had all boiled away, the mercury turned black
as tar. The centipede bent back, arching, so that its middle legs hung
in midair; it turned directly toward the watching men and opened four
eyes. Or were they windows? Or spotlights? But they looked like the
large eyes of a fish: round, surprised, with thin-band, metallic irises
and black, glittering pupils. This robot vehicle seemed to regard them
thoughtfully, with concern, out of those four pupils, which were now no
longer round but had narrowed like a cat's. At the same time something
flickered—weak, blue—in their centers. Then the centipede fell, resuming
its position on the black ground, and, swaying from side to side like a
real centipede, trotted off out of the field of vision. There were no
more birds in the sky, only the caption:

OUR SPACEPORT WE ACCEPT YOUR ARRIVAL CONTINUATION FOLLOWS

The continuation indeed followed, first with a thunderstorm. The
downpour lashed a row of buildings with slanting rain—buildings
connected by a multitude of overhead viaducts. A peculiar city in a
cloudburst. The water coursed down oval roofs, poured from spouts at the
bases of bridges—yet those were not bridges, they were tunnels with
elliptic windows, and in their centers rushed streaks of fluttering
light. An elevated railroad? Not a soul anywhere, the length of the
streets... but because the buildings were in a cascade arrangement, like
Toltecan pyramids cast in metal, there really were no streets. It was
impossible to determine the ground level of the city, if this was in
fact a city. The rain, whipped by the wind, drove in sheets of silver
across gigantic structures; lightning struck without a sound; and from
the pyramids the water streamed in a curious way. The gutters that
collected it were raised at the ends, so that great torrents flew into
the air and merged with the ever-pouring rain. But then one of the
lightning bolts split up and froze into words of fire:

STORMS ARE ON OUR PLANET FREQUENT PHENOMENON

The image dimmed and went out. In a dingy grayness appeared outlines,
broken silhouettes. Somewhere in the depths, a shuddering amalgamation
of fire and clouds, or smoke. Layer upon layer of the rubble of enormous
structures. In the foreground lay whitish blotches, as of the naked
bodies of creatures torn apart, smeared with mud, in even rows. Above
this vast cemetery, the color of iron, flashed the words:

THIS CITY WAS DESTROYED BY YOUR SELENOCLASM

The inscription vanished, and the picture wandered among the ruins,
showing close-ups of incomprehensible mechanisms. One of these,
reinforced all around with unusually thick metal, had been cracked open,
and inside—here a telephoto lens zooming in—were, again, mangled
remains, providing no clue as to the shape of what had lived, like human
corpses pulled from mass graves, half rags and clay. Then—the camera
retreating suddenly—again a great expanse of rubble, with deep
excavations. In them, like beetles, squat bulldozers streaked with red
gnawed at the debris, their mandibles working. The bulldozers pushed
stubbornly, with difficulty, ramming the center of a split façade, white
as alabaster, as milk, but singed by flame, until the wall crumbled and
dust lifted in a rust-red cloud, blocking out the scene. For a few
moments all that could be heard in the control room was rapid breathing
and the tick of a second hand. The screen brightened. A strange diadem
appeared, of crystal as transparent as a tear, with a hollow not made
for any human skull, and corymbs sparkling like diamonds. Set in it,
compact, a dodecahedron, a pale-pink spinel. Above this, the
inscription:

CROWNING CONCLUSION

But it was not the conclusion. Against a harsh halogen light there were
dark, headless crustaceans on the gentle slope of a mountainside, like a
herd of cattle grazing in an alpine pasture. In vain did the eye try to
identify them. Were they large tortoises? Giant coleoptera? The picture
lifted, went along an increasingly steep wall of rock with black
recesses, grottoes, caves; it was not water that flowed from them, but
perhaps a slurry, a brown-yellow vomitus. Then, on a purple, gently
undulating background, words began to march.

WE ACCEPT YOUR ARRIVAL SHIP OF REST MASS LIMIT THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND
TONS METRIC AT SPACEPORT AAO35 AS SHOWN GIVE TIME WE GUARANTEE YOU PEACE
FORGETTING BY YOUR CYLINDRICAL PROJECTION OF MERCATOR MERIDIAN 135
PARALLEL 48 WE AWAIT YOUR SIGNAL ANNOUNCEMENT ARRIVAL

The monitor went blank. Daylight flooded the control room. The second
pilot, very pale, his hands unconsciously pressed to his chest, still
stared at the empty screen. Harrach struggled with himself. Large beads
of sweat trickled down the man's forehead and rested on his thick blond
brows.

"It's blackmail," he blurted. "They... to put the blame on us for
that..."

Tempe started, as if suddenly awakened.

"But, you know," he said quietly, "it's true. Did anyone invite us here?
We landed smack in the middle of their misfortune to increase it."

"Enough of that!" Harrach snapped. "If you must do penance, go to that
priest of yours, don't try converting me. It's not only blackmail, it's
more cunning... Yes, I can see how they'd love to get us on their hook.
Use your head, Mark. _That_ wasn't our fault. It was they who—"

"Use _your_ head." Tempe got up, unable to sit still. "No matter how the
game ends, what we did, we did. Contact between intelligences—my God. If
you have to curse someone, then curse SETI, curse CETI, curse the day
you decided to become a 'psychozoic discoverer. ' Better yet, keep your
mouth shut. That's the smartest thing that you can do."

 

That afternoon, the Open Sesame containing the landers was pulled on
board. Arago asked Steergard for a general meeting to discuss future
courses of action. Steergard refused point-blank. There would be no
meetings, no councils, until the final phase of the program was
completed. Adorned with a gamma laser, the fake _Hermes_ disappeared
behind the curve of Sexta and made full speed for Quinta, exchanging
with it the prearranged sign and countersign.

As soon as he was off duty, Tempe tried to see the captain. The captain
refused: alone in his cabin, he was seeing no one. The pilot rode down
to the middle level—he hadn't the nerve to go to the monk—but turned
back halfway and asked on the intercom for Gerbert, who was not in his
room. Gerbert was in the mess hall, with Kirsting and Nakamura. The ship
maneuvered to provide a little thrust; they remained in shadow and had
weak gravitation. At the sight of people eating, Tempe realized that he
had not put a thing into his mouth since dawn. He joined them, silent,
with a plate of roast beef and rice, but when he touched the meat with
his fork he became—for the first time in his life—nauseous because of
the meat's grayish fibers. He had to eat, however, so he scraped his
plate into the kitchen vac and took from the automat an instant-heated
vitamin porridge. To fill the stomach with something. No one spoke to
him. It was only when he had tossed his plate and spoon into the washer
that Nakamura, with a faint smile, called him over. Tempe sat down
opposite the Japanese, who wiped his lips with a paper napkin. When
Kirsting left, when the two of them were alone with Gerbert, Nakamura
cocked his head in the way he had, his black hair combed flat, and
looked expectantly at the pilot. The pilot shrugged, which meant that he
had nothing to say. Nothing.

"When we turn our backs on the world, the world does not go away," said
the physicist suddenly. "Where there is mind, there is also cruelty.
They go together. One should accept this, since it cannot be changed."

"And why is the captain seeing no one?" the pilot said.

"He is entitled," the Japanese replied, unruffled. "The captain, like
all of us, must save face. When he is alone, too. Dr. Gerbert suffers,
our pilot Tempe suffers, but I do not suffer. As for Father Arago—I
don't even want to think about Father Arago..."

"How is it... that you don't suffer?" Tempe didn't understand.

"I don't have the right," Nakamura calmly explained. "Modern physics
demands an imagination that shrinks from nothing. It is no credit to me;
it is a gift of my predecessors. I am not a prophet, not a clairvoyant.
I am merely objective when it is necessary to be objective. Otherwise I,
too, would be unable to eat meat. Who was it that said _Nemo me impune
lacessit?_ Does he now regret his words?"

The pilot paled. "No."

"Good. Your buddy Harrach is putting on quite a show, the mask of fury
fixed on his face, like a demon in our Kabuki theater. One should be
neither angry nor despairing, neither feel pity nor seek revenge. And
you yourself now know why. Or am I mistaken?"

"No," said Tempe. "It's that we don't have the right."

"Exactly. The conversation is concluded. In thirty"—he consulted his
watch—"in thirty-seven hours the _'Hermes'_ will be landing. Who is on
duty then?"

"Both of us. Orders."

"You won't be alone."

Nakamura rose, nodded to them, and left. In the empty mess hall the
washer hissed softly, and there was a light breeze from the air
conditioning. The pilot glanced at the physician, who continued to sit
motionless, his head in his hands, staring into space. Tempe left the
man there without exchanging a word with him. There was nothing, really,
to say.

The landing of the _"Hermes"_ turned out to be spectacular. Descending
toward the designated point on the planet, it belched such fire from its
stern that the burn, transmitted by the myriads of tiny eyes dispersed
in space, entered the milky fullness of the clouds like an incandescent
needle, tearing it apart, beneath, into a whirl of pinkening scuds. Into
this window, this hole cleared by flame, the ship sank, then
disappeared. Wisps of feathery cirrocumuli, spiraling inward, began to
close the breach in Quinta's cloud cover, but they had not yet filled it
when a yellow light burst up through them. After nine minutes—the time
required for a signal to travel the distance separating the observers
from the planet—the transmitter of the fake _Hermes,_ aimed at Sexta,
beamed for the first and last time. The clouds once again parted in that
place, but more gradually, gently. In the control room full of people
there was a sound like a short, stifled sigh.

Steergard, the unblemished, white face of Quinta at his back, called
DEUS.

"Give me an analysis of the explosion."

"I have only the emission spectrum."

"Give the cause of the explosion, based on that spectrum."

"It will be uncertain."

"I know. Go ahead."

"Very well. Four seconds after the drive was shut off, the reactor core
blew up. Should I give the cause variants?"

"Yes."

"First: a stream of neutrons, at a high-low frequency designed to
penetrate the housing of the pile, struck the stern. The reactor, though
shut off, began functioning as an amplifier, and an exponential chain
reaction was triggered in the plutonium. The second variant: the armor
plate at the stern was pierced by a cumulative charge with a cold
anomalon warhead. Should I give the reasoning behind the first variant?"

"Go ahead."

"An attack of the ballistic type would demolish the entire ship. A
neutron blow, on the other hand, could knock out just the power source,
if the assumption is that there are biological creatures on board and
that they will be separated, therefore, from the engine area by
radiation-proof shielding. Should I show the spectra?"

"No. Enough."

Only now did Steergard notice that he was standing in the white light of
Quinta as in a halo. Without looking, he turned off the picture and was
silent for a moment, seeming to digest the words of the machine. "Does
anyone wish to take the floor?"

Nakamura raised his eyebrows and slowly, with great gravity, as if
formally offering condolences, said:

"I stand behind the first hypothesis. The ship was to have lost power
while the crew emerged from the attack in one piece. With injuries, but
alive. One cannot learn much from corpses."

"Who disagrees?" asked the captain.

All were silent—not so much because of what had happened and what had
been said as because of the look on Steergard's face. Hardly opening his
mouth, as if seized with lockjaw, he said:

"Come, doves, you champions of peace and mercy, speak up, give us—and
give them—a chance to be saved. Convince me that we should go back,
bringing Earth the small consolation that there exist worlds worse than
ours. And leaving _them_ to their own doom. For the duration of such
persuading I cease to be your captain. I am the grandson of a Norwegian
fisherman; I am a simple man who has overreached himself. I will listen
to any and all arguments—to insults, too, if someone considers that
necessary. What I hear will be erased from DEUS's memory. Go ahead."

"This is not humility, this is sarcasm. The symbolic resignation from
your position of captain does not change the fact." Arago, as if wanting
to be better heard, stepped forward from the rest. "But if each man is
to act according to his conscience to the end, whether he is in a drama
or a black comedy—because he did not choose the play himself and does
not know his lines by heart, like an actor—then I say this: Killing, we
save no one, we save nothing. Deception lay behind the mask of the
_Hermes,_ and it lies behind the mask of seeking contact at any price.
The thirst is not for knowledge but for vengeance. Whatever you do—if
you do not retreat—will result in a fiasco."

"And retreat would not constitute a fiasco?"

"No," replied Arago. "You know with certainty that you can bloody them.
But you know nothing else with certainty."

"That is true. Are you finished, Father? Who else wishes to speak?"

"I do."

It was Harrach.

"If you decide to retreat, Captain, I will do everything in my power to
prevent it. You'll have to bind me hand and foot. I know that, according
to DEUS, I've become abnormal. All right. But we are, every one of us
here, abnormal. We did all we possibly could to convince them that we
presented no threat. For four months we let ourselves be attacked,
lured, betrayed—and if Father Arago represents Rome here, then let him
remember what his Saviour said to Matthew: 'I came not to send peace,
but a sword.' And if... But I've talked too much. Do we vote?"

"No. Five hours have passed since their disappointment. We cannot delay.
El Salam, you will start up the solaser."

"Without warnings?"

"It's a bit late in the day for that. How much time do you need?"

"Sixteen minutes, back and forth, for the sign and countersign, plus
positioning. It can fire in twenty minutes."

"Fire away."

"By the program?"

"Yes, for an hour. Nakamura, let's have the viewer. Whoever doesn't want
to watch can leave."

Well hidden in the mask's dust cloud, whose radiance was induced by
Zeta, the solaser opened fire at one in the morning—a three-hour delay,
because Steergard wanted perfect collimation. To hit the ring along its
tangent, at the exact point where the trap had been set for them, it was
necessary to wait for the planet to rotate into position.

Eighteen terajoules shot out in a sword of light. The jump in the
photometers showed that the solar blade, invisible in empty space, had
traveled sideways. Brushing the edge of the ring, it peeled off the
outer rim. The scene, though it was deaf and dumb and an outstretched
palm could easily have covered it, demonstrated the full power taken
from the Sun when that power was released in the collision between the
light—harder than steel—and the circle of ice spread over thousands of
miles. The center of the blow they saw first as a sparkling gap out of
which poured a blizzard of swelling white clouds laced with unusual,
trembling, arching rainbows. The ice ring boiled, steamed, and—turning
to gas—immediately froze and scattered into the void beyond the
conflagration, making a long, streaming veil that trailed the planet. It
then set behind the disk, since the laser was striking in the direction
opposite to the rotation. Steergard had ordered the slanted, gleaming
ring to be hit in such a way as to pry it out of its dynamic
equilibrium. The power packed inside the solaser was sufficient for
seven minutes of terajoule surgery.

"On target," said DEUS.

The outer ring was already breaking up. The inner ring, separated from
it by a space six hundred miles wide, was alive with turbulence caused
by the changes in the angular momentum. When the circle of ice, sweeping
toward the darkness, reached with its long-maned clouds beyond the
dayside hemisphere and disappeared in the shadow of the nightside,
Quinta's horizon shone as though behind it there rose a second, twin sun
through pillars of smoke and rainbows—a sun that cast a smooth blood-red
glow on the curved sea of clouds. The view of this terrible catastrophe
was magnificent. The light caught in trillions of ice crystals from the
butchered ring produced a cosmic fireworks that dimmed every
constellation in the starry sky. It was breathtaking. The people in the
projection room instinctively shifted their eyes from the upper monitor,
in which an eccentric laser diamond trembled just above the sun, to the
main screen, where a constant, unpulsed beam of power stripped fractured
layers, slabs, snow-white floes from the circle of ice. Could _they_
have anticipated such a cataclysm? From the planet it must have looked
like an uncanny, unending explosion high in the heavens. But they were
probably unable to see the rainbows shooting upward like lightning
bolts, because billions of ice fragments already were hurtling down on
them. Mountains of ice, seething and thundering, fell from tattered
clouds, but this was no thrilling sight for the ones who perished
beneath that roaring avalanche.

Seen from the projection room, the atmosphere that encircled the planet
was an extremely thin layer. The great magnitude of this astroengineered
amputation could be seen safely only by the inhabitants of the tropical
regions—until the shock wave reached them, faster than sound. The photon
beam, moving millimeter by millimeter at the muzzle of the solaser,
crushed planes of ice hundreds of miles across at the target. Only at
the planet's southernmost point was there nothing yet to show the fury
of the broken disk, which every minute shed hundreds of cubic kilometers
of shattered ice. Now, within a cloud thrust high above the atmosphere,
the laser beam became visible; it struck in the heart of the cloud like
a well of fire. The spectrometers now recorded not churning steam but
ionized free oxygen and hydroxyl radicals. In the control room, the
minutes became an eternity. The ring, wobbling like a cracked top, lost
its clear shine, was riddled by dark holes. The northern hemisphere
began to swell, as if the planetary crust itself were being inflated,
but it was only that the impact of the ice debris was throwing air,
fire, and snow out into space. At the equator, the laser beam, a drill
of blue-white heat along the tangent, bored persistently into a
mushroom-shaped explosion, until the cloud cover of Quinta darkened to a
dull-pearl plain in the west, while the east blazed in jetting eruptions
toward the stars.

No one spoke. Recalling those minutes later, they realized that they had
expected a counterattack; had expected that _they_ would at least try
somehow to parry the blow falling on the very heart of the war-sphere
that had taken a century to build. That the Quintans even now were
readying themselves to strike at the source of the cataclysm, visible
against the face of the sun—since it was five times as bright. But
nothing happened. Above the planet there rose, wider than the planet, a
column of smoky white dust; it spread into a many-lobed mushroom covered
with continually splitting rainbows, cruelly beautiful. And the cutting
beam still stabbed through layers of mist like an incandescent wire of
gold taut between the Sun and the planet. The planet itself seemed to
veil its face gradually with distended cirrocumuli, as if in
self-defense against the incredibly thin and yet so destructive ray,
which jabbed at the remaining shards of ice as they sank into the
atmosphere. Then it was only at moments, from between the swollen
clouds, that there were glints of the remnants of the ring, still
orbiting in its death agony.

Steergard ordered the solaser shut off after the sixth minute: he wanted
to keep its remaining power in reserve. The solaser went out as abruptly
as it had flashed on, and let them know—in the infrared—that it was
changing its position. Locating it was simple, elementary, even when it
was extinguished, because of the Planck spectrum typical of stationary
bodies forced to radiate by the proximity of the chromosphere. So the
girders ejected, from small throwers, a dust that burned in the sun, and
the solaser carried out its move behind this screen, folding up into the
shape of a closed fan.

DEUS worked at top capacity. It recorded the results of the blow, the
fate of countless satellites that climbed from lower orbits into an
atmosphere expanded by explosions and died there in fiery parabolas. At
the same time DEUS informed them that the copy of the _Hermes_ could
also have been crushed by a magnetodyne attack in field concentrations
on the order of a billion gauss. DEUS had a fourth hypothesis as well,
involving implosive cryotronic bombs. The captain instructed it to file
those data in the archives.

They were still in stationary orbit in the shadow of Sexta when
Steergard summoned Nakamura and Polassar, to present them with a
handwritten ultimatum. For its transmission they were to use the
holographic eyes; these would be burned out by emitting so strong a
signal, but Steergard was willing to pay that price.

The ultimatum was straightforward.

YOUR RING WAS DESTROYED IN RESPONSE TO THE ATTACK ON OUR SHIP WE ARE
GIVING YOU FORTY-EIGHT HOURS IF YOU ATTACK US OR FAIL TO ANSWER WE WILL
ONE SWEEP AWAY YOUR ATMOSPHERE AND TWO INITIATE A PLANETOCLASM OPERATION
IF HOWEVER YOU RECEIVE OUR ENVOY AND HE RETURNS UNHARMED TO OUR SHIP WE
WILL REFRAIN FROM STEPS ONE AND TWO THAT IS ALL

The Japanese asked the captain if he was actually prepared to blast the
atmosphere. For the cavitation of the planet, he added, they lacked the
power.

"I know. I'm not sweeping away the atmosphere. I'm counting on their
belief that I will. As for using the sidereals, I'd like to hear
Polassar's opinion. Even behind an empty threat there should stand some
real force."

Polassar's reply came reluctantly.

"It would put a dangerous overload on the sidereals. We _could_ pierce
the mantle. If we disturb the foundation of the continental plates, the
biosphere perishes. Bacteria and algae survive. Is this worth
discussing?"

"No, that's enough."

Both felt it was necessary to learn the scope of the catastrophe, which
was extremely difficult. Holes in Quinta's envelope of noise indicated
that hundreds of transmitting stations had been knocked out, but without
an SG it was impossible to determine, even approximately, the extent of
the damage to the technological infrastructure on the large continent.
The effects of the cataclysm now began to take their toll in the
southern hemisphere and other continents. Seismic activity increased
violently: on the sea of clouds appeared dark patches. All the volcanoes
must have been belching magma with gases containing cyanide. DEUS
estimated the mass of the ice that had reached the surface of the ground
and the oceans to be between three and four trillion tons. The northern
hemisphere had suffered much greater devastation than the southern, but
the ocean had risen everywhere and invaded all coastal regions. DEUS
cautioned that it could not determine how many fragments of the ring had
fallen to the planet in solid form and how many had been melted, for
this depended on the exact size of the ice chunks, which was unknown. If
they exceeded a thousand tons, they lost only a small fraction of their
mass in the densest layers of air. But DEUS was unable to give a
definite denominator.

Harrach, who was on duty at the controls, was not part of the
conversation that went on in the projection room above his head, but he
heard it—and unexpectedly broke in.

"Captain, could I say something?"

"What now?" Steergard was irritated. "It wasn't enough for you? You'd
like to grind them to a pulp?"

"No. If DEUS is speaking the truth, forty-eight hours won't suffice.
They'll need to pull themselves together."

"You've joined the doves too late," snapped Steergard.

But the physicists agreed that the pilot had a point. The deadline for
answering was moved to seventy hours.

Shortly afterward Harrach found himself alone. He put the controls on
automatic—he had had his fill of looking at Quinta, particularly since
the reddish smoke from innumerable volcanic eruptions had spread over
the churning white of the planet and darkened to a dirty brown like
clotted blood. It was not blood. He knew that, but did not want to watch
it. In accordance with Steergard's orders the ship began revolving in
place like the outstretched arm of a pivoting crane, which provided them
with makeshift gravity, thanks to the centrifugal force, felt most
strongly in the control room at the prow. In the mess hall, where the
crew now gathered, the rotation enabled one to sit at a table without
the acrobatics of weightlessness. The precessional effects,
characteristic of a gyroscope, made Harrach sick to his stomach, even
though he had sailed often on Earth and the worst pitching and yawing
never brought on nausea.

He could not sit. What he had desired had come to pass. Looking at it
rationally, he bore no responsibility for the cataclysm. He was certain
that everything would have transpired the same even if he had not flown
into a rage or got into those pointless arguments with poor, blameless
Arago. No, nothing would have been different had he minded his own
business and kept his mouth shut. He jumped up from his seat at the
controls, to stretch his legs, but then was driven to pace the
navigation area, back and forth. There was no other outlet for his
anger, which kept returning to him like an echo, pressing him not to
wait, not to sit with folded hands. So he looked at the climatic
disturbances (if only they were just climatic!) of the stricken planet.
He would gladly have switched off the image, but was not allowed to do
that. The ellipsoid interior of the room was ringed by a railed walk
that separated the upper level from the lower. Staggering on feet wide
apart, like a sailor on a heaving deck, he ran up and jogged around and
around the gallery. One might have thought that the man was taking up
exercise on an indoor track.

On girders that came together like the spokes of a great wheel, between
cross-braces secured to the ceiling, was the center of operations. Deep,
velcroed chairs surrounded a terminal that was a low, truncated cone. At
its sides, in front of each chair, flickered an empty green screen. On
the cone table lay the discarded draft of the ultimatum, in Steergard's
characteristically sharp-angled handwriting. Moving between the chairs,
Harrach did a thing that no one ever would have expected of him. He
turned the paper over—the written side down—and glanced around to see if
anyone was watching. But only the flickering screens mimicked motion. He
sank into the chair usually occupied by the captain and looked in both
directions. Between the girdered supports, silvery plastic, were
wedge-shaped windows opening downward, through which he could see the
navigation area, also flickering with tiny lights—of various colors—and
the glare that came steadily from the main screen, the dull light of
Quinta. Harrach put his elbows on the slanted console and buried his
face in his hands. Had he been able, he would have sobbed for this Sodom
and Gomorrah.

XVI - The Quintans

 

He appeared calm. He did not say good-bye to anyone. None of his
comrades got into the elevator with him when it was time. In an ordinary
white spacesuit with the helmet tucked under his arm, he watched the
sequentially flashing numerals of the passing levels. The door opened by
itself. In the high-domed launch chamber stood a surprisingly small
rocket, of spotless silver—having not yet traveled through an
atmosphere, whose heat would blacken its prow and sides. He approached
it, past open-worked metal that gave a muffled echo to his steps, and he
felt an increase in weight: a sign that the _Hermes_ was accelerating,
to provide him with a good push at takeoff. He looked around. High up,
at the intersection of the curved girders, was a ring of strong
fluorescent lights. He paused in their shadowless glare to put on his
helmet. The cabin hatchway opened above him. The buckles, pulled tight,
clicked; automatically he touched the wide rim of the metal collar and
inhaled oxygen. He was now cut off from the air that filled the chamber.
The pressure was a little high, but it corrected itself immediately. The
platform, onto which he stepped, rose. The hatchway, dark a moment
before, lit up from within, and the moving platform touched its
threshold and stopped. Without haste, lifting his large boots across the
threshold, he moved his flexible glove along the tube of the handrail,
bent down, and eased himself in feet-first. With both hands he swung
from the grips on the transom and lightly dropped inside. The hatchway
closed. A growing musical whistling could be heard; it was the gastight
hood that had been suspended above the rocket but now fell onto it;
hydraulic pistons pressed the hood to the casing of a propulsion funnel,
so that the ship would not lose air on takeoff or be poisoned by the
flaming exhausts of the engines.

Easily, as in a simulator, he took the ribbed hoses of the
heating-cooling system and fit them into the appropriate sockets of his
suit. The catches snapped immediately, showing that the couplings were
engaged. He was now connected to the rocket. Its wall padding began to
inflate and inflated until he was totally enveloped, swaddled, but only
to the armpits, so that he had his hands free. There was no more room
than in an Egyptian sarcophagus. These one-man landers had in fact been
called "coffins." The countdown lever was on his right. Directly in
front of his face shone, through the glass of the helmet, the dashboard:
analog dials, digital counters for altitude, power, an artificial
horizon, and—in the middle—a rectangular screen, still blank. When he
pushed the lever, all the indicator lights flashed on, winking at him in
a homey, friendly way, assuring him that everything was ready: the main
engine, the eight correctionals, the four rétros, the ionosphere loop
parachute and the large emergency one (but the screen, with rapidly
fading points, reassured him that there could be no emergency, drawing a
perfect, precise curve of flight from the _Hermes_—represented by a
green asterisk—to the swell of the planet's outline). With a fractional
delay, the third parachute, a cascader (known as a "spare tire"),
announced its presence. He had experienced such moments before and
savored them. He trusted these little blinking, palpitating
lights—green, orange, and blue—knowing that they could flare red, like a
bloodshot eye in terror, because there was no such thing as a
trouble-free device, though everyone had taken great pains to see that
nothing would go wrong. The automatic was already counting down from two
hundred. It seemed to him that in the speaker he could hear the
breathing of the people assembled in the control room, and that it was
against this living background of bated breath that the indifferent,
mechanical voice rattled off numbers in decreasing progression.

At ten, he felt a slight quickening of the pulse, and frowned, as if
rebuking his insufficiently disciplined heart. True, almost no one was
spared a little tachycardia upon takeoff, even a routine takeoff, and
this circumstance was anything but routine. He was glad that no one
spoke to him, but when the time-honored "zero" was pronounced and he
felt a shudder pass through man and projectile joined into one, a soft
voice reached him, from someone who evidently stood some distance from
the microphones: "God be with you." These words surprised him, although
perhaps—who knows?—he _did_ expect them from that man. But there was no
time now for such reflections. The craft, borne powerfully yet gently by
a hydraulic paw, as if a giant steel hand gloved in satin were pushing
it up and out a cylindrical chute, separated from the ship. He could not
move in the balloonlike insulation, but weightlessness claimed him for
two or three seconds before the engines began to roar. For an instant he
saw the hull of the ship rush by at the upper edge of the monitor, but
that might have been his imagination. The rocket—named _Earth,_ as he
had requested—did a somersault; the pinpoints of stars flew at an angle
across the screen; Quinta swam by among them, a white disk, and
disappeared. His craft, sweeping the darkness with bursts from the
correctional nozzles, fell on course: the trajectory of its actual
flight matched the one plotted by the computer point for point. He ought
to have called the _Hermes_ by now, but kept silent—reveling in his
solitary flight.

"The _Hermes_ awaits your report."

That was Steergard. Before he could answer, another voice spoke,
Harrach's:

"Must have dozed off."

Such jokes, having a little of the flavor of barracks humor, had
accompanied the first space flights: to lighten the unprecedented
experience of men locked in the nose of a rocket as if inside an
artillery shell. Thus Gagarin had said, at the last moment, what in
Russian amounted to "Geronimo!" Thus one did not say, "There's an oxygen
leak. We're suffocating," but, "We have a little problem." Harrach was
probably unaware that with his wisecrack he was following an old
tradition. And Tempe, for no good reason, replied with, "Just flying
along"—but then caught himself and switched to an appropriately
professional tone:

"_Earth_ here. All units normal. I have Delta Harpyiae on my axis.
Entering the atmosphere in three hours. Confirm. Over."

"Confirmed. Heparia has given the meteorological conditions at point
zero. Overcast. Wind, north-northeast at thirteen meters a second. Above
the spaceport the ceiling is nine hundred meters. Visibility good. Want
to talk to anyone here?"

"No, I'd like to look at Quinta."

"You'll see her in eight minutes, when you reach the ecliptic. Then
you'll make a course correction. Over."

"I'll make the correction when the _Hermes_ gives the signal. Over."

"Good luck. Over and out."

The negotiations, after the destruction of the ice ring, had lasted four
days and nights. The crew dealt only with Heparia—which fact they did
not learn immediately, because the ultimatum was answered by an
artificial satellite so small and so well disguised as a fragment of
rock that DEUS did not identify it until it spoke. Set in a stationary
orbit 42,000 kilometers above the planet, it rotated accordingly, and
when it went behind the edge of the disk, communication was broken off
for seven hours. It talked with the _Hermes_ using the
twenty-one-centimeter band of hydrogen. The ship's radar had to examine
the thing's cisplanetary emission thoroughly before discovering how it
served Heparia as a relay transmitter. A strong underground radio
station controlled it, concealed in the vicinity of the spaceport where
the unmanned _Hermes_ had so fatefully landed. The station operated on a
ten-kilometer wavelength, which gave the physicists reason to suspect
that it was a special military installation, designed to go into action
in the event of a massive exchange of atomic blows. Such an exchange
would be accompanied by electromagnetic shock waves disrupting all
wireless radio communication, and with megaton concentrations of
explosions at the targets it would also be futile to use ordinary laser
transmitters. Only ultralong waves would be effective then, but their
low information capacity made it impossible to transmit multibit
messages in a short time. So Steergard aimed the _Hermes'_ emitters at
this radio station. When it did not respond, he sent the following
ultimatum: either they communicated directly, or in the course of
twenty-four hours he would destroy the whole range of bodies, natural
and artificial, that were in stationary orbit—and if even then he
received no reply, he would feel justified in raising the temperature of
an area of 800,000 hectares around the spaceport, including the
spaceport, to 12,000 degrees Kelvin. Which meant that the planet's crust
would be pierced to a depth of a quarter of its radius. The threat
worked, although Nakamura and Kirsting tried to dissuade the captain
from so drastic a measure, since it would be _de facto_ equivalent to a
declaration of war.

"Interplanetary law ceased to bind us from the moment we were attacked,"
retorted Steergard. "Negotiations on kilometer wavelengths, relayed and
repeated back and forth, could drag on for months, and behind the purely
physical reason for this consuming of time there might be hidden the
strategic attempt to delay—in order to turn the tables on us. I'm not
giving them the chance. If this is an informal exchange of opinions,
gentlemen, let's not hear any more about it, but if it's a _votum
separatum,_ then enter it in the expedition's log. I will answer for it
when I resign from my command. In the meantime, I am not resigning."

In its counterproposals, Heparia asked for strict limitations on the
envoy's latitude of action. The notion of "contact" became increasingly
nebulous the more precisely they tried to define it. Steergard wanted a
face-to-face meeting between his man and representatives of the local
government and science. But either the meaning of these concepts was
completely skewed between Quintans and humans, or else here, too, bad
faith had crept in. Tempe flew without knowing whom he would be seeing
at the spaceport, but somehow this did not bother him. He was not borne
on wings of euphoria; he did not count on any great success—and was
himself surprised at his calm. During his preparation on the training
equipment he had said to Harrach that he did not believe that _they_
would skin him alive. They might be unpitying—one expected that—but they
weren't idiots.

The negotiations were accompanied by deliberations on board. Putting up
constant resistance, haggling out point after point, the Quintan side
finally obtained conditions for the meeting. The visitor could leave the
rocket to inspect the remains of the fake _Hermes,_ and could move
freely within a six-mile radius of his rocket with guaranteed immunity,
provided he did not undertake "hostile acts" or convey to the host side
"threatening information." Great difficulty was encountered in
understanding these terms. The higher the level of abstraction, the more
human and Quintan semantics diverged. Such words as "authority,"
"neutrality," "side," and "guarantee" did not mean the same thing to
both—whether due to some outside factor, such as a fundamental
difference in their histories, or to intentional dishonesty. But
dishonesty, even, did not necessarily imply a desire to deceive or
trick: if, for example, Heparia, embroiled in a hundred-year war, was
neither free nor sovereign in this matter, yet did not wish—or was not
allowed—to reveal that fact to the _Hermes._ A factor here, too, as most
of the crew believed, may have been that so many generations of conflict
on the planet had had a cumulative effect on the way of thinking as well
as on the language.

The day before takeoff, Nakamura had asked the pilot if they could
converse in private. That was how he put it. He began in a roundabout
way: Intelligence without courage was worth no more than courage without
intelligence. The war, having escalated into space, was undoubtedly
intercontinental. It would have been best, therefore, to send equally
authorized envoys to both landmasses, with prior assurances that they
would deliver no militarily important information to either host. The
captain had rejected this variant, because he wanted to keep an eye on
what happened to the envoy. The ship could not be on both sides of the
planet at the same time. The captain wanted to impress upon the Quintans
his intention of retaliating if the envoy failed to return safe and
sound. He did not indicate the extent of that retaliation—a correct
tactic, but one that did not give the envoy complete protection.

Far be it from Nakamura to criticize the captain. He had asked to talk
to the pilot, however, because he considered it to be his duty. As
Shakespeare once wrote, it was dangerous for a lesser being to "come
between the pass and fell incensed points of mighty opposites." There
were three mighty opposites here: the _Hermes,_ Norstralia, and Heparia.
What did the Quintans know? They knew that the intruder enjoyed
superiority in both defense and offense and was able to place blows with
great accuracy. In whose interest, in light of this, lay the good health
of the envoy? Suppose the envoy's health suffered. Heparia would claim
that he met with an unfortunate accident, while Norstralia would prove
that it was no accident. In this way, each would try to deflect the
_Hermes'_ retaliatory blow to hit the opposing side. The captain,
indeed, had promised a total destruction—though history showed that the
Last Judgment was not a workable tool in politics. A couple of Americans
in the twentieth century had come up with the notion of a "doomsday
machine," a cobalt superbomb that would blackmail all the nations of
Earth with the threat of universal death. But no one followed through
with it—and rightly so, because when there was no longer anything to
lose, it was impossible to conduct _Realpolitik._ Apocalypse as a
reprisal had little credibility. Why should the _Hermes_ strike the
entire planet if there was one kamikaze in Heparia who made an attempt
on the envoy's life?

The Japanese's argument sounded convincing to the pilot. Why had it
failed to convince the captain?

Nakamura, bowing politely to his guest, continued to smile. "Because we
are without a surefire strategy. The captain does not want to untie
knots; his intention is to hack through them. Humble Nakamura does not
raise himself above anyone. He thinks his own Nakamuran thoughts. And
what does he think about? About three riddles. The first riddle is the
sending of the envoy. Will it lead to 'contact'? Only symbolically. If
the envoy returns in one piece, having seen the Quintans and learned
from them that nothing is to be learned from them, that will be a
tremendous accomplishment. The pilot is tempted to laugh?

"The planet is less accessible than Mount Everest. Although on that
famous mountain there is nothing but rock and ice, hundreds of people in
the course of many years have risked their lives to stand there, if only
for a moment. And those who returned, having climbed to within two
hundred meters of the summit but no farther, considered themselves
defeated, even though the place to which they climbed had no more or
less intrinsic value than the place that they had hoped to reach in
another few minutes. The mentality of our expedition has become like the
mentality of those conquerors of the Himalayas. But this is a riddle
with which men come into the world and die, so we have grown accustomed
to it.

"The second riddle, for Nakamura, is the fate of the pilot. May he
safely return! But if something unforeseen occurs, Heparia will argue
that it was white, and Norstralia that it was black. This contradiction
will push our captain from the role of avenger into the role of judge.
Our threat, sufficient to have forced them to accept the envoy, will
hang suspended in space.

"The third riddle is the greatest. It is the _invisibility_ of the
Quintans. No attempt on your life may take place. One cannot doubt, on
the other hand, that the Quintans absolutely hate to show what they look
like."

"Perhaps they are monstrous in appearance," suggested the pilot.

Nakamura still smiled.

"Symmetry must be observed here. If they are monsters to us, then we are
monsters to them. Forgive me, but the idea is childish. If an octopus
had an aesthetic sense, the most beautiful woman in the world would be a
monster to it. No, the key to this riddle lies beyond aesthetics..."

"Where, then?" asked the pilot. The Japanese had awakened his interest.

"We discovered points in common between Quintans and Earthlings within
the technological-military context. That commonality leads to a
crossroads: either they are like us or they are 'monsters of evil.' Such
a crossroads is a fiction. But it is a fact, not a fiction, that they do
not want us to become acquainted with their appearance."

"Why?"

Nakamura inclined his head in commiseration.

"If I knew that, the knot would be untied and our colleague Polassar
would not now have to ready the sidereals. I'll hazard only one foggy
guess. The Japanese imagination differs from that of the West. Deep in
the tradition of my country is the _mask._ I think that the Quintans,
resisting our aims with all their might—i.e., they don't want humans on
their planet—nevertheless, from the beginning, took that eventuality
into account. You still don't see the connection? You may behold the
Quintans without knowing that you have beheld them... We, on the other
hand, beamed cartoons to the planet, which featured heroes in human
form. I cannot give you courage, Mark. You have more of that, already,
than you need... I can only offer you one piece of advice."

He stopped, then said without a smile, enunciating slowly:

"I advise _humility._ Not caution. Nor that you should be confident. I
advise humility—that is, the readiness to admit that everything—and I
mean everything—you will see may be completely other than it seems...
End of conversation."

It was only when he was in flight that Tempe guessed the reproach hidden
in Nakamura's words. It was Tempe and his cartoons that had revealed to
the Quintans what humans looked like. (But perhaps it was not a
reproach, after all.)

These thoughts were interrupted by the rising of the planet. Its
innocently white face, wreathed with snowy cirri and showing no trace of
the ice ring or the catastrophe, gently swam through the void, pushing
the blackness and the pale dust of the stars out of the frame of the
screen. At the same time, the range finder began flashing numbers with a
rapid chatter. Along the coast of Norstralia, jagged with fjords, a cold
front moved in a flat bank of clouds from the north. Heparia, meanwhile,
was visible—greatly foreshortened—at the eastern bulge of the globe; it
lay beneath a darker gloom, and only its polar skyline gleamed with
peaks of ice. The _Hermes_ informed him that in twenty-eight minutes he
would touch the atmosphere, and it had him make a small course
correction.

From the control room Gerbert and Kirsting monitored Tempe's heart,
lungs, and functional brain currents, and in the navigation area the
captain, Nakamura, and Polassar watched the rocket, to intervene in the
event of an emergency. Although there was no clear idea what form an
emergency might take, or an intervention, the fact that the chief
physicist and the chief energeticist stood ready at Steergard's side
strengthened the buoyant mood (the tension notwithstanding) on board the
ship. The trailing telescopes gave a sharp image of the silver spindle
that was the _Earth,_ adjusting their magnification so that the rocket
remained in the center of the milky disk of Quinta. Finally DEUS threw
orange numerals onto the atmospheric monitor, empty until now: the craft
was two hundred kilometers above the ocean, in rarefied gases, and
beginning to heat up. Its tiny shadow fell upon the sea of clouds and
sped across their immaculately white surface. The _Earth's_ computer
transmitted, in a salvo of impulses, the last data of the flight,
because in a moment or two the cushion of friction-produced plasma in
the thicker layer of air would cut off all communication.

A golden spark marked the _Earth's_ entry into the ionosphere. The light
grew and spread; the pilot was now braking with his retros. The shadow
disappeared as the rocket plunged into the clouds. After twelve minutes,
the cesium clocks of projected time and real time dropped to the single
digits, whereupon the spectrograph, tracking the exhaust flame of the
lander, went blank and after a row of zeros displayed the last, classic
word: _Brennschluss._

The _Hermes_ moved high above Quinta, to keep the point of the landing
directly below it, in its nadir. The main observation screen was filled
with an impenetrable barrier of clouds. As was agreed, the hosts sprayed
masses of metallic dust into the cloud cover above this area, creating a
shield that blocked all radiolocation. Steergard had finally accepted
this condition, reserving the right, however, to take "drastic measures"
if so much as one of the laser flashes that Tempe was supposed to
send—every hundred minutes—failed to reach the _Hermes._

In order to provide the pilot with some visibility in the final stage of
landing, the physicists had equipped his rocket with an additional
section filled with a gaseous compound of silver and free radicals of
ammonia under high pressure. When the craft penetrated the stratosphere
and stabbed it from the stern with a fiery mane that flapped up along
the sides toward the prow, this ring-shaped section surrounding the
funnels of the jets was blasted free with explosive charges. Preceding
the vehicle, it came into contact with the flame and plasma and burst
open from the heat. The violently expanding gases swirled like the
funnel of a tornado and with a thunderous rush cleared a ragged, wide
vortex in the heavy clouds. At the same time, liquid oxygen, pumped from
the nozzles instead of the hypergol, extinguished the plasma cushion,
and the rocket, descending on a cold drive, regained its vision.

Through the heat-resistant lenses of the cameras appeared the landing
field, encircled by swollen storm clouds. He saw the gray, quadrilateral
surface of a spaceport, cut off on the north by slopes, as of hills, and
rimmed on the remaining sides by a multitude of red sparks that trembled
in the curving air above them like candle flames smoking. It was these
that spouted the streams of metallic dust. The exploded ammonium ions
and silver were accomplishing their purpose: to dissolve the last clouds
above the landing field into rain. There was such a downpour that the
smoking, crimson sparks darkened for a few minutes. Darkened, but did
not go out. Once again they flared, in dirty puffs of steam. Looking to
the south through the vapors driven apart by the whirlwind, he saw a
black structure like a flattened octopus or squid with many branchings
of shiny strips. The strips were neither conduits nor roads; they were
concave and transversely striated. The impression of an octopus might
also have come from the single Polyphemian eye that regarded him, from
the structure, with a sharp, luminous stare. An enormous optic
paraboloid, perhaps, that was tracking his descent.

As he descended, the greenery of the northern hills beyond the field
took on a different aspect. What from a great height had seemed a steep,
forested massif, with a rectangular concrete slab carved out by leveling
robots, lost the appearance of foliage. It was not the crowns of trees
that merged to form a dark-green, shaggy surface, but dry, lifeless,
bushlike tangles—tangles of grotesque barbed wire, or knotted tubes of
some type, or cables. Forced to abandon the image of a wooded hillside
where the light of occasional clearings shone through a gray-silvery
mass of conifer needles, he saw the artifact of an alien technology
whose skill renounced all earthly canons. Were men to have landscaped
the area around a spaceport in a wide valley between a metropolis and
mountainsides, they would have given care to the arrangement of the
terrain, uniting utility with the aesthetics of geometry. They most
definitely would not have covered the bare slopes with a jungle of
thousands of wildly branching metal gnarls and knots—which, moreover,
could not have been the work of engineers masking military targets under
a web of pseudovegetation, since the unnaturalness of such camouflage
would have betrayed itself immediately.

When the rocket, on cold drive, fell lower toward the gray concrete
runway, the whole bank of hills, shrouded by the influx of returning
clouds, vanished in them like a spiny lizard's skin sported with
eruptions, with pustules. But before that strange hideousness could
cause him to ponder the difference between designing technological
devices and releasing them into a self-directed, mutating growth, and
before he could look again at the structure to the south—the squid
already sinking on the horizon, watching him with its luminous eye set
in black—he had to take over the controls. The four g's fell to two;
compressed oxygen spurted in an icy boil from the nozzles; and the
arthropod legs emerged—flexing, spreading—beneath the stern. When they
struck the hard ground, the engine gave a final belch and fell silent.

The three-hundred-ton rocket executed a few diminishing shifts of
position on its undercarriage and then was completely still. He felt in
his gut the presence of a weight other than that of deceleration.
Hearing the fading hiss of the shock absorbers, he unbuckled his belts,
let the air out of the impact cushions around the suit, and stood up.
The straps slid from his shoulders and chest. The atmosphere analyzer
showed the presence of no poisonous gases, and the pressure came to
eleven hundred millibars, but he was supposed to go out helmeted, so he
connected the oxygen hose to his own tank. When the cameras were
switched off, the cabin lights brightened. He ran an eye over what he
had brought with him. On either side of the seat lay a heavy, wheeled
container that could be pulled like a cart. Harrach had painted on
these, with much solicitude, an enormous "1" and "2," as if they might
be confused. Harrach definitely envied him, but showed no sign of it. A
good comrade, Harrach was, and the pilot wished that the man was at his
side now. The two of them, perhaps, could better cope with the task.

Long before the flight, when there were only the words of Lauger, on the
_Eurydice,_ to assure him that he would "see the Quintans," he had
fallen into a depression—which DEUS observed—but after his conversation
with the doctor, Tempe rejected the machine's diagnosis. It was not his
belief that communication with the Quintans was senseless, based on
false assumptions—it was not that which oppressed him, but the fact that
they had entered into a game of contact where violence was the highest
suit. This thought he kept to himself, because more than anything he
wanted to see the Quintans. How could he, despite all his reservations
and doubts, turn his back on such an opportunity? Arago had taken a dim
view of their policy even before the phrase "show of strength" came up.
Arago had called the lie a lie, had repeated that they were entering
into a contest of deceit; that they were pushing so forcibly toward
communication that they were actually abandoning it; that they were
covering themselves with masks and stratagems—safer thereby, perhaps,
but more and more removed from any genuine opening up of a view into an
Alien Intelligence. They jumped upon Quinta's subterfuges, struck at
Quinta's every refusal, and made the goal of the expedition the less
attainable the more brutal the blows they used in its attainment.

He activated the hatchway door but had to wait for the results of the
analyses. While his computer chewed the incoming data on the chemical
composition of the ground, the force of the wind, the ambient radiation
(practically zero), he thought not of the next stages of the program but
of all the bad things that he had suppressed until now. Nakamura was of
the monk's opinion, but did not go over to his position, which meant
retreat. Tempe, too, felt that Father Arago was right. Yet right and
wrong could not deter him. If Quinta was a hell, Tempe was ready to
descend to that hell to see the Quintans.

So far, true, the reception did not seem hellish. Wind, nine meters a
second; visibility beneath the cloud ceiling, good; no poisons, mines,
or charges beneath the surface of the landing field, searched with
ultrasound. There was a whistle: the cabin pressure was being equalized
with that of the outside. Three green bulbs lit up over the hatchway.
The heavy lid made half a turn and sprang upward. He heard the scrape of
the lowering ladder and the click with which its sections stiffened at
an angle against the concrete. He looked out. Full daylight hit him
through the glass of the helmet. From his height of four stories he saw
the vast plain of the spaceport beneath—once more—a cloud-covered sky.
The northern hills had vanished in mist. In the distance, brown and
reddish smoke rose from a long line of well shafts. Against that
backdrop stood an enormous, crooked tower, at more of a slant than the
tower in Pisa: it was the fake _Hermes,_ alone and odd in the
desolation, rooted about a mile away. There was not a living soul in any
direction.

In the direction where the hills were hidden behind the sinking clouds,
at the very edge of the concrete runway, was a low, cylindrical building
resembling a hangar for zeppelins. From its silhouette thin mastlike
spars jutted skyward, connected by glistening threads that were like a
spiderweb spun across a quarter of the horizon. The octopus-metropolis
with its single eye had disappeared behind the smoke of the opposite
horizon. Now, he thought, they were observing him by means of this
spidery netting. He examined it carefully through binoculars and was
surprised by the irregularities in the mesh. The material hung unevenly,
making smaller and larger openings, like an old seine draped by a giant
fisherman over masts—masts so weighed down by their own height and the
netting that they bent in every direction. The appearance was sloppy.
The spaceport, in any case, was deserted, like an area evacuated before
the arrival of an enemy. Shaking off the impression, as repulsive as it
was strong, that he was viewing not an antenna installation but the work
of monstrous insects, he backed down the ladder, stooping beneath the
container he carried. It was almost a hundred kilograms. He unbuckled
the straps, lowered the container to the concrete, and began rolling it
toward the _"Hermes,"_ which rose at an angle from its shattered stern.
He walked with a steady step, not hurrying, so that those who watched
him (he did not doubt that there were watchers) would see nothing to
make them suspicious.

They knew that he would be inspecting the wreck, but not how. At the
stern, the smashed jets of which stuck in the radially cracked runway,
he stopped and looked around. Through the helmet he heard the wind
gusting, though he felt almost nothing in the suit. The peep of the
chronometer called him back to business. The small, folding duralumin
ladder proved to be unnecessary. Right above the funnels of the jets,
which were crushed into a giant accordion, a burned hole gaped in the
stern. The hole had tongues of sheet metal wrenched outward, and there
was a stump of a rib of the hull, twisted by the explosion. In a pinch,
he could crawl in through this opening, taking care not to rip his suit
on the steel edges. He pulled himself up onto the foot of a landing leg
that had not had time to extend completely—such was their hurry to open
fire. Which move, however, made sense, since a ship was most vulnerable
in the moment that it cut the main drive and shifted its entire mass
onto protractile supports.

Pulling the container in after him, he craned his neck as far as
possible to assess the condition of the hull. From the bottom he could
not see the prow hatches, which had been welded shut, but he did see the
doors to the hold. To his surprise, they were locked and had not been
forced. Those doors would not have let themselves be opened easily from
without. Strange. Having destroyed the engine room with a single
heavy-caliber shot—and with the ship, hit, at such a tilt—why should
they have entered through a radioactive hole a meter in diameter instead
of propping the thing up first with a solid scaffold and then breaking
into the central holds? After a hundred years of war they didn't have
sappers with the right equipment, they didn't have capable military
engineers? Still puzzled by the behavior of the local army, he struggled
with the container, now inside the ship. He aimed the radiometer at the
darkness. The single-use reactor had melted exactly as its designers
intended and flowed out, through Kingston valves installed for that
purpose, onto the cracked concrete of the spaceport, creating a fairly
small patch of radioactivity. Appreciating how nicely Polassar and
Nakamura had thought the whole thing out, he turned on his flashlight.
All around him it was dim and silent.

Of the engine room not even rubble remained. The construction had been
made to withstand the lifting of two thousand tons of an empty mock-up,
yet to fly apart at a puff of air. The needle of the Geiger assured him
that in the course of an hour he would receive no more than a hundred
roentgens. From the container he took two flat metal receptacles and
dumped their contents: a tremendous number of synthetic insects equipped
with microsensors. Carefully, he knelt among them, as though rendering
solemn homage to the broken ship, and switched on the activating system
at the bottom of the larger receptacle. The swarm, spilled across the
warped metal, came to life. Haphazardly, hurriedly scrambling with their
filament legs, like real beetles on their backs trying to turn
themselves over, the synthecs scurried off in all directions. He waited
patiently until the last ones left him. When only a couple of units,
evidently defective, circled helplessly at his knees, he rose and went
out into the daylight, pulling the now nearly empty container behind
him. Halfway back, he took a large ring from it, unfolded its stand,
directed it at the stern, and returned to the _Earth._ Fifty-nine
minutes had elapsed since his landing. For the next thirty, he
photographed the area, primarily the high spiderweb, using different
filters and lenses. Then he went up the ladder into the rocket.

In the dark cabin, the computer monitor was already on. The synthecs
were reporting, in the infrared, through the relay set up at half
distance for better coherence. Together with the computer and its
program they formed an electron microscope. The microscope was unusual
only in that it was separated spatially into these subunits. Ten
thousand of its tiny beetles rummaged through all the corners of the
wreck, prying into cinders, soot, dust, debris, and bits of slag and
melted metal: to find whatever had not been there originally. Their
electronic heads were "ordotropic"—attracted to the high levels of
molecular organization found in all living (and nonliving)
microorganisms. The beetles, too stupid themselves to make diagnoses,
served only as the remote lens of the microscope-analyzer in the rocket,
which was already drawing the first crystal mosaics of what had been
discovered and interpreting them. The technobiotic skill of the local
engineers of death commanded respect. The beetles had made possible the
identification, in innocent refuse, of slow-acting viruses. Millions of
viruses lay in the guise of dirt. The computer had not yet determined
their latency period. They were spores—eggs—slumbering in molecular
incubators, to hatch after weeks or months. From this he drew an
important conclusion: he was to leave the planet in one piece, in order
to carry the plague on board the _Hermes._ The reasoning, irreproachable
in its logic, tempted him to bold action. Only by returning, after all,
would he become the bearer of doom. But here a sudden doubt assailed
him. The viruses could also be fraudulent. Upon discovering them, a man
would have the desire—based on the deduction just now made—to attempt
something reckless. And how easy it would be for someone rash and
thoughtless to meet with an accident.

He found himself in a situation whose structure was typical of the
algebra of conflicts. A player made a model of his opponent, a model
that included the _opponent's_ model of the situation, then responded to
that with a model of a model of a model, and so on, ad infinitum. In
such a game there were no longer any clear, reliable facts. Very tricky,
he thought—devilish. Better than instruments here would have been an
exorcist. The chronometer beeped in his ear: a hundred minutes had gone
by. He placed both hands palm-down on the metal plates and felt the
tingling of the current flowing into the computer, for it to send to the
_Hermes_ the single-bit laser message that its scout was alive.

Time, now, for real reconnaissance. He hurried down the ladder with the
second container and from its rear compartment pulled out a folding
jeep: a light frame with a saddle and balloon tires, electrically
powered. As he drove north, in the direction of the mountain slopes,
toward the sky-high netting where the solitary hangar stood, a fine rain
began to fall. A gray mist blurred the outlines of the growing building.
He stopped the open vehicle in front of it, wiped the water running down
the glass of his helmet with a glove, and was amazed. The colossus was
both totally alien and incomprehensibly familiar. Windowless, with
bulging walls braced by the massive parallel ribs of girders, the thing
produced an impression contrary to both architecture and nature. It was
like the carcass of a whale into whose belly had been shot a grenade of
compressed gas, to make it swell hideously, while crammed inside the
trusswork of a bridge, until the dying body filled the entire frame.
Between two ribs gaped a semicircular opening. He dropped the container
from the jeep and trundled it before him through this gate into
impenetrable darkness. Instantly a strong white light blazed up on all
sides. He was standing at the foot of a hall in which even a giant
strider would have been an ant. The hall was encircled by rows of
galleries, one above the other, crooked, tangled together—an iron
theater with the stage and the seats torn out. In the center, on a
perforated metal sheet, lay a multicolored starfish of flowers that
gleamed like crystals. When he drew nearer, he noticed that above it
hung an inverted pyramid as transparent as the air. Its surface became
visible, flashing reflected light, only at a sharp angle. Deep in this
glass tetrahedron appeared the emerald letters:

THIS IS GREETING

The crystalline blossoms burst into magnificent colors, from azure-blue
to rich violet. Their radiant calyxes unfolded. Inside each was a
flaming diamond. The inscription gave way to the next:

WE ARE FULFILLING YOUR WISH

He stood motionless, and the rainbow of burning crystals slowly turned
gray. The diamonds glowed for a moment more, ruby-red, then went out,
and everything crumbled into fine ash. He stood before a barbed spool of
interwoven wires, and new words shone green inside the crystal:

GREETING CONCLUDED

He looked up from the dying embers and ran his eyes along the galleries,
along their drooping rails. In places the galleries were detached from
the concave walls. Then he jerked, as if struck in the face. Suddenly he
understood why this bizarre building was so familiar: it was an
inside-out replica, expanded a hundredfold, of the _Hermes._ The
galleries exactly mimicked the scaffolding that had been welded to the
ship's sides during the assembly and afterward mangled in the explosion
at the moment of its landing. And the ribs, indented in the façade, were
the ship's ribs, now girdling its everted hull on the outside. The
lights beneath the twisted balconies went out, one by one, until
darkness returned and only the sign greeting concluded, suspended in
midair, shone a gradually dimming apple-green.

What now? Having penetrated the wrecked ship, they copied it with
mindless precision—or with subtle mockery—so that he would enter it as
if walking into the belly of a slain, gutted animal. Whether this was
the work of gloating treachery or, instead, the ritual of a nonhuman
culture actually thus displaying hospitality, his mind remained in a
labyrinth that had no exit. Stepping back in the blackness, he bumped
into the container, which toppled over with a loud crash. The noise both
sobered and infuriated him. At a run, he wheeled the load toward the
daylight and out into the rain. The wet concrete had darkened. In the
distance, silver through the drizzle, stood the needle of his rocket.
Dirty columns of smoke, issuing steadily from the red fire pots, joined
to form a low, turbid bank of clouds. Alone over the whole waste—a dead,
slanting tower—jutted the _Hermes._ He checked the time. There remained
almost an hour of the second hundred minutes. He struggled to clear his
head of anger, to be deliberate, calm.

If they had designed machines of combat, had planned military
operations, done engineering on the planetary scale and in space, then
they had to be able to reason logically. If they did not want to show
themselves, they could at least direct him, with signposts, to where
their terminals would prove to him—using the code that had been
transmitted for months now, using equations of the algebra of
conflicts—that communication was pointless. They could repudiate the
arguments of superior force with practical, rational arguments, or
appeal to a higher authority, which would give them a choice, at least,
between different forms of annihilation. But there were no signposts, no
terminals, no devices for the exchange of information, nothing—less than
nothing, considering the metallic smokescreen in the clouds; or the
corpse of their ship, contaminated with a hidden plague; or its swollen
copy, like a frog inflated to death by a lunatic, made to serve as a
shrine of hospitality; or the crystal flower bed welcoming him by
turning to ashes. A ceremony full of contradictory meanings, as if to
say: "There is nothing here for you, intruders. You will wrest nothing
from us, by your fire or falling ice, but traps, deceptions, and
camouflage. Your envoy can do what he likes. Everywhere he will be met
by the same stony silence, until, forced to part from his expectations,
bewildered and defeated, he flies into a muddled rage, begins blasting
at whatever is at hand, and buries himself beneath tumbling ruins—or
crawls out from under them and departs skyward, not with knowledge
stolen in an orderly retreat, but only in panic, fleeing." And even if
he could in fact force anything, strong-arming his way into locked
places, into the iron reaches of the one-eyed metropolis beyond the wall
of smoke, surely in such alien, nonhuman surroundings the harder he
struck the less he would learn, unable to distinguish between what was
discovered and what was destroyed.

The rain fell. The clouds settled lower, enveloping the tip of the
wrecked _Hermes._ From a compartment in the container he took a
biosensor, an instrument so sensitive that at five hundred meters it
registered strongly the cellular metabolism of a moth. The needle
quivered constantly above zero, showing that life here, as on Earth, was
everywhere. But bacteria or pollen provided no thread of Ariadne.
Climbing the ladder, he extended the scope all the way and aimed it at
the smoke columns to the south, at the structures of the branching
metropolis hidden behind them. The sensor still quivered weakly near
zero. He increased the focal length to the greatest range. The smoke,
though metallic, presented no obstacle, nor did walls, but when he swept
that horizon with the biometer, the arrow did not move. A dead city of
iron? This was so hard to believe that he automatically gave the
instrument a shake, as if it were a watch that had stopped. It was only
when he turned around and directed the scope at the high spiderweb,
blurry through the rain, that the arrow began to flutter back and forth.
Moving the scope to the sides made the arrow jump erratically.

He jogged back to his jeep, set the container behind the saddle, stuck
the biosensor in a two-pronged holder by the steering wheel, and drove
to the foot of the netting-draped-over-masts.

It poured. Puddles of rainwater sprayed beneath his wheels. Water
streamed down the pane of his helmet, blinding him, and he kept having
to glance at the biosensor dial, which was jumping rapidly. According to
the odometer, he had covered four miles and was therefore approaching
the limit of the area of reconnaissance. In spite of this, he
accelerated. Had it not been for the warning blinks of red from the
instrument panel, he would have gone headfirst, jeep and all, into a
deep ditch that from a distance had looked like a strip of black across
the tarmac. Braked too sharply, the vehicle skidded, slid sideways on
locked wheels until it came to rest at the edge of broken slabs. He got
out to look at the obstacle. The mist made it difficult to judge
distance; it gave the impression of depth. The hard plain ended abruptly
in fragments of concrete. Many jutted into the air above a clayey bank.
The ditch, not of even width but nowhere spannable with the small
duralumin ladder, had definitely been created by explosive charges—not
long ago, and in haste, which was evident from the clay, in places so
ragged and overhanging that it could fall at any moment.

The opposite bank, with pieces of rubble driven into the soil by the
explosions, rose in a wide, not-too-steep slope, above which loomed,
through the mist, the meshes of the towering spiderweb. At large
intervals along the escarpment on the other side he could see steel
cables anchored in basins, cables of a gauge typically used to hold, on
the vertical, condenser antennas that sat in a socketed base without
supports. For two of the nearest spars an explosion had torn out the
anchors and the counterpoises. Running his eye along their heavily
drooping cables, he observed, some fifty meters higher, the trunk of a
mast with telescoping segments that, thinner and thinner, curved around
at the top—like an overweighted fishing rod—so that the netting, slack,
sagged low. Its bottom wires almost touched the ground. As far as he
could see in the mist, the slope was covered by protuberances lighter in
color than the clay. Not domes of embedded tanks of liquid or
gas—rather, the uneven bulges of molehills. Or shells of great
tortoises, half buried. Or the caps of giant mushrooms. Or were these
shelters, dugouts?

Overhead, the downpour and the wind rocked the meshes of the loosened
spiderweb. He took the biosensor from the jeep and began playing its
muzzle back and forth across the slope. The needle repeatedly leaped
into the red sector of the dial, fell, and again hit maximum, impelled
by a metabolism not of any microscopic infusorians or ants, but of
something on the order of whales and elephants, as if whole herds were
sitting on that drenched hillside. Forty-seven minutes remained, to a
hundred. Return to the rocket and wait? A pity to waste the time. And,
worse, it might be throwing away the element of surprise. He had a vague
idea, now, of the rules of the game: they had not attacked, but set
obstacles so he could break his fool neck if that was what he wanted.
Enough thinking on the subject. With the strange feeling that this
reality was less real, somehow, than a dream, he took from the container
the gear needed to jump to the other bank. He put on the jet holsters
and shoulder harness and stuck a small shovel into one of his pockets.
The biosensor he strapped to his back, in a knapsack. But, to play it
safe, first he used a gun that shot a nylon line. Aiming low at the far
slope, he shot, supporting the gun on his left elbow. The line,
unwinding with a whistle, hit the escarpment, and the hooks caught—but
when he pulled, the sodden ground yielded at the first tug. So he opened
the valve; a flapping rush lifted him into the air easily, as on a
training field. He flew over the dark trench with ooze at the bottom,
cut the thrust—a cold gas that fluttered along his legs—and dropped to
the place he had chosen: beyond a bulge that resembled, when he went
over it, an enormous, misshapen loaf of bread with a rough asbestos
crust. His boots slid from under him in the thick mud, but he kept his
balance. It was not that steep here. He was surrounded by bulging, squat
mounds the color of ashes, with paler lines where there were runnels of
rainwater. An abandoned village of a primitive African tribe, in mist.
Or a cemetery with barrows. He pointed the biosensor, taken from the
knapsack, at an uneven, swollen wall a foot away. The needle shook at
the red maximum, like a small voltmeter applied to a mighty dynamo.
Holding the heavy instrument in front of him with its muzzle
extended—like a rifle ready to shoot—he ran around the gray, crusty hump
that protruded from the clay. In the clay his boots, slapping, left deep
prints that filled immediately with dark water. He hurried up the slope
from one shapeless loaf to the next. Flattened at the top, they were
half again taller than he was. Perfect for inhabitants the size of a
man. But there were no entrances, openings, spy holes, embrasures. These
could not be bunkers—completely closed, unformed. Nor corpses buried in
crusted graves, because no matter where he turned the sensor, life
throbbed. For comparison, he directed the muzzle at his own chest. The
arrow at once dropped to the middle of the dial. Carefully, so as not to
damage it, he lay the biosensor aside, pulled the folding shovel from
his suit's thigh pocket, and on his knees dug in the pliant clay. The
blade scraped against an object. He shoveled away the muck, but water
rapidly filled the growing hole. He thrust in his arm to the shoulder,
as deep as he could reach, and, groping, felt a horizontal branching. A
root system for petrified mushrooms? No—they were thick, smooth,
tubular. They were pipes, and—what struck him particularly—neither hot
nor cold, but warm. Out of breath, muddied, he jumped up and punched the
fibrous crust with his fist. It gave elastically, though fairly hard,
and resumed its former shape. He rested his back against it. Through the
rain he could see more humps, shaped in the same random way. Some, close
together, made twisting alleys that led higher up the slope, where the
mist engulfed them.

Suddenly he remembered that the biosensor was two-way: it had a switch
for either aerobic or anaerobic metabolisms. The aerobic variety he had
discovered already. He lifted the instrument, with his glove wiped away
the clay smeared on the glass, moved the setting to anaerobic, and
trained the scope on the rough surface. The needle began to pulse, again
and again, in a steady rhythm. Aerobic organisms mixed with anaerobic?
How could that be? On this subject he was ignorant—but then no one else,
probably, would have been able to figure it out. Slogging through
streams of mud in the downpour, he came upon more and more humps. The
metabolic pulses varied in frequency. Were some sleeping inside, and
others awake? As if wanting to rouse the sleepers, he beat on the
coarse, bloated mounds, but this did not affect the pulse. Such was his
haste that he nearly fell, bumping into a taut antenna cable in one of
the passageways. It stretched at an angle toward the netting of the
large spiderweb, invisible in the milky mist. But how long had the alarm
of the chronometer been on, repeating its warning louder and louder? A
hundred and twelve minutes had gone by without his knowing it. Where was
his head? And now what? He could have flown back to the rocket in three,
four minutes, except that there was only enough gas in the tank for a
two-hundred-meter jump. Three hundred, tops. To the jeep... but that was
more than six miles. At least fifteen minutes. Should he try it? And if
the _Hermes_ struck sooner, and its envoy perished here not as a hero
but as a complete idiot? He felt for the handle of the shovel—not there.
The pocket was empty.

He had left the shovel stuck near the hole that he dug. No point looking
for the thing now, in this maze.

He swung the biosensor with both hands and hit the rough crust, hit it
and hit it until it broke, and from that rent burst a yellow-white dust
as from a puffball, revealing not the eyes of beings hidden in an inner
chamber but the sheer surfaces of a deep cleft with thousands of tiny
pores—like a loaf of bread cut in two by an ax, with ropy, raw dough at
the center. He froze, his arms raised for the next blow, and the sky
above him filled with an awful light. The _Hermes,_ opening fire on the
antenna masts outside the spaceport, pierced straight through the
clouds. The rain instantly evaporated in white steam. A laser sun rose.
In a wide radius a thermal blast swept the entire upland slope free of
mist and clouds. As far as the eye could see, the slope was covered with
throngs of naked, defenseless warts, and as the towering spiderweb and
the antennas, breaking, fell upon him in flames, he realized that he had
seen the Quintans.
