 Peace on Earth

The fifth Ijon Tichy book

by Stanislaw Lem

 

 

The Ijon Tichy Series

 

1) The Star Diaries

2) Memoirs of a Space Traveller: Further Reminiscences of Ijon Tichy

3) The Futurological Congress: from the memoirs of Ijon Tichy

4) The Scene of the Crime

5) Peace on Earth

6) Local Inspection

 

 

 

 

 

© Copyright by Stanislaw Lem, Krakow 1987

English translation copyright © 1994 by

Harcourt Brace & Company

 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or

transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,

including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval

system, without permission in writing from the publisher.

Requests for permission to make copies of any part of the work should be

mailed to: Permissions Department, Harcourt Brace & Company,

6277 Sea Harbor Drive, Orlando, Florida 32887-6777.

 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Lem, Stanislaw.

[Pokój na Ziemi. English]

Peace on Earth/Stanislaw Lem; translated from the Polish by

Elinor Ford with Michael Kandel. -- 1st U.S. ed.

p. cm.

ISBN 0-15-171554-8

ISBN 0-15-600242-6 (pbk.)

Translation of: Pokój na ziemi.

"A Helen and Kurt Wolff book."

I. Title.

PG7158.L39P5713    1992

891.8'537-dc20     91-47970

 

Designed by Lydia D'moch

Printed in the United States of America

First Harvest edition

J  I  H  G  F  E  D  C  B

 

 

 

 Contents

 

Doubled

Briefing

In Hiding

The Lunar Agency

The Mission

Round Two

Carnage

Invisible

Visits

Contact

Da Capo

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 Doubled

 

I don't know what to do. If I could say "I'm miserable," it wouldn't be
so bad. I can't say "We're miserable" either because I can only partly
speak for myself even though I'm still Ijon Tichy. I used to talk to
myself while I shaved but I had to stop because of my left eye's lewd
winking. Coming back in the LEM, I didn't realize what happened to me
just before lift-off. The LEM, by the way, doesn't have anything to do
with the American NASA module manned by Armstrong and Aldrin to collect
a couple of moon rocks. It was given the same name to disguise my secret
mission. Damn that mission. When I returned from the Calf constellation,
I intended to stay put for at least a year. But I agreed to go for the
sake of mankind. I knew I might not come back. Doctor Lopez said my
chance of survival was one in twenty point eight. That didn't stop me:
I'm a gambler. You only die once. Either I come back or I don't, I said
to myself. It never occurred to me that I might come back but not come
back because we would come back. To explain I'll have to release some
highly classified information but I don't care. That is, partly. I'm
writing this too only partly and with great difficulty, typing with the
right hand. The left I had to tie to the arm of the chair because it
kept tearing the paper out of the machine. It wouldn't listen to reason,
and while I was immobilizing it, it punched me in the eye. It's because
of the doubling. Our brains all have two hemispheres connected by the
corpus callosum or great commissure. Two hundred million white nerve
fibers connect the brain so it can put its thoughts together but not in
my case. It happened on that range where the moon robots tested their
new weapons. I stumbled in there by mistake. I'd accomplished my
mission, had outsmarted those unliving creatures, and was on my way back
to the LEM when I had to urinate. There are no urinals on the moon. They
wouldn't work anyway in a vacuum. You have a little container in your
suit, just like Armstrong and Aldrin, so you can relieve yourself
anytime, anywhere, but somehow I couldn't, not there in the full sun in
the middle of the Sea of Serenity. Not far from me was a solitary
boulder. I went over to its shadow. How was I to know there was an
ultrasound-inducing field there? While I'm urinating, I feel this little
snap. Like a crack in the neck, only higher, in the middle of the skull.
It was a remote callotomy. It didn't hurt. I felt funny but the feeling
passed and I continued on my way. The strangeness I attributed to an
understandable excitement, considering all I had been through. The right
hand is controlled by the left hemisphere of the brain. That's why I
said I was writing only partly. My right hemisphere obviously doesn't
approve of what I'm writing. And I can't say "I'm writing" -- it's my
left hemisphere that's writing. I'll have to reach some compromise with
the opposition because I can't sit forever with my hand tied. I've tried
to appease it but nothing works. It's arrogant, aggressive, vulgar.
Fortunately it can read only certain parts of speech, nouns mainly. I
know this because I've been reading up on the subject. It doesn't
understand verbs or adjectives, so while it's watching I have to express
myself carefully. Will this work? I don't know. And why is it that all
the civilized behavior is in the left hemisphere?

On the moon too I was supposed to land only partly, but in an entirely
different sense, because it was before the accident, before I was
doubled. I was supposed to circle the moon in stationary orbit, the
reconnaissance to be accomplished by my remote, which even looked like
me except it was plastic with antennas. I sit in LEM 1 and LEM 2 lands
with the remote. Those war robots hate people. They will kill at the
drop of a hat. At least that's what I was told. But LEM 2 malfunctioned
and I decided to land to see what was going on because I was still in
contact with it. Sitting in LEM 1, I suddenly had severe stomach pains,
not in the flesh, that is, but by radio because, as I learned after
landing, they broke LEM 2's hatch cover, grabbed the remote, and pulled
out its insides. I couldn't disconnect because if I did, my stomach
might stop hurting but I'd lose all contact with my remote and wouldn't
be able to locate it. The Sea of Serenity, where the attack took place,
is like the Sahara. Also, I got the wires mixed because even though each
wire is a different color there are too many of them and I couldn't find
the emergency instructions. Trying to find them with a stomachache made
me so mad that instead of calling Earth I decided to land, even though
I'd been warned I shouldn't do that under any circumstances. But retreat
just isn't in my nature. Besides, the remote may have been only a
machine stuffed with circuitry but I couldn't leave it in the clutches
of those robots.

I see that the more I explain, the less clear it gets. I should probably
begin at the beginning. Except I don't know what the beginning was
because most of it is remembered in the right hemisphere, which I can't
get to now. There's a lot I don't remember, and in order to obtain even
a little of that information I have to speak to my left hand with my
right in sign language but it doesn't always answer. The left hand gives
me the finger for example, and that's one of its more polite indications
of a difference of opinion.

I'd like to give it a good smack but the problem is, while the right
hand is stronger than the left, the legs are equal, and what's worse, I
have a corn on the little toe of my right foot and the left foot knows
about it. When that trouble started on the bus and I shoved my left hand
forcibly into my pocket, its foot took revenge by stomping on the corn
so hard, I saw stars. I don't know if it's a loss of intelligence caused
by the doubling but I can see I'm writing nonsense. The foot of my left
hand is, of course, my left foot. There are times my unfortunate body
falls into two enemy camps.

I interrupted my writing to kick myself. That is, my left foot kicked my
right so it wasn't I, or it was only partly I, but grammar simply can't
describe this situation. I started taking off my shoes but stopped. A
person, even in such straits, shouldn't make a fool of himself. Was I
supposed to twist my own arm to learn what the problem was with the
wires and the emergency instructions? True, I had beaten myself in the
past but the circumstances were different. Once in that time loop, when
the today me was against the yesterday me, and once to counteract the
poison of the benignimizers in that hotel in Costa Rica. I had beaten
myself black and blue, but remained myself, indivisible. It wasn't so
unusual. Didn't people in the Middle Ages flog themselves? But no one
now can put himself in my shoes. It's impossible. I can't even say that
there are two of me because there aren't. Or there are but only partly.
If you want to know what happened to me, you'll have to read this whole
story, word by word, even when it doesn't make sense. The sense will
come, though probably not completely because you can get to the bottom
of it only by callotomy, just as you can't know what it's like to be an
otter, say, or a turtle without being turned into an otter or a turtle,
and then you can't communicate it because animals don't talk or write.
Normal people, of which I was one most of my life, don't understand how
a split-brain person can be himself and look like himself and speak
about himself in the first person singular and walk normally and talk
coherently while his right hemisphere doesn't know what his left
hemisphere is doing (except for mushroom barley soup in my case). Some
say that callotomy must have existed in Biblical times because it is
written that the left hand needn't know what the right hand is doing,
but I always thought that was a figure of speech.

One character followed me for two months trying to wring the truth out
of me. He would visit me at the most uncivil hours to ask me how many of
me there really were. The medical textbooks I gave him didn't help him
any more than they had helped me. I loaned him the books only to get rid
of him. How did I meet him? I had gone to buy shoes without laces, the
kind with Velcro on the top, because if my left side didn't want to go
for a walk, it was impossible to tie my shoes. As soon as I'd tie a
shoe, my left hand would untie it. So I went to buy a pair of running
shoes with Velcro fasteners, not that I'm one of those jogging types, I
just wanted to teach the right hemisphere of my brain a lesson because
at that time I couldn't communicate with it at all and I was furious and
covered with bruises. I muttered something to the salesman to excuse my
erratic behavior which wasn't actually mine. Then, as he knelt before me
with the shoehorn, I grabbed his nose with my left hand. My left hand,
that is, grabbed his nose, and I tried to explain this to him, the
difference, figuring that even if he thought I was deranged (how could a
shoe salesman know anything about callotomy?) he would still sell me the
shoes. No reason for a madman to go barefoot. Unfortunately the salesman
was a philosophy student working part-time in the shoe store and he was
fascinated.

"Mr. Tichy!" he now yelled in my apartment. "According to logic, you're
either singular or you're plural! If your right hand is pulling up your
pants and the left hand interferes, it means that behind each stands a
separate half of the brain that thinks its own thoughts and refuses to
cooperate with the other. Because hands and feet don't go around
fighting each other on their own!"

That's when I gave him the Gazzanigi. The best research done on the
split brain and the results of that operation are in Professor
Gazzanigi's book, The Bisected Brain, published in 1970 by Appleton
Century Crofts, Educational Division, at the Meredith Corporation, and
may my brain never grow together again if I'm inventing Michael
Gazzanigi or his father to whom he dedicated his monograph and whose
name is Dante Achilles Gazzanigi, also a doctor (M.D.). If you don't
believe me, go to the nearest medical bookstore and ask for a copy.

The man who hounded me asking over and over what it's like living as two
learned nothing from me. All he accomplished was to drive both my
hemispheres to unanimous fury because I grabbed him with both hands by
the neck and threw him out the door. This brief armistice of my
dissociated being sometimes occurs, but I don't know why.

The young philosopher then telephoned me in the middle of the night,
hoping that half-asleep I would spill my incredible secret. He asked me,
ignoring the colorful language I was hurling at him, to place the
receiver first to the left ear then to the right. He said it wasn't his
questions that were idiotic but the state I was in, which defied all
anthropological and existential concepts of man as a rational being
conscious of his own rationality. He'd probably just finished his
finals, that philosophy student, because he threw Hegel at me and
Descartes (I think therefore I am, not we think therefore we are), and
Husserl and Heidegger, to prove that my condition was impossible because
it contradicted the greatest minds who for thousands of years, beginning
with the Greeks, studied the conscious ego, and here comes someone with
a severed commissure of the brain, as fit as a fiddle except his right
hand doesn't know what his left hand is doing, likewise with the legs,
and while some experts say that he has consciousness on the left side
only and that the right is a soulless computer, others believe he has
two consciousnesses but the right one can't speak because the Broca's
area is in the left frontal lobe, but a third group proposes two
partially separated egos. "You can't jump off a train in pieces," he
yelled at me, "or die in pieces, and you can't think in pieces either!"
I stopped throwing him out because I felt sorry for him. In his
desperation he tried to bribe me. Eight hundred and forty dollars, he
swore that was all he had, what he'd saved for a vacation with his girl,
but he was prepared to part with it and with her as well if I told him
who was thinking with my right hemisphere when I didn't know what it was
thinking. I sent him to Professor Eccles, an advocate of left brain
consciousness who believes the right side doesn't think at all, but the
student didn't buy that, knowing that I had painstakingly taught sign
language to my right hemisphere. He wanted me to go to Eccles and tell
him he was wrong. The student now read medical papers instead of going
to his classes in the evening. Learning that the nerve pathways are
crossed, he searched through the fattest textbooks to find out why in
the hell that crossing happened so that the right brain controls the
left half of the body and vice versa, but of course there was no answer
to that question. The crossing either benefits us as human beings, he
reasoned, or it doesn't. He read books by psychiatrists and found one
who said that consciousness is in the left hemisphere and the
subconscious in the right, but I was able to get that notion out of his
head. I had read more than he, naturally. Tired of struggling with
myself and now with this student burning with the thirst for knowledge,
I left, I fled to New York -- and jumped from the frying pan into the
fire.

I rented a studio apartment near Manhattan and took the subway or bus to
the public library to read Yozatitz, Werner, Tucker, Woods, Shapiro,
Riklana, Schwartz, Szwarc, and Shvarts, and Sai-Mai-Halassza, Rossi,
Lishman, Kenyon, Harvey, Fischer, Cohen, Brumbach, and about thirty
different Rappaports. Almost every trip caused a scene, because I
pinched the prettier women, particularly blondes. It was my left hand of
course that did the pinching but try to explain that in a few words. Now
and then I was slapped in the face, but the worst part was that most of
the women accosted didn't seem to mind at all. On the contrary they
considered it an overture, a pass, which was the last thing on my mind.

I could see I was getting nowhere trying to extricate myself
single-handed from this nightmare, so I finally contacted a group of
leading authorities in the field. These scientists were only too happy
to study me. I was examined, x-rayed, scanned, subjected to positron
emission tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, covered by four
hundred electrodes, strapped to a special chair, and asked to look
through a slit at pictures of apples, dogs, forks, combs, old people,
tables, mice, mushrooms, cigars, glasses, nude women, and babies, after
which they told me what I already knew: that when they showed me a
billiard ball so that only my left hemisphere could see it and at the
same time put my right hand into a bag with many objects, I wasn't able
to choose the ball, and vice versa. They said I was an uninteresting
case, but I said nothing about the sign language. I wanted, after all,
to learn something about myself from them; I didn't care about adding to
their knowledge.

I turned then to Professor S. Turteltaub, a loner, but instead of
shedding light on my condition all he did was tell me what a pack of
wolves, thieves, and parasites all the others were. Thinking his
contempt for them was on scientific grounds, I listened with interest,
but Turteltaub, it turned out, was angry only because they had rejected
his project. The last time I saw Drs. Globus and Savodnisky, or whatever
their names were -- there were so many of them -- they were offended
when I told them I was seeing Dr. Turteltaub. They informed me that he
had been expelled from their research group on ethical grounds.
Turteltaub wanted to offer murderers sentenced to death or life
imprisonment the chance to submit to callotomy instead. He argued that
since callotomization was performed only on severe epileptics, it was
not known whether the effect of cutting the commissure would be the same
in normal people. And a normal man sentenced to the electric chair for
murdering his mother-in-law, for example, would certainly prefer to have
his corpus callosum cut. But Supreme Court Judge Klössenfanger spoke
against this, because if Turteltaub murdered his mother-in-law in cold
blood, that could be the decision of his left hemisphere alone, the
right hemisphere knowing nothing about it, or knowing and protesting but
being overruled, and if the murder occurred anyway after such an inner
conflict, it would be difficult indeed to condemn one hemisphere while
exonerating the other. In effect fifty-percent of the murderer would be
sentenced to death.

Unable to obtain what he wanted, Turteltaub had to operate on monkeys,
which were much more expensive than convicts, and as his grants were
reduced, he feared he would end up with rats and guinea pigs, which
wasn't the same at all. Added to that, the Animal Protection League
people and other antivivisectionists broke his windows regularly. They
even burned his car. The insurance company wouldn't pay, saying he had
torched his own car in order to take the animal protectionists to court,
besides the car was too old to be worth anything. Turteltaub was so
boring that to shut him up I told him about the sign language my left
hand had taught my right. A mistake. He called Globus immediately, or
maybe it was Maxwell, to announce the presentation of a paper at the
next neurologists' conference, a discovery that would crush everyone.
Seeing what was coming, I left Turteltaub's without saying goodbye and
went straight home. They were waiting for me in the lobby, their faces
flushed and eyes burning with the unholy fire of science. I told them I
would of course be glad to accompany them to the clinic, I just had to
go up to my room to change first. While they waited for me in the lobby
I climbed down the fire escape from the eleventh floor and grabbed a
taxi to the airport. Since it didn't matter to me where I went as long
as it was far from those researchers, I took the first plane out, to San
Diego, and at a seedy little hotel there full of shady characters,
before even unpacking my bag, I telephoned Professor Tarantoga for help.

Tarantoga, thank God, was home. You learn who your real friends are when
the chips are down. He flew in to San Diego that night, and when I told
him everything as succinctly and precisely as I could the good soul
agreed to take me under his wing. Following his advice, I changed my
hotel and started growing a beard, meanwhile he looked for a doctor who
valued the Hippocratic oath more than the fame achieved by a rare case.
We quarreled on the third day because he brought me some good news and I
thanked him only partly. He didn't appreciate the sardonic winking from
my left side. I explained of course that it wasn't I but the right
hemisphere of my brain which I couldn't control. But this didn't mollify
him; he said that even if there were two of me in one body, the sneering
faces that half of me was making clearly showed that I must have
harbored some animosity toward him in the past, which manifested itself
now as black ingratitude, while he was of the opinion that one was
either a friend or one wasn't. A fifty-percent friendship he had no use
for. I finally managed to calm him down, and after he left I bought an
eye patch.

The specialist he found for me was in Australia, so we flew to
Melbourne. Joshua McIntyre, a professor of neurophysiology -- his father
and Tarantoga's father had been best friends -- inspired confidence
immediately. He was tall, with a gray crew cut, calm, sober, and, as
Tarantoga assured me, decent. He would not use me or notify the
Americans, who were frantic to find me. After the examination, which
lasted three hours, he put a decanter of whiskey on the desk and poured
a glass for me and for himself. When the atmosphere warmed up, he
crossed his legs, thought for a moment, cleared his throat, and said:

"Mr. Tichy, I will address you in the singular, which is more
comfortable. There is no question that your corpus callosum has been
severed from anterior to posterior commissure, though the skull shows no
sign of trephination. . ."

"But I've told you, professor," I interrupted him, "the skull wasn't
touched, it was a new weapon, a weapon of the future, designed not to
kill but only to give the opposing army a total and remote
cerebellotomy. Every soldier, his brain severed, would fall like a
puppet whose strings are cut. That's what I was told at the center whose
name I cannot divulge. By accident I was standing sideways, or
sagittally, as you doctors say, with respect to the ultrasound-inducing
field. But this is only conjecture. Those robots work in secret, and the
effects of the ultrasound aren't clear. . ."

"Be that as it may," said the professor, looking at me with kindly, wise
eyes from behind his gold-framed glasses. "Nonmedical circumstances need
not concern us right now. As for the number of minds in a callotomized
individual, there are eighteen different theories, each supported by
experimental evidence, therefore none of them wholly wrong and none of
them wholly true. You are not one, nor are you two, nor can we speak of
split personalities."

"Then how many am I?" I asked, surprised.

"The question is poorly phrased. Imagine twins, who from birth do
nothing but saw wood with a two-handled saw. They work well together,
otherwise they would be unable to saw. Take the saw from them, and they
become like you in your present state."

"But each twin, whether he saws or not, has one and only one
consciousness," I said, disappointed. "Professor, your colleagues in
America gave me plenty of such metaphors. Including the one about the
twins and the saw."

"Of course," said McIntyre, winking at me with his left eye, and I
wondered whether he too had something severed. "My American colleagues
are as green as a field of corn and their metaphors are a dime a dozen.
I mention the twins one on purpose; it comes from an American and is
misleading. If we were to show the brain graphically, yours would
resemble a large letter Y, because you still have a homogeneous brain
stem and midbrain. It's the downstroke of the upsilon, while the arms of
the letter are the divided hemispheres. Do you understand? Intuitively
one can see --" the professor broke off with a groan because I kicked
him in the kneecap.

"Sorry, it wasn't me, it was my left leg," I said quickly. "I didn't
mean to. . ."

McIntyre gave an understanding smile, but there was something forced
about it, like the grimace of a psychiatrist who pretends that the
madman biting him is a fine fellow. He pulled his chair back a little.

"The right hemisphere does tend to be more aggressive than the left," he
said, rubbing his knee. "Would you mind keeping your legs crossed, and
arms too? It will make our conversation easier. . ."

"I've tried, but they go limp. Anyway that upsilon business, excuse me,
doesn't explain anything. Where is the consciousness -- under the
division, on it, over it, where?"

"That cannot be precisely determined," said the professor, still
massaging his knee. "The brain, Mr. Tichy, is made up of a great number
of functional subsystems, which in a normal person connect in various
ways to perform various tasks. In your case the highest systems have
been permanently disconnected and thus cannot communicate with each
other."

"And about subsystems too I've heard a hundred times. I don't want to be
impolite, professor, or at least my left hemisphere, the one talking to
you now, doesn't, but I'm still in the dark. I walk normally, I eat,
read, sleep, the only problem is I have to keep an eye on my left hand
and leg because without warning they'll misbehave. What I want to know
is who is misbehaving. If it's my brain, why am I unaware of it?"

"Because the hemisphere that's doing it is mute, Mr. Tichy. The center
of speech resides in the left --"

On the floor between us lay wires from the different instruments
McIntyre had used to examine me. I had noticed my left foot playing with
these wires. It looped one, thick and shiny black, around its ankle, but
I didn't think much about this until suddenly the foot jerked sharply
backward and the wire turned out to be wound around the legs of the
chair upon which the professor was sitting. The chair reared and the
professor crashed to the linoleum. But he was an experienced doctor and
disciplined scientist because he picked himself up from the floor and
said in an even voice:

"It's nothing. Please don't be concerned. The right hemisphere is the
one with spatial ability, so it's adept at this type of function. I
would ask you again, Mr. Tichy, to sit well away from the desk, the
wires, everything. It will facilitate our deliberation as to the therapy
indicated."

"I only want to know where my consciousness is," I replied, freeing the
wire from my foot, which wasn't easy because the foot pressed hard on
the floor. "Was it I who pulled your chair out from under you, and if
not I, then who?"

"Your lower left extremity, governed by the right hemisphere." The
professor adjusted his glasses on his nose, moved his chair farther away
from me, and after a moment's hesitation stood behind the chair instead
of sitting down. Which of my hemispheres suspected that the next time he
might counterattack?

"We could go on like this until Judgment Day," I said, feeling my left
side tense up. Uneasy, I crossed my legs and my arms. McIntyre, watching
me carefully, continued in a pleasant voice.

"The left hemisphere is dominant thanks to the speech center. Talking
with you now, I'm speaking to it; the right side can only listen in. Its
capacity for language is extremely limited."

"Perhaps in others but not in me," I said, holding my left wrist with my
right hand, to be safe. "It's mute, yes, but I've taught it sign
language, you see. Which wasn't easy."

"Impossible!"

The gleam in the professor's eyes, I had seen it before in his American
colleagues, and immediately regretted telling him the truth. But it was
too late now.

"The right hemisphere can't conjugate verbs! That's been proved. . ."

"Doesn't matter. Verbs are unnecessary."

"All right, then. Ask it, please, I mean ask yourself, what it thinks of
our conversation? Can you do that?"

I put my right hand in the left one, patting it a few times to pacify
it, because that was the best way to begin, then made signs, touching
the palm of my left hand. Its fingers began to move. I watched them for
a while, then, trying to hide my anger, put the left hand on my knee,
though it resisted. Of course it pinched me hard on the thigh. I didn't
retaliate, not wanting to wrestle with myself in front of the professor.

"Well, what did it say?" he asked, imprudently leaning forward from
behind the chair.

"Nothing really."

"But I saw myself that it made signs. They weren't coherent?"

"Coherent, yes, very coherent, but nothing important."

"Tell me! In science everything is important."

"It said I'm an asshole."

The professor didn't even smile, he was so impressed.

"Really? Ask it about me now."

"If you wish."

Again I addressed my left hand, and pointed at the professor. This time
I didn't have to pat it; it replied immediately.

"Well?"

"You're an asshole too."

"Is that what it said?"

"Yes. It may not be able to handle verbs but it can make itself
understood. I still don't know who is speaking. Speaking with fingers or
lips, it makes no difference. In my head, is there an I and an It as
well? And if an It, how is it I don't experience what it experiences
even though it's in my head and part of my brain? It's not external,
after all. If my consciousness was doubled and everything confused, I
could understand that -- but this, no. Where did it come from, this It?
Is it also Ijon Tichy? And if so, why do I have to speak to it
indirectly, by signs, professor? And why does it cause me so much
trouble?" No longer seeing any sense in reticence, I told him all about
the scenes on the subway and the bus. He was fascinated.

"Blondes only?"

"Mainly. They can be bleached blondes."

"Is this still going on?"

"Not on the bus."

"Elsewhere?"

"I don't know, I haven't tried. I mean, I haven't given it the
opportunity. If you must know, I was slapped several times. It
embarrassed and angered me, being slapped, because I wasn't guilty, yet
at the same time I was pleased. But once a woman slapped me and the slap
landed fully on the left cheek, and when that happened I didn't feel the
slightest pleasure. I thought this over and finally figured out the
reason."

"But of course!" cried the professor. "When the left-hemisphere Tichy
was slapped on the cheek for the right-hemisphere Tichy, the
right-hemisphere Tichy was pleased. But when the slap was wholly on the
left, it didn't like that at all."

"Exactly. So there is some sort of communication in my unfortunate head,
but it appears to be more emotional than rational. Emotions too are
experience, though not conscious experience. But how can experience be
unconscious? No, that Eccles with his automatic reflexes was all wet. To
see an attractive girl in a crowd, and maneuver yourself close to her,
and pinch her -- that's a whole premeditated plan of attack, not a bunch
of mindless reflexes. But whose plan? Who thinks it, who is conscious of
it, if it's not mine?"

"It can be explained," said the professor, excited. "The light of a
candle is visible in the dark but not in the sun. The right brain may
have consciousness, but a consciousness as feeble as candlelight,
extinguished by the dominant consciousness of the left brain. It's
entirely possible that --"

The professor ducked, avoiding a shoe in the head. My left foot had
slipped it off, propped the heel against a chair leg, then kicked it so
hard that the shoe flew like a missile and crashed into the wall,
missing him by a hair.

"You may be right," I remarked, "but the right hemisphere is damned
touchy."

"Perhaps it feels threatened by our conversation, not fully
understanding it or misunderstanding it," said the professor. "Perhaps
we should address it directly."

"You mean, the way I do it? That's possible. But what do you want to say
to it?"

"That will depend on its response. Yours, Mr. Tichy, is a unique
situation. There's never been a person completely sound of mind, and not
an ordinary mind at that, who underwent a callotomy."

"Let me make myself clear," I answered, stroking the back of my left
hand to calm it because it was starting to move, flexing the fingers,
which worried me. "I am not interested in sacrificing myself for
science. If you or someone else enters into communication with It -- you
know what I mean -- that could turn out to be harmful to me, let alone
damned unpleasant, if, say, it becomes more independent."

"That's quite impossible," declared the professor, a little too
confidently, I thought. He took off his glasses and wiped them with a
piece of flannel. His eyes did not have that helpless expression of most
people who can't see without their glasses. He gave me a sharp look as
if he didn't need them at all, then immediately dropped his eyes.

"What happens is always quite impossible," I said, weighing my words.
"The whole history of mankind consists of impossibilities, and the
history of science too. A certain young philosopher told me that my
condition is an impossibility, contradicting all established thought,
which says that consciousness is an indivisible thing. The so-called
split personality is essentially a consciousness that alternates between
different states joined imperfectly by memory and a sense of identity.
It's not a cake that can be cut into pieces!"

"I see you've been reading the literature," observed the professor,
putting on his glasses. He added something I didn't hear. I was going to
go on but stopped because my left hand was putting its fingers into my
right palm, making signs. That had never happened before. McIntyre saw
me looking at my hands and understood immediately.

"Is It speaking?" he whispered as if not wanting to be overheard.

"Yes."

The message surprised me, but I relayed it:

"It wants a piece of cake."

The joy on the professor's face made my blood run cold. Assuring the
left hand that if it was patient it would have cake, I said to the
professor:

"From your scientific point of view it would be wonderful if It became
more independent. I don't hold that against you, I understand how
fantastic it would be having two fully developed individuals in a single
body, so much to learn, so many experiments to run, and all that. But
I'm not thrilled by the thought of having a democracy established in my
head. I want to be less plural, not more."

"You are giving me a vote of no confidence? Well, I can understand
that." The professor smiled sympathetically. "First let me assure you
that all this information will remain confidential. My professional oath
of secrecy. Beyond that, I will suggest no therapy for you. You must do
what you believe is best. I hope you'll think it over carefully. Will
you be in Melbourne long?"

"I don't know yet. In any case, I'll call you."

Tarantoga, sitting in the waiting room, jumped up when he saw me.

"Well? Professor. . . ? Ijon. . . ?"

"No decisions have been made," said McIntyre in an official tone. "Mr.
Tichy has various things to consider. I am at his service."

Being a man of my word, I asked the taxi driver to stop at a bakery on
the way, and bought a piece of cake and had to eat it immediately in the
car because It insisted, even though I wasn't in the mood for anything
sweet. But I had decided, for the present at least, not to torment
myself with questions such as who wanted the cake, since no one but me
could answer a question like that, and I couldn't.

Tarantoga and I had adjoining rooms, so I went to his and filled him in
on what happened with McIntyre. My hand interrupted me several times
because it was dissatisfied. The cake had been flavored with licorice,
which I can't stand. I ate it anyway, thinking I was doing it for It,
but apparently It and I -- or I and I -- have the same taste. Which is
understandable, in that the hand can't eat by itself and It and I do
have a mouth, palate, and tongue in common. I had the feeling I was in a
dream, part nightmare, part comedy, and carrying not an infant exactly
but a small, spoiled, precocious child. I remembered one psychologist's
theory that small children didn't have a continuous consciousness
because the fibers of the commissure were still undeveloped.

"A letter for you." With these words Tarantoga brought me out of my
reverie. I was surprised: no one knew where I was. The letter was
postmarked Mexico City, airmail, no return address. In the envelope was
a square of paper with the typed words: "He's from the LA."

Nothing more. I turned the paper over. It was blank. Tarantoga took it,
looked at it, and then at me:

"What does this mean? Do you understand it?"

"No. Yes. . . the LA is the Lunar Agency. They were the ones who sent
me."

"To the moon?"

"Yes. On a reconnaissance mission. I was supposed to submit a report
afterward."

"And did you?"

"Yes. I wrote what I remembered. And gave it to the barber."

"Barber?"

"That was the arrangement. Instead of going to them. But who is 'he'? It
must be McIntyre. I haven't seen anyone else here."

"Wait. I don't understand. What was in the report?"

"I can't tell that even to you. It's top-secret. But there wasn't much
in it. I forgot a great deal."

"After your accident?"

"Yes. What are you doing, professor?"

Tarantoga turned the torn envelope over. Someone had printed in pencil,
inside: "Burn this. Don't let the right sink the left."

I didn't understand it, yet there was some sense in it. Suddenly I
looked at Tarantoga with widened eyes:

"I begin to see. Neither message, on the envelope or in the letter, has
proper nouns. Did you notice?"

"So?"

"It understands nouns best. Whoever sent this wants to tell me something
and not It. . ."

As I was saying this, I pointed to my right temple with my right hand.
Tarantoga got up, paced the room, drummed his fingers on the table, and
said:

"In other words, McIntyre is. . ."

"Don't say it."

I took a notepad from my pocket and wrote on a fresh page: "It
understands what it hears better than what it reads. We'll have to
communicate, for a while, in this matter, by writing to each other. My
guess is that the things I didn't put into my report to the LA because I
couldn't remember, It remembers, and that someone knows or at least
suspects this. I won't phone M. or go back to him, because he's probably
the 'he' in the letter. He wanted to ask It questions. Perhaps to
interrogate It. Please write your reply."

Tarantoga read my note and frowned. Saying nothing, he bent over the
table and wrote: "But if he is from the LA, why this deviousness? The LA
can contact you directly, no?"

I wrote back: "Among those to whom I turned in NY there must have been
someone from the LA. Through him they learned that I found a way to talk
to It. But I left before they could try that themselves. If the
anonymous letter is telling the truth, the son of the man who was your
father's friend was supposed to take over. To find out, without arousing
my suspicions, what It remembers. Whereas, if they turned to me
directly, officially, I could refuse to submit to such an interrogation,
and they would be up a tree because legally It is not a separate person
and they would need my consent to talk to It. Please use participles,
pronouns, verbs, and avoid simple syntax."

The professor tore out the page I had written on, put it in his pocket,
and wrote: "But why is it that you don't want It to know what is now
happening?"

"To be safe. Because of what was written inside that envelope. It can't
be from the LA because the LA obviously wouldn't warn me about itself.
Someone else wrote it."

Tarantoga's reply this time was brief:

"Who?"

"About what is taking place where I was and had the accident, many
parties would love to know. The LA has plenty of competition. I believe
we should avoid the company of kangaroos. Let's get out of here. It
doesn't understand the imperative mood."

Tarantoga took all the pieces of paper from his pocket, rolled them into
a ball with the letter and envelope, lit it with a match, and tossed it
into the fireplace. He watched the paper shrivel into ash.

"I'm on my way to a travel agent," he said. "And what will you do now?"

"Shave," I said. "This beard itches like the devil and obviously is no
longer needed. The faster the better, professor. Maybe there's a night
flight. And don't tell me where we're going."

As I shaved in the bathroom and looked in the mirror, I made faces. The
left eye didn't even blink. I appeared completely ordinary. When I
packed, I looked at my left hand and leg now and then, but they behaved
normally. At the last moment, however, as I was putting my ties on top
of the folded clothes in the suitcase, the left hand took the green tie
with brown dots, a tie I liked though it was quite old, and threw it on
the floor. It, apparently, didn't like it. I picked up the tie with my
right hand and tried to make the left hand take part of it so we could
lay it neatly in the suitcase. What happened next had happened more than
once before: the arm obeyed but the fingers didn't. They opened, and the
tie fell on the bed.

"Hopeless," I sighed, stuffed the tie into the suitcase with my right
hand, and closed the suitcase. Tarantoga appeared in the doorway, showed
me two tickets without saying a word, and went to pack.

Did I have reason to fear my right hemisphere? I could think about this
without worrying, because It couldn't know what I thought unless I told
It by hand signals. Human beings are so constructed that they don't know
what they know. What a book contains can be learned from the contents
page, but there's no contents page in the head. The head is like a full
bag; in order to see what's in it you have to pull everything out, item
by item. Groping for a memory in your head is like groping in a bag with
your hand.

Tarantoga paid the hotel bill, and as we drove to the airport at dusk
and then waited in the terminal, I went over everything that had
happened after my return from the Calf, to see how much I could
remember. Earth had changed completely. There was total disarmament.
Even the superpowers no longer had the money to continue the arms race.
The more intelligent the weapons, the more they cost. That was the real
reason for the Geneva Agreement. In Europe and in the United States no
one wanted to enlist in the army. Men were replaced by machines, but one
machine cost as much as a jet plane. Live soldiers surrendered the field
to nonliving soldiers, who weren't robots, either, but simply small
computers inserted into rockets, self-firing firearms, and tanks like
giant bedbugs, flat, because no space was needed for a crew, and if its
computer was knocked out, a spare took over. Since command
communications were vulnerable to disruption, the machines were made
more and more autonomous, and therefore became more and more expensive.
I couldn't recall who came up with the idea of moving the arms race to
the moon. Not in the form of weapon factories but through the so-called
planet machines. These machines had been in use a couple of years for
exploring the solar system. Remembering this, I noticed that a number of
details were missing. Had I known them before or not? One usually knows,
when one can't remember something, whether or not one knew it in the
first place, but I didn't. I must have read about the new Geneva
Agreement before my mission, but I wasn't sure. The planet machines were
built by several companies, mostly American. They were unlike anything
industry had produced before. Not factories and not robots but something
in between. Some resembled giant spiders. Of course there was a lot of
debate, a lot of protests that they shouldn't be armed but used only for
mining and that sort of thing, but when it came to transporting the
weapons to the moon, it turned out that the countries who could afford
it already had self-programming mobile rocket launchers, cannon able to
travel underwater, fire-throwers able to travel underground like moles,
and laser artillery that could move like tanks and trigger, with salvos
of intense radiation, nuclear fusion reactions that would vaporize
everything, themselves included. Each country could program on Earth its
own planet machines, which were then transported to the moon and placed
in their respective sectors by the Lunar Agency, especially created for
that purpose. The principle of parity was adhered to, how much of this
and that could be put up there, and various international commissions
watched over this whole military exodus. Scientists and generals from
each country were allowed to verify that their devices were unloaded on
the moon and in working order, then they all had to return to Earth
together. In the twentieth century such a solution would have been
senseless because the arms race wasn't so much a matter of production as
of research, innovation, which in those days depended entirely on
people. But these new machines worked on a different principle, one
borrowed from the natural evolution of plants and animals. These were
systems capable of auto-optimization, speciation, and ramification,
which means they could change themselves and multiply. I was pleased
with myself that I had been able to remember that. Was the right
hemisphere of my brain, interested mainly in women's behinds and cake
and hating green ties with brown dots, able to grasp such concepts? How
could Its memory, then, be of value militarily? But if it wasn't, I
reflected, all the worse for me, because I could swear up and down that
It knew nothing but no one would believe me. They'd grill It, that is
grill me, and if they didn't obtain what they wanted with the signs I
taught It they'd use better teaching, better signs, and not let go for
anything. The less It knew, the more trouble I was in. My life, even,
might be at stake. This was not paranoia. I continued to dig into my
memory.

On the moon, the electronic evolution of new weapons was to begin. In
this way, despite disarmament, no nation would be defenseless, because
it would own a self-perfecting arsenal. And any surprise attack by an
enemy, war without declaration, was impossible now, because to commence
hostilities a government first had to ask the Lunar Agency for
permission to use its sector on the moon. There was no way to hide this,
and the side threatened would also apply for permission, and that would
begin the return of the means of annihilation to Earth. The whole point
was that the moon be inaccessible.

Neither people nor probes could be sent to learn what military
capability a given nation had at its disposal. A clever plan, but at
first the project met with strong resistance from the generals and
politicians. The moon was to be a testing ground and laboratory for
military evolution within the sectors allotted to the various nations.
The first order of business was to make sure there was no conflict
between the sectors. If a weapon developed in one sector attacked and
destroyed a neighbor's weapon, that would upset the balance of power.
The day such news came from the moon, there would be an immediate return
to the previous situation and very likely war, a war conducted with
modest means at first but in short order the nations would all rebuild
their arms industries. The programs of the moon systems, written by the
Lunar Agency in conjunction with multinational commissions, contained
locks to keep the sectors from attacking each other, but that protection
was considered insufficient. As before, nobody trusted anybody. The
Geneva Agreement had not turned men into saints or international
diplomacy into a convocation of angels. For that reason, after the
transporting was completed, the moon was declared off-limits to
everyone. The Lunar Agency itself could not enter there. If a defense
program in any of the testing ranges was destroyed or breached, all
Earth would know about it in an instant, for each sector bristled with
sensors that worked automatically and around the clock. They would sound
the alarm if any weapon, even a metal ant, crossed the boundary into the
belt that was no man's land. But even this wasn't guarantee enough. The
guarantee was the so-called doctrine of ignorance. Each government knew
that better and better weapons were being created in its sector, but it
did not know their value vis-à-vis the weapons being created in the
other sectors. It couldn't know, because the course of any evolutionary
process is unforeseeable. This had been proven ages before, but the
rigid politicians and generals were unreceptive to scientific argument.
It wasn't logic that convinced them; it was the increasing economic ruin
caused by the traditional arms race. Even a fool could see that one
didn't need a war, nuclear or otherwise, to destroy oneself; the rising
cost of weaponry could do that quite nicely. Since disarmament
negotiations had been unsuccessful for decades, the moon project seemed
the only solution. Every nation could feel it was powerful militarily
because of its moon arsenal, but it had no way of knowing how its
arsenal compared with those of the other nations. Since no one therefore
could count on victory, no one would risk going to war.

The Achilles heel of this solution lay in the monitoring of it. The
experts knew from the start that the first thing the programmers of each
country would try to do is send to the moon machines capable of
neutralizing the monitoring system. Not necessarily by attacking the
surveillance satellites directly; it could be a more devious method, one
more difficult to detect, such as invading the communication network and
falsifying the data transmitted to Earth and the Lunar Agency. My memory
of this seemed intact, so I felt calmer as I boarded the plane with
Tarantoga. Settling into my seat, I again took to probing what I
remembered.

Everyone understood that the peace depended on the monitoring, so the
question was how to make the monitoring untouchable. An insoluble
problem, it seemed, a regressus ad infinitum: One could devise a system
to monitor a monitoring system, but that system itself would be
vulnerable to attack, so one would have to monitor the monitor of the
monitor, and so on, without end. But this dilemma was solved quite
simply. They encircled the moon with two surveillance belts. The inner
belt guarded the sectors; the outer belt guarded the inner belt. And the
trick was: both would be independent of Earth. Thus the arms race could
continue on the moon in total secrecy from all countries and all
governments. The weapons would evolve, but the surveillance of them
would remain unchanged for a hundred years. The whole thing, really, was
quite absurd. An unknown arsenal was useless in politics. They should
have simply disarmed without bringing the moon into it, but there was no
mention of that possibility. Everyone knew where talk of disarmament
led: nowhere. In any case, when the idea of demilitarizing Earth and
militarizing the moon was accepted, it was clear that sooner or later an
attempt would be made to violate the doctrine of ignorance. The
newspapers from time to time ran stories under screaming headlines about
surveillance machines that vanished upon detecting something; some said
they were intercepted by satellites and captured. And governments
accused each other of sending probes, but it was impossible to tell
their origin because an electronic device is not a person: you can't get
anything out of it if it's made properly. But then these anonymous
scouts, these space spies, stopped appearing. And the human race sighed
with relief, especially because of the economics, the fact that the moon
weapons didn't cost a cent now. The energy was furnished by the sun, the
raw materials by the moon. Which should also help limit the evolution of
weapons, because there are no lodes of metal on the moon.

The generals had expressed the concern that weapons adapted to lunar
conditions might not work on Earth. I couldn't recall how the gravity
was increased, though they must have explained that to me at the LA.
Tarantoga and I were flying BOAC. The night outside the windows was
Stygian, and I thought, amused, that I had no idea where we were going.
Should I ask Tarantoga? On the other hand, perhaps it would be better if
we were to part company. In this awful situation, perhaps I should be
silent and fend for myself. A good thing It couldn't read my thoughts.
As if I carried an enemy in my head, though of course it was no enemy.

The reason the Lunar Agency, a supranational organization set up by the
UN, turned to me? Its double-guard system had worked too well. We knew
that the borders between the sectors had not been disturbed, but that
was all we knew. In certain nervous, imaginative minds rose the specter
of an attack upon Earth by the nonliving forces of the moon. The
military sectors' inability to exchange information might be only
temporary. The sectors might learn to communicate through ground
tremors, seismically, making the vibrations in the rock look like
natural moon-quakes. The self-engineered and self-improving weapons
might all join and one day unleash their monstrous power against Earth.
Why should they want to do this? How would it benefit a nonliving army
to reduce Earth to ashes? It wouldn't, of course, but cancer,
everpresent in the organisms of higher animals and human beings, is an
inevitable albeit disadvantageous consequence of evolution. People began
to talk and write about this lunar cancer, and there were seminars,
articles, novels, and films on the subject, and the fear of atomic
annihilation, which had been dispelled on Earth, returned in a new form.
The surveillance system included seismographs, and certain scientists
reported that the frequency of tremors in the moon's crust was
increasing, and seismic readings were analyzed for hidden codes, and
fear grew. To calm the public, the Lunar Agency said in communiques that
the odds of this happening were one in two hundred million, but no one
believed that calculation. The fear finally reached the politicians, and
they began to demand periodic inspection of the sectors and not just of
their borders. The Agency spokesmen explained that any such inspection
could not rule out the possibility of espionage to learn the current
state of the lunar arsenals. After long meetings and complex negotiation
the LA finally received authorization to reconnoiter.

Reconnaissance, it turned out, wasn't so easy. None of the probes
returned. Not a peep from them by radio. Specially armored landers were
sent, with television cameras. The observation satellite showed that
they indeed landed, and exactly on target, in the Mare Imbrium, in the
Mare Frigoris, in the Mare Nectaris, and in the no man's land between
the sectors. But not one of them sent back a picture. As if the ground
of the moon had swallowed them. Understandably, this caused panic. A
state of emergency. The papers urged that the moon be preemptively
bombed with hydrogen bombs just to play it safe. But that couldn't
happen unless a missile was built and atomic warheads again
manufactured. Out of this fear and confusion my mission was born.

We were flying above thick clouds, their mounds tinged with pink from
the morning sun still hidden below the horizon. Why, I wondered, did I
remember the terrestrial things so well, while remembering so little of
what happened on the moon? I knew some reasons. It wasn't for nothing
that I'd read all those medical books when I got back. There are two
kinds of memory, temporary and permanent. Severing the great commissure
does not affect what the brain has already accumulated, but fresh
memories evaporate, do not become permanent. What evaporates
particularly is what the patient experienced shortly before the
operation. Therefore I didn't remember most of what happened to me those
seven weeks on the moon, when I went from sector to sector. All that
remained in my head was an aura of strangeness, nothing I could put into
words, into a report. Strangeness, and yet it was not threatening, or so
it seemed to me. No dark conspiracy against Earth. I felt certain of
that. But could I swear that what I felt and knew was the whole story?
Perhaps It knew more.

Tarantoga was silent, only glancing at me from time to time. As usual on
eastward flights, with the Pacific beneath us, the calendar tripped and
dropped a day. BOAC was belt-tightening, apparently, because all we got
to eat was chicken salad. We landed in Miami. It was early in the
afternoon. Customs dogs sniffed our suitcases. We stepped out into the
heat. Melbourne had been much cooler. A rental car was waiting for us;
Tarantoga must have ordered it in Melbourne. We put our luggage in the
trunk and set off down a highway full of traffic, and still said
nothing, because I had asked the professor not to tell me our
destination. Overcaution, perhaps, but I would stick to that policy
until a better one suggested itself. And he didn't need to say anything,
because after more than two hours on back roads we arrived at a large
white building surrounded by pavilions, palms, and cacti, and I knew at
once that my trusted friend had brought me to an insane asylum. Not a
bad place to hide, I thought. In the car, I had looked over my shoulder
now and then to see if we were being followed, but it never entered my
head that I was such an important, valuable person that they would
follow me by a method less conventional, not found in any spy novel.
From a modern satellite not only can a car be observed but wooden
matches counted on a garden table. That never entered my head -- more
precisely the half of my head that could understand without sign
language the mess Ijon Tichy had got himself into.

 

 

 

 Briefing

 

The worst mess in my life. I got into it quite by accident, while trying
to see Professor Tarantoga after my return from Encia. He wasn't at
home; he'd flown to Australia for some reason. He'd be back in a few
days. Since he had a special kind of primrose that demanded constant
watering, he asked his cousin to apartment-sit for him. Not the cousin
who collects public-toilet graffiti around the world; another cousin, a
paleobotanist. Tarantoga has a lot of cousins. I didn't know this one.
When I saw that he was in a bathrobe and had just risen from a
typewriter, I apologized and turned to leave, but he said no, I wasn't
interrupting anything, I had arrived just in time: he was writing a
difficult, trail-blazing book and he always liked to marshal his
thoughts by telling someone, even a stranger, the idea of the chapter at
hand. I feared he was writing some botanical treatise and would fill my
head with weeds, bulbs, and perennials, but thank heaven it wasn't like
that. It was actually quite interesting. From the dawn of history, he
said, in the savage tribes there were unconventional individuals, no
doubt considered mad, who tried to eat whatever their eyes fell on:
leaves, sprouts, stems, roots both fresh and dried, and all kinds of
vegetation. They must have dropped like flies because so many plants are
poisonous. Which didn't deter the next generation of nonconformists, who
carried on this dangerous work. It is only thanks to them that we know
today how to use laurel leaves and nutmeg, that asparagus and spinach
are worth the trouble, and that it's better to give wild berries a wide
berth. Tarantoga's cousin acquainted me with the fact, ignored by world
science, that to find which plant was the best to smoke, these
Sisyphuses of antiquity had to gather, dry, ferment, roll, and turn into
ash a good forty-seven thousand varieties of leaf before they discovered
tobacco, because there was no sign on any sprig or branch that said this
one will be good for cigars and snuff. Over many centuries whole armies
of these prehistoric saints took into their mouths, bit, chewed, tasted,
and swallowed everything that grew by a fence or from a tree, and this
in every conceivable way, cooked and raw, with water and without,
strained and unstrained, and in countless combinations, thanks to which
we know today that cabbage goes with pork and beets with rabbit. The
fact that in certain regions it's not beets but red cabbage that goes
with hare Tarantoga's cousin attributes to the early rise of
nationalities. One cannot imagine a Slav, for example, without borscht.
Each nationality had its own experimentalists, and when they finally
decided on beets, its descendants remained loyal to beets even though
their neighbors turned up their noses at that vegetable. Tarantoga's
cousin plans to write another book, later, about cultural differences in
gastronomy and the influence of national character (the correlation
between mint sauce and English spleen, for example, in the case of the
loin chop). He will disclose in it why the Chinese, who have been so
many for so long, eat pre-chopped food with chopsticks and always have
rice.

"Everyone knows," his voice rose, "who Stephenson was and everyone
honors him for his locomotive, his steam engine, but what is that banal
relic next to artichokes, which will be with us forever? Vegetables do
not age like technology. . ." The paleobotanist warmed even more to the
subject. Was Stephenson risking his life when he put Watt's steam engine
on wheels? Did inventing the phonograph place Edison in mortal danger?
They risked at most their families' anger or bankruptcy. How unfair,
that inventors of old-fashioned technology are all famous while no one
even thinks about the great gastronomical inventors, or about raising a
monument to the Unknown Chef as we do for the Unknown Soldier. And yet
so many anonymous heroes fell in terrible agony after they made their
brave experiments, with mushrooms, for example, where the only way of
distinguishing poisonous from nonpoisonous is to eat and wait for the
results.

Why are the schoolbooks full of kings who became king for no other
reason than that daddy was king? Why do children learn about Columbus,
the discoverer of America who discovered it only by accident, on his way
to India, while there's not one word about the discoverer of the pickle?
We could have managed without America, sooner or later America would
have discovered itself, but not the pickle, and then there would have
been nothing to sit on our plate beside a roast beef sandwich. No,
gastronomy's nameless heroes were more heroic than those who found a
soldier's death! A soldier had to charge the enemy trench or face a
court-martial, but nobody ever forced a person to brave the danger of an
unknown berry. Tarantoga's cousin would like to see a commemorative
tablet over the door of every restaurant, with the inscription MORTUI
SUNT UT NOS BENE EDAMUS.

The telephone rang. Tarantoga's cousin handed me the receiver, saying it
was for me. I was surprised, because no one knew about my return from
the stars. It was someone from the office of the Secretary General of
the UN. He had called Tarantoga for my address, and the cousin
short-circuited the call, as it were, by giving the phone to me. Dr.
Kakesut Wahatan, plenipotentiary extraordinaire and adviser on global
security, wanted to see me as soon as possible. We made a date for the
next day. I jotted the time into my notebook, having no idea what I was
getting myself into. But I was glad for the call, because it had
interrupted the flood of eloquence from Tarantoga's cousin, who wanted
to tell me next about spices and pepper. I took my leave, saying I had
to go and promising (insincerely) that I'd drop in again soon.

Tarantoga told me later that the primroses died: his cousin, in his
paleobotanical-gastronomical fervor, forgot to water them. A common
phenomenon: he who devotes himself to the general does not concern
himself with the particular. Thus the meliorists who would make the
whole world happy but have no time for an individual.

I wasn't told straight off that I would be asked to risk my neck for
humanity by flying to the moon to see what those intelligent weapons
were up to. Dr. Wahatan received me with smiles, coffee, and old cognac.
He was Asian, a perfect Asian, because I learned nothing from him: he
knew how to keep a secret. The Secretary General, he said, intended to
read me, but being so very busy, he wondered if I could recommend the
ten books I felt were the most important. Seemingly by coincidence, a
couple of people dropped by and asked me for my autograph. It was hard
to refuse. The talk turned naturally to robots, to the moon, but the
moon mainly in its historical role: as a decoration in romantic
literature. I learned much later that thiis was no normal conversation
but a screening for security clearance, because the armchair in which I
sat so comfortably was riddled with sensors that analyzed my reactions,
through microscopic changes in muscle tension, to such key stimulus
words as "moon" and "robot." The diagnostic situation since I left Earth
for the Calf constellation had reversed itself: I was evaluated by
computer, my human interlocutors serving only to gather data. The next
day, I went again to the UN office, I don't know exactly why, and then
they invited me again. They kept wanting to see me; I began having lunch
with them in the cafeteria, which wasn't bad, but the reason for these
appointments remained unclear. There was talk about the United Nations
publishing my collected works in all the languages of the world: more
than four and a half thousand languages. I am not a vain man, but that
seemed like a good idea to me. These new acquaintances all turned out to
be fans of my Star Diaries. They were Dr. Rorty, Engineer Tottentanz,
and the brodiers Cybbilkis, identical twins whom I learned to tell apart
by their ties. Both madiematicians. The older, Castor, worked in
algomathematics, which is the algebra of conflicts that end fatally for
all parties. (This branch of game theory is sometimes called sadistics.)
The other Cybbilkis, Pollux, was not a sadistician but a statistician
and had the curious habit of suddenly interrupting a conversation with
such questions as "How many people on earth at this very moment are
picking their nose?" A phenomenal calculator, he could come up with
answers to such things instantly. One of the four was always waiting for
me in the vestibule as big as a hangar to take me to the elevator. We
went either to the Cybbilkis' workshop or to Professor Jonas Kuschtyk,
who also loved my books and quoted from them, giving the page number and
year of publication. Kuschtyk (like Tottentanz) worked with telefer
theory, a new field of remote robotics. The telefer slogan: "Where a man
can't go, a remote can." Kuschtyk and Tottentanz urged me to try
remoting. It's quite an experience to have all your senses connected by
radio to a machine.

I was willing. It was only much later that I realized they weren't Ijon
Tichy fans at all but had read me strictly in the line of duty. Their
task, with many other Lunar Agency people (whom I won't mention so as
not to immortalize them), was to pull me gradually into the Mission. Why
gradually? Because I could refuse, after all, and go home, taking with
me all the secrets of the Mission. And what if you did? asks someone
from the audience, a heckler. Would that be the end of the world? The
point is yes, possibly, it would. The person selected from thousands by
the Lunar Agency had to be both extremely capable and extremely loyal.
Capable we understand, but loyal? And loyal to whom, to the Agency? Yes,
inasmuch as it represented the interests of humanity. No nation or
coalition of nations could be allowed to learn the results of the lunar
reconnaissance, assuming it succeeded, because whoever knew the state of
the weapons there first would gain, by that strategic information,
immediate supremacy on Earth. The peace, in other words, was far from
idyllic.

So the friendly scientists who let me play with the remotes as a child
with a toy were actually dissecting my mind, that is, the computers
were, invisible but analyzing our every conversation. Castor Cybbilkis,
with his surrealist ties, was there as a theoretician of disastrous
endgames, because precisely such a game was being played with me,
against me. In order to accept or reject the Mission, I first had to
learn about it, but then if I rejected it or if I accepted, returned,
and then divulged the results of the reconnaisance, known only to me, it
would create a situation the algomathematicians called pre-catastrophic.

The candidates were of different nationalities, races, professions, and
accomplishments. I was one of many though I had no idea of that. The
person selected would be a delegate of humanity, not a spy -- or
potential spy -- for any country. His code name would be Missionary. But
I was kept in the dark as much as possible. When they finally made me
Missionary and I had crawled into the rocket for the nth time only to
crawl back out two hours later in my space suit bristling with wires and
tubes because again something had gone wrong during countdown, I finally
had time to think about the past few months and put two and two
together. I understood now the game the LA had been playing with me for
the highest possible stakes. If not the highest for humanity and the
world, certainly the highest for me: I didn't need algomathematics and
game theory to see that the simplest way for them to ensure secrecy in
this situation was to do away with the pilot immediately after his
return to Earth, as soon as he made his report. Knowing that they had to
send me now, since I had shown myself to be the best of the candidates,
I told this to my dear colleagues, the Cybbilkis brothers, Kuschtyk,
Blahouse, Tottentanz, and Garraphizi (more about Garraphizi later) who
along with a few dozen communications technicians would be the ground
support for my selenological expedition, that is they would be for me
what Houston was for Armstrong and Co. during the Apollo mission. To
make those hypocrites as uncomfortable as possible I asked them if they
knew who would take care of me after my return as a hero -- the Lunar
Agency itself or a hired gun?

That's what I said, in those exact words, to see their reaction. If they
had considered that scenario, they would understand me immediately. They
froze. It made quite a picture: the small area in the cosmodome called
the Waiting Room, with its Spartan décor -- coke machines, card chairs,
metal tables covered with bilious green plastic -- and I in my
angel-white space suit, my head under my arm (actually my helmet, but
that's how you say it: your head's under your arm when you're ready to
fly), and facing me, my loyal comrades, scientists, doctors, engineers.
I think it was Castor who spoke first. That it wasn't their doing, it
was the equation, the computer, because if you looked at the thing
mathematically, abstractly, the solution to the problem of ensuring
secrecy did not take into account any coefficient of ethics, and I was
insulting them all by suggesting, at such a moment, that they were in on
it.

"I've heard that before," I answered. "Blame it on the computer! Sure,
sure. But forget ethics for the moment. I know, you're all saints and
I'm one too. But didn't any of you, the computer included, think of
this?"

 "Of what?" asked a hangdog Cybbilkis.

"That I might suspect, and might confirm my suspicion, as I've done just
now. Surely that will affect the equation of my loyalty. . ."

"Oh of course that was taken into account," said the other Cybbilkis.
"It's the ABC of algomathematical statistics: I know that you know that
I know that you know that I know. The infinite series of conflict
theory."

"Very well," I said, getting interested in the scientific aspect of the
thing. "Then how did it work out for you in the end? Does or doesn't the
confirmed suspicion affect my loyalty?"

"It does," admitted Castor Cybbilkis reluctantly. "But the second
derivative of the curve of your loyalty after a scene like this one
(taking place as we speak) shows a leveling off to zero."

"Aha." I scratched my nose, shifting the helmet from my right arm to my
left. "So that what is now happening decreases the mathematical
expectation of reduction of my loyalty?"

"It decreases it," he said. And his brother added, looking at me both
kindly and searchingly: "You yourself probably feel. . ."

"Exactly," I muttered, realizing, not without surprise, that they were
right, they or the computer, in this psychological calculation: my
indignation had noticeably diminished.

The green light went on over the exit to the launch pad and all the
buzzers sounded, indicating that the problem had been corrected and I
was to get in the rocket again. I turned without a word and walked, they
in attendance, and as I walked I thought. I'm getting ahead of myself
here, but I have to finish. After I left stationary earth orbit and they
couldn't touch me, when they asked me how I felt, I answered fine, and
that I was considering whether I shouldn't make friends with the
"nation" of the moon in order to give a few people I knew on Earth a
good kick in the pants. How hollow was their laughter in my earphones. .
.

But that came later, after my trips to the simulated lunar testing range
and the visit to Gynandroics. That corporation has greater earnings than
IBM, even though it began as a small subsidiary of the company. I should
explain here that Gynandroics, contrary to popular belief, doesn't
manufacture robots or androids, if by those terms we mean humanlike
machines endowed with human intelligence. It's practically impossible to
put a human mind in a machine. The computers of the eightieth generation
and beyond are more intelligent than we, but their minds bear no
resemblance to a human being's. Man is a highly illogical creature and
therein lies his humanity. He has reason, yes, but it is heavily
polluted with prejudices, emotions, and attitudes carried from childhood
or the genes of the mother and father. That's why a robot passing for a
person (over the telephone, for instance) is fairly easily unmasked.
Nevertheless the porn industry put a limited line of S-dolls on the
market, S for sex. These didn't catch on; they were too logical, too
intelligent; a man going out with one would end up with an inferiority
complex. And they were expensive. Why pay $90,000, not counting local
taxes, when you could have a natural partner for much, much less? The
real revolution in the sex market was caused by remotes, or "empties,"
dolls also fashioned in the image of humans but brainless, brainless not
in a pejorative sense but literally: the remote woman and the remote man
were empty shells operated at a distance by humans.

By putting on a suit that pressed hundreds of electrodes to the skin,
anyone could link with a male or female remote. Little did people dream
how this technology would change their lives, especially their sex
lives. From marriage to the oldest profession in the world. The courts
were faced with unprecedented problems, legal dilemmas. The law didn't
recognize intimate relations with a doll as grounds for divorce. Whether
stuffed or inflated by a bicycle pump, whether with automatic
transmission or without, it didn't matter; that was no more adultery
than if a person was cohabiting with a chest of drawers. But teleferic
products forced judges to determine whether or not a married individual
entering into a liaison with a male remote or a female remote was
thereby committing adultery. The concept of "remote adultery" was the
subject of heated debate not only in the legal journals but also in the
daily press. And adultery was just the tip of the iceberg. Can you
deceive your wife, for example, with her own self but younger? A certain
Adlai Groutzer ordered from the Boston branch of Gynandroics a remote of
his wife at age twenty-one, not fifty-nine, her actual age. A further
complication was that when Mrs. Groutzer was twenty-one, she wasn't Mrs.
Groutzer at all but the wife of James Brown, whom she divorced twenty
years later to marry Adlai Groutzer. The case went all the way to the
Supreme Court. A ruling also had to be made as to whether a wife who
wouldn't operate the remote bought by her husband, for sex, was refusing
him his conjugal rights. And whether remote incest was possible, and
remote sadism and masochism. And remote sodomy. One company put out a
line of dolls with modular private parts, so that you could quickly
switch from male to female or even have it both ways. Among the
customers of Gynandroics were quite a number of elderly prostitutes, no
longer able to ply their trade; their years of experience made them
masters, by remote, of the art of love. But the technology wasn't
limited to the erotic in its application. Take for example the
twelve-year-old schoolboy who, receiving a poor grade for spelling
errors in composition, used his father's muscular remote to beat the
English teacher to a pulp and break all his furniture. This remote,
called Body Guard, sold like hotcakes. It was kept in the garden shed to
protect the family from burglars. The boy's father wore electrode
pajamas to bed, and when the alarm went off, signaling the presence of
an intruder, he could deal with the culprit or even culprits without
having to get out of bed, because the remote would hold them until the
police arrived. The son borrowed his father's pajamas while his father
was out. I had also seen picketing and street demonstrations against
Gynandroics and comparable Japanese companies. The protesters were
mostly women. In the few states where homosexuality was still against
the law, legislators were trying to decide whether a homosexual, in love
with a man who was not, was breaking the law if he sent him a female
remote which he, the homosexual, was operating. When the Supreme Court
finally ruled that relations per procura (with the aid of a remote) lay
within the lawful bounds of matrimony provided both parties consented,
the Kuckerman case came up. Mr. Kuckerman was a traveling salesman; Mrs.
Kuckerman ran a beauty salon. They spent little time together: she
couldn't leave the salon, and he was on the road a lot. They agreed to
intermediate their union, but couldn't agree whether it should be by
remote-husband or remote-wife. The Kuckermans' neighbor brought down
upon himself the wrath of both when he suggested, trying to be helpful,
that they compromise and use a teleferic pair: a remote husband with a
remote wife seemed to him a Solomonic solution to the problem. The
Kuckermans considered it idiotic and insulting. They had no idea that
their argument, after it appeared in the papers, would lead to a
phenomenon called teleferic piggybacking -- because a remote, too, can
put on an electrode suit and operate another remote, and so on ad
infinitum. The idea was received with enthusiasm by the underworld,
because it is as easy to find the operator of a remote as it is to
locate a radio transmitter. The police had no problem solving teleferic
burglaries and murders. But if the perpetrator remote was operated by
another remote, by the time you got to the second remote the criminal,
the human, had broken radio contact with his "middleman" and left no
clues.

The catalogs of Telemate and Sony offered remotes from Lillputians to
King Kongs, as well as famous people-in-history remotes, uncanny
re-creations of Nefertiti, Cleopatra, and Queen Navarra, not to mention
movie stars. In order to avoid lawsuits for "resemblance to persons
living or dead," anyone wanting a copy of the First Lady in his closet,
or his neighbor's wife, availed himself of a mailorder unassembled
model. The customer, in the privacy of his own home, could put together
the Playmate of his choice, following the instructions. Narcissists
ordered their own likeness. The legal system could not handle the flood
of new cases, moreover it became clear that one could not outlaw remotes
as one outlawed the manufacture of drugs or atomic bombs by private
individuals, because the remotes were already big business and
indispensable, besides, in agriculture, technology, and science,
including astronautics. It was only by remote, after all, that a man
could land on such planets as Saturn or Jupiter. Remotes were also used,
of course, for mining and for rescuing people in the mountains and
during earthquakes and other natural disasters. The Lunar Agency had a
special contract with Gynandroics for moon remotes. I would soon learn
that they had indeed used them in project LEM, but with results as
mystifying as they were catastrophic.

Chief Engineer Paridon Sawekahu showed me around the Gynandroics plant.
Tottentanz and Blahouse were with me. Engineer Sawekahu complained about
the new legal restrictions that hampered the firm's research and
development of prototypes. And banks, he said, were now putting sensors
at their entrances to detect remotes, but that was only the half of it.
The banks, of course, feared remote robbery. But instead of using a
simple alarm they employed thermoinduction. The remote, as soon as it is
recognized, is blasted with high-frequency waves, which cause its wires
to melt and turn it into scrap. And the customers complain not to the
banks but to Gynandroics. Also, there have been attacks, with bombs
even, on trucks carrying remotes, especially attractive females.
Engineer Paridon said his firm suspected the women's liberation movement
for these acts of terrorism but at the moment it had nothing that would
hold up in court.

I was shown the whole production process, from the welding of the
duraluminum skeletons to the covering of the "chassis" with fleshlike
material. Most of the remotes are produced in eight sizes. A custom-made
model costs twenty times more. Remotes don't have to resemble people,
but the more different they are from a human build, the harder they are
to control. A prehensile tail would be an excellent safety feature for
remotes working at great heights, installing cables on suspension
bridges for example, but a man has nothing with which to operate a tail.
Then we drove in a small electric car (because of the size of the place)
to the warehouses, and there I saw planetary and lunar remotes. The
greater the gravity, the harder it is to build a remote, because a
remote too small cannot accomplish much, and one too big, powered with
big engines to make it move, will weigh too much.

We returned to the assembly hall. If Dr. Wahatan of the UN had been a
diplomatic Asian, with a politely restrained smile, Engineer Paridon was
an enthusiastic Asian: his bluish lips never closed, and when he smiled,
he showed all his perfect teeth.

"Do you know, Ijon, what the team from General Pedipulatrics and its
robots couldn't manage? Walking on two legs! They flopped because their
prototype kept flopping over! Good, eh? Ha, ha, ha! Gyroscopes,
counterweights, double feedback in the knees -- nothing helped. Of
course we have no problem there, a man balances his remote naturally!"

I watched the female remotes coming down the conveyor belt, their skin
as rosy-white as a baby's. One after another they were taken by other
belts to the packing area, so that we stood under a line of naked women
moving steadily over our heads, inert but their long hair swinging as
though it were alive. I asked Paridon if he was married.

"Ha, ha, ha! You make a joke, Ijon! I have a wife and children, of
course. A shoemaker doesn't wear the shoes he makes. But we give our
workers one a year as a bonus."

"What workers?" I asked. There were none in the hall. On the assembly
line worked robots painted yellow, green, and blue, their articulated
arms extending like geometric caterpillars.

"Ha, ha, ha! In the office we still have a few people. And in the
sorting room, the control room, the packing department. Uh-oh, a reject!
The legs are not quite right. Crooked! Would you like to try one, Ijon?
No charge, you can have a week, and we deliver."

"No, thanks," I said. "I'm not the Pygmalion type."

"Pygmalion? Ah yes, of course, George Bernard Shaw! I see the allusion.
True, some find it repugnant. But you must admit, it's better to make
women than war! Eh?"

"There are still objections," I said. "I saw the picket line at the
gate."

"Yes. An ordinary woman just can't compete with one who's remote. In
life, beauty is the exception to the rule, but with us it is the norm!
The marketplace, supply and demand, yes, that's the way of the world. .
."

We visited the dressing room, which was full of rustling skirts and
lingerie and women busy with scissors and tape measures, not very
attractive but then they were only live, and I said goodbye to Engineer
Paridon, who accompanied me to the parking lot. Tottentanz and Blahouse
were strangely quiet on the way back. I didn't feel like talking either.
The day, however, was not finished.

On my return home I found a fat envelope in my mailbox. It contained a
book with the title The Unhumanization of Weapon Systems in the
Twenty-first Century or Upside-down Evolution. The author's name,
Meslant, told me nothing. It was a heavy book, full of graphs and
tables. Having nothing better to do, I sat down and began to read. On
the first page, before the introduction, was an epigraph in German:

 

Aus Angst und Not

 Das Heer ward tot.

            -- Eugen von Wahnzenstein

 

The author presented himself as an expert in contemporary military
history. His subject, the new pacifism at the close of the twentieth
century: it was prosperity and cowardice that gave birth to the
unhumanization of war. People were increasingly reluctant to be fired
upon, and this loss of martial spirit was directly proportional to the
standard of living. The youth of wealthy nations weren't interested in
the noble motto Duke et decorum est pro patria mori. And it was just at
that time that prices began falling in the intellectronics industry.
Microprocessing elements called chips were replaced by corn, the product
of the genetic engineering of a culture of artificial microbes, mainly
Silicobacterium logicum wieneri, named after the father of cybernetics.
A handful of these elements cost no more than a handful of barley. Thus
artificial intelligence grew cheap, yet the price of new weapons
increased geometrically. In the first world war a plane cost as much as
a car, in the second as much as twenty, and by the end of the century it
was six hundred times more. It was calculated that in seventy years a
superpower would be able to afford from eighteen to twenty-two planes.
The falling curve of the cost of intelligence and the rising curve of
the cost of weapons intersected, and at that point began the
unhumanization of the armies. The military became unliving. At which
juncture the world went through two crises. The first was when the price
of oil soared, the second when shortly thereafter it plunged. The
classic rules of economics went out the window, but few understood what
was happening, or that the image of a soldier in uniform and helmet
charging with bayonet was becoming as distant as the medieval knight in
armor. Out of inertia the engineers continued to make big-gauge weapons
for a while: tanks, cannon, carriers, and other fighting machines to be
used by men, though already these could have gone into battle
themselves, without them. Then followed a phase of accelerated
miniaturization. Until now all weaponry had been fashioned to fit man:
Tailored to his anatomy and physiology, so that he could kill and be
killed.

As is usually the case in history, no one saw what lay ahead, for the
discoveries which were to make possible the unhumanization of weapons
took place in fields of science far from one another. Intellectronics
produced microcomputers as cheap as grass, and neuroentomology finally
solved the riddle of social insects who live and work together,
communicating in their own language, even though bees, for example, have
a nervous system 380,000 times smaller than a human brain. The
intelligence of a bee is quite sufficient for a foot soldier, as
military prowess and intelligence are two different things, at least on
the battlefield. The major factor in the push for miniaturization was
the atom bomb. The need to miniaturize came from simple facts, but facts
that lay outside the military knowledge of the day. Seventy million
years ago a huge meteor hit Earth and chilled its climate for centuries,
making the dinosaurs defunct but hardly bothering insects and not even
touching bacteria. The lesson of paleontology was clear: the greater the
destructive force, the smaller the systems that escape it. The atom bomb
required the particularization of both soldier and army. But in the
twentieth century the idea of making soldiers the size of ants was only
a fantasy. You could not reduce people in size or diffuse them. So
thought was given to robot soldiers, humanoid, though even then that was
a naive anachronism. Industry was unhumanizing itself, but the robots
who replaced workers on the assembly line were not made in the likeness
of men; they were, rather, human parts selected and enlarged: a brain
with a big steel hand or a brain with eyes. But giant robots had no
place on an atomic battlefield. So radioactive synsects (synthetic
insects) were developed, and ceramic shellfish, and titanium worms able
to burrow in the earth and come out after the blast. Flying synsects
were airplane, pilot, and missiles all in one tiny entity. The
operational unit became a microarmy, fighting only as a whole, much as a
swarm of bees acts as a unit to survive while an individual bee is
nothing. Thus microarmies of many, kinds were made, on two opposing
principles. An army based on the principle of independence proceeded
like a column of ants or a cloud of germs or hornets. An army based on
the principle of teletopism, however, was an enormous flying or crawling
collection of self-assembling elements; according to need, tactical or
strategic, it could reach its target in extreme attenuation only to
condense there into its programmed whole. The simplest example was the
self-dispersing atomic warhead. An ICBM could be tracked, from space by
satellite or from Earth using radar; but it was impossible to detect a
cloud of infinitesimal particles of uranium or plutonium at very low
density, which finally would converge and reach critical mass at its
target, a factory or an enemy city.

For a while the old and new weapons coexisted, but the massive machines
soon succumbed to the invisible micro. As germs secretly enter an animal
organism and kill it from within, so did these unliving microbes
penetrate cannon barrels, shell chambers, the engines of tanks and
planes, and eat through metal, and detonate the ammunition inside. What
could a brave, grenade-carrying soldier do against a microscopic,
unliving adversary? He would be like a doctor trying to fight a virus
with a hammer. Against an autonomous cloud programmed to destroy all
things biological a man in uniform was as helpless as a Roman legionary
standing with sword and shield before a rain of bullets.

Even in the twentieth century the tactic of fighting in closed ranks was
replaced by the spreading out of troops, but there were still front
lines. Now there were none. Microarmies easily penetrated all defenses.
Nuclear weapons were ineffective combatting that viral contagion. The
cost of a warhead, moreover, cannot be considerably greater than the
value of its target. One doesn't use a destroyer to go after leeches.

The most vexing problem in this unhumanized stage of man's struggle with
man turned out to be that of telling friend from foe. In the past it had
been done by electronics, using the password principle. Challenged by
radio waves, a plane or missile either transmitted back the correct
answer or was attacked. This twentieth-century method became obsolete.
Now the makers of arms borrowed from the plants and animals, from
bacteria. For the recognition process they imitated the ways of living
species: immune systems, the duel of antigen and antibody, tropism,
mimicry, protective coloration, camouflage. A micro-weapon might pretend
to be an innocent microorganism, or the fluff of a plant, a piece of
pollen, but beneath that exterior lay corrosive death. The significance
of informational combat also increased -- not in the sense now of
propaganda but as the invasion of enemy communications, to paralyze it
or, as in the case of the atomic locust-cloud, to force premature
condensation to critical mass before it reached its target. The author
of the book discussed the cockroach, which was the prototype for one
kind of micro-soldier. On its abdomen the cockroach has very fine hairs.
When they are moved by the air, the insect flees, because these sensors
are wired directly to its rear nerve ganglion, and they can distinguish
between a draft and the disturbance caused by a predator.

As I read, I felt pity for the champions of uniforms, flags, and medals
for bravery: the new era of warfare must have been anathema to their
high ideals. The audior used the term upside-down evolution, because in
the beginning of life there were microscopic systems which slowly
changed into larger systems, while this military evolution proceeded the
other way, microminiaturization, and the great human brain was replaced
by mechanical insect ganglia. Microarmies arose in two steps. First, the
designers and builders were still human; then the unhumanized divisions
were conceived, battle-tested, and put into mass production by computer
systems that were equally nonhuman. People were eliminated from the
military and then from the weapons industry by a phenomenon called
"sociointegrational degeneration." The individual soldier underwent
degeneration: he became smaller and simpler. In the end he had the
intelligence of an ant or termite. But the collective of these tiny
warriors assumed a greater role. The nonliving army was far more complex
than a beehive or ant hill; it was more like a biotope in nature, an
ecosystem, a subtle equilibrium between competitive, antagonistic, and
symbiotic species. A sergeant or corporal in such an army obviously had
nothing to do. To grasp the whole picture, merely to inspect the troops,
not even the brain power of an entire university would suffice. Thus
officers as well as poor Third World countries did not fare well during
the great military revolution of the twenty-first century. The
irresistible momentum of army unhumanization destroyed the lofty
traditions of maneuvers, marches, drills, changing the guard, and
regalia. For a while but alas not for long, it was possible to preserve
the highest ranks for people, but the strategy-computational superiority
of the computerized echelons of command finally put even the most
corpulent leaders, including four-star generals, out of work. A chest of
ribbons and medals was no protection from early retirement. These
officers, facing permanent unemployment -- for they could do nothing
else -- revolted, forming an underground terrorist movement. The
crushing of this revolt with the use of microspies and minipolice built
on the abovementioned cockroach principle was a grim chapter in our
history, because neither cover of dark nor mist nor any kind of
camouflage could save those desperate traditionalists loyal to the ideas
of Achilles and Clausewitz.

As for the poor countries, they could go on fighting as before, using
live people, but only against opponents as anachronistic as themselves.
Those who couldn't automate militarily had to sit quietly in the corner.

But it wasn't fun for the rich countries either. The old political games
went out the window. The line separating war and peace, having long been
blurry, was now completely erased. The twentieth century had dispensed
with the formal declaration of war and introduced the fifth column,
sabotage, cold war, and war by proxy, but that was only the beginning.
Summit meetings for disarmament pursued mutual understanding and a
balance of power but were also held to learn the strengths and
weaknesses of the enemy. The world of the war-or-peace alternative
became a world in which war was peace and peace war. First, wide-range
subversive activity was conducted under the mask of official peace: the
infiltration of political, religious, and social movements, even such
worthy movements as those to protect the environment; the infiltration
also of the culture and mass media, taking advantage of the illusions of
the young and the conservatism of the old. Then covert military activity
intensified to the point of being overt, except that it was invisible.
Acid rain had been known in the twentieth century; now rain fell that
was so corrosive, it destroyed the roofs of houses and factories, roads,
electrical lines, but no one knew whether this was pollution or the
enemy sending poison clouds their way. It was thus with everything. Farm
animals died in epidemics that could have been natural or intentional. A
storm that flooded the coast might have been an act of God or the clever
redirection of a hurricane at sea. A drought -- a normal disaster, or
one caused by the secret switching of heavy clouds with light. With
seismic, meteorological, and epidemiological counterespionage and
reconnaissance the scientists had their hands full. More and more of the
scientific community became involved with intelligence work, yet the
results of their research grew less and less clear. The tracking down of
saboteurs was child's play in the days when they were human; but now,
when the suspect was a hurricane or hailstorm, or a crop or cattle
disease, or the rise in infant mortality or cancer rate, or even a
meteor (the twentieth century had already considered the idea of aiming
an asteroid at enemy territory), life became intolerable. Intolerable
not only for the man on the street but also for heads of state, who were
helpless and confused, and their advisors no less. The military
academies added new courses such as cryptotactics, cryptocountering
(that is, taking counterespionage to the nth power), crypto field
theory, and finally cryptocryptics, the secret study of the secret use
of secret weapons indistinguishable from natural phenomena.

To blacken the enemy, one could fake a natural disaster in one's own
country -- in a way that made it obvious it was not natural. Also it was
proved that certain rich nations, helping those less fortunate, put a
drug into the supplies of wheat, corn, and cocoa it sold (cheaply),
which caused impotence. This was, then, a secret war of birth control.
Although the catastrophic consequence of such escalation was obvious --
wherein victory was equivalent to defeat for both sides -- the
politicians continued with business as usual, concerned more about the
voters than the future, making fuzzy promises and being increasingly
less able to affect the course of real events. War was peace, not from
Orwell's totalitarian doublethink but because of a technology that
erased the boundary between natural and artificial in every aspect of
human life and its environment.

Where there is no difference, wrote the author, between natural and
artificial protein or between natural and artificial intelligence,
misfortunes caused deliberately cannot be distinguished from those
caused by no one. Just as light that falls into a black hole cannot pull
itself out of that gravitational trap, so humanity at war, reaching the
secrets of matter, cannot leave the trap of technology. It wasn't the
governments, heads of state, monopolies, generals, or pressure groups
that made the decision to invest everything in the new arms, it was
fear, fear that the Other Side would discover, invent, and develop
first. Traditional politics were useless. Negotiators could negotiate
nothing, because the offer to give up a new weapon only meant, for the
other side, that you had a weapon that was even newer. I turned to a
mathematical model of conflict theory which showed why further summit
meetings were a waste of time. At such meetings, agreements were
reached. But it took longer to reach an agreement than for a new
development to change radically the situation on which that agreement
was based, thus making it an immediate anachronism. The act of reaching
an agreement, then, was an empty game of appearances. This was what
compelled the world powers to accept the Geneva Agreement: an exodus of
weapons to the moon. The world breathed a sigh of relief, but not for
long, because fear returned -- now as the specter of the nonhuman
invasion of Earth by the moon. So there was no task more urgent than to
pierce the mystery of the moon.

With these words the chapter ended. There were a few dozen pages left in
the book, but they wouldn't turn. As if they were glued. Stuck together
with bookbinder's glue, I thought. I couldn't separate them, so finally
I took a knife and slid it carefully between the pages. The first page
was blank, but where the knife touched it, letters formed. I rubbed the
paper with the knife until I obtained the following message: "Are you
ready to assume this burden? If not, put the book back in the envelope!
If yes, turn the page!"

The next page was also blank. I ran the blade from top to bottom and
eight numbers appeared, in groups of two with hyphens between them like
a telephone number. I separated the remaining pages but there was
nothing on them. "A curious way to recruit Savers of the World!" I
thought. At the same time I began to suspect what lay in store. I closed
the book but it opened again by itself at the page with the numbers.
Nothing was left for me but to pick up the phone and dial.

 

 

 

 In Hiding

 

It was a private loony bin for millionaires. Somehow you never hear
about insane millionaires. A movie star or a statesman or even a king
can go insane but not a millionaire. At least not judging from the
newspapers which put revolutions and the fall of governments in small
print buried in the middle of the paper but on the front page they tell
you absolutely everything about the mental state of a practically naked
young woman with big breasts, or a snake that crawled up a circus
elephant's trunk, causing the animal to go on a rampage in a supermarket
and crush three hundred cans of Campbell's tomato soup along with a
register and one checkout girl. An insane millionaire would be welcome
in a paper like that. But millionaires don't like publicity whether
they're insane or not. Insanity might help a movie star's career but not
a millionaire's. A movie star doesn't even have to have acting ability,
or a voice, they can dub in another, and her real face can be totally
unlike her posters and films, the main thing is to have "it," and she'll
have "it" if she's getting divorced again or buys a convertible
upholstered with ermine or poses nude for Playboy or has an affair with
a pair of octogenarian Quaker Siamese twins. Today a politician too must
have a great voice, a great smile, and a great body to win voters over
the television. But millionaires can only be hurt by such things, not to
mention the market. A millionaire has to be calm, predictable, and
reserved. Any unpredictability better be hidden. And because it has
become extraordinarily difficult to hide from the press these days,
millionaire asylums serve as invisible fortresses, invisible because
inconspicuous: there are no uniformed guards, no slavering dogs on
leashes, no barbed wire, for that only whets a reporter's appetite. Such
an asylum should look uninteresting, and above all it will never call
itself an insane asylum. The asylum I found myself in was supposedly for
people with ulcers and bad hearts. How then, you ask, did I know
straight off that it was a loony bin?

We weren't allowed inside until Dr. House, a trusted colleague of
Tarantoga's, came to get us. He asked if I wouldn't like to take a
little walk in the park while he talked with Tarantoga. So I felt sure
he assumed I was insane. Apparently the professor hadn't had time to
fill him in, because we left Australia in such a hurry. House deposited
me among flower beds, fountains, and hedges, and our bags were whisked
away by two attractive women in elegant suits who didn't look at all
like nurses, which also set me thinking, but the clincher was when a
potbellied old man in pajamas, seeing me, moved over so I could sit
beside him on the lawn swing, which I did, to be polite. We swung back
and forth in silence for a while, then he asked if I wouldn't mind
urinating on him, though he put it more crudely. I was so taken aback
that instead of refusing I asked him why. This agitated him. He got up
and walked away, limping on his left foot and muttering to himself,
probably about me. I looked around the park, glancing now and then at my
left hand and foot, as you might at a purebred dog that you've recently
been given and that has already bitten a few people. The fact that they
were behaving themselves now, swinging quietly with me, was not at all
reassuring. I remembered the events of the last few days and thought
that in my head another mind lurked side by side with mine, a mind also
mine yet inaccessible, which was worse than schizophrenia because you
can be cured of that, and worse than the disease of St. Vitus because
there all that can happen is that you dance, while I was condemned to a
life of mad antics within. Patients were walking along the paths, some
followed at a distance by an electric golf cart, probably in case the
patient got tired. Finally I hopped off the swing to see if Dr. House
had finished talking with Tarantoga and that's how I met Kramer. He was
riding piggyback on an elderly servant dripping with sweat and blue in
the face because Kramer must have weighed two hundred and fifty pounds.
I felt sorry for the servant but said nothing and stepped aside to let
them pass, figuring that in my present situation I shouldn't involve
myself. Kramer, however, slid off the old man and introduced himself.
Evidently interested in a new face. I couldn't remember what my last
name was supposed to be at the asylum though Tarantoga and I had agreed
on one. All I could remember was the first name, Jonathan. Kramer liked
my informality and asked me to call him Adelaide.

He grew talkative. He'd been terribly bored since his depression lifted.
The anguish had kept him from being bored. His depression, he explained
to me, resulted from his inability to fall asleep if he first didn't lie
in bed and fantasize a while. In the beginning he pictured the stocks he
bought going up and the ones he sold plummeting. Then he pictured having
a million dollars. When he got a million, he pictured two, then three,
but after five it lost its charm. He had to find new ground for his
imagination. It was not easy, he said with a sigh. You can't fantasize
about what you already have or can obtain right away. For a while he
pictured getting rid of his third wife without paying a cent in alimony,
but then he managed to do just that. House still didn't appear, and
Kramer had got his hooks into me. For a while he used people he was mad
at to fall asleep. But that was a mistake because such fantasizing fired
up the hate inside him and then he had to take sleeping pills to fall
asleep, but the doctors said he shouldn't on account of his enlarged
liver, so the only way then to get rid of the hate was to get rid of the
objects of it. No, of course he didn't hire some Mafia hit man, that
kind of thing is strictly for the movies. He hired a real professional,
and a hundred thousand dollars a throw was nothing. No, not killing,
when you kill someone, you can't really do anything to him. Nor did he
derive any particular satisfaction from physical torture. An enemy or a
competitor should be ruined, shown pity, and that's the end of it. It's
like a corporate raid on the personal level. Kramer had an intellectual
side, too, which he concealed from his fellow millionaires, he read
books, even de Sade. A sad case, that! Fantasizing about impalement,
flaying, and disembowlment while he sat in a hovel with nothing to pick
on but flies. The poor have it easy! Everything lures the poor man,
everything appeals to him. Every beautiful woman is beyond his reach.
Which is why the porn industry does so well. Pneumatic women with
pouting fat-lipped mouths, detailed descriptions of orgies plus special
oils and paraphernalia, it's all surrogate and silly. Orgies are so
tiresome anyway, there's nodiing to talk about, nothing left to
fantasize about. Oh to have an unfulfillable longing! Adelaide shook his
head and said that he had foolishly cut off the branch he sat on by
settling those old scores. Now, having nothing to dream about, he
suffered from chronic insomnia. He hired a professional fantasist,
probably a writer or poet. The man did come up with a few passable ideas
for him, but a good fantasy compels its realization and after that it's
gone, so they had to be all but impossible. I interrupted to say that
that shouldn't be so hard. Move a continent. Saw the moon into four
equal parts. Eat the leg of the President of the United States in
Chinese duck sauce (I pulled out all the stops, after all I was talking
to a madman). Have intercourse with a firefly at the moment of its
brightest light. Walk on water, become a national holiday, change places
with God. Pay the terrorists to leave ministers, ambassadors, and
company executives alone and go after the people who really deserve it.

Adelaide was looking at me now not only with fondness but also with
admiration. "A pity we didn't meet sooner, Jonathan," he sighed. "You're
on the right track, but, you see, with continents and moons and miracles
there's no personal involvement. A true fantasist's emotions have to be
engaged. And fireflies don't do anything for me. But a good fantasy
isn't really a matter of lust or fury, it's like a rainbow, it's there
and not there, and then you fall asleep. During the day I never had time
for rainbows. My writer expert stated that the number of one's possible
fantasies is inversely proportional to the amount of one's liquid
assets. For him who has everything dreams are no longer possible. Change
places with God? God forbid! But I would have hired you anyway."

On the broad leaf of a low needleless cactus was a large slug. An ugly
thing, and that was no doubt why Adelaide nodded to his servant. "Eat
that," he said, pointing. At the same time he pulled a checkbook and pen
out of his pajama pocket.

"How much will he do it for?" I wondered. The servant put out his hand
for the slug but I stopped him.

"I'll give you a thousand dollars more than Mr. Kramer if you don't eat
it," I said, taking my notebook from my pocket. It was covered with the
same green plastic as Adelaide's checkbook.

The servant froze. In the face of the millionaire was hesitation, and I
didn't know whether or not we would start bidding now. My resources were
certainly no match for Kramer's. So I had to change tactics.

"How much will you eat it for, Adelaide?" I asked, opening my notebook
as though I were about to write a check. This delighted him. The servant
was no longer in the picture.

"I'll give you a blank check if you swallow it without chewing and
describe to me how it moves in your stomach," he said in a hoarse voice.

"Unfortunately I had breakfast already and I don't eat between meals," I
said with a smile. "Anyway your bank account must be controlled by
trustees."

"No, you're wrong! Chase Manhattan always honors my checks."

"Perhaps, but I'm not hungry. Let's return to fantasies." This
conversation had so absorbed me that I forgot all about my left side but
it reminded me. We were moving away from the slug of contention when I
tripped the millionaire and at the same time chopped him in the neck so
that he fell flat on the grass. I relate this in the first person though
it was my left foot and left hand that did it.

"Forgive me," I said, thinking quickly, "but that was my fantasy." I
helped him up. He was not so much offended as stunned. It was obvious no
one had ever treated him like that, either here or before the asylum.

"A clever fellow," he said, brushing off the dirt. "But don't do that
again, because I might slip a disk. And start fantasizing about you." He
laughed an evil laugh. "So what is wrong with you?"

"Nothing."

"Yes, of course, but why are you here?"

"To get a little rest."

I saw Dr. House at the far end of the shady path. He lifted his hand,
beckoned for me, then turned and went toward the pavilion.

"I have to go, Adelaide," I said, slapping him on the back. "We'll
fantasize another time."

From the open door came the pleasant coolness of air conditioning. The
walls were pale green and the place as quiet as pharaoh's tomb, with a
thick carpet white like the fur of a polar bear. Dr. House was waiting
for me in his office. Tarantoga was there too and seemed embarrassed. In
his lap was a briefcase stuffed with papers which he sorted through
while House pointed to an armchair. I sat down with a sinking feeling
that I was getting into something I would not be able to get out of in
one piece.

Dr. House sat at his desk reading a newspaper. Then Tarantoga finally
found what he had been looking for.

"This is how it is, Ijon. . . I saw two attorneys, two of the best, to
assess your situation from the legal point of view. I said nothing about
your Mission, of course, and sketched your story only in the most
general terms. A man gains access to certain highly secret information
and must report it to a certain division of the government, but he is
callotomized before he can do this, and part of what he learned is
forgotten, residing no doubt in the right hemisphere of his brain. What
is his duty now? What steps can the government take legally to retrieve
the information? Both lawyers said it is a difficult case because it
sets a precedent. If it is decided in court, expert witnesses will have
to be called in, though their testimony might or might not be ignored.
In any case without a subpoena you cannot be subjected to any
examination or experiment, if that's the route the government wishes to
take."

Dr. House raised his head from his paper. "An amusing case," he said,
taking a bag of ginger cookies from a drawer, sliding them onto a plate
and pushing the plate in my direction. "I realize, Mr. Tichy, that you
are not amused, but every paradox of the circulus vitiosus variety is
amusing. Do you know what lateralization is?"

"Of course," I answered, frowning as my left hand reached for a cookie
that I didn't want at all. But wanting even less to make a fool of
myself, I bit into it. "I've read plenty about it. In the average man
the left hemisphere is dominant because it governs speech. The right is
generally silent though it understands simple sentences and sometimes
can even read a little. If left lateralization is not strong, the right
hemisphere may be more independent and also have more linguistic
ability. In rare cases there is almost no lateralization and then the
centers of speech are found in both hemispheres, which can cause
stuttering and other problems. . ."

"Very good." House smiled at me approvingly. "From what I have been told
I would conclude that your left brain, as we sometimes call it, is
distinctly dominant, but that the right is unusually active. To be
certain of this, though, I would need to examine you at length."

"Where is the paradox?" I asked, trying inconspicuously to avoid my left
hand because it was putting more ginger cookies into my mouth.

"The value of questioning your right brain depends on the degree of your
right lateralization. We must first determine that degree, which means
examining you, but to examine you we need your consent. In other words,
the court experts could not go beyond what I am saying now: that the
court's decision depends upon the extent of the lateralization of Ijon
Tichy, but that cannot be determined without examination. One must
examine you to decide whether you can be examined. Do you understand?"

"Yes. What do you advise me to do, doctor?"

"I cannot advise you to do anything, because I am in the same boat as
the court and the experts. No one in the world, including you, knows
what your right brain holds. Your idea to use sign language has been
done before but without significant results, because the right
lateralization in those cases was too weak."

"And that's really all you can tell me?"

"You might put your left arm in a sling or better yet a cast. It betrays
you."

"What do you mean?"

Dr. House pointed at the plate of ginger cookies.

"The right brain usually likes sweets more than the left. There have
been statistical studies. I wanted to show you how simply someone could
establish your lateralization. As a right-handed person you would have
reached for the cookies with your right hand -- or not at all."

"But why should I keep my arm in a cast? What good would that do?"

Dr. House shrugged.

"Very well. I shouldn't say this but I will. You know about piranha?"

"The small carnivorous fish."

"As a rule they don't attack a man in the water. But if he has the least
cut, one drop of blood is enough for them to attack. The language skills
of the right brain are no greater than those of a three-year-old child,
and usually less. With you, they are considerable. If that fact gets
out, you are in serious trouble."

"Perhaps he should just go to the Lunar Agency," said Tarantoga, "and
put himself in their hands. They owe him something, since he risked his
neck for them. . ."

"That may not be the worst solution, but it is not a good one either.
There is no good solution."

"Why?" Tarantoga and I asked.

"Because the more they extract from the right brain, the more they'll
want, which could mean, to put it politely, a long isolation."

"A month? Two?"

"Or a year or more. Normally the right brain communicates with the world
through the left, in speech and writing. It has never happened that the
right has learned, and fluently, a whole language. But the stakes are so
high in your case that they will put more effort into this area of
research than all the specialists combined have done to date."

"Yet we must do something," muttered Tarantoga.

Dr. House rose. "True, but not necessarily today. At the moment there's
no hurry. Mr. Tichy may stay here if he likes, for a couple of months.
Perhaps in that time things will become clearer."

Too late I learned how right Dr. House was. Since no one can help me
better than I myself, I have written down everything that has happened,
read it into a tape recorder, burned all the notes, and now will put the
recorder and the cassette in a jar and bury them under the cactus where
I met the slug. I am speaking now to use up the end of the tape. The
expression "I met the slug" seems wrong somehow. You can meet a cow, or
a monkey or an elephant, but hardly a slug. Could this be because you
can meet only a party who is able to take notice of you? I doubt that
the slug noticed me although it moved its little horns. It's not a
question of size. No one says "I met a flea," on the other hand one can
meet a very small child. Why am I using the end of the tape for such
nonsense? I'll bury the jar and from now on write notes in a code I've
thought up. I'll call my right hemisphere It or maybe Andi, which is and
I, I and I, but maybe that's too transparent. The tape ends now and I'm
reaching for the shovel.

 

 

 July 8th / An awful heat wave. Everyone's in pajamas or a bathing suit.
Me too. Through Kramer I've met two other millionaires, Sturman and
Padderhorn. Melancholiacs both. Sturman is about sixty, jowly, a big
belly, bow-legs, and he whispers. Gives the impression that he's telling
secrets. He says his is a hopeless case. His depression worsened
recently because he can't remember why he got depressed in the first
place. He has three daughters, all married and unfaithful, and
photographers send him flagrante delicto photographs and he has to pay
them off. Trying to be of help, I suggested that this might be the cause
of his depression but he said no, he was used to it. I really don't know
why I'm putting this down. It's not very interesting. Padderhorn doesn't
talk. Supposedly he merged with a Japanese company and it soured. A dull
group. Gagstein's the worst. He chuckles and drools. And exposes
himself. I must avoid these characters. Dr. House tells me that tomorrow
someone is coming whom I can trust as I trust him. A young intern, but
in reality he's an ethnologist and writing a work on millionaires in the
context of small-group dynamics or something like that.

 

 

 July 9th / Tarantoga has left and I am now alone with House, his
assistant, and the millionaires who wander the park. House told me
privately that he prefers not to learn the extent of my right
lateralization because what is not known cannot be stolen. The assistant
revealed to me after I swore I was no millionaire that he is doing
fieldwork. He is studying the customs and attitudes of millionaires just
as one might study the beliefs of a primitive tribe. The young
ethnologist and I have had long evening conversations over a bottle of
Teachers in the small laboratory, using beakers for glasses. I've also
met a few other Croesuses. The most boring people in the world. The
ethnologist agrees with me. He begins to fear that he will not be able
to gather enough data here.

"You know what?" I told him. "You could do a comparative study: The Rich
Then and Now. The state or foundations as patron of the arts is a recent
phenomenon. In ancient Rome the patrons were private citizens. The
protectors of art, muses, and so on. Rich men and princes took care of
artists, sculptors, and painters. They took an interest. But these ones"
-- I pointed out the window with my thumb at the park, which was dark in
the night -- "are interested in nothing but market quotations. Take me,
for example: I am fairly well known. Because of my travel books I've
received a ton of letters, but among my millions of readers there has
not been one millionaire. Why is that? Most millionaires, I'm told, live
in Texas. We have three of them here. Even as lunatics they're boring.
What is the reason? The Roman rich were intellectually alive, but these
are not. What did this? The market? Money? And how?"

"No, it's something else. The rich of old were believers. They wanted to
serve God, but without mortifying the flesh. Building a cathedral or
supporting a painter, making a Last Supper possible or a Moses, or
something big and splendid with a spire, in that they saw a dividend,
Mr. Tichy, for they saw Him in it," and he pointed to the ceiling, the
sky. "And others followed their example. It became the thing to do. A
prince, doge, or magnate surrounded himself with gardeners and coachmen,
scribblers and painters. Louis XV hired Boucher to do portraits of naked
women. Boucher's third-rate, of course, but his work has survived, while
the coachmen and gardeners have left nothing."

"The gardeners produced Versailles."

"The point is that those rich didn't understand art but thought it was
in their interest. Today, in the age of specialization, they couldn't
care less. . . What's wrong? A chest pain?"

"No. I think I've been robbed."

My hand was in fact on my heart, because the inside pocket of my jacket
was empty.

"Impossible. There are no kleptomaniacs here. You must have left your
wallet in your room."

"No. I had it in my pocket when I came in. I know because I was going to
show you a picture of me with a beard."

"But there's no one else here, and I haven't even come near you. . ."

I had the glimmer of an idea.

"Please tell me exactly what I did from the time we entered."

"You sat down, and I took the bottle from the cupboard. What were we
talking about then? Kramer. You told me about the slug, but I wasn't
watching you, I was looking for clean beakers. When I turned, you were
sitting. . . no, standing. Next to the tachistoscope. Over here. You
were looking into it when I gave you your whiskey. . . We drank, and you
went back to where you are sitting now."

I got up and looked at the apparatus. A chair, a console, a black
partition with a pair of eyepieces, side lamps, a screen, and the box of
a projector. I turned on a switch and the screen lit up. I looked behind
the partition: oxidized black plates. Between the partition and a black
plate was a space no wider than a letterbox slot. I tried to get my hand
in but it was too narrow.

"Any tweezers around here?" I asked. "As long as possible. . ."

"I don't know. I don't see any. Here's a piece of wire."

"Let's have it."

I twisted it into a hook, let it down into the crack, and touched
something soft. After a few unsuccessful tries, a black leather corner
appeared. I needed my other hand to grab it, but the hand refused. The
young ethnologist helped me retrieve my wallet.

"It's It," I said, lifting my left hand.

"But how? Didn't you feel anything? And for what reason?"

"No, I didn't notice. And it wasn't easy, either, because the pocket is
on the left side. It was done nimbly, delicately, like a professional
thief. But that's the speciality of the right brain, coordination, in
games, in sports. For what reason? I can only guess. It's a nonverbal
intelligence, logical but a bit childish. Perhaps in order that I lose
my identity. With no identifying papers or cards a man is nameless to
those who do not know him."

"Ah. . . to make you disappear? But that is magical thinking."

"Yes. And it's not good."

"But It only wants to help you. Which is not surprising, after all It is
also you. Though a little isolated."

"This is not good because Its wanting to help me means that It believes
something is threatening me in this situation. We can laugh now, but the
next time. . ."

House came to see me later that evening. I was sitting on the bed in my
pajamas inspecting my left calf, which had a bad bruise.

"How are you feeling?"

"Fine, but. . ."

And I told him about the wallet.

"Curious. You really felt nothing?"

Then I saw the bruise and remembered. As I had looked into the
tachistoscope, my left leg hit against something hard. It hurt, but I
paid no attention. That's when the pocket must have been picked.

"Most interesting," said Dr. House. "The left hand cannot perform
complicated movements without alerting the muscles on the right side of
the body. Therefore it was necessary to distract you."

"With this?" I indicated the bruise.

"Precisely. The left hand and left foot worked together. When you felt
the pain, you felt nothing else in that moment, and a moment was
enough."

"Does this sort of thing happen often?"

"It is extremely rare."

"But what if someone wanted to get at me -- could he use the same trick?
For instance, stab me on the right so the right wouldn't interrupt while
the left was being interrogated?"

"A professional would do it differently. An injection of Amytal in the
left carotid artery, and the left brain goes to sleep while the right is
awake. It lasts a few minutes."

"And that's sufficient?"

"If not, you insert a little tube into the artery and give the Amytal in
drops. After a while the right hemisphere falls asleep too, because the
brain arteries are connected by the so-called collaterals. Then you have
to wait a while before you can begin again."

I rolled down my pajama leg.

"I don't know how long I can sit here waiting for I don't know what. A
little knowledge is better than none. Why don't you handle it, doctor?"

"But can't you do this yourself? You've found a way to communicate
between one hand and the other. Have you learned anything by that
method?"

"Very little."

"Does It refuse to answer questions?"

"Rather, Its answers are incomprehensible. I know only this: It
remembers in a different way. Perhaps in whole pictures, whole scenes.
But when It tries to put it in words, riddles result. Possibly
everything should be recorded in order and treated as a kind of symbolic
shorthand."

"More a task for a cryptographer than a doctor. Suppose you took such
notes. What would that give you?"

"I don't know."

"Neither do I. And on that note I'll say good night." He left. I turned
out the light and lay down but couldn't sleep. I lay on my back. After a
while my left hand raised itself and several times, slowly, patted my
cheek. Evidently it felt sorry for me. I got up, took a Seconal, and
with both Ijon Tichys extinguished I sank into oblivion.

 

 

My situation was not only bad, it was idiotic. Hiding in an insane
asylum without knowing from whom. Waiting without knowing for what. I
tried talking to myself by hand but although It answered more willingly
than before, I couldn't understand It. I rooted through the asylum
library and filled my room with textbooks, monographs, and piles of
professional journals to find out once and for all who or what I was on
my right hemisphere's side. My hand answered, making a clear effort to
be cooperative, and it even learned new words and expressions which
encouraged me to question further and at the same time made me uneasy.
What if It became my equal or even passed me? Then I would not only have
to take It into account but listen to It or maybe it would even come to
a tug of war where I would not remain in the middle but be torn in two
forever and struggle like a stepped-on beetle, some of whose legs pull
forward while others pull back. At night I dreamed about escaping and
wandering among dark crags and didn't even know which half of me was
dreaming it. What I found out from the pile of books is true: the left
brain, deprived of contact with the right, grows colorless, its language
becomes dry which you can tell by the infrequency of adjectives. Reading
over some of my notes, I saw that that was happening to me. But aside
from such details I learned nothing from the publications of the
experts. There were a lot of hypotheses but none of them fit me, and I
got furious with these scientists who claimed to know better than I did
what it was like to be me doubled. One day, I was ready to abandon all
caution and go to New York, to the Lunar Agency, but the next morning
that seemed to be the last thing I should do. I hadn't heard from
Tarantoga and even though I'd asked him to wait for a sign from me, his
silence too began to irritate me.

Finally I decided to pull myself together like the old, whole Ijon
Tichy. I would go to Berlin, a small town about two miles from the
asylum, to buy a typewriter so I could cross-examine my left hand and
type its answers until I had enough of them to see if there was any
sense there. It was possible of course that I was a right-sided moron
and it was only my personal vanity that kept me from seeing this. Blair,
Goddeck, Shapiro, Rosenkrantz, Bombardino, and McCloskey held that in
the muteness of the right hemisphere lay an unplumbed depth of talent,
intuition, instinct, perhaps even a kind of genius, for this region
contained all the wonders that left-handed rationalism refused to
acknowledge: telepathy, clairvoyance, the traveling of the spirit to
other planes, and visions, and states of mystic transport and
enlightenment. But Kleist, Zuckerkandel, Pinotti, Veehold, Meyer,
Ottitchkin, Nüerlö, and eighty other experts said nonsense. Yes, a
sounding board, an organizer of emotions, an associative system, an echo
chamber of thought, and perhaps some memory, but nothing that could be
put in words, for the right brain was a nonlogical freak, an eccentric,
a dreamer, a boaster, a hermit, a soul but in the raw state, it was
flour and yeast but only the left brain could bake the bread. And a
third opinion ran thus: the right was the engine, the left the steering
mechanism. The right was therefore at a distance from the world and so
had to be led, translated into human speech, commented upon,
disciplined, and made into a person by the left brain.

House offered me the use of his car. He was not surprised by my plan and
did not try to dissuade me. On a scrap of paper he drew a map of the
main street and made a cross where the department store was. But I
wouldn't make it today, he said, because it was Saturday and the store
closed at 1:00. I spent all Sunday in the park avoiding Adelaide. On
Monday I couldn't find House anywhere so I took the bus that left every
hour. It was nearly empty: the black driver, and two children licking
ice-cream cones. The town, a few miles from the asylum, was an
old-fashioned American town. One wide street, houses with low hedges,
gardens, fences, mailboxes, telephone poles, and a couple of larger
buildings at the corner. A mailman stood talking to a fat, sweaty man in
a flowery shirt whose dog, a big shaggy mongrel, was lifting its leg on
a lamp post. I got out not far from them, and when the bus drove off in
a cloud of foul smoke, I looked for the department store Dr. House had
told me of. It was on the other side of the street, large and with big
windows. Two employees in uniform were loading boxes by motor cart onto
a truck. The sun beat down. The truck driver, sitting with his door
open, drank beer from a can, not his first because there were empty cans
at his feet. He was a black man completely white-haired though his face
was not old. On the sunny side of the street walked two women, the
younger pushing a baby carriage with the top up, the older peering into
the carriage and saying something. Despite the heat she wore a black
wool shawl over her head and shoulders. The women passed a car repair
shop with its doors open and a couple of shining cars inside, you could
hear the whoosh of water and hiss of air. I noted all this as I stepped
from the curb to cross the street to the department store. I stopped
because a long dark-green Lincoln that was parked about fifty feet away
suddenly moved in my direction. The front windshield was so tinted I
couldn't see the driver. I got back up on the curb to let him pass but
he braked sharply in front of me. I thought he wanted to ask me
something, but someone grabbed me from behind and covered my mouth with
his hand. I was so surprised that I didn't even try to defend myself. A
man sitting in the back seat opened the car door, and I started to
struggle but I couldn't make a sound. The mailman dived at us and
grabbed me by the legs. Then there was a sharp crack and in an instant
the whole scene changed.

The old woman dropped her shawl on the sidewalk and turned to us. She
held a short machine gun with both hands and fired a volley at the car,
putting holes in the radiator and tires. The white-haired black man, not
drinking beer now, was behind the wheel and with one sharp turn his
truck blocked the Lincoln's way. The shaggy mongrel sprang at the old
woman but fell writhing to the asphalt, meanwhile the mailman let go of
me, jumped back, took from his bag something round and black, and hurled
it at the women. There was a boom and white smoke and the young woman
fell to her knees behind the baby carriage which opened up and started
shooting a column of foamy liquid like a huge fire extinguisher at the
driver of the Lincoln who had jumped out onto the sidewalk. Before the
foam covered him I saw that he was not a black man but only wore a black
mask and held a revolver. The stream hit the windshield of the limousine
with such force that the glass shattered and some of it hit the mailman.
The fat man who gripped me from behind all this time retreated,
protecting himself with my body. From the garage several people in
overalls ran out and pulled him off me. All this took no more than five
seconds.

One of the cars inside the garage backed out and two men in smocks threw
a net over the driver of the Lincoln, taking care not to touch him as he
was covered with gluey foam. The fat man and the mailman, now
handcuffed, were pushed into this car. I stood staring as the man who
had opened the rear door of the Lincoln got out slowly with his hands up
and walked obediently to the truck where the white-haired black man put
handcuffs on him. No one even spoke to me. The car drove away. The truck
holding the driver who'd been shot and his accomplice also pulled away,
and the woman picked up the black shawl, brushed it off, put the machine
gun back into the carriage, raised its hood, and walked on as if nothing
had happened. The street was again quiet and empty. Only the large
limousine with flat tires and broken headlights plus the dead dog were
proof that I hadn't dreamed this.

Next to the department store was a low wooden house with a porch and a
garden full of sunflowers. A sunburned gentleman, his hair so blond it
was almost white, stood in the open window with his elbows comfortably
on the windowsill and a pipe in his hand. He gave me a quiet but
eloquent look that seemed to say: "You see?" Only then did I become
aware of something that was even stranger than the kidnapping attempt:
though my ears still rang with the shots, the screams, and the
explosions, not a single window had opened and no one was looking out
into the street -- as if I was on an empty movie set. I stood there for
a good while, not sure what to do. Buying a typewriter no longer seemed
important.

 

 

 

 The Lunar Agency

 

"Mr. Tichy," said the director, "our people will fill you in on the
details of the Mission. I would just like to give you the general
picture -- so you don't miss the forest for the trees. The Geneva
Agreement made four impossibilities possible. A continuing arms race at
the same time as universal disarmament -- that's one. Arming at maximum
speed and at no cost -- that's two. Full protection of each nation
against surprise attack while each reserves the right to wage war --
that's three. And finally the liquidation of all armies despite their
continued existence. No troops, but the staffs stay on and can think up
anything they like. In a nutshell, we've instituted pacem in terris."

"True," I remarked. "But I read the papers. They say we've gone from the
frying pan into the fire. That the moon is silent and swallowing all
probes because Someone has been able to enter into a secret
understanding with the robots there. That an unnamed nation is behind
everything that's now happening on the moon. And that the Agency knows
this."

"Pure drivel," said the director. We were sitting in his enormous
office. On a platform at one end stood a huge globe of the moon covered
with its smallpox of craters. The sectors of the different nations,
colored green, rose, yellow, and red like a political map, went from
pole to pole, making the sphere look like a child's toy or illuminated
glass orange without its peel. On the wall behind the director hung the
flag of the United Nations.

"There's a lot of that now," he said with a pitying smile on his swarthy
face. "The press prints it all, and it's all nonsense."

"But that movement, those neopacifists, the lunarians, don't they
exist?"

"Oh yes. Have you read their statement? Their program?"

"I have. They call for negotiation with the moon. . ."

" 'Negotiation!' " the director snorted with contempt. "Not negotiation,
capitulation! And nobody knows to whom! Those muddled heads think the
moon has become a party, that it can enter into agreements and pacts,
that it's intelligent and powerful. That up there now is some giant
computer that has devoured all the sectors. Fear not only has big eyes,
Mr. Tichy, it has a small brain."

"Yes, but can we really rule out the possibility of some sort of
unification of all those weapons up there -- of those armies, if they
are armies? How can we be sure this hasn't happened, if we are in the
dark. . . ?"

"Because even in the dark we know that certain things are impossible.
The sector of each country was installed as a self-evolving testing
range. Take a look." He held a small flat box. The different sectors of
the moon lit up, until the globe was as bright as a Chinese lantern.
"The larger areas belong to the superpowers. Of course we know what we
put there: the Agency acted as transporter, after all. We also dug the
foundations for the simulators. Each sector has two simulators
surrounded by a production compound. The sectors cannot fight each
other; it's impossible. One simulator designs new weapons and the other
works to counter them. Both are computers programmed on the
sword-and-shield principle. It's as if each nation put on the moon a
computer that played chess with itself. Except that the game is played
with weapons instead of chess pieces and everything can change: the
moves, the pieces, the board, everything."

"You mean," I asked, surprised, "there's nothing up there but computers
simulating an arms race? Then how is this a threat to Earth? Surely the
simulation of a weapon no more dangerous than a piece of paper. . ."

"Oh no! The weapons that survive selection go into real production. The
whole problem is when. You see, the simulators design not just a new
weapon but a whole new system of warfare. These are, of course, nonhuman
systems. The soldier becomes one with the weapon. Think of natural
evolution, the struggle for existence, Darwin. One simulator designs,
say, a kind of predator, and the other finds its weakness in order to
destroy it. Then the first simulator thinks up something new, and the
second parries that too. In principle a contest like this, with endless
improvements, could go on for a million years -- but each sector after a
certain time must begin actual production of the weapons. The time --
and the effectiveness required of the prototypes -- was determined in
advance by the programmers of each nation. Because each nation wanted to
have an arsenal of real weapons on the moon, not just simulations like
blueprints on paper. Therein lies the rub, the contradiction. Do you
understand?"

"Not entirely. What contradiction?"

"Simulated evolution proceeds much more swiftly than natural evolution.
He who waits longer obtains the better weapon. But for as long as he
waits, he is defenseless. While the one who accepts a shorter simulation
run will obtain his weapon sooner. We call this the coefficient of risk.
Every nation, placing its military might on the moon, had to decide
first whether it wanted better weapons later or poorer weapons sooner."

"Curious," I said. "And what happens when sooner or later production
begins? The weapons are stockpiled?"

"Some of them, perhaps. But only some. Because then an actual, not a
simulated, battle begins -- of course only within the given sector."

"Something like maneuvers?"

"No. On maneuvers the fighting is an exercise, soldiers don't die,
whereas there" -- the director pointed to the colorful moon -- "genuine
combat is taking place. But always within the borders of each sector.
Neighbor cannot attack neighbor. . ."

"So the weapons attack and destroy each other in the computer first, and
then for real. And what then?"

"Good question! No one knows. There are basically two possibilities.
Either the arms race reaches a limit or it doesn't. If it does, this
means 'an ultimate weapon' exists and that the simulated arms race has
finally arrived at it. The weapon cannot defeat itself, and thus ensues
a state of permanent equilibrium. An end to progress. The lunar arsenals
fill with that weapon, which has passed the final test, and nothing more
happens. This is what we would like."

"But it isn't so?"

"Most likely not. In the first place, natural evolution has no end. It
hasn't because no 'ultimate' organism exists, that is, one which is
perfect in survivability. Every species contains a weakness. Secondly,
the evolution on the moon is artificial, not natural. And it's certain
that each sector monitors what is happening in the others and reacts to
that in its own way. Military equilibrium is different from biological
equilibrium. A living species must not be too successful in its struggle
against competitors. Why? Germs that are too virulent kill all their
hosts and so perish with them. Therefore in Nature equilibrium is set at
a point below annihilation. Otherwise evolution would be suicidal. But
research and development in weapons seeks to crush the enemy. Weapons
have no instinct of self-preservation."

"Just a minute," I said, taken by a sudden thought. "Each nation could
in secret build for itself the exact same computer complex on Earth as
the one it put on the moon, and by watching the copy, it would know what
the original was doing. . ."

"Ah, no," said the director with a sad smile. "That is not possible. The
course of evolution cannot be foreseen. We learned this the hard way."

"How?"

"As you said. We used identical computers in our research lab and
identical programs and let them go. Plenty of evolution, but divergent.
It's as if you wanted to predict the outcome of a chess tournament in
Moscow between a hundred grand-master computers by simulating the games
on a hundred identical computers in New York. What would you learn about
the Moscow games? Absolutely nothing. Because no player, man or
computer, always makes the same moves. Of course the politicians wanted
us to provide them with such simulators, but it didn't give them
anything."

"But if nothing so far has helped and all your probes disappeared like
stones in water, how can I hope to succeed?"

"You will have devices no one has had before. My assistants will give
you the details. Good luck. . ."

For three months I wore myself out on the training instruments at the
Lunar Agency and I can tell you that at the end of it I knew telematics
like the palm of my hand. It's the art of operating by remote. You have
to strip completely and pull on an elastic suit a little like a wet suit
but thinner and shining like mercury because it's made of wires lighter
than a spider's web. They're the electrodes. They cling to the body,
transmitting the electrical changes in your muscles to the remote which
uses them to repeat exactly your every movement. That's not odd, the odd
part is that you not only see with the eyes of the remote but you feel
what you would feel if you were in its place. If it picks up a stone,
you feel the shape and weight as if you had it in your own hand. You
feel every step, every stumble, and when the remote bumps into something
too hard, you feel pain. I thought that was a malfunction, but the chief
of my training program, Dr. Lopez, told me it has to be that way.
Otherwise the remote will be constantly damaged. If the pain is great,
you can disconnect the channel, but it's better to lower the intensity
with the modulator instead so you don't lose contact with the remote. A
person in an artificial skin loses all sense of himself and identifies
entirely with the remote. I trained on different models. A remote
doesn't need to be man-sized or -shaped; it can be smaller than an elf
or larger than a Goliath but that causes certain problems. If instead of
legs it has, say, a tractor tread, you lose the feeling of direct
contact with the ground, a little like driving a car or a tank. When the
remote is enormous, you have to move very slowly because its limbs might
weigh several tons each and possess no less inertia on the moon than on
Earth. I experienced this with a two-hundred-ton remote and it was like
walking underwater. But such a remote presents a target the size of a
tower. I also used tiny remotes resembling insects. It was quite
amusing, but from that vantagepoint every pebble is a mountain and it's
hard to get your bearings. The heavier moon remotes were grotesque.
Squat, with short legs to keep the center of gravity as low as possible.
My LEM maintained its balance better than a man in a spacesuit because
it didn't totter, and the arms were long like an orangutan's. Those arms
turned out to be useful in twenty-meter leaps. I particularly wanted to
hear which models had been used in the previous reconnaissance attempts
and how they had functioned. To brief me on those unsuccessful
expeditions my tutors had to get special permission from the director
because all this was top-secret. The whole Mission was top-secret and so
was the fact that the earlier ones had failed. The point was not to fan
the flames of panic which was spread by the press with its speculations.
Central Control gave me the cover of adviser to the Lunar Agency and I
had to avoid journalists like the plague. I was finally able to
interview the two reconnaissance pilots who had returned in one piece
but I never laid eyes on them, talking with them by telephone. Each had
changed not only his name but also his face so that his own mother
wouldn't recognize him.

The first pilot reached the zone of Radio Silence with no difficulty and
went into stationary orbit some two thousand miles above the Mare
Nubium, sending down an armored remote that landed in a completely
deserted region. It was attacked before it took a hundred steps. I tried
to get some details out of him, but he just repeated the same thing. The
remote was walking alone on the flat plain of the Mare Nubium, having
first checked the area in a radius of several hundred kilometers and
detecting nothing suspicious, when an enormous robot, at least twice the
size of the LEM, appeared to one side, very close, and opened fire.
There was a blinding, silent flash and that was all. The pilot
photographed the place from orbit afterwards, and there beside a small
crater lay the remains of the remote, melted into a lump of metallic
slag.

Around it was nothing but the empty plain.

The second pilot had two remotes but one began somersaulting after it
left the ship and broke up on the rocks. The other one was a double,
called twins. Twins are a pair of telemates operated by one person. They
do everything in tandem, one staying a hundred meters behind the other
to see what attacks it. Both were protected moreover by micropes, which
are microscopic cyclops, a sort of television camera made of a swarm of
sensors no bigger than flies and each equipped with a minuscule lens.
The whole cloud of micropes accompanied the twin remotes at an altitude
of a mile above the surface of the moon in order to keep them and their
surroundings too in sight. The pilot operates the remote but the
micropes send their pictures directly to Central Control on Earth. The
result of all this careful planning was miserable. Both remotes were
destroyed in the same moment, with hardly time for them to stand
straight in the lunar dust. The pilot told me they were attacked by two
robots of singular build, low to the ground, humpbacked, and extremely
pudgy. These appeared out of thin air and took immediate aim. He lifted
his gun but didn't have time to pull the trigger. He saw a blue-white
flash, laser for sure, and found himself back on the ship. He
photographed the remains of the remotes, and Control confirmed his
report. The remotes had become incandescent as they were hit by a laser
of great power, but the source of the beam could not be determined. I
watched the film of what the micropes recorded and also examined
pictures of the last moment, magnified to the maximum. The computer
analyzed the image of every stone in a radius of two kilometers which is
the lunar horizon because you can only go in a straight line with a
laser. It was mystifying. The two remotes landed well, not even
staggering, and began marching one after the other in slow motion, when
suddenly they lifted their guns as one man, though the camera showed
nothing, and opened fire, and were hit, one in the chest, the other a
little lower. The bolts of light blew them apart in a cloud of dust and
burning metal. Although the pictures were analyzed from every angle, it
was impossible to find the place from which the lasers were fired. The
desolation in the pictures was greater than the Sahara, and both the
attackers and their weapons remained invisible. But the pilot insisted
that at the moment of the attack he saw two grotesquely humpbacked
robots where a second earlier there was nothing. They came out of
nowhere, took aim, fired, and vanished. He didn't see them vanish, of
course, because the eyes of his remotes were vaporized, but from the
ship he observed the settling cloud of dust and glowing cinders in the
place of his defeat.

I had learned little, yet something of significance: that one could
return from the Mission in one piece. Regarding these mysterious
attacks, there were a number of hypotheses, including one that said that
on the moon something had taken control of both remotes, making them
destroy themselves with mutual fire. The enlarged pictures, however,
showed that they hadn't aimed at each other but to the side, and that
the laser response to their shots -- the measurement made was very
precise -- was practically simultaneous, one tenth of one millionth of a
second after. Spectroscopic analysis of the burning metal of the remotes
showed that the lasers used by the moon robots had the same power as
that of the twins but a different frequency.

It's impossible to simulate the weaker gravity of the moon on Earth, so
after a few exercises at the lab I flew a couple of times a week to the
Agency's orbital station where a special platform had been set up with a
gravity six times weaker than Earth's. When I was able to move
comfortably in the skin of the remote, the next stage of my training
followed, highly realistic though not at all dangerous. But it wasn't
pleasant. I had to walk on an imitation moon among large and small
craters and have things jump out at me.

Since my predecessors had not benefited from their weapons, the Mission
staff decided it would be better if I went unarmed. I was to keep with
the remote as long as possible because every second meant a mass of data
recorded by the micropes following me like a swarm of bees. There was no
point trying to defend myself, Tottentanz persuaded me, because I would
be entering a waste bristling with death and inevitably fall and the
whole hope was that we would learn something from my death. The first
reconnaissance pilots insisted on guns for psychological reasons not
hard to understand. In a tight spot it always feels better to have your
finger on a trigger. Among my mentors (tormentors) there were also
psychologists. Their task was to prepare me for every kind of unpleasant
surprise. Although I knew I was not in any real danger, I walked on that
imitation moon as on a hot plate, looking in all directions. It's one
thing to seek an enemy whose face you know, quite another to have no
idea because a nearby boulder, as lifeless as a corpse, might suddenly
split open and belch flame at you. It was a simulation, but the moment
of every such shock was a nasty thing. Automatic circuit breakers would
disconnect me from the remote when there was a hit, but they weren't
instantaneous and many times I experienced an indescribable sensation:
like being blown to bits and seeing, with the dimming eyes of the
severed head, intestines flying from my ruptured belly. The fact that
they were made of porcelain and silicon did provide some comfort. I went
through several dozen deaths like this and so had some idea what awaited
me on the moon. I went to the chief teletronicist, Seltzer, and put my
doubts on the table. I might return from the moon in one piece leaving
behind the remains of broken LEMs, but what good would that do? What can
one learn about an unknown weapon system in a few fractions of a second?
What was the point of sending a man there if he couldn't land anyway?

"Surely you know the reason, Mr. Tichy," he said, offering me a glass of
sherry. He was small, thin, and hairless as a knee. "We can't do it from
Earth. A quarter of a million miles means a three-second round-trip
delay in transmission. You'll descend as much as possible, to a thousand
miles, the lower ceiling of the zone of Silence."

"That's not what I mean. If we know in advance that the remote won't
last a minute, we could send it from here with micropes to record its
end."

"We've done that."

"And?"

"And nothing."

"And the micropes?"

"They showed a little dust."

"Can't we send, instead of a remote, something with real armor?"

"What do you consider real armor?"

"I don't know, perhaps a sphere like the kind once used in deep-sea
exploration. With windows, sensors, and so on."

"That was also done. Not exactly as you've described but near enough."

"And?"

"Nothing."

"What happened to it?"

"It's still there. We lost communication with it."

"Why?"

"That's the big question, isn't it? If we knew the answer, we wouldn't
have to put you to all this trouble."

There were other conversations along the same lines. After completion of
the second phase of my training, I was given a little leave. I'd been
living three months now on the carefully guarded base and wanted to get
away for one evening at least. So I went to the security director for a
pass. He was a pallid, melancholy civilian in a short-sleeved shirt who
listened sympathetically and said:

"I'm awfully sorry, but I can't let you go."

"What? Why not?"

"Those are my orders. Officially that's all I know."

"And unofficially?"

"Unofficially also. I imagine they're afraid for you."

"On the moon, I understand, but here?"

"Here even more."

"Does that mean I can't leave here until the launch?"

"Unfortunately."

"In that case," I said very quietly, very politely, which I do when I'm
furious, "I'm not flying anywhere. There was no talk of this. I agreed
to risk my neck but not to sit in prison. This is a volunteer flight.
Well, I hereby unvolunteer. Or do you intend to put me in the rocket
kicking and screaming?"

"What are you saying?"

I stuck to my guns and finally got the pass. I wanted to feel like an
ordinary person, walk in a city crowd, perhaps go to the movies, but
most of all eat in a decent restaurant instead of a canteen with people
discussing second by second Ijon Tichy's last moments in a remote that
bursts like fireworks. Dr. Lopez gave me his car and I left the base at
dusk. As I turned onto the highway I saw in my headlights someone
standing, hand raised, by a small car with its blinkers on. I stopped.
It was a young woman in white slacks and white sweater, a blonde, with
grease on her face. She said her motor was dead, it wouldn't turn over,
so I offered to take her to town. As she got her coat out of the car, I
noticed a large man in the front seat. He was motionless, as if made of
wood. I looked at him more closely.

"That's my remote," she explained. "He's broken. Everything breaks on
me. I was taking him to be fixed."

She had a husky voice and spoke almost like a child. I had heard that
voice before somewhere. I opened the door to let her in, and before the
car light went out I saw her face. She was incredibly like Marilyn
Monroe, a movie star of the last century. The same face, the same
innocence in the eyes and mouth. She asked if we could stop at some
restaurant so she could wash. I moved to the slow lane, and we passed
bright signs.

"There's a small Italian restaurant up ahead, really quite good," she
said.

And indeed, neon flashed: RISTORANTE. I parked, and we entered a dark
room. On a few small tables there were candles. The young woman went to
the ladies' room. I stood for a moment undecided, then finally sat down
in a corner booth. The place was nearly empty. Against the usual
background of colored bottles a red-headed bartender wiped glasses, and
near him brass-covered swinging doors led to the kitchen. In the next
booth a man was bent over a notebook beside his plate, writing
something. The woman came back.

"I'm starved," she said. "I stood outside for over an hour. No one would
stop. Can we eat something? My treat."

"All right," I replied.

A fat man sitting at the bar with his back to us stared at his glass. He
held a big black umbrella between his knees. The waiter appeared, took
our order while balancing a tray of dirty dishes, and, kicking open the
swinging doors, went into the kitchen. The blonde said nothing; she took
a crumpled pack of cigarettes from her pocket, lit one from the candle,
and held the pack out to me. I shook my head no. I tried not to stare at
her. She did not differ from Marilyn Monroe in any way. Strange, since
so many women have tried and failed. Monroe was inimitable though hers
was neither a great nor an exotic beauty. Many books were written about
her but none ever captured that mixture of child and woman which made
her different from the rest. Looking at pictures of her once when I was
still in Europe, I thought that this was more than a girlish woman, with
her constant surprise and joy of a capricious child and the hidden
despair or fear, like someone who has no one to confess her sins to. My
companion inhaled from her cigarette deeply and blew the smoke slowly at
the candle flickering between us. No, it was not a similarity, it was an
exact replica. All kinds of suspicions came to me because I wasn't born
yesterday, for example why did she keep her cigarettes in her pocket:
women never do that. She had a purse after all, and a big one, bulging,
which she had hung on the arm of her chair. The waiter brought the pizza
but forgot the Chianti, he apologized and rushed away. Another waiter
brought it. Although the restaurant was run tavern-style and the waiters
wore large napkins to their knees like aprons, this waiter held his
napkin in the crook of his arm. He didn't leave after he filled our
glasses but only stepped back and stood just behind the partition. I
could see him there because the brass doors acted like a mirror. The
blonde couldn't see him from where she sat. The pizza was all right but
the crust was hard. We ate in silence. Pushing aside her plate, she
reached for another Camel.

"What is your name?" I asked. I wanted to hear another name, to weaken
the impression that this was she.

"Let's drink first," she said in her hoarse voice. And took both our
glasses and switched them.

"What does that mean?" I asked.

"A superstition I have."

She didn't smile.

"To our health!"

With these words she raised the glass to her lips. I also. The pizza had
been peppery and I would have emptied the glass in one draught, but with
a crack and a whirl something knocked it out of my hand. The wine
spilled on the woman, staining her white sweater like blood. It was the
waiter who did this. I wanted to jump up but couldn't, my legs were too
far under the table, and by the time I got free, a lot was happening.
The waiter without the apron seized the blonde by the arm. She pulled
away and took her purse in both hands as if to shield her face with it.
The bartender ran out from behind the counter. The sleepy, bald fat man
tripped him, and he fell with a crash. The woman did something with her
purse, and a stream of white foam shot from it as from a fire
extinguisher. The waiter jumped back and clutched his face covered with
white that dripped down his vest. The blonde aimed a white stream at the
other waiter, who fell screaming through the swinging doors, hit. Both
desperately rubbed their foamy eyes like slapstick actors who had taken
cream pies in the face. We were now in a white fog because the foam gave
off an acrid gas that filled the room. The blonde, with a quick glance
left and right at the two waiters put out of action, turned her purse at
me. I was next. To this day I don't know why I didn't try to cover
myself. Something large and black appeared before me and boomed like a
drum. It was the fat man shielding me with the open umbrella. The purse
went sailing to the center of the room and ignited, thick dark smoke
pouring from it and mixing with the white fog. The bartender sprang from
the floor and ran along the counter toward the kitchen doors, which were
still swinging. The blonde had disappeared through them. The fat man
threw the open umbrella at the feet of the bartender, who jumped over
it, lost his balance, careened into the glass behind the bar, which fell
with a great crash as he dove into the kitchen. I looked at the
battlefield. The charred purse smoldered between the tables. The white
fog thinned out, still stinging my eyes. Around the open umbrella on the
floor lay pieces of glass, broken plates, cups, and pizza, all covered
with sticky foam and spilled wine. This all happened so fast that the
Chianti bottle was still rolling in its basket, until it hit the wall.
From the next booth someone rose -- the man who had been writing in his
notebook and drinking beer. I recognized him at once. It was the pallid
civilian I'd quarreled with at the base a couple of hours ago. He lifted
his melancholy eyebrows and said:

"Was it worth fighting for that pass, Mr. Tichy?"

 

 

"A tightly rolled cloth napkin at close range can stop a bullet," said
Leon Grün thoughtfully. He was the security chief and known as
Lohengrin. "The French flics knew this when they were still in long
capes. And neither a Parabellum nor a Beretta would fit into a handbag.
She could have had a larger bag, but the bigger the piece, the longer it
takes to get it out. Nevertheless I advised Truffles to take an
umbrella. And I was right, as you saw. Sodium pectate, wasn't it,
doctor?" The chemist he turned to scratched behind his ear. We were back
at the base, in a smoky room full of people, well after midnight.

"Who knows? Sodium pectate or another salt in aerosol form with free
radicals. Radicals of ammonia plus an emulsifier and an additive to
reduce surface tension. At high pressure -- a minimum of fifty
atmospheres. A lot of it could fit in that purse. They obviously have
experts."

"Who?" I asked, but no one seemed to hear me.

"What was the purpose? Why did they do it?" I asked, louder this time.

"To put you out of commission. To blind you," said Lohengrin pleasantly.
He lit a cigarette but immediately ground it out in the ashtray with
disgust. "Give me something to drink. I've smoked too much. You've cost
us a lot of trouble, Tichy. To put together protection like that in half
an hour wasn't easy."

"I was to be blinded? Temporarily or permanently?"

"Hard to say. It's extremely caustic stuff, you know. Possibly a cornea
transplant could have saved you."

"And those two? The waiters?"

"Our man managed to close his eyes in time. A good reflex. But the purse
was a bit of a novelty."

"But why did that. . . false waiter knock the glass out of my hand?"

"I haven't spoken with him. He's not able to talk yet. I assume it was
because she changed glasses."

"There was something in my glass?"

"A ninety-five percent likelihood. Why else would she have done it?"

"But she drank the wine too -- I saw her."

"Not the wine, the glass. Wasn't she playing with the glass before the
waiter came?"

"I'm not sure. Wait, yes, she was. She turned it around in her fingers."

"Well, there you are. We're waiting for the lab test results. Only
chromatography or mass spectrometry will work because there is so little
material left."

"Poison?"

"I'd say so. You were to have been put out of the picture: neutralized,
but not necessarily killed. Probably not killed. Put yourself in their
place. A corpse means news coverage, theories, an autopsy, talk. But a
psychosis, that's a different story. Gives more elegant results. There
are plenty of such drugs today. States of depression, dementia,
hallucinations. I think that if you had drunk the wine, you wouldn't
have felt a thing then. Only tomorrow, or later. The more delayed the
effect, the more it looks like a real psychosis. Who can't go insane
these days? Anybody can. Starting with me, Mr. Tichy."

"And the foam? The spray?"

"The spray was the last resort. The spare tire in the trunk. She used it
because she had to."

"Who are the they we're talking about?"

Lohengrin smiled. He wiped the sweat from his forehead with a
handkerchief that was not the cleanest, looked at it with a grimace, put
it back in his pocket, and said:

"You are naive. Not everyone is as thrilled about your nomination as we,
Mr. Tichy."

"Do I have an alternate? I never asked. . . Do you have someone in
reserve? Through him, we might be able to learn who. . ."

"No. There is not one alternate now. There are many with similar scores,
but we'd have to start a whole new selection process."

"One more thing," I said, a little embarrassed. "Where did that woman
come from?"

"About that we know something," Lohengrin said evenly. "Your European
apartment was gone through a couple of weeks ago. Nothing taken but
everything examined. That's where they got it."

"I don't understand."

"Your library. You have a biography of Marilyn Monroe and two picture
albums of her. The proclivity is obvious."

"You searched my apartment and didn't tell me?"

"Everything was put back in place, even dusted, and as for searching, we
weren't the first. You can see it was a good thing our men learned about
the books. We didn't tell you so as not to upset you. You have enough on
your mind as it is. Maximum concentration is essential. We are
collectively, you see, your nursemaid," and he swept his arm to include
everyone present: the fat man now without an umbrella, the chemist, and
three silent men leaning against the wall.

"So when you demanded the pass, I thought it best not to tell you about
your apartment, because that wouldn't have stopped you. Would it have?"

"I guess not."

"So you see."

"All right. But the uncanny resemblance. Was she -- human?"

"Yes and no. Not directly. Do you want to see her? She's lying in that
room." He pointed to the door behind him. For a second I had the mad
thought that Marilyn Monroe had died a second death.

"A product of Gynandroics?" I asked slowly.

"A different company. There are others. Would you like to see her?"

"No," I said. "But someone must have been. . . steering her?"

"Of course. Probably a woman, and one with great acting ability. The way
she moved -- did you notice? -- was perfect. An amateur couldn't have
done it. To render her so well, to capture the spirit, must have taken a
lot of study. Practice. Going over the old movies. . ." He shrugged.

"They went to all that trouble. . ." I said. "For what?"

"Would you have picked up an old lady?"

"Yes."

"But you wouldn't have stayed for the pizza. Anyway, not for sure, and
they had to be sure. And you couldn't refuse a Marilyn Monroe, could
you? But enough said."

"What did you. . . do to her?"

"Nothing. A disconnected remote is a puppet with the strings cut. A
doll."

"But then why did she run?"

"Because the product can tell you things. They didn't want to leave any
evidence, any prints. It's almost three. You must take care of yourself,
Mr. Tichy. You have, if you will forgive me, old-fashioned tastes in
women. I wish you a good night and pleasant dreams."

 

 

The next day was a Sunday. We didn't work on Sundays. I was shaving when
a messenger arrived with a letter. Professor Lax-Gugliborc wanted to see
me. I had heard of him. His field was communications and telematics. He
had his own laboratory at the base. I dressed and at ten o'clock went to
his place. He had drawn me a little map on the other side of the letter.
Among some low buildings stood a long pavilion surrounded by a garden
and a high wire fence. I pushed the bell once, twice. A sign lit up
above it: I'M NOT AT HOME TO ANYONE. Then the lock buzzed and the gate
opened. A narrow gravel path led to a metal door. It was closed and had
no knob or handle. I knocked. Not a sound inside. I knocked again. I was
about to leave when the door opened a little and a man peered out, tall,
thin, in a blue smock covered with spots and splatters. What was left of
his white hair was cut very short, and he wore thick glasses that gave
him the look of a startled fish. A long sniffy nose, a massive forehead.

He stepped back without a word to let me in, then locked the door and
not with just one lock either. The hallway was very dark. He went first
and I followed, my hand on the wall. This was strange, conspiratorial.
The stink of chemicals hung in the hot, dry air. The next door was a
sliding door. He had me go first.

I found myself in a large lab that was incredibly cluttered. Metal
apparatuses, oxidized black, were piled one on top of the other and
connected with wires that lay tangled on the floor. In the middle of the
lab was a table heaped with more equipment, papers, tools, and a cage
stood next to it, a birdcage large enough to hold a gorilla. The most
curious thing was the dolls lying in a row along three of the walls.
Naked, resembling store mannequins, with open skulls or with no heads at
all, and their chests parted like doors, containing a jumble of
connectors and circuit boards, and under the table was a pile of arms
and legs. There was not one window in the room. The professor threw on
the floor a coil of cable and electronic parts occupying a chair, and
with an agility I wouldn't have expected of him he crawled under the
table, pulled out a tape recorder, and turned it on. Looking up at me,
he put a finger to his lips, and at the same time his strident voice
came from the machine:

"I have invited you here, Tichy, to instruct you in a few things you
must know about communications. Please have a seat and listen. You may
not take notes. . ."

While his voice went on, the professor gestured for me to get in the
cage. I hesitated. Without ceremony he pushed me in, climbed in after
me, and pulled my arm to make me sit. He sat opposite me on the floor,
crossing his legs, his sharp knees jutting from his smock. The whole
thing was like a scene out of a bad movie about a mad scientist. In the
cage too there were wires going everywhere, and he brought two together,
which made a quiet, monotonous buzz. Meanwhile his voice spoke on the
machine by the chair. Lax-Gugliborc reached behind him for two thick
black collars. One of these he pulled over his head and around his neck,
and gave me the other and indicated that I do likewise. Then he took a
wire with an olive-shaped plug and put the plug in his ear, and again in
pantomime told me to do the same. The tape recorder went on speaking,
but in my ear I heard what he said to me.

"Now we can talk. You may ask questions but only intelligent ones. No
one will hear us. We are shielded. You are surprised? No need to be.
Even the trusted are not trusted, and that's as it should be."

"Can I talk?" I asked. We sat in the cage so close that our knees
touched. The tape recorder jabbered on.

"Go ahead. For every electronic device there is another electronic
device. I know you from your books. The clutter here is just for
decoration. You've been promoted to hero. The moon reconnaissance
mission. You're going."

"I'm going," I said. He hardly moved his lips when he spoke, but I could
hear him perfectly through the microphone.

"Everyone knows that. A thousand people will assist you from Earth. The
never-failing Lunar Agency. Except that it's divided."

"The Agency?"

"Yes. They'll provide you with a series of remotes. But only one is
worth anything. Mine. A completely new approach. Dust thou art, unto
dust shall thou return, then rise again. I'll show it to you later. A
demonstration. But first you'll get a viaticum from me, tips for the
traveler."

He raised a finger. His eyes, small and round behind the thick glasses,
smiled at me with kindly cunning.

"You'll hear what they want you to hear, but I will tell you first what
they don't want you to hear. I'm a man of old-world principles. Now
listen. The Agency is an international institution but it can't hire
angels. On the far perimeter, on Mars, say, you would have to act alone.
One against Thebes. But on the moon you will be only the tip of the
strategic pyramid, the Earth team supporting you beneath. Do you know
who will be on that team?"

"I know most of them. The Cybbilkis brolhers, Tottentanz, Dr. Lopez. And
Seltzer and the rest -- what? What's wrong?"

He shook his head sadly. We must have looked pretty funny inside that
big wire cage, with the constant insect buzz from the outside, from the
tape, mixing with his voice.

"Those people represent different interests. It can't be otherwise."

"Whom can I trust?" I asked, understanding.

"No one, going by what you will hear from me. Myself included. Yet you
must confide in someone. That whole idea of the change of venue," and he
pointed at the ceiling, "and the doctrine of ignorance -- it was slupid,
of course. It had to end this way. If this is the end. They made their
bed. The director told you about the four impossibilities made
possible?"

"He did."

"There's a fifth. They want to learn the truth and don't want to learn
the truth. That is, not every truth. Each a different truth. Do you
understand?"

"No."

We sat opposite each other on the floor but I heard him as if over the
phone. And he me. The current buzzed, the machine kept talking, and he
said, blinking often and with his hands on his knees:

"I set this up to block the bugs. It doesn't matter whose bugs or for
whom. I want to do what I can because I believe I should. Common
decency. Don't bother to thank me. They will defend you -- but it would
be healthier to keep certain facts to yourself. You won't be in a
confessional. We don't know what has happened on the moon. Sibelius and
others like him believe that evolution up there has taken a step
backward. The development of instinct instead of intelligence. An
intelligent weapon is not an optimal weapon. It can become frightened,
for example. Or stop wanting to be a weapon. It can get ideas. A
soldier, living or nonliving, shouldn't get ideas. Intelligence is the
multidimensionality of action, and that means freedom. But there it's
completely different. The level of human intelligence has been
surpassed."

"How do you know?"

"Because he who sows evolution reaps mind. And mind does not wish to
serve anyone. Unless it must. And there is no must there. But I should
not speak about what is or isn't there because I do not know. What
matters is what is here."

"Which is. . . ?"

"The Lunar Agency was supposed to have made it impossible to obtain
information from the moon. Now it will do that once and for all. Which
is why you are going. You return either with nothing or with news more
destructive than the atom bomb. Which do you prefer?"

"Hold on. Speak more plainly. Are you saying your colleagues represent
other intelligence agencies? That they're spies?"

"No. But you could bring that about."

"I could?"

"Yes. The balance of power since the Geneva Agreement has been shaky.
When you return, you may replace the old threats with new ones. You
cannot play the savior of the world, the messenger of peace."

"Why not?"

"The scheme of moving Earth's conflicts to the moon was doomed in its
inception. For how could it be otherwise? Arms control had been made
impossible by microminiaturization. One can count missiles and
satellites but not artificial bacteria. Or keep track of natural
disasters that are not natural, or what is causing the decline in the
population rate of the Third World. Which decline was necessary. Though
it was impossible to do properly. You can take a couple of people aside
and explain what's good for them and what isn't. But you can't take all
humanity aside and explain things, can you?"

"What does this have to do with the moon?"

"Just this, that destruction hasn't been ended, only moved in space and
time. And that cannot last forever. I have created a new technology
which can be used in telematics. For the building of dispersants.
Remotes capable of reversible dispersion. I didn't want the Agency to
have it, but what's done is done." He put up both hands in resignation.

"One of my assistants showed it to them. I'm not sure which one, and it
doesn't really matter. When the pressure is great, there's invariably a
leak. Any loyalty has its limits." He ran a hand over his shiny pate.
The tape recorder was still talking. "I can do one thing: I can show
that dispersion telematics isn't ready yet. That I can do. For a year,
let's say. Eventually they'll find out that I tricked them. Would you
like me to do this?"

"I have to decide? Why me?"

"If you return with nothing, no one will be interested in you."

"True."

"But if you return with information, the consequences will be
incalculable."

"For me personally? You want to save me? Out of kindness?"

"No. To play for time."

"To put off learning about the moon? Then you don't believe the moon
will ever invade Earth? You think that's just mass hysteria?"

"Mass hysteria, or rumors intentionally spread by certain nations."

"To what purpose?"

"To break the doctrine of ignorance and return to the old
Clausewitz-style politics."

I was silent, not knowing what to say -- or even what to think.

"But that is only one man's assumption," I said finally.

"Yes. The letter Einstein wrote to Roosevelt also was based on an
assumption, that an atom bomb could be built. He regretted it to the end
of his life."

"I understand -- you don't want to have such regrets?"

"The atom bomb would have been developed with or without Einstein. My
technology too. But the later, the better."

 "Après nous le déluge?"

"No, something else. This fear of the moon was created intentionally. Of
that I'm certain. Returning from a successful mission, you'll only be
exchanging one fear for another. That other could be worse: more
realistic."

"I see now. You want me to fail?"

"Yes. But only if you agree to it."

"Why?"

The nastiness suddenly left his little squirrel eyes. He was laughing,
open-mouthed, soundlessly.

"I told you why. I'm a man of old-world principles, and that means Fair
Play. Please answer now, because my legs are starting to hurt."

"You could have put in a couple of cushions," I said. "And as for that.
. . dispersion technology, please give it to me."

"You don't believe what I've said?"

"I believe you, and that's why I want it."

"To be a Herostrates?"

"I'll try not to burn the temple. Could we get out of this cage now?"

 

 

 

 The Mission

 

Take-off was aborted eight times. Something went wrong at every
countdown. It was the air conditioning, or a backup computer reporting a
short circuit that wasn't real, or a short circuit that was real but not
reported by the main computer, and on the ninth countdown, when it
looked like I'd be on my way at last, the Number 7 LEM balked. There I
lay, swaddled and wrapped in tape that held a thousand sensors, like a
mummy in a sarcophagus, my helmet shut, the laryngophone at my throat,
and the tube of the orange juice container in my mouth. With one hand on
the emergency ejector switch and the other on the steering wheel, I was
trying to think of things pleasant and far away, so my heart wouldn't
pound, because it was being watched on screens by eight people along
with my blood pressure, muscle tension, sweat level, eye movements, and
galvanic skin response, all revealing the fear felt by the intrepid
astronaut as he waits for the ritual zero and the thunder that will
thrust him upward. But each time what I heard was profanity, in chief
coordinator Wivitch's voice, and the words "Stop! Stop! Stop!" I don't
know whether it was my ears or the microphones but his voice echoed as
in an empty barrel; I said nothing, however, knowing that if I mentioned
this, they'd examine the helmet and call in resonance experts and there
would be no end to it.

This last problem, called LEM's Mutiny by the technicians, was really
quite peculiar: from the diagnostic signals intended only to check out
its systems the unit began moving, and when it was turned off, instead
of stopping it shuddered and tried to get up. Like a mindless idol it
struggled against its straps and nearly tore apart the harness, though
they disconnected all the lines to it one by one and couldn't figure out
where the power was coming from. It must have been a leak of some sort
in the current. Impedance, capacitance, resistance, susceptibility. When
engineers don't know what's happening, their vocabulary takes on the
richness of physicians discussing a hopeless case. As is well known,
whatever can go wrong eventually will and in a unit of 298,000 circuits
and chips no amount of redundancy can provide a hundred-percent
certainty. A hundred-percent certainty, says Halevala, the oldest
repairman, is provided only by a dead body, in that it won't rise up.
Halevala liked to say that God, creating the world, didn't take
statistics into account, and when problems started in Paradise He
resorted to miracles but by then it was too late. Wivitch said that
Halevala brought bad luck and asked the director to dismiss him. The
director believed in bad luck but the Council didn't, so the Finn,
appealing the dismissal, kept his job. Such was the atmosphere in which
I prepared myself for the Mission.

I had no doubt that in lunar orbit too something would go wrong, though
the simulations and inspections had been repeated ad nauseam. But of
course I didn't know when that would happen or into what sort of mess it
would put me. At the next countdown everything went fine, but this time
I pulled the plug, because my left leg fell asleep, too tightly wrapped,
and I argued on the phone with Wivitch who said the pins and needles
would pass and the tape shouldn't be any looser. But I insisted, and
they had to spend an hour and a half unwinding me from my cocoon. It
turned out that someone -- but of course no one confessed -- had used a
pipe-cleaning utensil to help pull the tape and it had been forgotten
under the wrapping around my shin. I asked them to let the matter drop
even though I could guess who had done it, since only one of them smoked
a pipe. In heroic tales of space such things never happen. An astronaut
does not get the runs, nor do the amenities malfunction so that his
spacesuit fills with piss. Which actually happened to the first American
astronaut in his suborbital flight but out of natural
historical-patriotic delicacy NASA didn't mention it to the press.

The more care they take for your comfort, the more likely it is that
some tangled bit of wire will dig under your arm or a buckle pinch in
the worst possible place, driving you up the wall. When I once suggested
they put remote scratchers inside the suit, they all thought it was a
joke and laughed, except the seasoned astronauts who knew what I was
talking about. It was I who discovered Tichy's Law which says that the
first itch occurs in a place on the body you can't possibly reach. The
itching stops only when something serious happens, because then your
hair stands on end, your flesh crawls, and breaking into a cold sweat
does the rest. True as this is, the authorities don't want to hear it
because it doesn't rhyme well with One Giant Leap for Mankind. Can you
imagine Armstrong climbing down the rungs of that first LEM and saying
instead that his underwear was riding up? I've always thought that the
people at Central Control who sit back in their chairs with a can of
beer and give advice to the astronaut-turned-mummy, with their words of
encouragement and support, should first put themselves in his shoes.

The last two weeks I spent at the base were not pleasant. There were new
attempts to remove Ijon Tichy. Even after the incident with the false
Marilyn Monroe they didn't tell me that my mail was being scanned by a
special machine. The technology of epistolary terrorism is so developed
that a charge able to blow the addressee to pieces can be placed inside
a Christmas or birthday card wishing him health and happiness. It was
only after a deadly letter from Professor Tarantoga almost put me out of
the picture and I raised holy hell that they showed me the machine, an
armored container with slanted steel slabs to absorb explosions. Each
letter is opened by pincers and examined by x ray and ultrasound to
trigger the detonator if there is one. The letter in question didn't
explode and Tarantoga had actually written it, so they brought it to me
and I was saved thanks to my sense of smell. The envelope reeked of
mignonette or lavender, which seemed strange to me, suspicious, because
Tarantoga is the last person to use perfumed stationery. No sooner did I
read the words "Dear Ijon" than I began to laugh and instantly realized
that although I was laughing I was not amused, and since one does not
laugh for no reason, I concluded, putting two and two together, that
this laughter was not natural. I did a very prudent thing then, slipping
the letter under the glass that covered my desk, to read it that way.
And thank God I also had a runny nose, which I blew. The Council
afterward debated whether I blew my nose automatically or from an
instant insight, and I myself wasn't sure. In any case this was why I
inhaled only a very small amount of the drug with which the letter had
been impregnated. It was a completely new drug. The laughter it produced
was the overture to hiccups so persistent that they could be stopped
only by a strong narcotic. I immediately phoned Lohengrin, who at first
thought I was playing some joke because while I spoke, I roared with
laughter. From the neurological standpoint laughter is the first stage
of a hiccup. Finally the matter became clear, the letter was taken to
the laboratory by two men in masks, and Dr. Lopez and his colleagues
came and gave me oxygen. When I had subsided to a chuckle, they made me
read all the lead articles in the newspapers of that day and the day
before.

I didn't realize that during my absence the press as well as television
had split in two. There are papers and programs that give all the news
and those that give only the good news. Until now they had been feeding
me the second kind, which is why at the base I had the impression that
the world had truly improved after the signing of the Geneva Agreement.
You would have thought that at least the pacifists were happy, but no. A
book Dr. Lopez loaned me tells the story of our new society. The author
shows that Jesus was a subversive sent to undermine Jewish unity with
that love thy neighbor business, on the principle of divide and conquer,
which worked, and which a little later brought down the Roman Empire.
Jesus himself had no idea he was a subversive, and the apostles too were
in the dark, having only the best intentions although everyone knows
what is paved with good intentions. The author, whose name I have
unfortunately forgotten, says that anyone who proclaims brotherly love
and peace on earth should be immediately arrested and interrogated to
see what his agenda really is. So it's not surprising that the pacifists
have changed their tactics. Some have taken up the cause of delicious
animals. There has nevertheless been no decline in the consumption of
pork chops. Others urge solidarity with all living things, and in the
German Bundestag eighteen seats were won by the Probacteria Party which
says that microbes have as much right to live as we so instead of
killing them with medicine we should alter them genetically to live not
on humans but on something else. There is a real groundswell of good
will, with disagreement only about who is standing in its way. But there
is no disagreement that the enemies of brotherly love should be
exterminated root and branch.

At Tarantoga's I saw an interesting new encyclopedia entitled The
Lexicon of Fear. It used to be, says the book, that fear had its roots
in the supernatural: in spells, witches, demons, heretics, atheists,
black magic, ghosts, Bohemians, and abstract art, but in the industrial
age fear shifted to things more concrete. There was fear of tomatoes
(carcinogenic), aspirin (stomach bleeding), coffee (birth defects),
butter (saturated fat), sugar, cars, television, discotheques,
pornography, birth control pills, science, cigarettes, nuclear power
plants, and higher education. I wasn't surprised by the popularity of
this encyclopedia. Professor Tarantoga is of the opinion that people
need two things. First, an answer to the question "Who is responsible?"
and second, to the question "What is the secret?" The first answer
should be brief, obvious, and unambiguous. As for the second, scientists
have been annoying everyone for two hundred years with their superior
knowledge. How nice to see them baffled by the Bermuda Triangle, flying
saucers, and the emotions of plants, and how satisfying it is when a
simple middle-aged woman of Paris can see the whole future of the world
while on that subject the professors are as ignorant as spoons.

People, says Tarantoga, believe what they want to believe. Take
astrology for instance. Astronomers, who after all should know more than
anyone about the stars, tell us that they are giant balls of
incandescent gas spinning since the world began and that their influence
on our fate is considerably less than the influence of a banana peel, on
which you can slip and break your leg. But there is no interest in
banana peels, whereas serious periodicals include horoscopes and there
are even pocket computers you can consult before you invest in the stock
market to find out if the stars are favorable. Anyone who says that the
skin of a fruit can have more effect on a person's future than all the
planets and stars combined won't be listened to. An individual comes
into the world because his father, say, didn't withdraw in time, thereby
becoming a father. The mother-to-be, seeing what happened, took quinine
and jumped from the top of the dresser to the floor but that didn't
help. So the individual is born and he finishes school and works in a
store selling suspenders, or in a post office. Then suddenly he learns
that that's not the way it was at all. The planets came into
conjunction, the signs of the zodiac arranged themselves carefully into
a special pattern, half the sky cooperated with the other half so that
he could come into being and stand behind this counter or sit behind
this desk. It lifts his spirits. The whole universe revolves around him,
and even if things aren't going well, even if the stars are lined up in
such a way that the suspenders manufacturer loses his shirt and the
individual consequently loses his job, it's still more comforting than
to know that the stars don't really give a damn. Knock astrology out of
his head, and the belief too that the cactus on his windowsill cares
about him, and what is left? Barefoot, naked despair. So says Professor
Tarantoga, but I see I am digressing.

They shot me into orbit on the 27th of October, wrapped in sensor tape
like an infant in swaddling clothes. From a height of four hundred miles
I observed Mother Earth and could hear the engineers at the base
cheering that this time it worked. My first stage, the main booster,
separated as it was supposed to, above the Atlantic, on the dot, but the
second got stuck and I had to help it. I think it fell in the Andes.
After the traditional good lucks and safe trips I took over the controls
myself and proceeded through the most hazardous zone on the way to the
moon. You have no idea how many old satellites, civilian and military,
are circling Earth. Something like eighteen thousand not counting the
ones that have come apart, particularly dangerous because the pieces are
almost too small for radar. And then there's a lot of ordinary garbage
in space, all kinds of waste products, especially radioactive, deposited
here by jet. So I flew with extreme caution until space was properly
empty. Only then did I unbuckle all the belts and start checking my
LEMs.

I turned on one after the other, seeing how each felt, seeing the
interior of the bay through its crystal eyes. I had nineteen remotes,
but the last one was by itself in a crate marked fruit juice to fool
unauthorized persons. Inside the crate was a hermetically sealed
cylinder, light blue, which housed a powdered remote, Professor
Lax-Gugliborc's top-secret creation, and I was to use it only as a last
resort. I knew the principle of its operation but still don't know
whether I should reveal that yet. Nor do I want to turn this account
into a Gynandroics catalog or a product list of the Lunar Agency's
teleferic division. LEM 5 started shivering when I turned it on. Since
it was feedback-connected to me, I shivered too, as in a fever, teeth
chattering. I was supposed to inform the base at once about such
defects, but I didn't because I knew from experience what would happen.
They would immediately call in a whole army of mechanics, designers,
engineers, and specialists in electronic pathology, who would be angry
with me for making such a big deal out of light convulsions that might
go away by themselves, and they would give me contradictory
instructions, connect this, disconnect that, and how many amps to zap
the poor thing with because electroshock can help machines as well as
people. And that would produce some new, unpredicted response, and they
would tell me to wait patiently while they ran simulations of the LEM,
analog and digital, and of me too, as they argued with each other
constantly and now and then told me to stay calm. The team would split
into two or three camps like distinguished doctors in consultation.
Perhaps they would have me climb into the bay with tools and open the
LEM's belly and train the hand camera on it since all the circuitry is
there and not in the head which hasn't room. So I'd be following the
baton of the experts, and if it worked, they'd take the credit, and if
it didn't, I'd get the blame.

But I was 100,000 miles from Earth now and increasingly glad I had kept
quiet about the problem, because soon there would be more than a
second's delay in communicating with the base and I'd be sure to bust
something, precise movements are difficult when you're weightless, a
spark would tell them I'd caused a short, and then there would be a
chorus of sour remarks. Tichy's screwed it up, they'd say, there's
nothing we can do. So I had spared both them and myself that
aggravation.

The nearer I got to the moon, the more unnecessary the advice and
cautions I was receiving over the radio, until finally I said that if
they didn't stop bothering me, I'd turn the damned thing off. I knew the
moon like the palm of my hand from the days when they were considering
turning it into a Disneyland. I circled it three times in high orbit and
over the Oceanus Procellarum began a slow descent. On one side I could
see the Mare Imbrium and on the other the crater Eratosthenes, then
Murchison and the Sinus Medi all the way to the Mare Nubium. I was now
so low that the continuation of the moon's pock-marked surface was
hidden from me. I was at the lower boundary of the Zone of Silence. So
far nothing unexpected had happened if you don't count the two empty
beer cans that came to life during my maneuvers. When I braked, the cans
-- as usual discarded in haste by our technicians -- manifested
themselves and began flying around the cabin, hitting the walls and my
head. A greenhorn would have tried to catch them. I changed orbit and
flew above the Taurus mountains. When the great Sea of Serenity
stretched out before me, I was hit in the back of my helmet so sharply
that I jumped. It was a tin of salted crackers that probably had gone
with the beer. The base heard the noise and immediately there were
questions, but I lied, explaining that I had tried to scratch my head
and forgot both helmet and bulky glove. No point in getting the
technicians in trouble. They always leave stuff in rockets. It's like a
law of nature.

I flew through the zone of internal control without difficulty, because
its satellites had been told by Earth to let me pass. It wasn't in the
program, but I braked hard a few times to dislodge any other mementos
from the assembly-and-inspection crews. A comic book stuffed in the
reserve selenography drawer fluttered out like an enormous moth. Taking
a quick inventory -- two beer cans, a cracker tin, a comic book -- I
concluded that there would be more surprises in store and I would have
to stay alert.

I surveyed the moonscape through twenty-power binoculars, but it looked
lifeless, uninhabited, empty. I knew that the computer arsenals in the
different sectors were a good hundred feet below sea level, sea level
meaning those great plains created long ago by lava flows. The arsenals
had been set so deep to protect them from meteors. Nevertheless I looked
with particular care at the Mare Vaporum, the Mare Tranquillitatis, and
the Mare Fecunditatus (the old astronomers who named these plains of
stone had some imagination), then circled the Mare Crisium and the Mare
Frigoris, thinking I might see a little movement there. I had excellent
binoculars and could count the gravel on the slopes of the craters, or
at least rocks the size of a person's head, but nothing stirred and that
was what intrigued me. Where were those legions of armed robots, hosts
of intelligent tanks, steel giants and equally death-dealing
Lilliputians which had been constantly spawning for years beneath the
surface? I saw nothing but stones and craters ranging from very large to
small as a plate, trenches in the shiny ancient magma radiating out from
Copernicus, the Huygens fault, the pole, Archimedes toward Cassini,
Plato on the horizon, and everywhere the same incomprehensible
desolation. Along the meridian marked by Flamsteed, Herodotus, and
Rümker and through the Sinus Roris ran the widest strip of the no man's
land, and that was where I was supposed to land the first remote after
putting the ship into selenosynchronous orbit. They hadn't given me an
exact spot; I was to decide that myself, choosing the safest place.
Though there was no indication here, none whatever, of safety or danger.
To go into selenosynchronous orbit I had to ascend, and maneuvered and
maneuvered until the whole enormous sunlit moon below me stopped moving,
at which point I was directly over Flamsteed, a very old crater, shallow
and almost filled with volcanic tuff. I hung there a while, maybe half
an hour, looking down at the rubble and deliberating.

The remotes didn't need rockets to land. They had little braking nozzles
on their legs, and gyroscopes. I could take one down at any speed I
liked, using the leg jets, which could be kicked off easily after
touching down, the jets and the empty fuel tank. From that moment on the
remote was forever moonbound, unable to return. It was neither robot nor
android, having not a thought in its head; it was, rather, a tool, an
extension of me, incapable of the least initiative. And yet I was
uncomfortable thinking that no matter what the outcome of my
reconnaissance it was doomed, because I would have to leave it behind in
this dead wilderness. It even occurred to me that maybe LEM 7 had faked
its malfunction to get out of this in one piece. A ridiculous thought,
because I knew perfectly well that Number 7, like all the other LEMs,
was but a man-shaped shell. But this gives you some idea of my state of
mind.

There was no reason to wait any longer. I examined carefully one more
time the gray plateau I'd chosen for the landing, roughly estimating its
distance from the northern edge of Flamsteed, then put the ship on
automatic and pushed button number one. The leap of all my senses,
though expected and indeed experienced so many times before, was
violent. I was no longer sitting in a deep chair in front of the
blinking lights of the computers and holding my binoculars, but lying on
my back in a bunk as cramped as a coffin and open on only one side. I
worked my way out, looked down and saw dull-gray armor, a trunk, thighs,
and shins of steel, the retrojets strapped to them like holsters. I
straightened slowly, feeling my magnetic shoes cling to the metal floor.
Around me, in stacked bunks like the one in which I had been lying, lay
the other remotes, all motionless. I could hear my own breathing but did
not feel my chest moving. With difficulty I pulled first my left, then
my right foot from the floor of the bay and walked to the handrail at
the hatch, stood with my arms in so they wouldn't hit an edge when I was
pushed down by the ejector and went hurtling, and waited for the
countdown. After a few seconds I heard the lifeless voice of the timer:
"Twenty . . . nineteen ..." I counted with it, calm now because there
was no turning back. But I couldn't help tensing a little when we
reached "zero" and something soft but powerful shoved me into the open
well so that I went flying like a stone. Lifting my head, I was able to
see for a moment the dark shape of the ship against the darker
background of the sky with its myriad dots of dimly glowing stars. As
the ship disappeared in the black horizon, I felt a strong push at my
feet and was wrapped in pale flame. With the retros firing, I fell much
slower, but the moon still increased in size, as if trying to pull me in
and devour me. Feeling the heat of the flame in uneven waves through my
thick steel, I kept my arms in and, craning my neck, watched the fields
of rubble, now gray-green, and the sandy slopes of Flamsteed grow before
my eyes. When no more than three hundred feet separated me from the
crater, I reached for the control stick at my belt and applied thrust
carefully to brake more and shift direction, avoiding a great jagged
rock. I aimed in order to land in sand, with both feet, but something
flashed above me. I saw it out of the corner of my eye, looked up, and
was dumbfounded.

White against the black sky and no more than thirty feet above me, a man
in a heavy spacesuit descended, wrapped from feet to waist in the pale
flame of retrojets and with his hand on the control stick at his belt.
He fell, slowing, his body straight, until he was even with me, and hit
the ground at the exact moment I felt it under my own feet. We stood
five or six steps apart, like two statues, as though he too was
astounded not to be alone. He was exactly my height. Gray smoke from the
nozzles by his knees curled around his large moon boots. I sensed he was
staring at me, though I couldn't see his face behind the shaded glass of
his white helmet. My head was in a whirl. At first I thought this must
be remote Number 2 which had been pushed from the ship after me by
mistake, a malfunction, but then I saw the large black #1 on its chest.
But that was my number, and I was pretty sure there were no other Number
1s on board. I stepped forward to see his face through the glass, and at
the same time he stepped toward me. When we were quite close, I froze
and my hair stood on end because I could see through the glass now and
there was no one inside. In the helmet, two small black bars pointing at
me, nothing more. I shrank back and lost my balance and almost fell,
forgetting that one has to move slowly in low gravity, and he did
exactly the same. I began to understand. I held my control stick in my
right hand; he held his in his left. When I raised my hand slowly, so
did he, and when I moved my leg, so did he, therefore it was clear
(although nothing really was clear) that this was my mirror image. To
make sure, I forced myself to approach him, and he approached me, until
our suits practically met. Slowly, as if reaching to touch a hot iron, I
put my hand on his chest and he did likewise to me, I with my right and
he with his left. My large five-fingered glove went through him,
disappearing, and his hand disappeared in me up to the wrist. I had no
doubt now that I was alone and standing in front of a reflection, though
there was no trace of a mirror to be seen. We stood there, and I began
to look not at him but at his surroundings and noticed, behind him and
to the side, a jagged rock jutting from the gray sand, the same rock I
had avoided a minute ago while landing. But the rock was behind me, of
that I was absolutely certain, thus I faced not only my own image but
the image of everything around me. Now I looked for the place where the
mirroring ended, because it had to end somewhere and merge with the
shallow dunes, but I could not find the boundary, the seam. Not knowing
what to do next, I retreated, and he too went backward like a crab,
until we were so far apart that he seemed a little smaller. Then, I
don't know why, I turned and walked toward the low sun which blinded me
in spite of my antiglare glass. Taking thirty or forty steps with that
uncertain ducklike waddle one can't avoid on the moon, I stopped and
looked back at myself. He stood at the top of a small dune and, sure
enough, had turned to face me.

Further experiments were unnecessary. I may have stood there like an
idiot but my brain was working feverishly. It dawned on me, only now,
that the reconnaissance probes sent by the Lunar Agency to the moon had
been armed. No one ever said anything specific about that, and I
stupidly didn't inquire further. But of course: If the probes were armed
with lasers, their sudden silence after landing might have a simple
explanation. I had to find out what kind of lasers, but how? There was
no direct communication between me and the base on Earth, only via the
ship that hung high above me in stationary orbit. I was indeed on that
ship in my physical person, but standing in the Flamsteed crater here as
a remote. To talk to Control, I had to turn my transmitter back on,
having deliberately switched it off just before leaving the ship so they
wouldn't ruin my concentration during the descent with their advice
which no doubt would have come thick and fast had I remained in radio
contact with them according to instructions. So I turned the volume knob
on my chest and called Earth. The response would come with a
three-second delay, I knew, and those seconds seemed like ages. At last
I heard the voice of Wivitch. He had a million questions but I told him
to be quiet, saying only that I had landed without mishap and was at the
target 000 and nothing was attacking me. On the subject of the other
remote I was silent.

"Please answer one question, it's very important," I said, trying to
sound phlegmatic. "The remotes that were sent here before me carried
lasers. What kind? Neo-dymium?"

"You found their remains? Are they burned? Where are they?"

"Please don't answer a question with questions," I said, interrupting.
"Since it's my first communication from the moon, this is obviously
important. What kind of lasers did the two recon pilots have? Were they
the same?"

A moment of silence. Standing stockstill, under the heavy black sky and
beside the shallow crater filled with sand, I saw the line of my
footprints across three sloping dunes to the fourth, where my reflection
stood. I kept him in sight while listening to the indistinct voices in
my helmet. Wivitch came back with the information.

"The automata had the same lasers as the pilots," his voice suddenly
rang in my ear, making me jump. "Model E-M-9. Nine percent emission in
the x-ray and gamma range, the rest in blue."

"Visible light? Ultraviolet too?"

"Yes. The E-M series all have continuous spectra. Why?"

"Just a minute. Maximum emission in the bands above visible light?"

"Yes."

"What percent?"

Again silence. I waited patiently, feeling the left side of my suit,
where the sun was, slowly warm up.

"Ninety-one percent. Tichy, what's going on?"

"Wait."

This information puzzled me at first because I remembered that the
emission spectrum of the lasers that destroyed our probes was different.
More in the red. Could the device have been a mirror even so? Then I
remembered that with nonlinear optics a reflected ray need not have the
same frequency as the one incident. Even in the case of ordinary glass.
Though this wasn't glass here, of course. Whatever reflected laser beams
could also move them in the spectrum toward the red. I couldn't ask to
talk to physicists now -- later maybe -- so I racked my brain for what I
remembered of optics. To turn high-energy radiation into visible light
didn't require additional energy, it just needed some energy absorption.
It was therefore easier. I could stay with the mirror hypothesis without
looking for miracles. I felt better. I started to figure out where I was
by the stars. The French sector was about five miles to the east, and
less than a mile behind me was the American sector.

"Wivitch? Do you read me? Moon here."

"Yes. Tichy! There have been no flashes. Why did you ask about lasers?"

"Are you recording me?"

"Of course. Every word."

I could hear the exasperation in his voice.

"Listen. What I'm about to say is important. I am standing in the
Flamsteed crater. I am looking east, in the direction of the French
sector. There is a mirror in front of me. I repeat: a mirror. Not an
ordinary mirror but something that reflects only me and my surroundings.
I don't know what it is. I see myself exactly, that is I see remote
Number 1 at a distance of approximately two hundred and forty paces. The
image landed with me. I don't know how high this reflecting area
extends, because while landing I was looking downward, at my feet. I
first saw the double right above the crater, very close. It was a little
higher than me, also larger. But when it stood in front of me, it was
exactly my size. The mirror may be able to enlarge the images. I think
that's why the moon robots that destroyed those remotes seemed so
incredibly squat. I tried touching my double. My hand went right
through, there was no resistance. If I'd had a laser and shot at it,
that would have been the end of me, I'd have received the whole
reflected charge. I don't know what happens next. I can't see where the
mirror ends. That's it for now. I've told you all I know. If you're
quiet, I'll keep the radio on, but if there's a lot of talking, off it
goes, because I don't want distractions. Which is it to be?"

"Keep it on, keep it on. . ."

"Then be quiet."

I could hear Wivitch breathing heavily, each huff with a three-second
delay, two hundred and forty thousand miles above me, because Earth
stood high in the black sky, almost at the zenith, a gentle blue among
the stars. The sun, on the other hand, was low, and as I watched my
double in the white spacesuit I could see the long shadow from me
stretching across the dunes. A little crackling in the earphones, but
there was silence. I could hear my own breathing, realizing it was me on
the ship, yet I heard it as if I were standing in my own body here in
Flamsteed. We had expected surprises but not in the no man's land.
Apparently they used this mirror trick to make every intruder, living or
nonliving, self-destruct upon landing, before he could start sniffing
around. Clever. More, intelligent. But inauspicious for me. No doubt
much more was in store. I wouldn't have minded returning to the ship to
think over the situation and discuss it with Control -- it was easy to
leave the remote, just break the safety glass on my chest and turn a
knob -- but I wasn't about to do that. Besides, I was in no greater
danger here than on the ship. What then, look for the source of the
mirror? And if I found it? The image would disappear, that was all.

They say you get your best ideas when you're taking a walk. I started
moving, not exactly the way one strolls but with that slightly drunken
moon stride, first one foot forward as on Earth but then both feet
together, hopping like a sparrow. Or rather like an oversized ball that
bounces and between bounces sails for a while above the sandy ground.
Having covered some distance in this manner from where I had landed, I
stopped to look back at myself. I saw a small figure on the horizon and
was dumbfounded for the second time. Even far away I could see that it
was no longer myself in white but someone else. Someone slender,
graceful, the head shining brightly in the sun. A human figure on the
moon without a spacesuit! And completely naked. Robinson Crusoe seeing
Friday couldn't have been more astounded than I. I quickly raised both
arms but the creature did not follow suit. It was not my reflection. It
had golden hair that fell over its shoulders, a white body, long legs,
and it came toward me without haste and as if without any particular
purpose, and not waddling and halting either but smoothly, as one walks
on the beach. Thinking "beach," I realized it was a woman. A young
woman, and with not a stitch on her. In her hands she held something
large and multicolored, and it covered her breasts. She approached not
directly but at an angle, as if to pass me at a modest distance. I
almost called Wivitch but bit my tongue. He wouldn't believe me. He'd
think I was hallucinating. I didn't move, searching her face, wishing
desperately I knew what to do but I didn't. The only thing I was sure of
was that my eyes weren't deceiving me, nor my brain. I don't know why
but it seemed to me that everything depended on her face. If it was
Marilyn Monroe again, as at that Italian restaurant, then I would have
to doubt the evidence of my senses, because how could any wave or force
get into my memory and obtain precisely that image? I wasn't even
standing here on this lifeless ground in my own person, I was sitting in
the ship, strapped to the armchair at the controls, but even if I were
here myself, what could enter my head with such perfect accuracy?
Apparently, I thought, there were different kinds of impossibility, some
greater and some lesser.

She was the siren of the islands that Odysseus passed. Luring men to
their death. I don't know what made me think of that. I stood, and she
kept coming, now and then lowering her face framed by flowing hair to
sniff the flowers she held, though on the moon one can't smell anything.
She paid no attention to me. But no matter what her appearance or
actions, the mechanism inside her had to function logically, following
logical programs. That had to be my point of departure. The invisible
mirror was to put every armed intruder out of action. Seeing an
opponent, the intruder would pull its gun to defend itself, though not
to attack, its purpose being only reconnaissance. But when the other
also drew its gun, the intruder would shoot, because if it allowed
itself to be destroyed, it would not be carrying out its
information-gathering program. But I did not produce a weapon. Instead I
called Earth and told Wivitch what I saw. Were my words overheard?
Almost certainly. An enormous, truly criminal oversight on the part of
the whole project was that no one had thought to shield Tichy's
communication with the base, which wouldn't have been that hard to do. A
device built into my radio could have converted what was said into an
unintelligible code. The underground military computers knew human
speech, and even if they weren't given it to begin with, it was child's
play for them to learn it, all they had to do was listen to Earth's tens
of thousands of radio stations. Not to mention television programs,
which is no doubt where the naked woman came from like Venus riding the
sea foam.

All very logical. If it's not a robot because it doesn't shoot and
doesn't even inspect its double, which surely would be the first thing a
robot would do upon landing, then it's a man. And if it's a man, then it
must be a male because people wouldn't send a female first on such a
mission. And the Achilles heel of every male has been revealed ad
nauseam on television, to wit, the opposite sex. Whatever I did,
therefore, I shouldn't approach the siren. How dearly I would pay if I
did I didn't need to determine by experiment. Her face couldn't be
Marilyn Monroe's, also, because no one knew about that episode, which
was top-secret. Unless some of the moon-weapon makers had spies inside
the Lunar Agency. . . No, inconceivable.

She walked slowly and that is why I had time for all this thought, but
now only a few dozen steps separated us. Not once did she look in my
direction. I wondered if her bare feet left prints in the sand, but
couldn't tell. If she left prints, that would be worse, for it would
indicate an awesome level of technology for this mirage. When I saw her
face, I breathed a sigh of relief. It was not Marilyn Monroe, though her
features did seem familiar, probably taken from a movie because she was
not only young but beautiful. She walked even slower, as if undecided
whether or not to stop and lie down in the sun as on the beach. The
flowers no longer hid her breasts; she held them lower. She looked
around until she found a large, slanted rock with a smooth surface, sat
on it, and let the flowers fall. They looked strange, red, yellow, and
blue in that lifeless, gray-white moonscape. She sat sideways, and I
thought furiously, trying to answer the question of what her creators or
operators expected of me now, as a man, because whatever it was I should
be very careful not to do it. Had I told Wivitch about this meeting,
that would have served their purpose, because he wouldn't have believed
me, not he or anyone else at Control, though of course they wouldn't
have said that. Convinced that I was raving, they would have ordered me
to abandon remote Number 1 like an empty shell and return to the ship,
and to proceed to target 002 or 003 on the moon's other hemisphere and
repeat the whole landing procedure from the beginning, meanwhile they
would have held an emergency psychiatric meeting to decide which pills
the deranged Ijon Tichy should take from the ship's medicine cabinet. It
was well stocked but I hadn't opened it yet. Having lost credibility
with the earthly powers that be, I would have thereby had ninety percent
less chance of succeeding in my mission, which would have suited the
creators of the mirage, for this hid their activity from Earth as
effectively as their earlier destruction of the lunar spy satellites.
Therefore I should not consult with Control. Nor did sex enter into it.
Surely they knew enough about humans not to expect a live scout to make
advances to a naked woman in a moon crater. But he would definitely want
to have a closer look, to see if she was maybe a physical manifestation
and not just a holograph. Obviously we were not talking about a real
woman. If I touched her, I might not survive that touch. A mine for
humans, built on the principle of sexual attraction. I was in a
quandary. Telling Control was no good, not telling Control was bad too,
and personally investigating this moon siren was risky to say the least.
So I had to do what no man would do, on Earth or the moon, when he
encountered a gorgeous naked blonde. I had to do something the program
of this trap could not foresee.

Looking around, I saw a boulder split in half about a dozen steps away,
large enough for me to hide behind. Gazing passionately at the woman and
as if not knowing where I was going, I went toward the boulder, and when
I was behind it, I moved quickly. I picked up a sizable stone, one that
on Earth would have weighed ten pounds, and hefted it. It was hard and
light, like a petrified sponge. To throw or not to throw, that is the
question, I thought as I watched the seated siren. Half recumbent on her
boulder, she seemed to be sunbathing. I could see her rosy nipples and
that her breasts were whiter than her belly, as with women who wear
two-piece suits to the beach. I threw. The stone sailed slowly,
endlessly, hit her shoulder, passed through her, and embedded itself in
the sand at her bare feet. I expected an explosion but there was none. I
blinked, and in that blink she vanished. One second she was sitting with
her elbow on her knee and twisting a lock of golden hair around a
finger, and the next second she was gone without a trace. The stone I
had thrown wobbled a little before it stopped, and a small cloud of
kicked-up sand settled on the gray rock. I was alone again. I rose from
my crouch, and Wivitch spoke. Apparently he couldn't take my silence any
longer.

"Tichy! We have no picture! What happened?"

"No picture. . . ?" I asked.

But of course -- they must have observed this whole episode on the
video. I had forgotten there was a cloud of micropes somewhere above me.

"We had static for forty seconds. The engineers thought it was our
equipment but that's been checked and everything here is working. Look
hard, you should see them."

He meant the micropes. They're as small as flies but in the sun you can
see them at a considerable distance, like sparks. I looked up at the
black sky but saw not one spark. What I did see was different and quite
strange. It was raining. Here and there little dark droplets fell into
the sand. One of them hit my helmet, and I was able to catch it before
it rolled off. It was a micrope, but blackened, melted into a tiny lump
of metal. The drizzle grew lighter as I told this to Wivitch. After
three seconds I heard him curse.

"Melted?"

"That's what it looks like."

Which was logical. If the naked woman ploy was to succeed in undermining
my credibility, Earth should see nothing.

"What about the backups?" I asked.

The micropes were operated by the teletronics people and not under my
control. Four additional batches of them were on the ship.

"The second cloud was sent. Wait!"

Wivitch turned to speak to someone. I could hear another voice.

"It was sent two minutes ago," Wivitch said. He was breathing heavily.

"Have you reestablished video?"

"Yes. Hey, Jack -- how much on the telemeters? We can see Flamsteed now,
Tichy, they're descending. We'll have you too in a second. . . what's
that?"

The question was not addressed to me, but I could have answered it,
because again it began to rain melted micropes.

"Radar!" cried Wivitch, not to me but I could hear him, he was so loud.
"What? Not enough resolution? Ah. . . Listen, Tichy. We saw you for
about eleven seconds. Again there's no picture. You say they're melted?"

"Yes. And black as if fried to a cinder."

"We'll try once more, this time with a tail."

Which meant that the third cloud of micropes would be followed and
observed by the fourth. I didn't expect anything from this. They knew
the micropes from previous reconnaissance attempts and knew how to deal
with them. Heating by induction, a zone in which any piece of metal
would melt from eddying Foucault currents. At least as far as I could
remember from high-school physics. But the particular device was not
important. The micropes were worthless no matter how radar-proof and
state-of-the-art they were. Built on the model of an insect's eye, where
in flight each ommatidium-prism could take in more than 2,400 square
feet. The resultant picture was holographic, three-dimensional, in full
color, and sharp even if three quarters of the cloud was blinded. The
moon obviously knew all about the micropes. Not encouraging, though to
have been expected. The main thing that puzzled me was why I was still
standing in one piece. If they could dispose of the micropes so easily,
why wasn't I disposed of when the mirror trick didn't work? Why hadn't
they disconnected me from my remote? The teletronicists said that that
was virtually impossible because the control channel was in the band of
the hardest cosmic rays, an invisible needle that reached from ship to
remote and was so high-energy that it could be significantly affected
probably only by the gravitational pull of a black hole. Only a
million-tesla magnetic field would be able to bend that needle, and to
generate such a field would require on the order of trillions of
megajoules. In other words they'd have to pump gigatons of energy into
space between the remote and the ship, and maintain something like an
open umbrella over the moon, a shield of thermonuclear plasma. Either
they couldn't, or they chose not to do so at this moment.

Such restraint, perhaps, came not from insufficient power but from a
strategy. So far nothing on the moon had really attacked the
reconnoiterers, whether robots or people. They had destroyed themselves,
being the first to shoot. As if the nonliving inhabitants of the moon
had decided to remain on the defensive. And true, an adversary on the
attack is in less clear a position than the adversary who knows an
attack is coming. And so the doctrine of ignorance as a guarantee of
peace, devised with so much trouble, had been turned with mockery and
menace against its inventors.

Wivitch was speaking: the third group of micropes had arrived safely and
I was on their screens again. So maybe they had only wanted to blind
Control during the nude-woman mirage. I was plunged into thought. The
moon, listening to the radio, had to know about the growing anxiety on
Earth. The fear stirred by the press had infected not only the people
but the governments. Though everyone realized that a nuclear strike
against the moon would spell the end of peace on Earth. Therefore either
a preemptive attack against the human race was imminent, or something
very strange was taking place on the moon. Wivitch called me again to
tell me that all the micropes would be deployed. They would come in
successive clouds, wave after wave, not only from my ship but from all
four corners of the world, as it were, because it had been decided to
activate the reserves stockpiled under the zone of silence. I hadn't
even known they were there. I sat down in that lifeless desert and
leaned back a little to take in the black sky. I couldn't see the ship
but saw the micropes, sparkling clouds descending and also approaching
from all horizons. Some hung over me, swelling and billowing and
glittering like a swarm of golden gnats playing in the sun. Others, the
reinforcements, I could make out only now and then, when one of the
stars winked out for a moment, obscured by a cloud of my microscopic
guardians. They had me in their screens now at all angles. I should have
got up and continued on but I was suddenly reluctant. Slow and ungainly
in my heavy spacesuit, quite the opposite of the micropes, I made a good
target even for someone with bad cataracts. Why did I have to be at the
front of this mission anyway? Why couldn't the swift micropes go
instead, scouting ahead for me? Control agreed. A change of tactics.
Swarms of golden mosquitoes sailed above me in a wide swath toward the
lunar Urals.

I walked, looking carefully in all directions, until I came to a gently
rolling plain pitted with small craters filled with sand. In the sand of
one crater was something that looked like a thick dead branch. I grabbed
it and tugged, as if pulling a deep root from the ground. Then I used a
small folding shovel that I carried strapped to my side. From the sand
and dust emerged a piece of iron, burnt, perhaps a fragment of one of
the countless primitive rockets that crashed here in the early days of
lunar exploration. I didn't call Control, who through the micropes could
see my discovery for themselves. I pulled at the strangely bent bars
until a thicker part appeared, and under that was a shinier metal. It
didn't look particularly promising, but having begun this scavenging, I
pulled harder, not afraid that one of the sharp pieces might puncture my
suit, because I had no need of air. But something changed. At first I
didn't understand why it was hard for me to keep my balance, then
realized that my left boot was caught, gripped by flattened, curved
prongs. I tried to free it, thinking I'd walked right into this one, but
the foot was held fast and even the blade of my shovel didn't help,
unable to pry the prongs apart.

"Is Wivitch there?" I asked, and waited three seconds for him to
respond.

"They have me in some kind of bear trap," I said.

How incredibly stupid, getting taken by something like this! I couldn't
get loose. The micropes surrounded me like excited flies as I struggled
with the clamps that had closed on my boot like a vise.

"Return to the ship," Wivitch suggested. Or it might have been one of
his assistants, because the voice sounded different.

"I don't want to lose the remote," I said. "I need to cut this!"

"You have a Carborundum saw."

I unhooked the flat holster at my thigh, and in fact it contained a nice
little saw. I plugged its cord into the generator in my suit and bent
over. Sparks flew from the spinning edge. The pincers holding my boot at
the ankle began to give, practically cut all the way through, when I
felt a growing heat in the boot. With all my strength I wrenched my leg
away, then saw that the metal bulb from which the bars protruded like
roots from a great potato was glowing red-hot. The white plastic of the
boot had blackened and was cracking from the heat. I made one last
effort and, suddenly released, fell backward. Blinded by forked
lightning, I felt a violent blow in my chest, heard the sound of the
suit torn open, and was plunged into impenetrable darkness. I didn't
lose consciousness, I was simply in darkness. After a moment I heard
Wivitch:

"Tichy, you're on the ship. Say something! The first remote was taken
out."

I blinked. I was sitting in the chair, my head on the headrest, my legs
curiously bent, and holding my chest where a moment ago I had taken the
blow. A painful blow, I realized only now.

"Was it a mine. . . ?" I asked. "A mine connected to a bear trap? Was
that the best they could think up?"

I heard voices, but they weren't talking to me. Someone asked about the
micropes.

"There's no video," said someone else.

"What? They were all destroyed by that one explosion?"

"Impossible."

"Impossible or not, we have no video."

I was still breathing as if after a long run, regarding the face of the
moon. With the tip of my finger I could cover the entire crater of
Flamsteed and the plain on which I had so stupidly lost the remote.

"What's wrong with the micropes?" I asked at last.

"We don't know."

I looked at my watch and was surprised: I had spent almost four hours on
the moon. It was after midnight, by ship time.

"I don't know about you," I said with a yawn, "but I've had enough for
today. I'm going to sleep."

 

 

 

 Round Two

 

I awoke rested and immediately went over the events of the day before.
You always think better after a good shower, which is why I had insisted
on a bathroom with running water instead of those wet towels which are
no substitute for a tub. Of course there couldn't be a tub, with the
wash area no bigger than a barrel. Water rushed in on one side and was
sucked out by a strong current of air on the other. In order not to
drown, because water in zero gravity covers the body and face in a
growing layer, I had to put on an oxygen mask before showering, which
was a nuisance but better that than no shower. As we all know, even
after the engineers could build rockets in their sleep, astronauts were
still plagued by toilet accidents, and technology wrestled with that
problem for a long time. Human anatomy is horribly unsuited for outer
space. The astroengineers lost sleep over this but not the science
fiction writers, who being artists simply didn't mention it. Urinating
(for men, that is) wasn't too bad, but defecating was solved only with
the offices of a special computer, which was fine, but when that broke
down you found yourself in extremity and had to improvise. In my lunar
module, this computer -- about the only one -- worked throughout like a
Swiss timepiece, thank God. Washed and refreshed, I drank my coffee from
a plastic bulb and ate a raisin cake under a funnel with its suction set
on high so the crumbs wouldn't stick to my fingers or choke me. I don't
like to give up my habits. Having breakfasted properly, I took a seat at
the selenograph and, gazing at the globe of the simulated moon, smiled,
since they wouldn't be inflicting advice on me for a while. I hadn't
informed Control that I was awake; they thought I was still sleeping.

The mirror phenomenon and the naked blonde had clearly been two tests to
determine who or what had landed, and apparently I had passed those
tests, being allowed to wander through Flamsteed unenticed and
unattacked. But the trap that turned out to be a mine didn't fit this
picture. On one hand they go to great trouble to produce a mirage in the
no man's land, all done at a distance because it is a no man's land, and
on the other they plant mines -- as if I was facing an army equipped
with both early-warning radar and clubs. But the mine could have been
there from earlier days, though neither I nor anyone else had any idea
what had taken place on the moon during all those years of hermetic
isolation. Not solving this mystery, I began preparing for the next
reconnaissance.

LEM 2, in perfect working order, was the product of General Teletronics
and a different model from the one I had lost so unexpectedly, poor
thing. I crawled into the bay to have a look at it before I became it.
It was exceptionally strong judging from the girth of its legs and arms,
its broad back, the triple plates of armor that made a dull boom when I
tapped with my finger. Apart from the apertures in the helmet it had six
additional eyes, on its shoulders, hips, and knees. To outdo their
competitor who designed the first LEM, General Teletronics had given
their model two personal rocket systems: besides the retros ejected
after landing this athlete of steel had jets fastened to its heels,
shins, and even one in its behind, which was for balance -- as I read in
the self-congratulatory instructions -- and for the execution of
fifty-foot leaps. Its armor moreover gleamed like pure mercury, so that
the ray of any laser would be deflected. This LEM may have been
marvelous but I can't say I was thrilled as I inspected it, because the
more eyes and dials and jets and auxiliary devices there are, the more
the attention they take, and being a standard-model person myself I have
no more limbs and senses than anyone else. Returning to the cabin, I
hooked into the remote and stood in it, acquainting myself with the
complicated controls. The switch that activated the great jumps was a
wired wafer you took between your teeth. But how was I to talk to
Control with a switch in my mouth? Well, it was elastic and could be
molded like clay and tucked inside your cheek, and you could move it
between your molars when necessary. In difficult situations, warned the
instructions, you should take care not to bite down too hard. There was
nothing about teeth chattering from excitement. The switch tasted awful;
I immediately spat it out. Possibly they had smeared it with something
at the proving ground on Earth, orange or mint toothpaste. I
disconnected from the remote, went into a higher orbit, and flew around
the moon to target 002 between Mare Spumans and Mare Smythii while
conversing with the base as politely as I could.

I was flying as peacefully as a fed baby in its cradle when something
happened to the selenography. It's an excellent instrument when it's
working. There's no reason to travel with an actual globe of the moon;
you can use a hologram, which is like having the entire satellite
hanging in the air not three feet from you, rotating slowly, and you can
see both its sculpted surface and the boundary lines of the sectors, the
nations indicated by the kind of letters that appear on cars: US, G, I,
F, R, S, N. But something had gone wrong, because the sectors began
changing color, all the colors of the rainbow, then the pockmarks of the
craters blurred, the image shuddered, and when I frantically turned
knobs, it returned as a smooth white sphere. I tried adjusting the
focus, size, contrast, but the moon for a second appeared upside down
then disappeared altogether and the selenograph couldn't bring it back.
I told Wivitch, and of course he said I had pushed a wrong button. After
I assured him ten times that we had "a serious problem here," because
since Armstrong that's how you put it, the experts finally got to work
on the selenograph, and that took half a day. First they told me to go
into an orbit above the Zone of Silence in order to rule out any
interference from unknown forces or waves directed at me from the moon.
When that didn't help, they checked directly from Earth all the
circuits, integrated and not, in the holograph, meanwhile I fixed myself
lunch then dinner. Since it's not easy to make a good omelette in zero
gravity, I took off my helmet and earphones so the disagreements between
the information scientists and the teletronicists, not to mention an ad
hoc team of professors, wouldn't distract me. After all the debating
they came to the conclusion that the selenograph was broken. They also
established which micro-component had blown, but it happened to be the
only one I didn't have a spare for. They told me therefore to take my
ordinary moon maps, the ones printed on paper, and tape them to the
screen and use that to navigate. I found the maps but unfortunately I
had four copies of the first quarter of the moon, where I'd been, and
that was all. Great consternation. They told me to look again, more
carefully. I searched the ship with a fine-tooth comb but found only a
small comic book, pornographic, left by one of the technicians during
the final preparations before takeoff.

Control now split into two camps. One said that under such conditions I
couldn't continue the mission and should return; the other wanted to
leave that decision to me. I agreed with the second camp and decided to
land as planned. They could always transmit to me a television picture
of the moon. Not a bad idea, except that this couldn't be synchronized
with my trajectory; they'd either show me the surface of the moon
whizzing past or hardly moving at all. On top of that I would be landing
at the very edge of the face visible to Earth and then proceeding to the
far side, which presented another problem. They wouldn't be able to send
me a television picture directly when the ship was parked above the far
hemisphere, which should have been child's play because the picture
could be relayed to me by the monitoring satellites but they refused.
They refused because somehow no one had foreseen this eventuality and
the satellites were programmed according to the doctrine of ignorance
and therefore weren't allowed to transmit anything to Earth or from
Earth. Not anything. True, to maintain contact with me and my micropes,
so-called Trojan satellites had been put into high equatorial orbit, but
these were not for relaying television signals. That is, they were, but
only via the micropes. There was an awful lot of discussion about this,
then someone suggested they brainstorm the problem, and for the next
four hours the scientists talked. They talked so much, I couldn't stand
it, and then they drifted off the subject and were talking not about how
to help me but who was to blame for not having provided redundancy in
the selenographic system. As usual when people work collectively,
shoulder to shoulder, the blame was not individual, but the accusations
flew back and forth like tennis, until finally I told them I'd handle it
myself. The risk was already so tremendous that a little additional
risk, it seemed to me, wouldn't make any difference. Besides, the
question of which sector I landed in, US, R, F, G, I, C, or any other
letter of the alphabet, was purely academic.

The whole idea of the nationality of the robots inhabiting the moon, who
knows in what generation now, was absurd. As you know -- or may not --
the most difficult task of military automation programming turned out to
be the identification of the enemy. On Earth this was not a big problem;
that's what uniforms were for, flags, colorful insignia on the wings of
airplanes, helmet styles, and it wasn't all that hard to tell if a
prisoner of war spoke Dutch or Chinese. With machines it was a different
story. Therefore two strategies emerged: the Friend strategy and the Foe
strategy. The first advocated the use of a multitude of sensors,
analytical filters, differential selectors, and other such recognition
devices; whereas the second was simplicity itself -- the enemy was
whoever or whatever didn't know the password and so had to be destroyed.
But nobody knew what course the autoevolution of weapons on the moon had
taken, or what kind of tactical programs had developed to distinguish
friend from foe. Though of course friend and foe are highly relative
terms. You can dig through public records and other documents to find
out if a certain person had an Aryan grandmother, but there's no way to
tell if that grandmother's Eocene ancestor was a sinanthropus or a
pithecanthropus. Moreover, the automation of the armies eliminated
ideology. An attacking robot follows its program, acting in accordance
with focalization and optimization algorithms, differential diagnostics,
and game theory -- not patriotism. Military mathematics and weapons
automation, moreover, if they had their apostles, they also had their
apostates. The former maintained there were programs that could ensure
perfect loyalty in a war robot so that nothing could turn it to treason;
the latter said nonsense, because there is no code that can't be cracked
and no security system that can't be subverted, just look at the history
of computer crime. A hundred and fourteen programmers protected Chase
Manhattan Bank's information centers from entry by unauthorized persons,
and a bright young kid armed with nothing but a hand calculator and an
ordinary telephone broke into that inner sanctum as a joke and left a
calling card: auditors wanting to check a balance, before each CREDIT
and DEBIT command had to type PEEKABOO. Of course the experts
immediately devised a different, much more complicated, unbreakable
program. I don't remember now who broke that one. But this has no
bearing on round two of my mad mission.

I don't know the name of the crater I landed in. From the north it
resembled Helvetius but not from the south. I had examined this second
landing site from orbit although not that carefully. It didn't matter to
me whether or not it had been a no man's land once. I could have
determined the coordinates, playing at the astrograph and doing
declinations from this star and that, but I decided to save that for
later. LEM 2 was a lot better than I thought it would be, but it did
have one problem, the temperature control worked in only two positions,
so I had to keep turning the switch, jumping back and forth between oven
and icebox which made my nose run. But why was I still sitting in the
ship, putting off the landing? It wasn't fear, I suddenly understood,
but the fact that I didn't know the name of the crater where I would be
landing. As if a name had special significance. Which no doubt explains
the zeal with which astronomers christened every surface feature of the
moon and Mars, and why they fell into despair when they discovered on
other planets so many mountains and valleys and had no more names left
that sounded good.

The area was flat except for the northern horizon where a line of
ash-gray vertical rocks stood against the black sky. I slogged with
difficulty through abundant sand, checking from time to time to see if
the micropes were still with me. They hovered so high above that only
occasionally could I see them sparkle, distinguished from the stars by
their movement. I was near the terminator, the night side of the moon
about two miles ahead of me. The sun, very low, touching the horizon at
my back, cut the plain with long parallel shadows. Every depression in
the ground, even small ones, was filled with such darkness that it was
like stepping into water. Hot and cold by turns, I walked stubbornly on,
in the direction of my own giant shadow. I could talk with Control but
had nothing to say. Every few minutes Wivitch asked me how I was doing
and what I saw, and I answered: all right, and nothing. On a sloping
dune lay a stack of large flat stones, and I went toward them, seeing a
glint of something metallic there. It was the shell of an old rocket,
clearly from the days of the first moon shots. I lifted it, looked at
it, dropped it, and walked on.

At the top of a rise where there was hardly any of that fine sand that
clings to your boots, was a stone the shape of a badly baked loaf of
bread, and I don't know why but I kicked it. Maybe out of boredom or
because it was lying so apart. The stone broke instead of rolling
downhill, and a piece the size of a fist flew off, leaving a surface
that gleamed like quartz. Of course I knew plenty, from my briefing,
about the chemical composition of the moon's crust but couldn't remember
if it included quartz, so I picked up the fragment. It was surprisingly
heavy. I held it and looked at it, and not knowing what more to do with
it, tossed it away and moved on, but didn't move on because at the last
moment, as it left my hand, it glittered in the sun very curiously, as
if something tiny was trembling in the concave broken place. I didn't
pick it up again, but bent over it and watched for quite a while,
blinking because I thought my eyes were playing tricks on me unless
something really strange was taking place in that stone piece. The
surface of the break was quickly losing its shine, in a few seconds was
dull, and then it began to fill out as if drawing substance impossibly
from within. The stone seemed to exude a viscous sap like a cut tree.
Carefully I touched it with a finger, but it was not sticky; gummy,
rather, like plaster before it sets. I looked at the other, larger piece
and was even more surprised. It had not only dulled but swelled out a
little at the place of the break. I didn't say anything to Wivitch, just
stood there, legs apart, feeling the sun at my back, a hot pressure, it
hung not far above the gently curved, white-and-black striped plain, but
I didn't take my eyes from the stone.

It was growing or, more precisely, healing. After a few minutes the two
parts, the stone and the fragment I had held in my hand, no longer fit,
they had both swelled until each was a lump that had no flat side from
the fracture. I waited to see what would happen next but nothing more
happened, as if the wound had been sealed in both places by a scar.
Absurd yet true. Remembering how easily the stone had broken, because I
hadn't kicked it very hard, I looked around for more. A few, smaller,
lay on the sunny slope, so I took out my folding shovel, went over and
hit them, one by one, with its sharp blade. They split like overripe
chestnuts and shimmered inside, until I came to an ordinary rock,
because the shovel bounced off it leaving only a white line on its
surface. I returned to those that had fallen in two. They were healing,
there was no doubt about it. I had a little Geiger counter in a pocket
on my right thigh. It registered nothing when held near the stones. This
was an important find because stones don't heal, therefore these were
probably the product of some local technology and I should collect them.
I was reaching for one when I remembered that I couldn't return to the
ship because that wasn't in the Mission. Nor could I do an in-the-field
chemical analysis, having no reagents. If I told Wivitch about this
phenomenon, a lengthy conference would ensue, full of expert opinions,
and excited scientists would forbid me to leave the spot and ask me to
break as many of the stones as I could, like eggs, and observe what
happened while they theorized more and more boldly, but I felt in my
bones that nothing would come of it, because you have to have some idea
in your head before you start experimenting. Then I heard from Wivitch,
who had seen me hitting something with the shovel but apparently the
picture transmitted by the micropes was not sharp enough for him to see
what. I answered that it was nothing and quickly continued on my way,
full of thoughts.

The ability of those injured in battle to repair themselves might be
useful to warrior robots but hardly to stones. Could this mean that the
computers in this locality were building weapons from the ground up, as
it were? But even so, why would stone projectiles need to heal? Then the
thought occurred to me that I was here, after all, not as a living being
but as a nonliving remote. Could it be that the evolution of the moon
weapons had proceeded along two independent lines: as the production of
weapons that would attack what was nonliving, and separately, what was
living? Let us assume that. Let us assume -- I thought -- that a device
designed to destroy a nonliving weapon could not with the same
efficaciousness destroy a living enemy, and that I had encountered the
second type of device, one set for the landing of a man. Since I was not
a man, these mines -- if they were mines -- failing to detect a living
body inside my suit, did nothing to harm me, and only sealed themselves
up. A robot scout from Earth, happening upon them, would pay no
attention to healing rocks, not programmed to notice so bizarre and
unforeseen a phenomenon. But I, neither man nor robot, had noticed. What
then? I did not know, but if there was any truth at all in my theory, I
could expect other mines, mines not for humans but for automata. I
walked more slowly, placing my feet with great care, passing dune after
dune, the unmoving sun behind me. The stones I came to, some larger,
some smaller, I didn't hit with the shovel or kick in case there were
indeed two kinds of mines. I went on like this for a good three miles or
maybe more but didn't take out my pedometer, which was in a shin pocket
so deep and narrow it was murder getting my glove in. Then, looking to
the south, I saw ruins.

It didn't make much of an impression on me because there are so many
piles of rock on the moon that from a distance look like the ruins of
buildings. Still, I changed direction and waded through deeper sand,
expecting that grouping of rocks to reveal its true, random nature, but
it didn't. On the contrary, the closer I got, the more definitely it
looked like the half-broken façade of a low building, and the black
places weren't shadows but holes, maybe not as regular as windows but on
the moon no one had ever come across such large holes in rock and
certainly not in a row. The sand stopped giving way beneath me, and my
boots hit something rough, pitted, and glassy, like lava except it
wasn't lava but perhaps sand that had been raised to an extremely high
temperature then cooled. I wasn't mistaken because this surface was
dazzling in the sun and covered the entire slope that led to the ruins.
A high dune lay in front of them, and when I reached the top of it I had
a perfect view and understood why I hadn't seen them from orbit. The
ruins were deep in rubble. If these were truly houses, then the rubble
came up to the windows. From a distance of about three hundred yards
they resembled something familiar from photographs: stone foundations
after an earthquake, for example in Iran. From orbit you would see them
only near the terminator, the low sun shining through the window
openings, which were misshapen as if from an explosion. But I still
hadn't ruled out the possibility that this was merely a peculiar rock
formation. I went closer. Feeling very uneasy, I took out my Geiger
counter and plugged it into my suit so I could hear if the ground was
radioactive. It was plenty radioactive but not until halfway down the
dune. When I stepped onto the rubble that surrounded the squat houses
with jagged walls and no roofs (now quite positive this was not the
product of natural forces), I heard the counter's rapid clatter. The
rubble didn't move under my feet as normal rubble would, it was as if
all fused by the intense heat of an explosion. I was at the first house
now but couldn't inspect it properly because I had to watch every step,
placing my heavy boots carefully among the pointy ledges of that great
heap so I wouldn't slip and become stuck between two boulders, which
wouldn't have been difficult. Higher up, on a level with a nearby ruin,
the rubble changed to a glaze covered with black streaks like soot. It
was easier to walk, and I went to a window, an irregular opening with
hanging stones at the top. I looked inside and saw -- though not at
once, because it was so dark -- long objects  lying haphazardly.
Reluctant to crawl through the broken window because my remote, a
massive thing, might get wedged, I looked for a door. If there were
windows here, why not a door. But I didn't find one. Walking around the
house, which was grotesquely squashed as if by some tremendous force, I
discovered a crack in a side wall, wide enough to let me in if I
hunkered down. On the moon, where sun and shadow coexist without
intermediaries, the contrast is too much for the human eye even when
relayed by a remote. I crawled groping into a corner of the room,
pressed my back against the wall, and closed my eyes until they grew
accustomed to the dark. I counted to a hundred, then looked around.

The interior was like a cave without a ceiling, which didn't mean light
from above because the lunar sky is as black as night. And the sunlight
through the window was not visible as a shaft because there was no air
or dust to diffuse it. The sun remained outside, present only as a
blazing white patch on the wall opposite the corner where I stood. In
its reflection, at my feet, lay three corpses. That's what I thought in
the first moment, because although blackened and distorted they had
legs, arms, and one even had a head. Blinking and shielding my eyes from
the patch of sun, I knelt over the nearest one. It was not a human body,
nor any kind of mortal remains, for what has never been alive cannot
die. The form sprawled before me was a manikin but probably not a robot,
because its torn-open trunk was completely empty. There were only a few
bits of rubble and sand inside. Cautiously I pulled at the thing's
shoulder. It was surprisingly light, as if made of styrofoam, and black
as coal, and headless, but then I saw the head by the wall -- it was
upright on its severed neck and regarded me with its three empty
eyesockets. Naturally I wondered: why three and not two? The third eye
was a round cavity positioned where on a man you would have the bridge
of the nose, but this curious manikin surely never had a nose because on
the moon there would have been no point. The other manikins were also
only roughly humanoid. Although the destruction of the house had greatly
deformed them, you could see that even to begin with they had been only
approximations to the human shape. Their legs were too long, about one
and a half times the length of the torso, and their arms were too thin
and attached not to the shoulders but oddly, one to the chest, the other
to the back. Which must have been by design because the explosion, shock
wave, and cave-in could have contorted the limbs of one like that but
not all of them in the same way. Having an arm in front and an arm in
back might be, who knows, advantageous in certain situations.

Squatting opposite the sharp patch of sun and in the darkness with three
manikin corpses, I realized that aside from the rapid clicking of the
Geiger counter I was hearing nothing -- that for at least a few minutes
the voice of Wivitch had not reached me. The last time I spoke to him
was from the top of the dune that overlooked the ruins, and I had said
nothing about my discovery, wanting to make sure first that it wasn't an
illusion. I called Control, but heard only the alarm-rattle of my
counter. The radiation level was high, but I didn't bother to take a
reading because as a remote I didn't have to worry, then suddenly it
occurred to me that it was some ionized gas given off by these
irradiated broken stones which had cut off my radio communication, and
that at any moment resonant absorption could cut my contact with my
ship. A stab of fear that I would be stranded here forever, which was
stupid because if I lost contact with my ship, only the remote would
remain in this rubble and ruins while I found myself back on board. But
so far I felt no lessening whatever of control over the remote. My ship
must have been hovering right over the house, maintaining the orbit that
kept it near the zenith above me. No one of course had foreseen such a
discovery or such a situation, but the zenith position is optimal for
maneuvering a remote, since the distance between it and its operator is
smallest and thus so is the response time. Without an atmosphere the
concentration of ionized gas (perhaps from vaporization after the
explosion) could not be great. Was it also interfering with
communication between the base and the micropes? I didn't know and
wasn't concerned about that at the moment; what intrigued me was what
had happened here and why.

I dragged the biggest corpse, the one with the head, backward through
the crack in the wall. Outside, the radio still didn't work, but I was
more interested in this poor thing that had never lived, true, but for
all its ghastliness made a most pathetic impression. He must have been
nine feet tall, or maybe a little less, was thin, and the head was
elongated, it had three eyes, no nose or mouth, a narrow neck, and the
hands were prehensile, but I couldn't count the fingers because the
material from which he was made had melted the most there. He was
covered with tarry cinders. It must have been hot, I thought, and only
then did it occur to me that this could have been a group of buildings
like those they once set up on Earth to study the effects of nuclear
explosions, it was in Nevada and someplace else too, with houses,
courtyards, stores, and streets, but animals were used for people, sheep
and goats I think, and especially pigs because like us they don't have
fur and therefore suffer the same kind of burns we do. Had this been
such a test site? If I knew the force of the blast that turned these
buildings into rubble, I could determine from the present level of
radioactivity how long ago that happened, but the physicists could also
probably calculate it from the mix of isotopes here, so I put a little
gravel into the thigh pocket of my suit, then remembered angrily, again,
that I wouldn't be returning to the ship. But it was necessary to date
the explosion, even if only approximately. I decided to leave the
contaminated area, reestablish contact with Control, and tell them about
this, letting the physicists solve the problem of how to analyze the
specimen I'd taken.

I don't know exactly why, but I picked up the corpse and threw it over
my shoulder, it didn't weigh more than ten or fifteen pounds here, and
beat a rather awkward tactical retreat, its long legs dragging on the
ground and catching on stones. I had to go very slowly to keep from
falling. The slope was not that steep but I wasn't sure whether it would
be better to walk on the slippery glass-rock or over the rubble which
rolled and shifted at every step. Because of this difficulty I went in
the wrong direction and found myself not on the dune again but about a
quarter of a mile to the west of it, between large round rocks that
looked like monoliths. I put the corpse down on a flat place and sat to
catch my breath before I tried raising Wivitch. I looked for the
micropes but the glittering cloud of them was nowhere to be seen. And
still I heard no voices though I should have by now. The clatter of the
Geiger counter in my helmet slowed until it was like individual grains
of sand falling on a drum. Then I heard a muffled voice and went numb,
because it wasn't the base. Incoherent and hoarse, yet I caught two
words: "My brother. . . my brother. . ." A moment of silence, and again:
"My brother. . ."

"Who is that?" I wanted to shout but didn't dare. I sat hunched, feeling
the sweat break out on my forehead, and the voice again was in my
helmet. "Come, my brother. Come to me. Without fear. I do not wish you
harm, my brother. Come. We will not fight. Do not fear. I do not wish to
fight. Come. Let us be brothers. Let us help each other, my brother." A
snapping sound, and the same voice but in a completely different tone,
sharp, barking: "Put down your weapon! Put down your weapon! Or I'll
fire! Don't try to run! Turn around! Hands up! Both hands! And don't
move! Don't move!"

Something snapped again and the first voice returned, weak and hesitant:
"My brother, come. Let us be brothers. Help me. We will not fight." It
was the corpse talking, that was clear. It lay where I had dropped it,
and looked like a stepped-on spider with its abdomen split and its legs
tangled and its empty eyesockets staring at the sun. It didn't move but
something inside it was addressing me in a loop. A song in two keys,
first come my brother and then the barking. That's its program, I
thought. Whether manikin or robot, it was designed first to lure a man,
a soldier, then take him prisoner or kill him. It couldn't do anything
now, all that was left in it was an unburned scrap of the program
playing in a loop. But why by radio? If it was built to fight on Earth,
surely it would speak in a regular voice. I didn't understand the radio.
There were no live soldiers on the moon, and a robot wouldn't be taken
in by this. Or would it? It just didn't make sense. I looked at the
blackened skull, the twisted hands and melted fingers, the torso ripped
open, but now without the instinctive pity of a moment ago. With
disgust, rather, with ill will, even though the thing was not to blame,
it had been programmed this way. How can one be indignant with a bunch
of circuits?

When it began its my-brother routine again, I spoke to it, but it didn't
hear me. Or gave no sign of hearing me. I stood, my shadow fell on its
head, and it stopped in the middle of a word. I stepped back, and it
continued. So it was activated by the sun. I wondered what to do next.
This manikin-trap was of little interest, too primitive to be much of a
"war machine." And even the lunar armorers must consider these
long-legged figures obsolete and worthless, seeing as they used them to
test the effects of a nuclear hit. Because its lifeless refrain made it
hard for me to concentrate, but to tell the truth it may have been for
another reason, I picked up some larger pieces of rubble and threw them
at the thing's head and then its torso, as if to bury it. It fell
silent, and all I heard was a thin squeaking. At first I thought the
squeaking was from the corpse, and looked around for more rocks, but
then I realized it was Morse code. -- t-i-c-h-y -- 1-i-s-t-e-n --
t-h-i-s -- i-s -- c-o-n-t-r-o-l -- s-a-t-e-1-l-i-t-e --
m-a-l-f-u-n-c-t-i-o-n -- s-o-u-n-d -- w-i-1-1 -- r-e-t-u-r-n -- s-o-o-n
-- w-a-i-t -- t-i-c-h-y.

So one of the Trojan satellites between us had gone on the fritz. They
would fix it soon, sure, I thought sarcastically. I couldn't reply,
there was no way. For the last time I looked at the charred remains, and
at the ruins white in the sun on the other side of the dune, and I ran
my eyes over the black sky trying in vain to find the micropes. I walked
toward a large convex wall of rock that rose from the sand like the gray
hulk of a whale. I made for a break in the rock, which was black as tar
in shadow, like the mouth of a cave. I blinked. Someone was standing
there. A human figure, almost. Short, broad-shouldered, in a gray-green
spacesuit. I raised an arm, thinking it was again my reflection and that
the color of the suit was only from a shadow, but the figure did not
move an inch. I hesitated, perhaps from fear or some premonition. But I
hadn't come here to run, besides where would I run to? I stepped
forward. He looked just like a squat man.

"Hello," came his voice. "Hello. . . Can you hear me?"

"I hear you," I said without much enthusiasm.

"Come over here. . . I have a radio too!" That sounded pretty idiotic,
but I went to him. There was something military in the style of his
suit. Shining metal bands across his chest. His hands held nothing.
Well, that was something, I thought, approaching but more slowly. He
came toward me and lifted his arms in a simple gesture of greeting an
old friend.

"Welcome! Welcome! How good of you to come at last! We can talk. . . you
and I together. . . about bringing peace to the world. . ."

He spoke in an effusive, vibrant, strangely penetrating voice as he came
toward me through the deep sand, arms held out, and his whole bearing
expressed such cordiality that I didn't know what to think. He was now
only a few steps from me, the dark glass of his helmet blazing with the
sun. He embraced me, hugged me, and we stood that way on the gray slope.
I tried to see his face but saw nothing, even as close as a hand's
breadth, because the glass was opaque. It wasn't even glass, more a mask
covered with glass. How could he see me then?

"You'll feel at home here with us, old friend. . ." He bumped my helmet
with his as if trying to kiss me on both cheeks. "At home. . . we don't
want war, we are peace-loving, meek, you'll see. . ." And with that he
kicked me so hard that I fell on my back, and jumped on me, both knees
in my stomach. I saw stars, literally, the stars of the black lunar sky,
while my "friend" held my head down with his left hand and with his
right pulled off his metal bands which themselves twisted into horseshoe
hoops. I said nothing, dazed, as he fastened my arms to the ground one
at a time with the hoops, driving them in with powerful, unhurried blows
of his fist, and continued:

"At home, old friend. . . We're simple folk, kind, I like you and you
like me, old friend. . ."

"And not 'my brother'?" I asked, now unable to move either arms or legs.

"Brother?" he said thoughtfully, as if trying out the word. "So be it,
brother! I'm good, you're good, brother for brother!"

He stood, quickly and expertly tapped my sides, legs, found my pockets,
took out everything I had, the flat box of tools, the Geiger counter,
the folding shovel, and frisked me again, harder this time, especially
under the arms, and tried to work his fingers into the top of my boots,
and during this careful search of my person not for a moment did he stop
talking.

"My brother, you said. Maybe yes, maybe no. Did one mother give birth to
us? Ah, mother. Motherhood. Mother is a saint, and you're a saint too,
brother, no weapon on you, none. A clever brother. . . just taking a
little stroll, to pick mushrooms. Lots of boletus here, but the forest
is hard to see. Yes, old friend. . . I'll make it better for you soon,
all better. We're simple folk, meek, and we will inherit the earth."

He took a kind of flat knapsack off his back and opened it. Sharp
instruments gleamed. He hefted one in his hand, put it back, selected
another, powerful shears like the cutters used by soldiers in battle to
get through barbed wire, and turned to me, the blades sparkling in the
sun. He sat on my stomach, lifted the tool, and with the words "To your
health" thrust it into my chest. It hurt but not much. Evidently my
remote had pain dampers. I knew that this lunar friend of mine would
open me like a fish and that I should return to the ship and leave him
the body to cut up, but I was so fascinated by the contrast between his
words and his actions that I lay as if mesmerized.

"Why don't you speak?" he said, slicing through my suit with a crackling
sound. Excellent shears, made of incredibly hard steel.

"I can say something?" I asked.

"Go ahead!"

"Hyena."

"What?"

"Jackal."

"You insult me, my friend? Not nice. Not friend but enemy. Treacherous.
You came here unarmed to confuse me. I wished you well, but an enemy
must be searched. My duty. That's the rule. I was attacked. With no
declaration of war you stepped upon this sacred ground. Your own fault.
My brother, hah. Brother of a dog! Worse than a dog, and you'll regret
calling me hyena and jackal, but not for long, because memory ends with
life."

The last of my chest welds gave way, and he began to break and pry apart
things. He looked inside and hmmed.

"Interesting little gadgets," he said, getting up. "Fancy stuff. Our
experts will figure it out. You wait here. But where can you go?
Nowhere. You're ours now, my friend!"

The ground shook. Turning my head to the side as far as I could, I saw
others like him. They marched in formation, goose-stepping the dust up.
My executioner stood at attention, preparing to make his report, I
supposed.

"Tichy, answer, where are you?" roared in my ears. "The sound is back.
Wivitch here. Control. Can you hear me?"

"I hear you," I said.

Some of this must have been overheard by the soldiers, because they
broke into a run.

"Do you know what sector you're in?" Wivitch asked.

"Yes. I've just realized. They've taken me prisoner! I'm cut open!"

"Which country?" Wivitch began, but my executioner drowned him out.

"Emergency!" he shouted. "Seize him!"

"Tichy!" cried Wivitch from far away. "Don't let them take you!"

I understood. Letting Earth's latest technology fall into robot hands
was to be avoided at all cost. I couldn't move even a finger, but there
was still a way. I bit down as hard as I could, heard a snap like an
overwound spring, and was plunged into total darkness. Instead of sand
under my back was the soft upholstery of my chair. I was on the ship. A
little dizzy, I couldn't find the right button immediately, but then saw
it. I broke the plastic cover and hit the red button with my fist so the
remote would not be examined by them. Below, a pound of ecrasite blew it
to smithereens. I felt sorry for the LEM but I had to do it. And so
ended the second reconnaissance.

 

 

 

 Carnage

 

Of the next ten landings I have memories as fragmentary as they are
unpleasant. The third reconnaissance lasted the longest, three hours,
even though I came down in the middle of a pitched battle between robots
that looked like prehistoric lizards. They were so busy fighting, they
didn't notice me when I descended on the battlefield in a halo of fire,
white as an angel though without wings. Still aloft, I understood why
this region had seemed empty from the ship. The robots were camouflaged;
on their backs they had a knobby design that was like scattered stones
in sand. They slithered with terrible speed. At first I didn't know what
to do; there were no bullets whizzing past, no explosives, but the laser
flashes were blinding. I lumbered quickly to some large white rocks,
because this was the only cover in reach. Peering out from behind a
boulder, I watched the battle.

I couldn't tell who was fighting whom. The lizard robots, which
resembled caimans, were attacking up a shallow slope in my direction,
hopping. But the enemy seemed to be among them, in their ranks, perhaps
the enemy had parachuted in, because I saw some lizards struggling with
others and they looked exactly the same. At one point three that were
pursuing one came quite close. They caught it but couldn't hold it
because it shook off all its legs and escaped, writhing like a snake. I
hadn't expected such primitive combat, with tails and legs being torn
off, and I waited for them to get around to me, but somehow in the heat
of battle I was ignored. A line of soldiers advanced on the slope,
spitting laser fire from mouths funnel-shaped like blunderbusses. But
something odd was happening higher up on the slope. The robots in front,
covered by the fire of those behind, slowed about halfway up and began
to change color. Their sandy backs darkened, then were covered with gray
smoke as though from an invisible flame, and then they ignited. But
there were no flashes from the other side, so it could hardly have been
lasers. The slope was now strewn with charred and melted machines, but
new troops came and went rushing to their doom.

It was only when I turned on my telesights that I saw what they were
attacking. At the top of the hill was something huge and unmoving like a
fortress, but a peculiar fortress because it was all mirrors. Or maybe
not mirrors but screens of some kind, which in the top half showed the
black sky with stars and in the bottom the sandy slope strewn with
debris. Unless they were both mirrors and screens at the same time. The
lasers had no effect on the fortress, were deflected, meanwhile lower,
where the biggest pile of robot corpses lay, the temperature of the rock
was over three and a half thousand degrees according to the bolometer in
my helmet. A force field heating by induction or something like that, I
thought, pressing tight to the boulder that was my shield. The lizards
attacked, and the mirror-screen thing surrounded itself with an
invisible wall of heat, fine, meanwhile what was I supposed to do,
defenseless as an infant caught in a wave of charging tanks? I didn't
have to report all this to Control because my third remote was followed
by a special rocket that looked like an ordinary rock. It impersonated a
meteor, except that this meteor didn't fall but hung two miles above me.

Something touched my thigh. I looked down and froze. It was one of the
legs of the robot that a moment ago had turned into a snake. The leg had
inched its way to the boulder where I was hiding and had come upon me.
In this blindly twitching thing with three sharp claws and sandy
camouflage there was something both repulsive and pathetic. It tried to
attach itself to my thigh but of course couldn't, finding no purchase. I
picked it up with disgust and threw it as far from me as I could. It
came back. So instead of observing the battle I had to fight with that
leg, because it was trying to climb up me again, ineffectually, as if it
was drunk. And now the others will come, I thought, and the situation
will be really ridiculous. I threw it. At least Control was silent,
because any conversation might be overheard, which would be bad for me.
Crouching in the shadow of my boulder, I gripped my shovel and waited
for the leg, and thought darkly that all I needed was for the damned
thing to have some radio transmitter too. Contracting and lengthening in
turn, it reached my knees because I was kneeling, and I held it down
with one hand and with the other started chopping with the shovel.
Instead of taking notes on robot warfare Ijon Tichy sits on the moon
making lizard-leg hamburger. Wonderful. Finally I must have hit a
sensitive spot because it rolled over and stiffened. I got up then and
peered around the boulder.

The laser-shooters had fallen, and I could hardly distinguish the
individual robots, their gray blending into the surroundings. But now up
the slope came, from where I don't know, a spider as big as a shack and
listing like a ship at sea. Flat as a turtle on top, it wavered on its
many widespread legs, the knees higher than itself on both sides, but it
proceeded methodically, heavily, carefully placing those many-jointed
stilts, and approached the wall of heat. I was curious to see what would
happen. Under its belly something long and dark, almost black, came into
view, probably a weapon of some kind. The spider stopped at the wall of
heat and stood awhile, as if thinking. All action stopped. The only
thing I could hear was high squeaking in my helmet, a signal in some
incomprehensible code. A strange battle, for it was primitive,
resembling the struggle of Mesozoic dinosaurs on Earth millions of years
ago, but at the same time it was sophisticated, because these lizards
had not hatched from reptilian eggs but were robots armed with lasers
and packed with electronics. The giant spider now hunkered down, its
belly touching the ground, and seemed to close in upon itself. I heard
nothing, but of course even if the very moon were to split open you
would hear no sound, however the ground shook once, twice, three times.
The tremors became continuous, till everything around me, and myself,
shook with an increasingly intense vibration. The dunes in the distance
strewn with the bodies of gray lizards, the slope facing me, and the
black sky above it, I saw everything as through trembling glass. The
outlines of objects blurred, even the stars on the horizon winked as on
Earth, and I shook feverishly, like a tuning fork, and so did the
boulder I clutched. I shook in every bone and finger, more and more
violently, as if every part of my being were quivering jelly. The
vibration was painful now, like a thousand microscopic drills at once. I
tried pushing away from the boulder, to stand separate, because then it
would reach me only through the soles of my boots, but I couldn't move,
my hands were paralyzed, I only watched, half-blind, as the giant spider
drew itself into a dark bristling ball like a real spider dying under a
magnifying glass that focuses the sun. Then everything went black and I
was falling into an abyss, until I opened my eyes, covered with sweat,
my throat tight, and saw the bright, friendly colors of the control
panel. I had returned to the ship. Apparently a safety mechanism
disconnected me at a certain level of discomfort. I rested a minute,
then decided to go back, although with the hideous feeling that I might
be entering a corpse. Carefully I pushed the lever, as if it could burn
me, and found myself again on the moon and in the all-consuming
vibration. Before the safety mechanism threw me on the ship again I saw,
though not that clearly, a great mound of black fragments that were
slowly rumbling down. The fortress fell, I thought, and again was back
in my own body. But the fact that the remote hadn't come apart gave me
the courage to try it one more time.

Nothing shook now. All was deathly still. Among the charred lizards lay
the ruins of the mysterious fortress that had blocked the way to the top
of the hill. The spider that had destroyed it using resonance lay in a
ball of twitching legs which straightened and bent, straightened and
bent, movements that grew slower until they stopped completely. A
Pyrrhic victory? I waited for another advance but nothing moved. If I
hadn't seen what I had seen, I might not even have noticed the burnt
debris that littered the whole field, it blended in so with the sand. I
tried to rise but couldn't. I was not even able to move a hand. At most
I managed to tilt my head in the helmet so I could see myself.

It was not a pretty sight. The boulder that had served me as a shield
was split into large pieces and those were covered with a network of
hairline cracks. My legs or rather what remained of them were stuck in
rubble. The poor remote was an armless, legless torso. I had the eerie
sensation that my head was on the moon and my body was on the ship,
because even as I saw the battlefield under the black sky, I felt the
seat and shoulder belts of my chair. The chair was with me yet not with
me because I couldn't see it. It wasn't hard to figure out the reason:
the remote's sensors, without incoming data, shut down so I remained in
contact only with the head which, protected by the helmet, had survived
the murderous moonquake caused by the spider. Nothing more for me to do
here, I thought. But I stayed, half in half out of the rubble, and
looked over the sunlit field.

In the distance something was flapping in the sand, sluggishly, like a
fish on a beach. One of the lizard robots. Sand rolled off its back as
it hauled itself into a sitting position like a kangaroo or dinosaur,
and it sat there, the last witness of a battle that no one won. The
robot turned toward me and suddenly began to spin, and spun so fast, the
centrifugal force made its long tail fly off. I watched, amazed, while
it whirled now like a top, until pieces flew in all directions and it
fell flat, flopped over a few times, and with a final somersault landed
on the other bodies and was still. Although I had attended no lecture on
the theory of electronic expiring, I knew that this was what I had just
seen, it was so like the death spasms of a crushed beetle or
caterpillar. We know how their death looks but cannot know if those last
spasms signify suffering. I had had enough of this. I felt, in a way
difficult to describe, that I was involved in it, even responsible. But
because I hadn't come to the moon to philosophize on moral questions, I
bit down hard to disconnect myself from the pitiful remnant of LEM 3 and
in the blink of an eye was back on board to tell Control what had
happened this time.

 

 

 

 Invisible

 

Tarantoga, to whom I showed these notes, said that I describe all who
worked on my mission and kept watch over me as either idiots or
bunglers. Whereas the General Theory of Systems proves mathematically
that there exists no element or part that is infallible, and even if you
reduce fallibility to one in a million, in other words provide that a
given part will break down only once in a million times, a system
containing a million parts must fail because one of the million will
fail. But the lunar system I belonged to was made up of not one but
eighteen million components, therefore the idiot bungler responsible for
the majority of my problems was the world, because if all the experts
stood on their heads and were geniuses every one, the situation could
only be worse, never better. Probably true. On the other hand, I was the
one who suffered as a result of all those unavoidable breakdowns, and
anyway psychologically, when you're in a fix, you don't curse the atoms
or electrons but specific individuals so my radio tantrums were also
unavoidable.

Control pinned their hopes on the last LEM because it was a miracle of
technology and guaranteed the maximum safety. It was a remote in
powdered form. Instead of a steel athlete you had a container filled
with microscopic grains, each grain of such concentrated intelligence it
rivaled a supercomputer. In the presence of certain impulses these
particles came together to form a LEM. I could land as a thin cloud of
molecules, could coalesce if necessary in the form of a robot of human
shape, but I could just as easily become one of forty-nine other
programmed things, and even if eighty-five percent of the grains were
destroyed, the rest would be enough to carry on. The science behind such
a remote, called a dispersant, was so advanced that Einstein, von
Neumann, the entire physics department of M.I.T., and Rabindranath
Tagore working together would have had a problem with it, so I didn't
even try to figure it out. All I knew was that they'd embodied me in
thirty billion separate particles, particles more versatile than the
cells of a living organism, and there was unimaginable redundancy for
joining these in various combinations which could all be turned back to
dust at the push of a button, dust so scattered you couldn't see it, and
each particle incorporating stealth technology, making it undetectable
by radar or laser or anything except gamma rays. If I was ambushed I
could disperse myself, retreat, and reform in whatever way I liked. What
one experiences as a cloud spread over several thousand cubic feet is
impossible to put into words. To know it, you have to be such a cloud.
If I lost my vision, or to be more precise my optical sensors, I could
replace them with any other organ, and the same for arms, legs,
tentacles, tools. I just had to be careful not to become lost in the
wealth of possibilities. This time, I would have only myself to blame if
I failed. The scientists thus washed their hands of responsibility if
the remote malfunctioned. I can't say this made me happy.

I landed at the equator on the other side of the moon, smack in the
middle of the Japanese sector, as a centaur, that is as a being with
four extremities plus two arms attached to the upper trunk, with an
additional device that surrounded me like an intelligent gas, so
actually there was not much resemblance to the mythological creature.
Even though I had familiarized myself with this powdered remote too at
the Lunar Agency's testing range, I first crawled into the bay to check
it out. It was indeed fascinating to watch that pile of glittering
powder begin to move when you turned on a program, and flow, and
connect, and mold itself to make the given shape, and how when you
turned off the field (electromagnetic or possibly something else), it
flew apart like a kicked sand castle. This ability to fly apart at any
moment was supposed to make me feel secure. The sensation was quite
unpleasant, like a strong vertigo combined with the shakes, but there
was nothing I could do about that. At least it only lasted until I
assumed a new form. The one thing that could destroy me was a
thermonuclear explosion and even that had to be up close. I asked if it
was possible for me to disperse completely due to a malfunction but they
never gave me a straight answer. As an experiment I tried to run two
programs at once, becoming at the same time a humanoid giant and a
nine-foot caterpillar with a flattened head and enormous pincers, but it
didn't work because the selector worked on an either/or principle.

This time I stood on lunar soil without the rear guard of the micropes,
because I was myself in a sense a multitude of eyes, pulling after me a
flowing gauzy train of transmitters. Possessing an inquiring mind, I had
asked what would happen if it turned out that similar protean robots had
been developed on the moon. They couldn't answer that though on the
testing range they had pitted two, even three such robots against each
other, which mixed like clouds going in different directions. The clouds
preserved ninety percent of their identity. Ninety percent of an
identity is probably also something you have to experience to
understand. This reconnaissance, at any rate, started without any
trouble. I trotted forward, not even having to turn my head because I
could see on all sides at once, the rear included, like a bee, which has
round eyes and sees out of thousands of ommatidia at the same time.

The way that the individual nations programmed their weapon factories
was known only to them, but from the Japanese particularly, famous for
their ingenuity, I expected unpleasant surprises. Professor Hakagawa, a
member of our team at Control, had no more idea than any of us what
monsters the Japanese computers might hatch, but he warned me to stay on
my toes and not be taken in by appearances. Not knowing how to tell
appearance from reality, I cantered across the monotonous, flat terrain.
At the horizon rose the embankment of a large crater, and Wivitch,
Hakagawa, and the rest of them were delighted with the picture relayed
to Earth by the Trojan satellites because it was razor-sharp. After an
hour I observed some low shoots among the rocks and in the sand, and
they turned in my direction. They looked like the withered leaves of
potato plants. I asked if I should pull up a clump, but nobody wanted to
make the decision for me, some said I definitely should and others said
I'd better not. I leaned my centaur's body over one of the larger plants
and tried to pick a pliant stem. Nothing happened, so I lifted it to my
eyes. It began writhing like a snake and coiled itself tight around my
wrist, but after trying a couple of things I discovered that if you
stroked it lightly, like tickling with a finger, it let go. I felt
stupid addressing potato leaves though I knew this had nothing to do
with the vegetable kingdom, but I gave it a try anyway. There was no
answer, not that I expected one. I shook off the tendrils, which
squirmed like worms, and galloped on. The area looked like a poorly kept
garden, a bucolic scene, but I was prepared for an attack at any moment
and even provoked those pseudoplants, stepping on them with my hooves
(which are what my boots looked like; had I wanted, I could have made
them cloven hooves). Then I came to a patch of another dead vegetable,
in long rows, and before each row stood a large sign with the words
STOP! HALT! ARRÊTE! and so on in some twenty tongues including Malay and
Hebrew. Despite this I plunged ahead into the field. Farther on, tiny
pale-blue flies swarmed in circles near the ground, and when they saw me
they arranged themselves into the letters DANGER! OIIACHOCTb! GEFAHR!
PERÌCOLO! YOU ARE ENTERING JAPANESE PINTELOU! I Called Control, but no
one, not even Hakagawa, knew what PINTELOU meant. I encountered my first
problem, because when I pushed through these trembling letters they
stuck to me and began crawling over my body like ants. They did me no
harm, however. I flicked them off with my tail (showing its usefulness
for the first time) and ran down a furrow between two patches until I
came to the edge of the crater. The plants continued into a gully and
on, deeper, into a wide ravine, its bottom hidden in moon shadow as
black as coal.

Suddenly a large tank came at me out of that darkness, squat, huge, its
wide treads grinding and rumbling, which was odd because one can't hear
on the moon, there's no air to carry the sound waves. Nevertheless I
heard the noise, heard even the gravel crunching under the steel tracks.
The tank bore down on me. Behind it appeared a long column of other
tanks. I would gladly have stepped aside to let them pass, but it was
too narrow where I stood. I was going to disperse but when the first
tank reached me, it went through like fog, making everything a little
darker for a couple of seconds. More phantoms, I thought, and let the
next tanks roll through me. After them came a line of soldiers, ordinary
soldiers, with almond eyes, bayonets fixed on short rifles, and among
them walked an officer with a saber and a flag that displayed the rising
sun. They all went through me like smoke, and I was alone again. It grew
darker in the deepening ravine so I turned on my lights, which bordered
all my eyes, and proceeding more slowly I came to the mouth of a cave
behind a rampart of scrap iron. The opening was too low for me, so in
order not to have to keep stooping I changed into a dachshund-centaur,
which sounds stupid but is descriptive because my legs shortened and my
belly brushed stones as I entered the moon's interior, going where no
human being had ever set foot though my feet weren't exactly human
either. I stumbled more and more, my hooves slipping on gravel, when I
remembered what I was capable of and turned them into padded paws that
held the floor like a lion's or tiger's. I felt more at home in my new
body but didn't have time to play games. Lighting up the irregularly cut
walls of the cave, I reached a grating that filled the entire
passageway, and I thought how polite these Japanese weapons were to
intruders because on the ceiling above the grating glowed the large
sign: NOT ENTERING! NOT TO TRESPASS THIS BARRIER! YOU HAVE WARNING TO
KEEP OUT! and beyond the bars floated a phosphorescent skull and
cross-bones with the words DEATH IS A VERY PERMANENT CONDITION. That
didn't deter me. I went to powder, passed through the grating, and
pulled myself together on the other side. The natural stone of the
corridor gave way to an oval tunnel, its walls bright and smooth like
ceramic. I tapped it with a finger, and from the place I touched a small
root emerged and flattened into a plaque that read MENE MENE TEKEL
UPHARSIN. It was clear they weren't joking but I hadn't come this far to
retreat now, so I proceeded on quiet paws, feeling my tail following
softly, ready to come to my assistance at any moment. It didn't bother
me that Control couldn't see me. The radio had fallen silent, and I
could hear only a low, plaintive sound, like keening. I came to a wider
place where the tunnel forked. Above the left passage glowed a neon THIS
IS LAST WARNING but over the right there was no sign so I went left of
course and saw white: a wall, and an enormous armored door with a row of
locks and keyholes, like a door to a sultan's treasure. I clouded my
right hand and slipped it through one of the keyholes. It was darker
than midnight inside. I felt around, then slipped my whole body through
in the form of a mist or aerosol, hoping that intruders flowing through
keyholes was something the Japanese or rather their machines hadn't
foreseen. I had difficulty breathing but only figuratively because I
didn't breathe. I lit up the place not only with the lights around all
my eyes but also with my whole self, like a glowworm, remembering the
versatility of this LEM. So much light blinded me at first, but I soon
grew accustomed to it.

The tunnel kept descending, straight as an arrow, until it was blocked
by a curtain of what seemed ordinary straw. I pushed it aside and
entered a large room lit with ceiling lights. The scene was one of
complete chaos. In the center lay a ruin among large shiny pieces of
porcelain; it looked like a supercomputer taken apart by a bomb. Broken
curling cables went in and out between these fragments covered with
crushed glass and the glittering flakes of integrated chips. Someone had
been here before me and wreaked havoc in the heart of the Japanese
weapons complex. The strangest part was that the giant computer, several
stories high, had been smashed by a force acting from within and
probably from the bottom up, since its thick armor-plated walls had
buckled and split outward. Some of the sections were like library
shelves or cabinets, filled with tight coils of wire, banks of switches,
and circuit boards. As if an unbelievable hand had struck up into this
colossus and ripped and shattered, but in that case I should have been
able to see that hand in the center of the destruction. So I began
climbing the rubble, which was as dead and empty as a plundered pyramid,
and reached the top and looked down.

Someone lay there as if in a deep and well-earned sleep. At first I
thought this was the same robot who had greeted me so warmly during my
second reconnaissance, calling me brother only to knock me flat and open
me like a can of sardines. I looked at him lying at the bottom of the
uneven funnel of debris from the smashed computer. He was man-shaped
though larger than a man. There is no hurry to wake him up, I thought.
Better to figure out first what happened here. Obviously the Japanese
weapons factory had not wished this attack upon itself. I dismissed the
hara-kiri possibility as unlikely. Seeing as the borders between sectors
were so well guarded, the invasion may have been carried out below them,
by burrowing through the rock. In that way the unknown attacker could
have made it to the very heart of the computer arsenal to demolish it. I
should question this robot who slept so soundly after completing his
murderous mission. The prospect didn't fill me with enthusiasm. In my
head I went through all the different forms I could assume, to choose
the one that would be safest for our conversation, because this
character, awakened, might prove hostile. I couldn't speak as a cloud
but could as a partial cloud, a cloud with a voice box inside it. That
seemed the most prudent. To wake the giant I didn't bother with niceties
but pushed a chunk of computer so it would roll down on him, and changed
myself as quickly as I could. It hit his head, which made the whole
mountain of rubble tremble, and other pieces of electronic debris began
to sift down. He got to his feet immediately, stood at attention, and
barked:

"Mission a success! Enemy position taken, for the fatherland! Reporting
for further instructions!"

"At ease," I said.

He probably hadn't expected a command like that but he relaxed, stood
with his legs apart, and only then noticed me. Something inside him
whirred.

"Hello," he said. "How are you? You're a little hazy, my friend. But
it's good that you've finally come. Come closer, we'll have a chat, sing
a song, put our heads together. You'll like it with us. We're meek,
peaceful, we don't want war, we hate war. Which sector are you from
exactly. . ." he added in a different tone, as if suddenly suspicious,
or else he had switched to a more appropriate program. What lay around
us was hardly evidence of peaceful activity. He held out his huge, iron
right hand, and I saw that each finger was a muzzle.

"You want to shoot a friend?" I asked, wafting gently over the porcelain
heap. "Well then go ahead, brother. Shoot, and may it do you good."

"A Japanese spy!" he barked, blasting at me with all five fingers.
Pieces of wall fell but I, still hovering calmly above him, lowered my
voice box so it wouldn't be hit. Thickening the bottom half of the
cloud, which was myself, I pushed a chunk of computer the size of a
chest of drawers, and it bore down on him, carrying with it an avalanche
of rubble.

"An attack!" he yelled. "I'll draw their fire! For the fatherland!"

"You're so dedicated," I said, then turned myself into all cloud, and in
the nick of time, because there was a boom and the mountain of debris
burst into flame. My self-sacrificing interlocutor stood in blue fire,
blazed then blackened but with his last breath managed to shout "For the
fatherland!" before he came apart. His arms fell off, his chest split
from the heat, revealing for a moment a curiously primitive tied bundle
of copper wire, and finally his head went, popped open, and was
completely empty, like a walnut shell. But still he stood, a pillar of
embers which finally collapsed for good into ashes.

Although I was a gas, I felt the heat beating from the ruins as if from
a volcano. I waited a minute, spread along the walls, but no new
candidate for conversation stepped from the flames, which leaped upward
so fiercely, the ceiling lights, those that were still in one piece,
began to crack, and bits of tubing, glass, and wire rained on the rubble
and it became darker. The room, geometrical and once neat, a perfect
circle, was now like a scene from a witches' Sabbath in the glow of the
blue flame that kept roaring upward, and the air scorched me. Seeing I
had no more to learn here, I gathered myself and floated out to the
corridor. No doubt the Japanese had other, reserve military centers, so
this one might not be that important, but I felt I should return to the
surface and tell Control what happened before I continued the
reconnaissance. Nothing barred my way or challenged me. I took the
tunnel to the armored door, passed through the keyhole and then the
grating, and looked with pity at the warning signs I passed, they were
so useless. Finally I saw the mouth of the cave glimmer in the distance.
Only now did I assume an approximately human shape, having missed it --
a new, unprecedented kind of nostalgia, that -- and I looked for a
boulder where I could sit and eat, because I felt hungry, except I
forgot that as a remote I couldn't put a thing in my mouth. And I really
couldn't leave such an excellent machine undefended just to get a quick
bite to eat. So I put that off. I would report to Control first and then
break for lunch after I stashed the remote in a safe place.

I called Wivitch but the only answer was dead silence. I checked with
the Geiger counter to see if maybe there was ionized gas here too. Or
possibly the short waves couldn't get out of this narrow ravine. So with
a sigh I turned back into a cloud and flew high into the black sky and
like a bird again called Earth. Of course I couldn't be a bird, with no
air there's nothing to support wings, I only said bird because it sounds
nice.

 

 

 

 Visits

 

I returned from my aborted shopping excursion as if in a dream. I don't
remember how I got back to my room, I was thinking so hard about what
had happened in front of that department store. Having no desire to sit
at the table with Kramer and the others, I ate all the cookies in the
desk drawer and washed them down with a Coke. It was dusk when someone
knocked. Thinking it was Dr. House, I opened the door. A stranger stood
in a dark suit and with a thin black briefcase in his hand. He looked
like a funeral director.

"May I come in?" he asked. I stepped back without a word. Not looking
around, he sat on a chair, the one I had thrown my pajamas over, put his
briefcase on his knees, and took out a bunch of typewritten pages. From
his pocket he took pince-nez and set them on his nose, and regarded me
awhile in silence. His hair was gray but his eyebrows black, his face
gaunt, and his bloodless lips turned down at the corners. I stood by the
desk, waiting, and finally he laid his card on the blotter. I read
PROFESSOR ALLEN SHAPIRO, I.C.G.D. The address and telephone number were
so small, I couldn't make them out, but I didn't pick up the card. I was
filled with a weary indifference which was like drowsiness.

"I am a neurologist," he said. "Fairly prominent."

"Yes, I think I've read you," I mumbled. "Callotomy, the lateralization
of brain function. . . Is that right?"

"Yes. I am also a consultant for the Lunar Agency. It's thanks to me
that you were allowed to proceed as you have. I believe that in the
present situation you should be protected but no more than that. The
escape attempt was infantile. Consider. You have become the bearer of a
priceless treasure. Geheimnisträger, the Germans would say. Your every
step has been followed and not only by the Agency. To date the Agency
has thwarted eight attempts to kidnap you, Mr. Tichy. When you flew to
Australia, you were under observation by special satellites and not just
ours. It's been all I can do to keep our own government leaders at bay.
They want you arrested, put out of commission, and so on. The advice you
obtained through your friend is worthless. When the stakes are high
enough, the law means nothing. As long as you are alive, everyone -- all
the players -- are stalemated. This can't go on. If they are unable to
get you, they'll kill you."

"Who?" I asked, without surprise. Seeing that this would be a long
visit, I took a seat, throwing a few newspapers and books to the floor.

"It doesn't matter. You have acted in good faith. Your official report
was compared with what you wrote here and buried in the jar. In addition
the Agency has all the tapes from Control."

"And?" I said, because he had paused.

"Some is the truth, some confabulation. But not done by design. You
believed both what was in your report and what you put down here. When
there are gaps in the memory, it is natural for a person to fill them
in. One does it quite unconsciously. Anyway we don't really know if your
right brain contains a treasure."

"Which means?"

"The callotomy might not have been an accident."

"What then?"

"A maneuver to divert attention."

"By the moon?"

"It's possible."

"Is this really so crucial?" I asked. "The Agency can always send more
scouts."

"And has. You returned after six weeks. Once the diagnosis was made --
your callotomy, I mean -- three more people were sent."

"And they didn't succeed?"

"They succeeded in returning. All of them. Unfortunately. . ."

"Yes?"

"Their experiences were totally different from yours."

"Totally?"

"It's better for you not to know the details."

"But you know them, so you too, Professor Shapiro, are in danger," I
said with a smile. He nodded philosophically.

"The scientists have a hundred different theories, but there's general
agreement that the classical remotes were no surprise to the moon. The
surprise was the molecular remote, your final remote. But now this too
the moon is aware of."

"Which means?"

"You've probably already figured it out. You penetrated farther than the
ones who followed you."

"The moon put on a show for them?"

"That's what it looks like."

"And not for me?"

"You got through the stage sets, at least partly."

"Why did they let me return?"

"In their strategic game, it was the optimal solution to the problem.
You returned, the mission completed, and at the same time did not return
or complete your mission. Had you not returned at all, the Security
Council would have voted against further reconnaissance."

"And instead, to destroy the moon?"

"Not destroy so much as neutralize."

"That's something new to me. How is it done?"

"There's a way. Incredibly expensive, since it's a completely new
technology. I don't know the details. It's better not to know them."

"You must have picked up something. . ." I muttered. "It would have to
be a post-atomic technology in any case. No warheads or rockets,
something more discreet. Something the moon would not be able to detect
in time. . ."

"For a man with only half a brain, you're not stupid. But let's get back
to the subject, that is, to you."

"You want me to agree to be examined? By the Agency? Let them give my
right hemisphere the third degree?"

"It's more complicated than you think. We have, besides your report and
the tapes of the mission, certain hypotheses. One says that the
individual sectors on the moon are at war. That they have not united,
neither for the destruction of some by others nor to plan an attack on
Earth."

"What exactly has happened, then?"

"If we knew exactly, I wouldn't have to bother you. The barriers between
the sectors definitely failed. The military games have engaged each
other. It's produced unprecedented effects."

"Such as?"

"I'm no expert on this, but as far as I know, there are no experts on
this. We're at the mercy of conjecture under the banner of, if you'll
pardon my Latin, Ceterum censeo humanitatem preservandam esse."

"What is it you want of me?"

"Nothing at the moment. You are, excuse the metaphor, a man with the
plague before there were antibiotics. I came to see you because I
insisted. They finally agreed. You are sort of a last resort. Who
unfortunately multiplied the possibilities of what is happening on the
moon. Speaking plainly, after your return we know less, not more."

"Less?"

"Of course less. We're not even sure that your right brain contains any
critical information. The number of unknowns has increased."

"You speak like an oracle."

"The Lunar Agency transported to the moon and placed into sectors what
it was supposed to under the Geneva Agreement. But the computer programs
of that first generation remained the secret of the participating
nations. The Agency wasn't privy to them."

"So it was wild cards from the very beginning?"

"Of course, because of the world's antagonisms. The question is, is it
possible to tell the difference between a program that after a few
decades derails from the safeties installed by its designers and a
program designed to derail in a certain way?"

"I don't know. Perhaps computer scientists could tell."

"No, no one can tell except those who wrote the programs."

"Professor Shapiro," I said, getting up and going to the window. "I have
the impression that you are drawing me into a web. The more we talk, the
cloudier the subject becomes. What has happened on the moon? We don't
know. What I experienced there, was it real? We don't know. What was the
reason for this damned callotomy of mine? We don't know. Does half of my
brain hold important information? We don't know. I most respectfully ask
you to get to the point."

"Most respectfully. You have been treated most respectfully up to now."

"Because it was in the Agency's interest, and perhaps in the interest of
others as well. Or are you telling me I was saved and protected out of
the goodness of your hearts?"

"No. Goodness doesn't enter into it. As I said before, the stakes are
too high. So high, that had we been able to extract what we want from
you by torturing you to death, that would have been done long ago."

An unexpected thought came to me. I turned, my back to the now dark
window, and smiled, crossing my arms on my chest.

"Thank you, professor. Only now do I understand who has really been
protecting me all this time."

"But I told you."

"But I know better. It is they. . ." And opening the window, I pointed
at the moon rising above the trees, a sharp white crescent against the
dark blue sky.

The professor said nothing.

"It must have something to do with my landing," I went on. "With the
fact that I went down myself to take what the last remote found, which I
could do because there was a spacesuit and lander in the bay. They put
them there just in case, and I used them. True, I don't remember what
happened to me when I stood on the moon with my own two feet. I remember
and don't remember. I found the remote but I don't think it was the
molecular one. I remember that I knew why I came down: not to save it,
which was impossible and made no sense, but to take something. A sample?
Of what? That's what I can't recall. The callotomy itself I either
didn't feel or don't remember, as with amnesia after a concussion, but
when I returned to the ship and put my spacesuit back into its special
closet, I remember how it was covered with a fine, soft powder. A
strange powder, dry between your fingers, like salt, yet difficult to
wipe off your hands. It wasn't radioactive. But I washed as if it had
been. Later I didn't even try to find out what the stuff was, though I
didn't have the opportunity anyway to ask such questions. When I learned
that my brain had been severed, I was too taken up with that trouble to
think about my hour on the moon. Did you hear anything about that
powder? Like talcum. Anyway, I brought something back. . . but what?"

My visitor squinted at me through his pince-nez, poker-faced.

"You're warm," he said. "Even hot. . . Yes, you brought back something.
. . That's probably why you returned alive despite your landing."

He got up and came to where I stood. We both looked at the moon,
innocent and bright among the stars.

"The molecular LEMs remained behind," my visitor said as if to himself.
"But, let us hope, destroyed beyond duplication! You destroyed your own
although you didn't know it, when you went to the bay for your
spacesuit. That activated the autodestruct program. I can tell you this
now because it no longer matters."

"For a neurological consultant you are remarkably well informed," I
said, my eyes still on the moon as it went behind a cloud. "Perhaps you
even know what came back with me. Was that their micropes, that powder
so unlike ordinary sand?. . ."

"No. As far as I know, just silicon-based polymers."

"And not a virus?"

"No."

"Then why is it so important?"

"Because it accompanied you back."

"The spacesuit closet lost its hermetic seal?"

"No. Most likely you inhaled some of the particles while in the rocket,
getting out of your suit."

"And they're in me?"

"I don't know if they still are. The fact that it wasn't normal moon
dust we learned when you ran off to Australia."

"Ah! Every place I've been has been put under a microscope?"

"More or less."

"And. . . they were found?"

He nodded. We were standing at the window, and the moon sailed through
the clouds.

"Does everybody know?"

"Everybody?"

"All the interested parties. . ."

"Probably not yet. At the Agency, only a few people, and in the clinical
department only I."

"Why did you tell me?"

"You were on the track of it yourself, besides I want you to understand
the situation."

"My situation?"

"Yours and in general."

"So they're keeping me under observation?"

"I don't know to what extent. There are different levels of secrecy
here. Based on what I've heard from a couple of friends, completely off
the record, research is still in progress and they haven't yet ruled out
the possibility that those particles are in contact with the moon. . ."

"What kind of contact? Radio?"

"Definitely not."

"Another means of communication?"

"I flew here to ask you a few questions and you're grilling me."

"You said you came to fill me in on my situation."

"But I can't answer questions to which I don't know the answers."

"In a nutshell, then, I have been protected so far by the possibility
that the moon is interested in my fate and can step in. . . ?"

Shapiro didn't answer. The room was dark. He walked over and turned on
the light, which hurt my eyes and also brought me back to earth. I
pulled the curtain, took a decanter and two glasses from the bar, and
poured what was left of the sherry. I gave him a glass, pointed to the
armchair, and sat down.

"Chi va piano, va sano," the professor said unexpectedly. Only wetting
his lips with the sherry, he put the glass on the desk and sat down with
a sigh. "Human beings always proceed according to a model," he said. "In
a case like this, however, there are no models. And yet we must act,
because no good will come of procrastination. Nor does guesswork help us
any. As a neurologist I can say this much: There is short-term memory
and long-term memory. The short-term turns into long-term if there are
no violent disruptions. It is hard to imagine a disruption more violent
than the severing of the great commissure! Therefore what happened just
before and immediately after that event does not exist in your memory.
As for the warfare on the moon, we don't even know who is attacking and
who is defending. No nation will ever admit that its programmers didn't
follow the directives of the Geneva Agreement, which everyone signed.
But even if one of those programmers came forward and confessed, it
would be of little use, because neither he nor anyone else knows what
course things have taken on the moon. And you. . . are about as safe in
this asylum as in a den of lions. You think I exaggerate? In any case
you won't be here forever."

"A long conversation," I said, "and yet we go in circles. What you want
is for me to put myself in your hands?" I tapped the right side of my
head.

"I think you should. I personally doubt that it will help either you or
the Agency that much, but I see nothing better."

"Your skepticism may be only to disarm me. . ." I muttered to myself as
if thinking aloud. "Are the effects of a callotomy absolutely
irreversible?"

"If it was done surgically, the severed white matter would definitely
not grow back. But your skull, I believe, was not cut into. . . ?"

"I see," I answered after a moment of thought. "You offer the hope that
something different could have happened to me. Either to tempt me, or
you believe it a little yourself. . ."

"And your decision?"

"I'll tell you within forty-eight hours. All right?"

He nodded and pointed at the card on the blotter.

"My number."

"You mean we'll do this in the open?"

"Yes and no. No one will pick up the receiver. You will wait ten rings
and phone again after one minute. And wait ten rings again and hang up."

"And that will mean I agree?"

He nodded and rose. "We'll take care of the rest. But now I must go.
Good night."

After he left, I stood awhile in the middle of the room, staring
vacantly at the curtain. Suddenly the ceiling light went out. The bulb
blew, I thought, but when I looked out the window, I saw that all the
buildings of the asylum were dark. Even the distant lights on the ramp
to the highway were out. It had to be a power failure. My watch said
eleven. I didn't feel like hunting for a flashlight or candles, so I
opened the curtain and in the weak light of the moon undressed and took
a shower in my small bathroom. Deciding to put on a bathrobe instead of
pajamas, I opened the closet door and froze. Someone was standing there,
fat, short, almost completely bald, as rigid as a statue, his finger to
his lips. It was Kramer.

"Adelaide," I said but stopped because he shook his finger sharply. He
pointed at the window. When I didn't move, he got down and crawled on
all fours around the desk and to the window, and carefully reached up
and closed the curtain. It was so dark that I could hardly see him
return to the closet, still on his hands and knees, and take out
something rectangular and flat, but when my eyes grew accustomed to the
dark, I saw that Kramer was opening a briefcase, sorting through strings
or wires, connecting something, then there was a snap, and, sitting on
the rug, he whispered:

"Come over here, Tichy, and we'll talk. . ."

I sat beside him, too surprised to say anything. Kramer moved closer,
his knees touching mine, and said quietly:

"We have at least three-quarters of an hour before the power goes back
on. Some of the bugging devices are on batteries but they're low-tech
and we have first-class screening. Tichy, you can keep calling me
Kramer, Kramer will do. . ."

"Who are you?" I asked, and heard him chuckle.

"Your guardian angel."

"But haven't you been here a long time? How could you know I would come
to this asylum? Surely Tarantoga. . ."

"Curiosity killed the cat," Kramer replied mildly. "There are more
important things for you to think about, Tichy. For example, I would not
advise you to do what Shapiro says. That would be the worst thing you
could do."

I was silent, and Kramer chuckled again. He was obviously in a good
mood. His voice was different, not as drawling as before, and there was
nothing asinine about the man now.

"You think I am an 'agent of a foreign power,' yes?" he said, clapping
me on the back. "I understand, you are suspicious in eighteen different
ways, but let me appeal to your reason. Suppose you take Professor
Shapiro's advice. They'll get you in their clutches, without torture,
God forbid, no, in their clinic you'll be treated like the President
himself. They'll pull something out of the right side of your head, or
they won't, either way it will make no difference, because the verdict
has already been delivered."

"What verdict?"

"The diagnosis, the results of the scientific auscultation, through your
arm, leg, foot, who cares? Please don't interrupt, I'm telling you
everything. Everything that's known."

He paused, as if waiting for my go-ahead. We were sitting in the dark.
Suddenly I said:

"Dr. House might come."

"He won't. No one will come, don't fret about that. We're not playing
cowboys and Indians here. Pay attention now. On the moon the programs of
different parties have been going after each other. Who started it is
not important, at least not now. To put it very simply, there's a cancer
proliferating there. The mutual production of chaos, the
interpenetration of weapons both hardware and software, the blows and
counterblows, call it what you like."

"The moon has gone mad?"

"In a sense, yes. When the programs as well as what they created were
destroyed, altogether new processes began, processes no one on Earth
foresaw."

"What were they?"

Kramer sighed.

"I'd light a cigarette now," he said, "but can't, because you don't
smoke. What were they? You brought back the first evidence."

"That dust on my spacesuit?"

"It's silicon polymers, the beginning, the scientists say, of an
orthogenesis, the birth of nonliving organisms. What's taking place up
there is no threat to Earth, and yet for that very reason the Agency
sees a threat."

"I don't understand."

"The Agency stands guard over the doctrine of ignorance. There are
nations that seek the end of that doctrine, of the whole business of
packing weapons off to the moon. But it's more complicated than that.
Different interest groups exist, and some would like to see a growing
panic under the rubric of The Moon Invades Earth, so that a coalition
will form, in the UN or outside it, to strike preemptively, whether in
the traditional way, which means thermonuclear, or with that new quantum
gravity collapsar technology, don't ask me about it now, I'll tell you
later. What they want is to arm on a grand scale, a global scale, for if
a true invasion threatens, it would be necessary to crush it before it
begins."

"And the Agency doesn't want that?"

"The Agency itself is torn. Each interest group has its people in it.
Otherwise the Agency would not represent Earth. You have become a trump
card in this game. Possibly the highest."

"I? Because of my problem?"

"Exactly. Whatever information Shapiro and his crew get out of you
cannot be verified, after all. Except for a few people no one will know
whether they really learned something or only said they did and that
they would soon announce it to the public or first go with it to the
Security Council. But the announcing doesn't matter. The point is that
no one, including you, will know whether they are lying or telling the
truth."

"It would probably be a lie, since you said before that the verdict has
already been delivered. . ."

"That's how it looks. But I am not omniscient. In any case they can't
use force on you."

"But Shapiro said. . ."

"The attempted abductions? But they were arranged, Tichy, in such a way
that you would not lose your life. Because if you did, no one would have
anything."

"Who were they?"

"Different parties and for different purposes. First, to have you.
Later, when such efforts were foiled, to frighten you a little, push
you, soften you up, so you would run into the welcoming arms of
Shapiro."

"Wait, are you saying that the Agency itself. . . that the later attacks
were staged?"

"Yes."

"All right. Suppose that nevertheless I let them examine me. What would
happen?"

"Bridge or poker."

"I don't understand."

"The game, the bidding. One can foresee the beginning but not what
follows. It's clear that on the moon things didn't happen as they were
supposed to. We're left with the question: Is or is not Earth in danger?
So far everything suggests there is no danger and will be none for the
next few hundred years, being very conservative. Perhaps for the next
few thousand years or even million. But politics cannot think in such
distant terms. We can sleep peacefully till the year three thousand. But
many do not want to sleep peacefully. Many need a harmless moon."

"To do what?"

"To make sure no nation has an arsenal left there, or anything else.
That the whole lunar project is defunct, the Geneva Agreement
meaningless, and we all have to go back to Clausewitz."

"So either way it ends badly? If there's a true threat of invasion, we
have to arm ourselves against the moon, and if there's not, we return to
the old way, the Earth way, is that it?"

"That's it. You grasp the situation."

"A nice situation. And the secret hidden in my head isn't worth a
plugged nickel. . ."

"You're wrong there. Depending on what result they announce from the
examination of your person, different scenarios can be set up."

"Scenarios?"

"According to our computer simulation there are at least twenty. Not
from the real result, of course, but from what they announce as the
result."

"You don't know what that is?"

"No, because they themselves don't know yet. Even Shapiro's group is
divided. You have to understand, Tichy, the lie they announce will not
be a hundred-percent. They could do that only if they were an absolutely
solid, sure conspiracy of professional crooks. Which they're not. They
can't even rule out the possibility that you, although not learning
anything from the examination about the contents of your right brain,
will nevertheless join the poker game."

"How?"

"Don't be naive. What's to stop you from writing afterward to the New
York Times or the Züricher, or wherever you like, and saying that they
added, doctored, falsified things? Think of the uproar! Experts would
come forward to defend you, to ask for new and better controlled tests.
It would be a royal mess."

"If you see this all so clearly, why don't Shapiro's men?"

"But what else can they do other than persuade you to submit to an
examination? We are all, despite our different roles, prisoners of the
situation."

"They could kill me."

"No good. Even if you killed yourself, the suspicion that you were
murdered would travel around the world."

"I can't believe it's impossible to repeat what I did on the moon.
Shapiro said that they tried and nothing came of it, but surely new
scouts could be sent."

"True, but that too is a labyrinth. You are surprised? Tichy, there is
not much time left. We have a stalemate on the global board, with no
moves to ensure peace, only different kinds of risk."

"And what do you advise me as my guardian angel?"

"To take no one's advice, mine included. I too represent certain
interests, I'm not hiding it, it was neither God nor Providence that
sent me to you, only a group that doesn't want the arms race started
again."

"And what does this group wish me to do?"

"Nothing at the moment. Nothing at all. Stay here. Don't telephone
Shapiro. Keep in touch with crazy old Kramer during the next two weeks,
or it might be only days, and we'll see what develops."

"Why should I believe you?"

"You shouldn't, as I said. I've given you the general picture, that is
all. The main transformer was disconnected for about an hour, and now
I'll take my electronic toys and go to bed, because I'm a millionaire
suffering from depression, aren't I? See you later, Jonathan."

"Good night, Adelaide," I said.

Kramer crawled to the door, pushed it open, and I thought I saw someone
standing in the hall who gave him a sign. Kramer got to his feet, went
out, and shut the door quietly behind him. I sat there, my legs pins and
needles, until the lights went back on.

Turning them off, I got into bed. Where Kramer had been sitting lay an
object like a flattened ring. I picked it up. There was a rolled piece
of paper stuck inside. I unrolled it. "Just in case," said the hasty
scrawl. I tried putting the ring on my finger. It was gray, a dull
metal, strangely heavy, maybe lead? On one side it had a hump like a
lima bean with a pinhole through it. The ring fit only on my little
finger. For some reason it troubled me more than both my visitors. What
was it for? I tried scratching a windowpane with it. It left no mark on
the glass. I licked it. Salty. To keep the ring on or not? I decided to
keep it on. I looked at my watch. It was after midnight but I wasn't
sleepy. I didn't even know what to worry about first. Perhaps the fact
that my left arm and leg had been so well behaved, because their
passivity, it seemed to me as I grew drowsy, might be a trap, a trap
this time from within. I lay half-awake, or else half-asleep, I didn't
know which, and puzzled over this for a long time, until it grew light.
Dawn, I thought, therefore I must have managed to sleep a few hours
after all, except that the light wasn't coming from the curtained
window, it was coming from under the door.

The light was curiously strong, as if someone were directing a spotlight
at the threshold of my room. I sat up. Something was flowing in across
the floor, not water, more like mercury. It rolled in tiny balls, came
together in a wide puddle that gathered around the small rug before my
bed, and in the light from under the door came other rivulets of that
strange metallic liquid. Now almost the whole floor gleamed like a
mercury mirror. I switched on the table lamp. The stuff wasn't mercury,
it had more the color of tarnished silver. There was so much of it now
that the rug floated, then the light behind the door went out. I sat and
watched wide-eyed. The syrupy liquid separated into drops and the drops
clumped together to form a mushroom shape that swelled like leavened
dough and stiffened and lifted. This had to be a dream, I told myself,
and yet I didn't dare let my bare feet touch the "quicksilver," which
was indeed a metaphor come true, for quick meant living and this moved
like a thing alive, though not animal or vegetable. The monster changed
into a cocoon, a shell, armor that was more and more humanoid, though
full of holes, especially the gaping slit in front. When I tried
recreating that metamorphosis in my memory, which was much later, the
best comparison I could think of was watching a film run in reverse: as
if someone had built a weird weapon and then subjected it to high
temperature so it would melt, except that what took place before my eyes
was all backward, first the liquid, then the hollowed-out body rising
from it. The figure lost its sheen now and resembled a large
store-window mannequin with a hairless head and face without mouth or
nose though two round holes could serve as eyes. Then it turned into a
woman, or not a woman but the statue of a woman, empty inside and open
like a cupboard, and this statue began to extrude its own clothes, first
white underwear then over that a light-green dress.

Convinced now I was asleep and dreaming, I got out of bed and approached
the apparition. The green dress turned white like a hospital gown and
the face grew more defined. On the head a white nurse's cap with a red
silk ribbon appeared over blond hair. Enough, I thought, time to wake
up, this dream is too stupid -- but I hadn't the courage to touch the
thing. Looking around, I saw my whole room in the light of the lamp, the
desk, the curtain, the chairs. I stood undecided, then turned again to
the phantom. She looked a lot like Didi, a nurse I had seen often in the
garden or Dr. House's office, though was much larger and taller. She
said: "Get in me, you'll leave here, take the doctor's Toyota, you can
drive out because the gate is open. Get dressed and take money, you'll
buy a ticket and fly straight to Tarantoga. Don't stand there like a
moron, no one will stop you as a nurse. . ."

"But Didi is smaller than you. . ." I stammered, surprised not only by
her words but also by the fact that she was speaking although not with
her mouth. The voice came from the body which together with the white
coat opened so wide, I could actually step inside. But should I, that
was the question. Suddenly I was thinking very clearly: it didn't have
to be a dream because of the technology of molecular teleferics which I
had used myself. But if it was real, might it not be a trap?

"Size doesn't matter at night. Come on, get moving! Dress, and take your
checkbook," she said.

"But why should I leave and who are you anyway?" I asked, but started
dressing at the same time, not because I really intended to participate
in this unexpected escapade, it's just that one feels more confident
when clothed.

"I am not a person -- you can see that," she replied. The voice was a
woman's, however, low, warm, a little husky, I knew it from somewhere. I
was sitting on the edge of the bed tying my shoes.

"So who sent you, Mrs. Nonperson?" I asked, looking up, and the next
thing I knew, she had fallen upon me, that is, engulfed me, wrapped me
not in her arms but in her whole body, and this happened so quickly that
one moment I was sitting in my sweater and no tie, thinking I'd tied the
left shoe too tight, and the next moment I was pulled inside and
surrounded as if I'd been swallowed by a python. I can't describe it
better because nothing like that had ever happened to me before. It was
soft inside, and I saw the room through the eye openings, but I couldn't
move, that is I could but only as she wanted to, she or it, though of
course somebody was operating this remote for the purpose of taking me
to where they were waiting impatiently for Ijon Tichy. I fought the
monster with all my strength but to no avail. My limbs moved not as I
wanted them to but against my will, my hand opening the door, turning
the knob, even though I resisted every inch of the way. The hall was
dim, lit with green night-lights, and there was not a soul about. I
hadn't time to wonder who was behind this, because the who-less thing
that had swallowed me, a veritable Frankenstein suit, was walking
steadily, unhurriedly, then I remembered the ring from Kramer, but how
could it help me? Even if I knew I was supposed to bite it or turn it on
my finger as in a fairy tale to make the genie appear, I couldn't have
done anything.

The front door of the pavilion loomed ahead, swinging doors, and my
captive hand pushed them open. In the shadow of an old palm tree was the
black shape of a car, rivers of distant light on its body. One of its
rear doors opened but there was no one inside, at least I couldn't see
anyone.

I got in or rather was got in, still pulling back for all I was worth,
until I realized my mistake. I shouldn't pull back -- that was what the
operator of the remote expected. I should go instead in the direction
imposed on me, but in such a way as to achieve my own ends. Bent over in
the doorway of the car, I hurled myself forward, hit my head against
something, passed out, and opened my eyes.

I was lying on the floor beside my bed. The curtains were gray with
dawn. I raised my hand to my eyes and saw no ring. Was it a dream after
all? But at what point did it begin? Kramer had definitely been here. I
went to the closet where he had stood and yes, my clothes were all
pushed to one side. Something white lay on the floor of the closet, a
letter. I picked it up -- no address -- and tore open the envelope.
Inside was a sheet of paper that had typewritten words, no date, no
letterhead. I checked to see if the door was locked, turned on the lamp,
not wanting to open the curtains, and read:

 

If you've had a dream about being abducted or tortured and it was vivid
and in color, that means you've been subjected to a test, given a drug.
They may be examining your reaction to certain substances. We aren't
sure about this. The only one you can turn to besides me is your doctor.

 -- Slug Eater

 

Slug Eater. So the letter was from Kramer. He could be telling the truth
or lying. I tried to remember as precisely as possible what Shapiro had
said and what Kramer had said. According to both, the lunar mission had
failed. But on other things they parted company. The professor wanted me
to be examined, Kramer wanted me to wait. The professor represented the
Lunar Agency, or at least that's what he claimed, while Kramer didn't
say anything about who stood behind him. But why hadn't he warned me
about the possibility of drugs, leaving only this letter? Could there be
another player in this game? Both spoke at length, yet I still hadn't
been told why what my right brain held was so important. And why hadn't
that poor, practically mute half of my head shown any sign of life since
-- when was it? -- yesterday? Did I swallow something which put it to
sleep? Let's suppose. But for what reason? It seemed to me that all
these hunters of Tichy didn't really know what to do and were playing
for time. In which game I was a wild card, maybe a high trump, maybe
nothing, and each was preventing the others from finding out. Had they
put my right hemisphere to sleep so I couldn't communicate with myself?
This at least I could verify immediately. I took my left hand in my
right and addressed it in the way I had developed.

"What's new?" I asked with my fingers.

The little finger and the thumb of the left hand twitched, but weakly.

"Hello, are you there?" I signaled.

My ring finger and my thumb made a circle that meant "Hello."

"So how are you doing?"

"Get lost."

"Tell me how you feel. Look, we have a common interest."

"My head hurts."

And at that moment I felt that my head hurt too. I had read enough in
the neurological literature by now to know that emotionally I was not
halved but whole, because the seat of the emotions is in the midbrain,
which was not touched by the callotomy.

"The same head hurts both of us. Do you understand?"

"No."

"You don't?"

"Don't."

I was in a sweat from this silent exchange but decided, come what may,
not to let go. I would learn something if it killed me. Then I had an
inspiration. The sign language of the deaf required a lot of work and
dexterity. But I knew Morse code, had known it since childhood. So I
made my left hand flat and with the forefinger of my right began to draw
dots and dashes. The left hand submitted to this for a while, but
suddenly it clenched into a fist and punched me hard. "Isn't working," I
thought, but then the hand extended a finger and began marking dots and
dashes on my right cheek. Yes, son of a gun, it was answering in Morse
code.

"Don't tickle or you'll get it."

This was the first English sentence I had received, albeit only by
touch, from It. I sat perfectly still on the edge of my bed, because the
hand was continuing.

"Jackass."

"Me?"

"You. You should have done that to begin with."

"Why didn't you let me know?"

"A hundred times, jerk. You didn't notice."

It dawned on me now, yes, that the left hand had been tapping at me
quite a bit, but it never entered my head (my side of my head) that this
was in Morse.

"Amazing," I tapped back, on the hand. "Then you can speak?"

"Better than you."

"Then speak. You will save me, that is, save us."

I don't know whether it was I or It who got better at this, but our
silent conversation went faster and faster.

"What happened on the moon?"

"Tell me what you remember."

This sudden turning of the tables floored me.

"You don't know?"

"I know that you wrote it down. Then buried it in a jar. Yes?"

"Yes."

"Did you write the truth?"

"Yes. What I could remember."

"And they dug it up. That first one."

"Shapiro?"

"I don't remember names. The one who looked at the moon."

"Do you understand spoken speech?"

"Not well. It's better in French."

Whatever that meant.

"Only in Morse?"

"Morse is best."

"So talk."

"You'll write it down and they'll steal it."

"I won't, word of honor."

"Okay. You know some of it and I know some of it You go first."

"You didn't read what I wrote?"

"I can't read."

"All right. . . The last thing I remember. . . I was trying to make
contact with Wivitch after getting out of that underground ruin in the
Japanese sector, but I couldn't. Or if I did, I don't remember. All I
know is that later I landed myself. Sometimes I think maybe I wanted to
retrieve something from the remote, which had got into something. . . or
else it had discovered something. . . but I don't know what, or even
which remote it was. Probably not the molecular remote. I don't know
what happened to that."

"The powdered one?"

"Yes. But. . . you must know," I suggested carefully.

"First tell yours to the end," It answered. "Sometimes you think. And
other times?"

"That there was no remote there at all, or there might have been but I
wasn't looking for it, because. . ."

"Because what?"

I hesitated. What I sometimes remembered was like a surreal dream
impossible to put into words and which left only the feeling of an
extraordinary revelation.

"I don't know what you're thinking," It tapped on me, "but I know you
have something up your sleeve. I can feel it."

"Why should I have something up my sleeve?"

"Why, because. I'm the intuition half. Continue. You think you were
looking for. . ."

"Sometimes I think I landed because I was summoned."

"What did you write in the log?"

"About that, nothing."

"But they have tapes. If you were summoned by the moon, they would know.
The Agency was monitoring."

"I don't know what the Agency knows. I never laid eyes on any tapes at
the base. But you must know that."

"I know more than that."

"What?"

"You lost the powdered one."

"The dispersant? Well, obviously, if I later got into a spacesuit myself
and --"

"Not what I mean."

"It broke down?"

"No. They took it."

"Who?"

"I don't know. The moon. The remote was changing down there. By itself.
One could see it from the ship."

"I saw it?"

"Yes, and you had no control over it."

"Then who was operating it?"

"I don't know. It had been disconnected from the ship but was still
changing. Using all those different programs."

"Impossible."

"But true. And then back on the moon, down there. I was. That is, you
and I were. And then Tichy fell."

"What are you saying?"

"He fell. It must have been the callotomy. There's a hole there for me.
Then back on the ship and you put the spacesuit in its container and the
sand fell out."

"Did I go down to see what happened to the molecular remote?"

"I don't know. Maybe. There's a hole there. The callotomy was for that."

"On purpose?"

"I think. I'm sure. So you'd come back and not come back."

"They already told me that. Shapiro and Kramer too, though not so
clearly."

"Because it's a game. There are things they know and things they don't.
They must have a hole too."

"But wait, why did I fall?"

"The callotomy, stupid. You lost consciousness. How could you not fall?"

"And that sand? The talcum dust? Where did it come from?"

"I have no idea."

I thought furiously. It was light now, almost eight o'clock. The lunar
project failed? But in the rubble of that failure was more than
senseless battles and tactics -- for from it also had emerged something
that no one on Earth ever programmed or anticipated. And this something
had apparently taken control of the remote of Professor Lax-Gugliborc.
Then lured me to land, intending evil or something else. Why deprive me
of my memory? What purpose would that serve? None that I could see. Or
was it to give me something? Or to tell me something? But in that case I
wouldn't have needed to land. Did it give me that dust? And then
something -- another party -- not wanting this to succeed, cut the great
commissure of my brain. Let's say that's what happened. Then did the
thing operating the dispersant save me? But was the point to save Ijon
Tichy? Probably not. The point was that the thing that was given reach
Earth. The powder, the sticky dust, was the message. No, it had to be
more than information. A material thing. And I was to bring it back with
me. Yes. A piece of the puzzle had been fitted in. I quickly explained
this theory to my other half.

"Could be," It said finally. "They have the dust. But it's not enough."

"Hence the abductions and rescues, the persuading, visits, and
nightmares?"

"To get you to submit to an examination. That is, me."

"But they'll learn nothing if you know no more than you're saying."

"True."

"But if something has arisen there that is powerful enough to take over
the molecular remote, why couldn't it communicate directly with Earth?
With the Agency, with Control, with anyone it wanted. At the very least
with the men the Agency sent after my return."

"Where did they land?"

"I don't know. In any case it appears that there are opposing parties
both here and there. What could have evolved on the moon, out of that
cancer, that chaos? What word did Kramer use? Orthogenesis. Order out of
chaos. Electronic self-organization. But to what end?"

"To no end. Like life on Earth. The hardware fought claw and fang, and
the programs diverged. Some went in circles, repeating themselves, some
broke down completely, and some entered the no man's land and set up
mirrors and mirages. . ."

"Maybe, maybe." I felt a strange exaltation. "Yes, I can picture it. Out
of the general deterioration something grew like photobacteria, viruses
made of integrated circuits. But it couldn't have been everywhere, it
happened only in one particular place, an extremely rare event. . . and
from there it began to multiply and spread. Fine, I agree that's
possible. But for some entity to arise out of that -- no! This is pure
fantasy. You can't have an intelligence coming into the world made of
spare parts, broken bits of electronics."

"Then who took control of the molecular remote?"

"You're sure that's what happened?"

"Consider the evidence. After you left the Japanese ruin, you weren't
able to contact the base, were you?"

"Yes, but I have no idea what happened after that. I tried to raise
Control and also the Trojan satellites through the ship's computer to
see if Control had me on its screen. But no one answered, no one. So the
micropes must have been destroyed again, and the Agency didn't learn
what happened to the remote. All they knew was that shortly after that I
landed on my own, then returned. The rest is only guesses. So?"

"But that's the evidence. The only person who knows more is the inventor
of the dispersant. What was his name?"

"Lax-Gugliborc. But he works for the Agency."

"He didn't want to give you the remote."

"He said it was my decision."

"That's evidence too."

"You think so?"

"Yes. He had misgivings."

"You mean he feared that the moon -- ?"

"There is no technology that can't be figured out."

"And that's what happened?"

"I'm sure. Except differently from what he imagined."'

"How can you know that?"

"Everything is always different from what we imagine."

"I see it now," I tapped in the surrounding silence. "This was no taking
over of controls. Hybridization, more likely! The thing that came into
being there joined with the thing fashioned here in Professor
Lax-Gugliborc's workshop. One dispersion electronics combined with
another that also had the ability to dissipate and metamorphose. The
molecular remote, you see, contained a memory, and transformation
programs, like little crystals of ice that can join together to form
millions of different snowflakes. Each flake has hexagonal symmetry yet
is different. Yes! I operated the remote, in a sense was the remote, but
at the same time I was only providing it with signals telling it in
which way to change. It did the changing itself, at the scene, on the
surface of the moon and also below."

"Did it have intelligence?"

"I really don't know. One doesn't need to know how a car is constructed
to drive one. I drove, and saw what it saw, that was all. I couldn't
tell you whether it was an ordinary remote, an empty shell, or could
function like a robot."

"But Lax-Gugliborc could tell us."

"Indeed. But I would prefer not to approach him, at least not directly."

"Write to him."

"Are you crazy?"

"Write so that only he will understand."

"They read all letters. The telephone is out too."

"Write, but don't sign it."

"And the handwriting?"

"I'll write, you dictate."

"It'll be chicken scrawls."

"So? Now I'm hungry, I want an omelette with jam. And then we'll do the
letter."

"Who will send it? And how?"

"Breakfast first."

The letter seemed an impossible task. I didn't know the professor's home
address. And that was the least of our problems. We had to let him know
that I wished to see him but in such a way that nobody else would
understand the message. All correspondence was examined by the best
experts, so we would have to be fiendishly clever. Forget about codes.
Moreover there was no one I could trust even in the matter of sending
the letter. And possibly Lax-Gugliborc wasn't working anymore at the
Agency, and even if by some miracle the letter reached him and he
decided to see me, a horde of agents and intelligence operatives would
not let him out of their sight. Also, there were probably special
satellites in stationary orbit keeping my building under constant
surveillance. I trusted House no more than I did Kramer. Nor could I
turn to Tarantoga, whom I trusted like myself but there was no way to
inform him of my (our) plan without drawing attention to him, and even
as it was, ultrasensitive laser microphones were no doubt aimed at his
every window, and when he bought corn flakes and yogurt at the
supermarket, they were both no doubt x-rayed as he carried his groceries
to the car.

After breakfast I went to the town, taking the same bus I took the first
time. In front of the department store was a stand selling colorful
postcards, and I looked through them and found the perfect one: it
showed, against a red background, a golden cage and in it a white owl
with big round eyes. I wasn't so stupid as to reach for this card then
and there, but selected it with eight others, and one with a parrot,
then two more. I bought stamps and headed back to the asylum on foot.
The town was almost deserted. A few people puttering in their gardens,
and at a car wash across from the spot where that shoot-out for me took
place cars were moving slowly through water and big blue brushes. No one
seemed to be following me, or watching me, or preparing to kidnap me.
The sun beat down. My shirt was soaked with sweat when I returned after
an hour of walking, so I showered and changed, then sat down to send
greetings to friends -- Tarantoga, both Cybbilkises, Wivitch, two of
Tarantoga's cousins -- the messages not too short and not too long, and
of course with no mention of the Agency, the Mission, the moon, only
pleasant, innocent sentiments, and my return address, why not? To make
clear the lightheartedness of the postcards, I drew on each one, two
black-and-white pandas for the twins, with mustaches and ties, a
dachshund with a halo for Tarantoga, and I gave the owl glasses just
like the professor's, and on the bar where it was perched I drew a
mouse. How does a mouse behave, especially around an owl? It is quiet,
quiet as a mouse, and the professor might know that my name, Tichy,
meant quiet in Czech or Russian, moreover at his place we had sat
together in a cage. Writing to each one that it would be nice to see
him, I could do the same with the professor, and thanked him for
everything, and in a postscript conveyed greetings from Mrs. Mudstone, a
subtle allusion, by anagram, to moon dust. If the professor didn't get
it, the card would fail, but I couldn't be more explicit.

I didn't call Shapiro, and Kramer did not go out of his way to talk to
me. I spent half the day by the pool. My other self, since I had come to
an understanding with it, caused no trouble. At night, lying in bed, I
sometimes exchanged a few words with It before dropping off to sleep. It
occurred to me that it might have been better to send Lax-Gugliborc the
parrot instead of the owl, but it was too late, the ball was in his
court now. Three days passed and nothing happened. Twice I swung with
Kramer in the canopied swing by the fountain, but he didn't talk
business. Perhaps he too was waiting. He sweat, breathed heavily,
groaned, complained about his rheumatism, was obviously in a bad mood.
Bored, I took to watching television in the evening and reading the
paper. The Lunar Agency reported that analysis of the data from the
lunar reconnaissance was under way and so far revealed no irregularities
or malfunctions in the various sectors. The media demanded more
information, called for a hearing, for the director of the Lunar Agency
and the heads of its different departments to appear before a special
commission of the UN, and that a press conference be held to throw light
on matters about which a fearful public was in the dark.

Russell, the young ethnologist who wanted to write his dissertation
about millionaires, came to see me in the evenings. He had most of his
material now thanks to his interviews with Kramer, but I couldn't tell
him those interviews were worthless and that Kramer was only playing the
role of a Croesus while the true millionaires, especially the ones from
Texas, were dull as dishwater. Even in the asylum they had their own
secretaries, masseurs, and bodyguards, and each had a pavilion to
himself. They were so reclusive, Russell had to set up a special
telescope on my roof to observe them through their windows. He was
discouraged, because even when they were stark raving mad, what they did
was unoriginal. Since nothing was happening, Russell would come down his
ladder and drop in on me for some human conversation.

The prosperity that obtained after the weapons were moved to the moon
had unfortunate consequences, made worse by automation. Russell called
it the electronics Stone Age. Illiteracy increased, particularly since
now you didn't even have to sign a check, only a thumbprint was
necessary and a computer scanner did the rest. The American Medical
Association finally lost the battle to save their profession, because
computers gave better diagnoses and were much more patient with
patients. Prosthetic sex was replaced by a simple device called an
Orgaz. This was a headset with electrodes and a handgrip that resembled
a toy pistol. Pulling the trigger gave you the ultimate pleasure because
the appropriate place in your brain was stimulated with no effort, no
exertion necessary, plus there were no upkeep expenses for male or
female remotes, nor indeed the aggravations of natural courtship and
matrimony. Orgazes flooded the market. To be fitted you went to special
clinics. Gynandroics and other firms that manufactured synthetic women,
angels, nymphs, fauns, etc., went out of business with much gnashing of
teeth. As for education, most of the developed countries did away with
compulsory school attendance. "Children," went the new doctrine, "should
not be subjected to daily imprisonment and the psychological torture
called learning." Who needs to know how many men's shirts you can sew
out of six yards of Egyptian cotton if one shirt requires seven eighths
of a yard, or when two trains will collide if one engineer is eighteen,
drunk, and going 100 miles an hour and the other is colorblind and doing
75, if they're separated by 15 miles of track and 43 pre-automation
semaphores? Equally useless are facts about kings, wars, battles,
crusades, and all the other rotten behavior of history. Geography is
best learned by traveling. All you have to know is the price of the
ticket and when the plane takes off. Why learn foreign languages when
you can put a translator chip in your ear? The study of biology
depresses and depraves young minds, nor is it practical since no one now
can become a doctor or dentist (after the appearance of dentautomata,
about thirty thousand out-of-work dentists in both the Americas and
Eurasia have committed suicide each year). And chemistry is of no more
value than a knowledge of hieroglyphics. Meanwhile on traffic signs and
street signs words are slowly being replaced with pictures.

Russell saw no point complaining about this state of affairs because
nothing could be done. There were still some fifty thousand scientists
and scholars left in the world but their average age was now 61.7.
Everything had been smothered in the boredom of prosperity, and that was
why, said Russell, most people were actually pleased by the prospect of
an invasion from the moon, and the panic reported in the papers and on
television was only to increase sales. Mundus vult decipi, ergo
decipiatur, the ethnologist concluded, staring at the now empty bottle
of bourbon. His field work was so disappointing that he had stopped
aiming his telescope at the windows of the millionaires and turned it
instead to the solarium where the nurses and their aides sunbathed in
the nude. I thought that odd, since after all he could simply go there
and look at them up close but when I said this, he shrugged, remarking
that that was the problem: nowadays one could just do that.

In the rec room of the new pavilion workmen were almost finished setting
up the fants. Russell took me there one evening. You put a cassette into
a fant and an image appears in front of the machine. More than an image,
a whole artificial reality, Mount Olympus, for example packed with gods
and goddesses, or something more from life, a two-wheel tumbrel carrying
a bunch of illustrious people through a furious crowd toward the
guillotine. Or Hansel and Gretel at the witch's house stuffing
themselves with shingles of gingerbread. Or a convent after Tartars or
Martians break in. The idea is that what happens next depends on the
viewer, who has a pedal under each foot and a joystick in his hand. You
can go from idyll to bloodbath, have the gods depose Zeus, put ear wings
on the heads falling into the guillotine basket so they fly away.
Anything is possible. The witch wants to make cutlets out of Hansel, but
you can have Hansel make cutlets out of her. The Prince of Denmark can
steal the royal jewels and run off with Ophelia, or with Rosencrantz,
depending on which key you push, because some fants have a keyboard. The
instruction manual is a thick book but you can do without it. We tired
of the fants after fifteen minutes of playing, even though we were both
a little drunk, and went to bed. The asylum bought twenty fants, but
they are hardly ever used. Dr. House is not happy about that. He went
from patient to patient, trying to persuade them to give it a try
because it's good therapy. But apparently none of the millionaires or
billionaires ever heard of Hansel and Gretel or Olympus or Hamlet.
Tartars or Martians, it's all the same to them. The guillotine they
consider an oversize cigar cutter and silly. Dr. House worked the fants
himself, probably out of a sense of duty, mixing the Middle Ages,
Shakespeare, Agatha Christie, and volcanoes, and tried to get me to join
him, but I refused. I was still waiting for a sign from Professor
Lax-Gugliborc. Kramer too seemed to be waiting for something, and that's
probably why he avoided me. Waiting for new instructions? But I was in a
good mood, having reached an understanding with myself.

 

 

 

 Contact

 

It was the end of August already, and before turning on my desk lamp in
the evening, I had to close the window because of moths. Except for
ladybugs I don't much care for insects. Butterflies I can take or leave
but moths for some reason frighten me. That August there were a lot of
them and they kept fluttering outside my window. Some were so big I
could hear their thuds against the glass. Since even looking at them
bothers me, I got up to pull the curtains, when I heard a sound. A
clear, sharp sound, as if someone was touching a pane with a metal rod.
I approached the window, the lamp in my hand. Among the fluttering moths
I saw one that was all black, larger than the others, and it gleamed in
the reflected light. It backed away, then came at the window again and
hit it with such force that I felt the frame shake. What's more, the
moth had a small beak instead of a head. I stood fascinated because it
wasn't hitting the glass at random but in regular intervals, groups of
three; three dots, a pause, three dots, a pause, repeated until I
realized it was the letter S in Morse code. I hesitated about opening
the window. It wasn't a live thing but I didn't want to let real moths
into the room either. I finally got up my nerve and I opened the window
a crack, and it flew in immediately. I shut the window and looked
around. The moth had lit on the papers covering the desk. It had no
wings and now didn't resemble a moth at all or any other bug. It looked
most like a black olive. Then it was hovering above the desk and
humming. I reached for it, and it let me take it between my fingers. It
was hard, made of metal or plastic. Again I heard the humming, three
dots, three dashes, three dots. I held it to my ear and heard a weak,
distant, but distinct human voice.

"Owl here. Owl here. Do you read me?"

I put the olive in my ear and answered:

"Mouse here. Mouse here. I read you, Owl."

"Good evening."

"Greetings." Expecting a long conversation, I pulled the curtains and
double-locked the door. Now I could hear the professor perfectly. I
recognized his voice.

"This way we can talk freely," he said and chuckled. "Don't worry, I'm
using a scrambler of my own invention. No one will understand us. But
let's stay Owl and Mouse to be safe."

"Fine," I replied and turned off the lamp.

"It was not that hard," said Lax-Gugliborc. "You did the right thing. I
understood immediately."

"But how. . .?"

"Better for the mice not to know. In the vernacular of criminals, the
mouse should know that his accomplice is not a double-crosser. We have
before us different pieces of a puzzle. The owl will go first. The dust
isn't dust. It's silicon micropolymers of very curious structure doped
with selenium so that they superconduct at room temperature. Some joined
with the remains of our poor molecular remote on the moon."

"What does that mean?"

"Too soon for a definite answer. I have a few ideas. I was able to
obtain a pinch of the powder through a friend. We have half an hour
before the thing enabling our connection goes behind the mouse's
horizon. I couldn't get in touch with you during the day. We would have
had more time then, but the risk would have been greater."

I was dying to know how the professor sent me this metal insect, but I
realized I shouldn't ask.

"Continue, Owl, I'm listening."

"My fears were confirmed, but in an opposite way. I figured that
something on the moon would arise out of the chaos, but I never dreamed
it would be something able to make use of our messenger."

"Can't you be a little more clear?"

"Not without getting very technical. I'll make it as simple as I can. It
was an immune response. Not on the whole surface of the moon, of course.
At one location, and from there the antibodies spread. What we're
calling the dust."

"Where did these antibodies come from and what do they do?"

"From the rubble of bytes and logic circuits. Some draw their energy
from the sun. Which is not that surprising because there were plenty of
photoelectric materials there to begin with. How should I put it? The
moon gradually built up an immunity to any kind of invasion. I'm not
talking about intelligence. We conquered gravity, we conquered the atom,
but we haven't conquered the common cold. If self-regulating ecosystems
developed on Earth, you could say that one developed on the moon, albeit
nonliving, out of that whole tangle of attacks and tunnelings. In other
words the strategies of sword and shield indirectly gave rise, in their
mutual destruction, and this without the intention or knowledge of the
programmers, to these cybernetic antibodies."

"But what exactly do they do?"

"Well, in the first place I think they acted like the most ancient
bacteria on Earth and simply multiplied, and there must have been many
varieties of them and the majority perished, as in natural evolution.
After a while, symbiotic species emerged. The kind that work together
for their mutual benefit. But I repeat: this is not intelligence. They
are merely capable of an enormous number of metamorphoses or mutations,
like the flu virus, for example. But unlike earthly bacteria, they are
not parasites, for they have no host, if you don't count the computer
ruins that first nourished them and let them breed. The situation was
complicated by the fact that meanwhile the weapons being produced by the
programs still functional underwent a division."

"Yes, a division into weapons directed against living opponents and
weapons directed against nonliving opponents."

"The mouse is quick. Correct. From the first antibodies that arose many
years ago probably nothing remains. They evolved into -- let us call
them selenocytes. These joined into multicellular forms to survive, to
become more versatile, much as ordinary germs increase in virulence by
growing resistant to the antibiotics used against them."

"But what played the role of antibiotics on the moon?"

"An interesting question. The main threat to the selenocytes must have
been those products of the military self-evolution which were designed
specifically to attack and destroy them."

"You mean, they treated them as an enemy."

"Or as good target practice. Think of the artillery with which the
pharmaceutical companies bombard bacteria. This accelerated the
selenocyte evolution. And the selenocytes won, because they proved to be
more viable. A person can have a cold but a cold can't have a person. Or
can it? The persons on the moon were the great, complex systems."

"And then?"

"A most curious and completely unexpected development. The resistance
went from passive to active."

"I don't understand."

"From defense the selenocytes switched to offense. They hastened, and
very quickly, the demise of the lunar arms race. . ."

"That dust?"

"That dust. And when only the expiring remnant of the vaunted Geneva
project was left, the selenocytes received an unforeseen reinforcement."

"Which was?"

"The dispersant. They made use of it. Not destroying it so much as
assimilating it. Or, to put it better, an exchange of information took
place. Hybridization took place. A crossbreeding."

"How is that possible?"

"It's not really all that strange. I too was working with semiconducting
silicon polymers. Different, yes, mine were doped with rare-earth
elements, but the adaptability of my dust was not unlike the
adaptability of the lunar dust. There was an affinity. Similar starting
materials, similar results."

"And now what?"

"That I don't know. The key could be your landing. Why did you land in
the Mare Ignium?"

"The Japanese sector? I don't know. I don't remember."

"Nothing?"

"Not a thing."

"And your right hemisphere?"

"Also nothing. I can communicate with it now. But please keep that under
your hat."

"I will. I'd love to know how you did it but won't ask. What does it
know?"

"That when I returned to the ship I had a pocketful of that dust. How it
got there is a mystery."

"You could have scooped it up yourself. The question is why."

"And the Agency. What does the Agency think?"

"The dust caused quite a sensation, and a panic especially when it
followed you. You know about that?"

"Yes. Professor S. told me. He came to see me a week ago."

"To get you to submit to tests? You refused?"

"I played for time. There's at least one other character here. He
advised me not to be tested. I don't know who he works for. He pretends
to be a patient."

"There are more of them around you."

"You said, 'Followed me.' The dust is spying?"

"Not necessarily. One can carry a disease without knowing it."

"And the part about the spacesuit?"

"That's a tough one. It was put into your pocket or you did that
yourself. For some reason. Just as you landed for some reason. And found
something. And someone erased your memory afterward. With the
callotomy."

"Then there are at least three parties?"

"It is not the number that matters but how to identify them."

"But why is this so important? Sooner or later the failure of the whole
lunar project will become public knowledge. And even if those
selenocytes are the moon's 'immune system,' what does that have to do
with Earth?"

"It affects us in two ways. First, it means a return to the arms race,
which is no surprise. Second -- the surprise -- the selenocytes have
begun to take an interest in us."

"In the human race? Earth? Not just me?"

"Precisely."

"What are they doing?"

"At the moment, only multiplying."

"In the laboratories?"

"Before our scientists knew what was happening, the dust had got out and
spread to all four corners of the globe. Only a small amount has
accompanied you."

"They're multiplying? And?"

"So far, nothing. They are the size of ultraviruses."

"And they get their energy --"

"From the sun. It's estimated that there are a few trillion of them now,
in the air, in the oceans, everywhere."

"And doing nothing?"

"So far. Which has caused great concern."

"Why?"

"The sense that this was planned. If you landed, there must have been a
reason. But what? They want to know."

"But I remember nothing, and likewise the other half of me. . ."

"They are unaware that you are now talking to yourself. In addition,
there are different kinds of amnesia. Under hypnosis or in certain other
ways one can obtain things from a person that he cannot recall for the
life of him. They have been careful with you lest some shock or trauma
to your brain damage or wipe out completely what you may know though you
can't dredge it up. Anyway our people disagree about how to proceed with
the examination. . . which until now has spared you much."

"Yes, I think I know where I stand in this game. . . But why didn't the
reconnaissance flights that followed yield results?"

"Who told you that?"

"My first visitor. The neurologist."

"What did he say exactly?"

"That the scouts returned but they'd been shown stage sets. That's how
he put it."

"Not true. As far as I know, there were three more flights. Two
teleferic, and all their remotes were destroyed. They didn't use mine,
only conventional remotes. Equipped with special rockets, however, to
shoot samples of the soil up to the ship. But nothing came of that."

"Who destroyed them?"

"Unknown, because communication was cut off early. When they landed, the
area in a radius of several miles became covered with a fog opaque to
radar."

"Something new. And the third scout?"

"He went, landed, and returned. With complete amnesia. He woke up back
on his ship. Or so I heard. It might not be the truth. I never saw him.
The murkier this business becomes, the more secrecy surrounds it. I
don't know if he too brought back dust. I assume they're examining the
poor man but without success, since they're still taking such good care
of you."

"What should I do?"

"The situation looks bad but is not hopeless. Very soon now the
selenocytes will have paralyzed the last of the moon weapons. Shorting
them all out. The moon project has already been written off, not
officially yet but that's not the point. A couple of top information
scientists here believe that the moon has begun to take an interest in
Earth. They say: 'The selenosphere has entered the biosphere.' "

"An invasion, then?"

"No, probably not, or at least not in any traditional sense. A multitude
of genies were sent in well-corked bottles. They broke out, battled each
other, and as a side effect microorganisms appeared, vital though not
alive. It doesn't have the look of a planned invasion. Rather of an
epidemic, a pandemic."

"I don't understand the difference."

"I can present this only in metaphors. The selenosphere reacts to an
intruder the way the immune system reacts to a foreign body or an
antigen. Even if that's not quite right, we have no other way of
conceptualizing it. The two scouts who went after you had at their
disposal the very latest in weaponry. I don't know the details, but it
was not a conventional device, or nuclear. The Agency is keeping what
happened on the moon hush-hush, but the dust clouds were so large that
they could be seen and photographed by many observatories. What is more
-- when the clouds dissipated, the ground was changed. Holes had formed,
craters, but completely unlike the moon's typical craters. This the
Agency was unable to keep secret, so it said nothing. It was only then
that headquarters began to see that the more strong-arm the methods used
for reconnaissance, the more strong-arm the counteroffensive would be."

"So there you are. . ."

"No. Because we are dealing not with an adversary or enemy, but only
with a kind of giant anthill. Such strange theories have occurred to me,
I won't even repeat them. But our time is up. Stay put. As long as they
don't go completely mad, they'll leave you alone. I'll be away for three
days, will talk to you Saturday at this time if I can. Keep well,
intrepid Missionary."

"Until then," I said but don't know if he heard me because there was no
answer. I took the olive out of my ear and after a moment of thought
wrapped it in tinfoil and hid it in a box of chocolates. I had plenty to
think about. I opened the curtains before I got into bed. The moths had
left, probably drawn by the bright windows of the other pavilions around
the garden. The moon sailed through white, feathery clouds. "We've done
it this time," I said to myself, pulling the covers up to my head.

 

 

Next morning Kramer knocked at my door while I was still in bed. He told
me that yesterday Padderhorn had swallowed a fork. The man had swallowed
cutlery before in order to kill himself. Last week he swallowed a
shoehorn. They did an esophagoscopy on him -- and gave him a new
shoehorn a foot and a half long but he pinched someone's fork in the
dining hall.

"You came to talk about flatware?" I asked politely.

Kramer sighed, buttoned the top button of his pajamas, and sat in an
armchair beside my bed. "No. . ." he said in a surprisingly weak voice.
"It's not good, Jonathan."

"Depends on for whom, Adelaide," I replied. "In any case I have no
intention of swallowing anything."

"It's really not good," Kramer said. He folded his hands over his
stomach and twirled his thumbs. "I'm afraid for you, Jonathan."

"Don't be," I said plumping up my pillow behind my head. "I am well
protected. Do you know about the selenocytes?"

I took him by such surprise that his mouth fell open. Then his face grew
stupid, the face of a millionaire who had nothing left to fantasize
about.

"I know you heard me. And perhaps you know about the selenosphere too?
Yes? Unless your rank is not high enough for you to be privy. Did they
tell you about the sad fate of the quantum collapsar weapon in the last
missions? About the clouds above the Mare Ignium? But no, that they
wouldn't tell you. . ."

He sat staring at me wide-eyed and breathless.

"Do me a favor, Adelaide, and pass that box of chocolates on the desk."
I smiled at him. "I like something sweet before breakfast. . ."

As he didn't move, I hopped out of bed and got the box myself. Getting
back under the covers, I held it out to him, but keeping my thumb over
the piece in the corner.

"Go ahead."

"How do you know?" he asked in a hoarse voice. "Who. . .?"

"No need to get upset," I said, not too clearly because I had caramel on
the roof of my mouth. "What I know, I know. And not only what happened
to me on the moon but also the troubles of my colleagues."

He had difficulty breathing. He looked around the room as if he were
there for the first time.

"Transmitters, secret lines, antennas, modulators, yes?" I went on.
"There's nothing here except that the showerhead leaks a little. Needs a
new washer. Why are you surprised? Can it be you don't know that they
are inside me?"

He sat speechless. He wiped the sweat from his nose. He tugged on an
earlobe. I watched him with sympathy.

The chocolates were good. I had to be careful to leave enough in the
box. Licking my lips, I said, "Adelaide, move, speak, you're making me
feel bad. You were afraid for me and now I'm afraid for you. You think
you'll be in trouble? Perhaps, if you behave, I can protect you, you
know with whose help."

I was bluffing. But why shouldn't I? The fact that these few words had
so dismayed him proved the powerlessness of whatever power he
represented.

"I promise not to name names so I won't get you into further trouble."

"Tichy. . ." he finally groaned. "For God's sake. No, it's not possible.
That's not how they work."

"Did I say how? I had a dream, that's all. Didn't I tell you, I'm
clairvoyant."

Kramer suddenly decided. Putting his finger to his lips, he left
quickly. Certain that he would be back, I hid the box of chocolates
under my shirts in the closet and had time to shower and shave before I
heard him knock lightly. He wore a white suit and under his arm held a
large bundle wrapped in a towel. He drew the curtains and from the
bundle pulled apparatuses that he positioned with their black funnels
pointed at all the walls. From a black box he plugged a cord into a wall
socket and fiddled with something else, wheezing, because he was really
quite fat, his belly altogether authentic, and was probably pushing
sixty. Face flushed, he knelt and struggled with his electronics, then
finally straightened with a grunt and a sigh.

"Now we can talk," he said.

"About?" I asked, putting on my nicest shirt, the one with the blue
collar. "But you first. You might want to tell me about the gray hair
I've given you. After your boss assured you I was as insulated here as a
fly in a bottle. But say what you like, speak, confess, unburden
yourself. You'll see how much better you feel."

And suddenly, apropos of nothing, like a poker player who wins the pot
with a pair of threes, I tossed off: "What division are you in, the
fourth?"

"No, the first --"

He stopped himself.

"What do you know about me?"

"Enough of that." I sat on a chair, its back in front of me. "Surely you
don't think I'm giving you something for nothing."

"What do you want to know?"

"We could start with Shapiro," I said pleasantly.

"He's from the LA. That's a fact."

"And more than just a neurologist."

"He has another job."

"Go on."

"What do you know about the selenosphere?"

"What do you know?"

It occurred to me that maybe I'd overplayed my hand. If he was a secret
agent, it didn't matter for whom, he wouldn't know that much. Scientists
didn't usually involve themselves in such activity. But this was an
unusual case, so I could be wrong.

"Enough of this hide-and-seek," said Kramer. He was desperate. His white
jacket had patches of sweat under the arms. "Sit here next to me," he
muttered, getting down on the carpet.

We sat as if to smoke a peace pipe, in the center of a circle of gizmos
and wires.

 

 

 

 Da Capo

 

Before he had time to open his mouth, the drone of an engine could be
heard above us and a great shadow swept across the garden and windows.
Kramer grew bug-eyed. The throbbing faded, then returned. A helicopter
hung just above the trees. There were two reports, as if someone had
uncorked enormous bottles of champagne. The helicopter was so low, I
could see the people in its cabin. One of them opened the door and shot
another flare downward. Kramer jumped up. I didn't dream he could move
so fast. He rushed from the room, his head down. From the helicopter
something shiny fell and was lost in the grass. With a roar the machine
lifted and flew off. On his knees in the high grass, Kramer opened a
container no larger than a soccer ball, took out something, an envelope,
and tore it open. The message must have been important because the paper
shook in his hands. He looked in my direction. He was pale, changed.
Again he read the paper, and stood. He crumpled it in his fist, put it
in his pocket, and slowly crossed the lawn, not bothering to take the
path. He came back in and without a word kicked one of the antibug
devices. Something in it crackled and there was a little blue smoke from
it. I still sat on the floor, and Kramer stamped on his equipment and
tore at the wires as if he'd gone insane in earnest. Finally, out of
breath, he took off his jacket and sank into the armchair. Then he
looked at me as if seeing me for the first time, and grunted.

"I just lost my temper," he explained. "They'll retire me. Your career
too is finished. Forget about the moon. You can send a postcard to
Shapiro. Care of the Agency. They'll still be there for a while, out of
inertia."

I said nothing, suspecting some new trick. Kramer took a large plaid
handkerchief from his pocket, mopped his brow, and regarded me, I
thought, with a mixture of pity and resentment.

"It started two hours ago and is going like a house on fire, everywhere.
Incredible. We're pacified, all right, here and overseas and from pole
to pole! The global loss -- trillions of dollars. Including space,
because the satellites were the first to go. Why are you gaping?" he
added, irritated. "Haven't you figured it out? I got a letter from our
Uncle Sam. . ."

"What does it say?"

"You think we're still playing? No, my friend, the game is over. Sit
down and write about your adventures, the Agency, the Mission, whatever
you like. Maybe it will be a bestseller. And no one will touch a hair on
your head. But don't put it off, or the guys at the Agency may scoop
you. They may already be starting their memoirs about the old order. .
."

"What has happened?"

"Everything. Did you ever hear of Sim Wars?"

"No."

"Core Wars?"

"Aren't those computer games?"

"Ah, you see, you do know! Yes. Programs that destroy other programs.
They were thought up back in the eighties. They were unimportant then.
An amusement for programmers. Viruses and counter-viruses. DWARF,
CREEPER, RAIDER, DARWIN, and a hundred others. But here I am giving you
a lecture on cybertronic pathology." He grimaced. "This has cost me my
health! And now I fill you in instead of looking for a new job!"

"Uncle Sam sends you letters by copter? Isn't the post office working?"
I asked, still sniffing for a trap.

Kramer took out his checkbook, scribbled something across a check, made
a paper airplane out of it, and sailed it onto my lap.

"To the Missionary: a souvenir from Adelaide," I read. "What are you
getting at?"

"That's all it's good for. Uncle sends his greetings, of course. There
is no post office. There is nothing now, nothing." He swept his arms in
a circle. "All gone! It started two hours ago, didn't I tell you?
Doesn't matter who's to blame. Your professor too is out of work. Nice
old man! At least I bought a house in time. I'll grow roses, vegetables,
for barter. No more banks now either. It's stuffy in here. . ."

He fanned himself with his checkbook. Then he looked at it with disgust
and threw it into the wastebasket.

"Pax Vobiscum," he spat. "Et cum spiritu tuo."

I began to understand. He wasn't pretending.

"Those viruses?" I asked slowly.

"Yes, my brave little Missionary. This is your work. It was you who
brought that clever dust to Earth. Now they can either give you the
Nobel Peace Prize or have you shot for treason. I wouldn't pin your
hopes on a Nobel, but you've definitely made it into the history books.
You brought humanity a plague, whether of doom or deliverance is up to
the historians to thrash out over the coming years. You'll be in every
encyclopedia."

"Maybe together with you?" I suggested. I still didn't know exactly what
had befallen us, but Kramer wasn't playacting, I'd have bet both halves
of my poor head on that.

"There was another program then, WORM," Kramer went on sadly. "You have
to realize that nowadays a person in my profession has to have a higher
education. Those days are gone when it was enough to be a beautiful
woman, go to bed with someone, photograph a stolen document in the
bathroom, and it's back to Washington. No, first you need a Ph.D. in
math, then information theory, then your specialty, and it's half your
life in school before you can even begin."

"As a spy?"

"Spy." He turned the word over in his mouth as if it was sour, and
snapped his suspenders, which were deep blue with white stars. "I am a
civil servant in a special section and privy to the highest matters of
state. The word spy is an insult to me. But it doesn't matter anymore.
From WORM and programs like it came the theory of information erosion --
you know about it?"

"A little."

"So. It turned out that information erosion wasn't the invention of some
professors of computer science but had been used by bacteria four
billion years before, give or take a few hundred million. They were the
oldest cells, the first, each with its own program, and they fed on each
other and off each other because there was no one around yet to get
herpes or cancer. But our great scientists somehow didn't see the
connection. They were too full of their own knowledge. The theory was
tested only a few times, in the context of secret battles between
consortiums, each trying to paralyze the others' computers. Software
warfare. You've heard of that, I think?"

"But it was a long time ago."

"Forty, maybe fifty years. That's precisely why now we are undone. . .
Because except for clubs, kitchen knives, and pistols there are no
weapons that have not been computerized! Everything became programs,
chips, processors, and it's for that reason. Have you tried to use the
phone?"

"Not today. Why?"

"The telephone system is out, too. The viruses attacked everywhere at
once! Did you listen to the radio?"

"No. I don't have one."

"They aren't intelligent. That was clear from the beginning. They have
as much intelligence as any other virus. But the erosion capability is
phenomenal!" He squinted at a van Gogh on the wall, fiery sunflowers.
"But why am I here talking to you? Maybe I'll take a walk, or hang
myself. On these wires."

He kicked the nearest gizmo.

"What seems a great mystery from the front is as plain as potatoes from
behind," he said. "Did we send the best weapon-creating programs to the
moon? We did. Did they improve themselves over x years? And how. Did
they go at each other hammer and tongs? Of course, it couldn't have been
otherwise. Who won? As always, the side that packed the most punch in
the least space. The parasites won, the molecular midgets. I don't think
they've even been named yet. How about Virus lunaris pacemfaciens? All I
want to know is what made you land there and bring back that do-good
plague? You can tell me now -- privately, because it makes no difference
to the governments. Not anymore."

"All programs have been destroyed? Computer memory, everything?" I asked
in a daze. I was beginning to see the scope of this.

"Yes, Missionary of pestilence. It puts me in mind of Poe's Red Death.
Not that you spread it intentionally, because how could you have known?
We are thrown back to the first half of the nineteenth century.
Technologically speaking and in general. Except that there were cannon
then. We'll have to pull them out of museums."

"Hold on, Adelaide," I interrupted. "Why the nineteenth century? After
all, there were fully equipped armies then. . ."

"You're right. Our situation is without precedent. Like after a quiet
little atomic war where the whole infrastructure goes up in smoke. The
industrial base, communications, banking, commerce. Only simple machines
are left, yet no one has been hurt, not even a fly. Although actually
that's not true. There must have been plenty of accidents, but without
the media we remain uninformed. After all, newspapers have not been
printed on a hand press for a very long time. Forget the editorial
offices. Forget our cars too. My Cadillac is no more."

"It was a company car, wasn't it?" I observed. "Not your worry. . ."

"True," agreed Kramer. "The poor will be on top now, the Fourth World,
because they still have the old Remingtons, maybe even muskets from
1870, and of course spears and boomerangs. Those are now the weapons of
mass destruction. We could not withstand an invasion of Australian
Aborigines. But come, there is no reason now not to tell me: Why did you
land on the moon?"

"You think I know." It began to sink in, how small I had become, how
insignificant my situation. "But I don't. I'd happily give you five
percent of my royalties from that bestseller if you could tell me. After
all your studies you should be better than Sherlock Holmes. It's
elementary! You know the clues as well as I do. . ."

He shook his head in a melancholy way.

"He doesn't know," he told van Gogh's flowers, which the sun had just
reached. They cast a yellow light over my unmade bed. My legs hurt from
sitting cross-legged, so I got up, took the bottle of bourbon hidden in
my closet and some ice cubes from the refrigerator, and poured for
myself and for him. I proposed a toast to the memory of the arms
disarmed.

"I have high blood pressure and diabetes," Kramer said, turning the
glass in his fingers. "But one drink won't hurt. So be it. To our dead
world!"

"Why dead?" I asked.

We drank. Kramer choked, coughed a bit, put the glass down, and rubbed
his face. I noticed he hadn't shaved well. In a weak voice, as if he'd
aged ten years in a moment, he said:

"The higher one has gone with computers, the farther he'll fall. They
ate every single program." He slapped his pocket where the letter from
Uncle Sam was. "The end of an era."

"Why? There are antivirus programs. . ."

"Medicine is useless when the patient has died. Anyway there are no more
programs of any kind, on land, in the air, at sea, in space. Even to
deliver this letter an old Bellem was used, because the new models won't
move. It began a few minutes after eight. . . and those idiots thought
it was an ordinary virus."

"Everywhere at once?"

I tried to imagine the chaos in banks, airports, offices, hospitals,
computer centers, universities, schools, factories. . . and couldn't.

"No one knows for sure because there's no communication, but from what
I've heard, yes, everywhere at once."

"How is that possible?"

"What you brought was in a dormant form, like spores. The spores
multiplied in chain reaction to achieve a certain level of saturation in
the air, water, everywhere, and that specific concentration in turn
activated them. The weapons programs on the moon must have been the best
shielded, so with ours on Earth it was like taking candy from a baby.
Total bytocide. With the exception of living things, which on the moon
the spores never had to deal with. Otherwise they would have butchered
the lot of us, along with the antelopes, ants, sardines, and grass. But
enough! I'm tired of talking. . ."

"If it is as you say, everything will start again from the beginning --
in the old way."

"Of course. In six months or a year they'll find an antidote for Virus
lunaris bitoclasticus, and the world will proceed to the next mess."

"Maybe you won't lose your job."

"No, I'm through," he said firmly. "I'm too old. The new era will
require new training, new courses. Antilunar information theory and so
on. They'll probably heat the moon by thermonuclear means, sterilize it,
and even if the cost goes into the trillions, it'll be worth it not to
have to worry."

"Worth it for whom?" I asked. This Kramer was an odd character: he kept
saying goodbye but didn't get up to go. Maybe he was just unburdening
his heart because I was the only one in the asylum who knew who he was.
Maybe, with his broken life, he should see a psychiatrist.

"What do you mean, for whom? The armorers, the industrial-military
complex. Everyone. They'll go to the libraries for old blueprints,
rebuild some classic machines, rockets, and then turn to the dead
computers. Because the hardware is perfectly preserved, like mummies.
Only the software is kaput. Wait a couple of years. You'll see."

"History never repeats itself exactly," I said, and poured him another
bourbon without asking. He tossed it down and didn't choke; his bald
head reddened a little, that was all. Little flies played in a ray of
sunlight coming in from the window.

"The damn flies survive," Kramer muttered. He looked at the garden where
patients in colored bathrobes and pajamas were shuffling along the paths
as if nothing had happened. The sky was blue, the sun was shining, the
wind made the big chestnut trees sway, and the fountains made little
rainbows with their spray. While one world was perishing, departing to
an irrevocable past, the new world was not even in diapers yet. I didn't
share this insight with Kramer, it was too banal. I just poured him the
rest of the bottle.

"You want to get me drunk?" he asked, but drank. He put down the glass,
stood at last, threw his jacket over his shoulder, then hesitated, his
hand on the doorknob.

"If you do remember. . . you know what. . . write to me. We'll compare
notes."

"Compare notes?" I said like an echo.

"You see, I have my own theory."

"About why I landed?"

"Yes."

"Tell me."

"Can't."

"Why not?"

"It wouldn't be right. Oath of office, duty, and all that. We sat on
opposite sides of the table."

"The table's gone. Don't be such a stickler. I give you my word I'll
keep it to myself."

"Sure! You'll put it in your book, then swear that your memory
returned."

"All right, a deal. Six percent of my royalties."

"You'll put this in writing?"

"Of course."

"Twenty!"

"You're crazy."

"I'm crazy?"

"I've begun to figure out anyway what you'll tell me."

"Hm."

He frowned. You could see that with all the high-level courses he had
taken, he hadn't learned enough. I decided he wasn't really cut out for
his profession but I didn't tell him. He was retiring anyway.

Kramer let go of the door and went to the window, then sat on the edge
of the desk and scratched behind his ear.

"So you tell me," he said.

"If I tell you, you don't get a cent. . ."

Behind him the garden was green. Old Padderhorn came down a path in his
wheelchair, an enormous shoehorn in his hand. He held it like a flag.
The orderly pushing the chair was smoking one of his cigars. Several
steps behind them walked Padderhorn's bodyguard, in shorts, muscular,
with a bronze tan. He wore a wide-brimmed panama and his face was hidden
behind a comic book. The holster on his loose belt slapped against his
thigh.

"Speak or go, old friend," I said. "You know that whatever I write, the
Agency will deny it. . ."

"But if you name me as your informant, it could mean unpleasantness for
me."

"The money will make the unpleasantness less unpleasant. I'll name you
if you don't tell me. Anyway, I think you should get professional help.
Your nerves are shot. It's quite obvious. You can't hide it."

He was silent, a broken man. The corners of his mouth twitched. I felt
sorry for him.

"You won't quote me?"

"I'll change the name and your appearance."

"They'll know me even so."

"Not necessarily. Do you think it was only you they sent to stick to me?
But this whole thing was your side's work, wasn't it?"

He was indignant.

"We have nothing to do with the Lunar Agency. They were the ones!"

"How and why?"

"I'm not sure how but I know why. It was so you wouldn't make it back.
If you died there, things would remain the same."

"Not forever. Sooner or later. . ."

"That was the point, it would be later. They were afraid of the report."

"Let's suppose. And the dust? How did it get into my suit? How could
they have known about the dust?"

"They didn't know, but Lax-Gugliborc had his fear. That's why he fiddled
with the dispersant."

"You learned this?" I was surprised.

"His assistant belongs to us. Lauher."

I remembered my first meeting with the professor. He had indeed said
that one of his colleagues was a spy. It put everything in a different
light.

"The callotomy, that was them too?"

"I don't know." He shrugged, added, "And you will never know. No one
will ever know. When the stakes are that high, the truth no longer
exists. All that remain are theories. Different versions. As it was with
Kennedy."

"President Kennedy?"

"The stakes here were higher. The whole world! There's nothing higher.
Now write what you promised. . ."

From the drawer I took a sheet of paper and a pen. Kramer stood at the
window, his back to me. I signed the document and handed it to him. He
looked and was surprised.

"You made a mistake."

"No."

"Ten?"

"Ten."

"All right. It's my turn. I'll tell you. The dispersant was supposed to
draw you to the moon."

"You're telling me it was Lax-Gugliborc? I don't believe it!"

"Not the professor. He didn't know anything. Lauher knew. To the
fifty-odd programs he added one. Not hard to do for a programmer."

"So it was your side after all."

"No. He was also working for a third party."

"Lauher was?"

"Yes, but we needed him."

"All right. The dispersant called me. I landed. But what about the
sand?"

"An unplanned factor. Unforeseen by everyone. If you can't remember that
moment, no one will ever know. Ever."

He folded the paper in two, put it in his pocket, and at the door turned
and said:

"So long."

I watched him walk toward the main pavilion. As he disappeared behind
the hedge, my left hand took my right hand and shook it. I can't say I
was thrilled by this gesture of support. But life must go on.
