[[Image]] 



TABLE OF CONTENTS


Title Page

Table of Contents

Copyright

A Perfect Vacuum

Les Robinsonades

Gigamesh

Sexplosion

Gruppenführer Louis XVI

Rien du tout, ou la conséquence

Pericalypsis

Idiota

U-Write-It

Odysseus of Ithaca

Toi

Being Inc.

Die Kultur als Fehler

De Impossibilitate Vitae and, De Impossibilitate Prognoscendi

Non Serviam

The New Cosmogony

Footnotes

 Northwestern University Press
www.nupress.northwestern.edu

Copyright © 1971 by Stanisław Lem. English translation copyright © 1979,
1978 by Stanisław Lem. Reprinted 1999 by arrangement with Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, Inc., New York. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America

10 9 8 7 6 5 4

ISBN-13: 978-0-8101-1733-4
ISBN-10: 0-8101-1733-9

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA

Lem, Stanisław.
[Doskonała próżnia. English]
A perfect vacuum / Stanisław Lem ; translated from the Polish by Michael
Kandel.
p. cm.
ISBN 0-8101-1733-9 (pa. : alk. paper)
1. Imaginary books and libraries Reviews. I. Kandel, Michael. II. Title.
PG7158.L39D613 1999
891.8' 5373—dc21 99-42422
CIP

©The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
the American National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of
Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992.



 A PERFECT VACUUM


S. Lem

  _(Czytelnik, Warsaw)_

 

Reviewing nonexistent books is not Lem’s invention; we find such
experiments not only in a contemporary writer, Jorge Luis Borges (for
example, his “Investigations of the Writings of Herbert Quaine”), but
the idea goes further back—and even Rabelais was not the first to make
use of it. _A Perfect Vacuum_ is unusual in that it purports to be an
anthology made up entirely of such critiques. Pedantry or a joke, this
methodicalness? We suspect the author intends a joke; nor is this
impression weakened by the Introduction—long-winded and theoretical—in
which we read: “The writing of a novel is a form of the loss of creative
liberty....In turn, the reviewing of books is a servitude still less
noble. Of the writer one can at least say that he has enslaved
himself—by the theme selected. The critic is in a worse position: as the
convict is chained to his wheelbarrow, so the reviewer is chained to the
work reviewed. The writer loses his freedom in his own book, the critic
in another’s.”

The overstatement of these simplifications is too patent to be taken
seriously. In the next section of the Introduction (“Auto-Momus”) we
read: “Literature to date has told us of fictitious _characters._ We
shall go further: we shall depict fictitious _books._ Here is a chance
to regain creative liberty, and at the same time to wed two opposing
spirits—that of the belletrist and that of the critic.”

 “Auto-Momus”—Lem explains—is to be free creation “squared,” because the
critic of the text, if placed within that very text, will have more
possibilities for maneuvering than the narrator of traditional or
nontraditional literature. One might go along with this, for in fact
literature nowadays fights for greater distance from the thing created,
like a runner on his second wind. The trouble is, Lem’s erudite
Introduction doesn’t seem to want to end. In it he discourses on the
positive aspects of nothingness, on ideal objects in mathematics, and on
new metalevels of language. It is all a bit drawn out, as if in jest.
What is more, with this overture Lem is leading the reader (and perhaps
himself as well?) afield. For there are pseudoreviews in _A Perfect
Vacuum_ that are not merely a collection of anecdotes. I would divide
the reviews, in opposition to the author, into the following three
groups:

(1) Parodies, pastiches, gibes: here belong “The Robinsonad,” “Nothing,
or the Consequence” (both texts, in different ways, poke fun at the
_nouveau roman),_ and perhaps also “You” and “Gigamesh.” It’s true that
“You” is a somewhat chancy entry, because to invent a _bad_ book, which
one can then lambaste because it is bad, is rather cheap. The most
original formally is “Nothing, or the Consequence,” since no one could
possibly have written that novel, and therefore the device of the
pseudo-review permits an acrobatic trick: a critique of a book that not
only does not exist but also cannot. “Gigamesh” was the least to my
taste. The idea is to give the show away; yet is it really right to
dispose of a masterpiece with _those_ kinds of jokes? Perhaps, if one
does not pen them oneself.

(2) Drafts and outlines (for they actually are, in their own way,
outlines): “Gruppenführer Louis XVI,” for instance, or “The Idiot,” and
“A Question of the Rate.” Each of these could—who knows—become the
embryo of a decent novel. Even so, one ought to write the novels first.
A synopsis, critical or otherwise, only amounts to an hors d’oeuvre that
whets our appetite for a course not found in the kitchen. Why not found?
Criticism ad hominem is not “cricket,” but this once I will indulge in
it. The author had ideas that he was unable to realize in full form; he
could not write, but regretted not writing—and there you have the whole
genesis of this aspect of _A Perfect Vacuum._ Lem, sufficiently clever
to foresee precisely such a charge, decided to protect himself—with an
introduction. That is why in “Auto-Momus” he speaks of the poverty of
the craft of prose, of how one must, as an artisan at his workbench,
whittle descriptions to say that the Marquise left the house at five.
But good craft is not impoverishment. Lem took fright at the
difficulties presented by each of these three titles, which I have
mentioned only by way of example. He preferred not to risk it, preferred
to duck the issue, to take the coward’s way out. In stating, “Every book
is a grave of countless others, it deprives them of life by supplanting
them,” he gives us to understand that he has more ideas than biological
time _(Ars longa, vita brevis)._ However, there are not all that many
significant, highly promising ideas in _A Perfect Vacuum._ There are
displays of agility, to which I alluded, but there we are speaking of
jokes. Yet I suspect a matter of more importance—namely, a longing that
cannot be satisfied.

 The last group of works in the volume convinces me that I am not
mistaken: “De Impossibilitate Vitae,” “Civilization as Error” and—most
of all!—“The New Cosmogony.”

“Civilization as Error” stands on their head the views which Lem has
more than once expounded in his books both belletristic and discursive.
The technology explosion, there condemned as the destroyer of culture,
here is put in the role of the savior of humanity. And for a second time
Lem plays apostate in “De Impossibilitate Vitae.” Let us not be misled
by the amusing absurdity of the long causal chains of the family
chronicle. The purpose lies not in these comic anecdotes; what is taking
place is an attack on Lem’s Holy of Holies—on the theory of probability,
i.e., of chance, i.e., of that category on which he built and developed
so many of his voluminous conceptions. The attack is carried out in a
clownish setting, and this is meant to blunt its edge. Was it, then, if
only for a moment, conceived not as satire?

 Doubts like these are dispelled by “The New Cosmogony,” the true _pièce
de résistance_ of the book, hidden in its pages like a Trojan horse. If
not a joke, not a fictional review, then what precisely is it? A bit
heavy for a joke, loaded down as it is with such massive scientific
argumentation—we know that Lem has devoured encyclopedias; shake him and
out come logarithms and formulas. “The New Cosmogony” is the fictional
oration of a Nobel Prize laureate that presents a revolutionary new
model of the Universe. If I did not know any other book of Lem’s I might
conclude that the thing was meant to be a gag for the benefit of some
thirty initiates—that is, physicists and other relativists—in the entire
world. That, however, seems unlikely. What then? I suspect, again, that
there was an idea, an idea that burst upon the author—and from which he
shrank. Of course he will never admit to this, and neither I nor anyone
else will be able to prove to him that he has taken seriously the model
of the Universe as a game. He can always plead the facetiousness of the
context, and point to the very title of the book _(A Perfect
Vacuum_—that is to say, a book “about nothing”). And besides, the best
refuge and excuse is _licentia poetica._

All the same, I believe that behind these texts there hides a certain
gravity. The Universe as a game? An Intentional Physics? Being a
worshiper of science, having prostrated himself before its sacred
methodology, Lem could not well assume the role of its foremost
heresiarch and dissenter. Therefore, he could not place this thought
within any discursive exposition. On the other hand, to make the idea of
a “game of Universe” the pivot of a story plot would have meant writing
yet another work, the umpteenth, of “normal science fiction.”

 What then remained? For a sound mind, nothing but to keep silent. Books
that the writer does not write, that he will certainly never undertake,
come what may, and that can be attributed to fictitious authors—are not
such books, by virtue of their nonexistence, remarkably like silence?
Could one place oneself at any safer distance from heterodox thoughts?
To speak of these books, of these treatises, as belonging to others, is
practically the same as to speak—without speaking. Particularly when
this takes place within the scenario of a joke.

And so, from long years of secret hungering for the nourishment of
realism, from notions too bold with regard to one’s own views for them
to be voiced outright, from all that one dreams of and dreams in vain,
arose _A Perfect Vacuum._ The theoretical Introduction, which ostensibly
makes the case for a “new genre of literature,” is a maneuver to divert
attention, the deliberately exhibitory gesture of the prestidigitator
who wishes to draw our eyes from what he is actually doing. We are to
believe that feats of dexterity are being performed, when it is
otherwise. It is not the trick of the “pseudo-review” that gave birth to
these works; rather, they, demanding—in vain—to be expressed, used this
trick as an excuse and a pretext. In the absence of the trick all would
have remained in the realm of the unsaid. For we have here the betrayal
of fantasy to the cause of well-grounded realism, and defection in
empiricism, and heresy in science. Did Lem really think he would not be
seen through in his machination? It is simplicity itself: to shout out,
with laughter, what one would dare not whisper in earnest. Contrary to
what the Introduction says, the critic does not have to be chained to
the book “as the convict is ... to his wheelbarrow”: the critic’s
freedom does not lie in raising up or tearing down the book, but lies in
this, that through the book, as through a microscope, he may observe the
author; and in that case _A Perfect Vacuum_ turns out to be a tale of
what is desired but is not to be had. It is a book of ungranted wishes.
And the only subterfuge the evasive Lem might still avail himself of
would be a counterattack: in the assertion that it was not I, the
critic, but he himself, the author, who wrote the present review and
added it to—and made it part of_—A Perfect Vacuum._



 LES ROBINSONADES


Marcel Coscat

  _(Editions du Seuil, Paris)_

 

After Defoe’s Robinson came, watered down for the kiddies, the Swiss
Robinson and a whole slew of further infantilized versions of the life
on the desert island; then a few years ago the Paris Olympia published,
in step with the times, _The Sex Life of Robinson Crusoe,_ a trivial
thing whose author there is no point even in naming, because he hid
under one of those pseudonyms that are the property of the publisher
himself, who hires toilers of the pen for well-known ends. But for _The
Robinsonad_ of Marcel Coscat it has been worth waiting. This is the
social life of Robinson Crusoe, his social-welfare work, his arduous,
hard, and overcrowded existence, for what is dealt with here is the
sociology of isolation—the mass culture of an unpopulated island that,
by the end of the novel, is packed solid.

Monsieur Coscat has not written, as the reader will quickly observe, a
work of a plagiaristic or commercial nature. He goes into neither the
sensational nor the pornographic aspect of the desert island; he does
not direct the lust of the castaway to the palm trees with their hairy
coconuts, to the fish, the goats, the axes, the mushrooms, and the pork
salvaged from the shattered ship. In this book, to spite Olympia,
Robinson is no longer the male in rut who, like a phallic unicorn
trampling the shrubbery, the groves of sugar cane and bamboo, violates
the sands of the beach, the mountaintops, the waters of the bay, the
screeches of the seagulls, the lofty shadows of the albatross, or the
sharks washed ashore in a storm. He who craves such material will not
find in this book food for the inflamed imagination. The Robinson of
Marcel Coscat is a logician in the pure state, an extreme
conventionalist, a philosopher who took the conclusions of his doctrine
as far as possible; and the shipwreck—of the three-master _Patricia_—was
for him only the opening of the gates, the severing of the ties, the
preparation of the laboratory for the experiment, for it enabled him to
reach into his own being uncontaminated by the presence of Others.

 Sergius N., sizing up his situation, does not meekly resign himself but
determines to become a true Robinson, beginning with the voluntary
assumption of that very name, which is rational, inasmuch as from his
past, his existence till now, he will no longer be able to derive any
advantage.

The castaway’s life, in its sum total of hardship and vicissitude, is
unpleasant enough already and needs no further ministration by the
futile exertions of a memory nostalgic for what is lost. The world,
exactly as it is found, must be put to rights, and in a civilized
fashion; and so the former Sergius N. resolves to form both the island
and himself—from zero. The New Robinson of Monsieur Coscat has no
illusions; he knows that Defoe’s hero was a fiction whose real-life
model—the sailor Selkirk—turned out to be, when found accidentally years
later by some brig, a creature grown so completely brutish as to be
bereft of speech. Defoe’s Robinson saved himself not thanks to
Friday—Friday appeared too late—but because he scrupulously counted on
the company—stern, perhaps, but the best possible for a Puritan—of the
Lord God Himself. It was this Companion who imposed upon him the severe
pedanticism of behavior, the obstinate industry, the examination of
conscience, and especially that fastidious modesty which so exasperated
the author of the Paris Olympia that the latter attacked it head on with
the lowered horns of obscenity.

 Sergius N., or the New Robinson, feeling within himself some measure of
creative power, knows ahead of time that there is one thing he will
definitely never produce: the Supreme Being is sure to be beyond him. He
is a rationalist, and it is as a rationalist that he sets about his
task. He wishes to consider everything, and therefore begins with the
question of whether the most sensible thing might not be to do nothing
at all. This, of a certainty, will lead to madness, but who knows if
madness may not be an altogether convenient condition? Tush, if one
could but select the type of insanity, like matching a tie to a shirt;
hypomanic euphoria, with its constant joy, Robinson would be perfectly
willing to develop in himself; but how can he be sure it will not drift
into a depression that ends with suicide attempts? This thought repels
him, particularly out of esthetic considerations, and besides, passivity
does not lie in his nature. For either hanging himself or drowning he
will always have time, and therefore he postpones such a variant ad
acta.

The world of dream—he says to himself, in one of the first pages of the
novel—is the Nowhere that can be absolutely perfect; it is a utopia,
though weakened in clarity, being but feebly fleshed out, submerged in
the nocturnal workings of the mind, the mind which does not at that time
(at night) measure up to the requirements of reality. “In my sleep,”
declares Robinson, “I am visited by various persons, and they put
questions to me, to which I know not the answer till it falls from their
lips. Is this to signify that these persons are fragments untying
themselves from my being, that they are, as it were, its umbilical
continuation? To speak thus is to fall into great error. Just as I do
not know whether those grubs, _already_ appetizing to me, those juicy
little white worms, are to be found beneath this flat stone, here, which
I begin gingerly to pry at with the big toe of my bare foot, so, too, I
do not know what is hidden in the minds of the persons who come to me in
my sleep. Thus in relation to my _I_ these persons are as external as
the grubs. The idea is not at all to erase the distinction between dream
and reality—that is the way to madness!—but to create a new, a better
order. What in a dream succeeds only now and then, with mixed results,
in muddled fashion, waveringly and by chance, must be straightened,
tightened, fitted together, and made secure; a dream, when moored in
reality, when brought out into the light of reality _as a method,_ and
serving reality, and peopling reality, packing it with the very finest
goods, ceases to be a dream, and reality, under the influence of such
curative treatment, becomes both as clear as before and shaped as never
before. Since I am alone, I need take no one into account; however,
since at the same time the knowledge that I am alone is poison to me, I
will therefore not be alone. The Lord God I cannot manage, it is true,
but that does not mean I cannot manage Anyone!”

 And our logical Robinson says further: “A man without Others is a fish
without water, but just as most water is murky and turbid, so, too, my
medium was a rubbish heap. My relatives, parents, superiors, teachers I
did not choose myself; this applies even to my mistresses, for they came
my way at random: throughout, I took (if it can be said I took at all)
what chance provided. If, like any other mortal, I was condemned to the
accidents of birth and family and friends, then there is nothing for
which I need mourn. And therefore—let there resound the first words of
Genesis: Away with this clutter!”

He speaks these words, we see, with a solemnity to match that of the
Maker: “Let there be...” For in fact Robinson prepares to create himself
a world from zero. It is not now merely through his liberation from
people due to a fortuitous calamity that he embarks upon creation whole
hog, but by design. And thus the logically perfect hero of Marcel Coscat
outlines a plan that later will destroy and mock him—can it be, as the
human world has done to _its_ Creator?

 Robinson does not know where to begin. Ought he to surround himself
with ideal beings? Angels? Winged horses? (For a moment he has a yen for
a centaur.) But, stripped of illusions, he understands that the presence
of beings in any respect perfect will be difficult to stomach.
Therefore, for a start, he supplies himself with one about whom before,
till now, he could only dream: a loyal servant, a butler, valet, and
footman in one person—the fat (no lean and hungry look!) Snibbins. In
the course of this first Robinsonad our apprentice Demiurge reflects
upon democracy, which, like any man (of this he is certain), he had put
up with only out of necessity. When yet a boy, before dropping off to
sleep, he imagined how lovely it would be to be born a mighty lord in
some medieval time. Now at last that fantasy can be realized. Snibbins
is properly stupid, for thereby he automatically elevates his master;
nothing original ever enters his head, hence he will never give notice;
he performs everything in a twinkling, even that which his master has
not yet had time to ask.

The author does not at all explain whether—and how—Robinson does the
work _for_ Snibbins, because the story is told in the first (Robinson’s)
person; but even if Robinson (and how can it be otherwise?) does do
everything himself on the sly and afterward attributes it to the
servant’s offices, he acts at that time totally without awareness, and
thus only the results of those exertions are visible. Hardly has
Robinson rubbed the sleep from his eyes in the morning when there at his
bedside lie the carefully prepared little oysters of which he is so
fond—salted lightly with sea water, seasoned to taste with the sour tang
of sorrel herbs—and, for an appetizer, soft grubs, white as butter, on
dainty saucer-stones; and behold, nearby are his shoes polished to a
high shine with coconut fiber, and his clothes all laid out, pressed by
a rock hot from the sun, and the trousers creased, and a fresh flower in
the lapel of the jacket. But even so the master usually grumbles a
little as he eats and dresses. For lunch he will have roast tern, for
supper coconut milk, but well chilled. Snibbins, as befits a good
butler, receives his orders—of course—in submissive silence.

 The Master grumbles, the Servant listens; the Master orders, the
Servant does as bid. It is a pleasant life, quiet, a little like a
vacation in the country. Robinson goes for walks, pockets interesting
pebbles, even builds up a collection of them; Snibbins, in the meantime,
prepares the meals—but eats nothing at all himself: how easy on the
budget and how convenient! But by and by in the relations of Master and
Servant there appear the first sands of discord. The existence of
Snibbins is beyond question: to doubt it is to doubt that the trees
stand and the clouds float when no one is watching them. But the stiff
formality of the footman, his meticulousness, obedience, submission,
grow downright wearisome. The shoes are _always_ waiting for Robinson
polished, the oysters give off their smell each morning by his hard bed;
Snibbins holds his tongue—and a good thing, too, the Master can’t abide
servants’ ifs, ands, and buts—but from this it is evident that Snibbins
_as a person_ is not in any way present on the island. Robinson decides
to add something that will make the situation—too simple, primitive
really—more refined. To give Snibbins slothfulness, contrariness, an
inclination to mischief, cannot be done: the way he is, is the way he
is; he has by now too solidly established himself in existence. Robinson
therefore engages, as a scullery boy and helper, the little Boomer. This
is a filthy but good-looking urchin, foot-loose, you might say, somewhat
of a loafer, but sharp-witted, full of shenanigans, and now it is not
the Master but the Servant who begins to have more and more work—not in
attendance on the Master, but to conceal from the Master’s eye all the
things that that young whippersnapper thinks up. The result is that
Snibbins, because he is constantly occupied with thrashing Boomer, is
absent to an even higher degree than before; from time to time Robinson
can hear, inadvertently, the sounds of Snibbins’s dressing-downs,
carried in his direction by the ocean wind (the shrill voice of Snibbins
is amazingly like the voice of the big gulls), but he is not about to
involve himself in the bickering of servants! What, Boomer is pulling
Snibbins away from the Master? Boomer will be dismissed—has already been
sent packing, scattered to the winds. Had even helped himself to the
oysters! The Master is willing to forget this little episode, but then
Snibbins cannot, try as he might; he falls down on the job; scolding
does not help; the servant maintains his silence, still waters run deep,
and it’s clear now that he’s started thinking. The Master disdains to
interrogate a servant or demand frankness—to whom is he to be confessor?
! Nothing goes smoothly, a sharp word has no effect—very well then, you
too, old fool, out of my sight! Here’s three months’ wages—and to hell
with you!

 Robinson, haughty as any master, wastes an entire day in the throwing
together of a raft, with it reaches the deck of the _Patricia,_ which
lies wrecked upon a reef: the money, fortunately, has not been carried
off by the waves. Accounts squared, Snibbins vanishes—except that he has
left behind the counted-out money. Robinson, insulted thus by the
servant, does not know what to do. He feels that he has committed an
error, though as yet feels this by intuition only. What has gone wrong?!

I am Master here, I can do anything!—he says to himself immediately, for
courage, and takes on Wendy Mae. She is, we conjecture, an allusion to
the paradigm of Man Friday. But this young, really rather simple girl
might lead the Master into temptation. He might easily perish in her
marvelous—since unattainable—embraces, he might lose himself in a fever
of rut and lusting, go mad on the point of her pale, mysterious smile,
her fleeting profile, her bare little feet bitter from the ashes of the
campfire and reeking with the grease of barbecued mutton. Therefore,
from the very first, in a moment of true inspiration, he makes Wendy Mae
... three-legged. In a more ordinary, that is, a tritely objective
reality, he would not have been able to do this! But here he is Lord of
Creation. He acts as one who, having a cask of methyl alcohol, poisonous
yet inviting him to drink and be merry, plugs it up himself, against
himself, for he will be living with a temptation he must never indulge;
at the same time he will be kept on his toes, for his appetite will
constantly be removing from the cask, lewdly, its hermetic bung. And
thus Robinson will live, from now on, cheek by jowl with a three-legged
maid, always able—of course—to imagine her _without_ the middle leg, but
that is all. He becomes wealthy in emotions unspent, in endearments
unsquandered (for what point would there be in wasting them on such a
person?). Little Wendy Mae, associated in his mind with both Wednesday
and Wedding Day (note: Wednesday, _Mitt-woch,_ the middle of the week—an
obvious symbolization of sex; perhaps, too, Wendy—Wench—Window), and
also with a poor orphan (“Wednesday’s child is full of woe”), becomes
his Beatrice. Did that silly little chit of a fourteen-year-old know
anything whatever about Dante’s infernal spasms of desire? Robinson is
indeed pleased with himself. He created her and by that very act—her
three-leggedness—barricaded her from himself. Nevertheless, before long
the whole thing begins to come apart at the seams. While concentrating
on a problem important in some respects, Robinson neglected so many
other important facets of Wendy Mae!

 It begins innocently enough. He would like, now and then, to take a
peek at the little one but has pride enough to resist this urge. Later,
however, various thoughts run through his brain. The girl does what
formerly was Snibbins’s job. Gathering the oysters—no problem there; but
taking care of the Master’s wardrobe, even his personal linen? Here
already one can detect an element of ambiguity—no!—it is all too
unambiguous! So he gets up surreptitiously, in the dead of night, when
she is sure to be still sleeping, and washes his unmentionables in the
bay. But since he has begun to rise so early, why couldn’t he—just
once—you know—for fun (but only his own, Master’s, solitary fun)—wash
_her_ things? Didn’t he give them to her? By himself, in spite of the
sharks, he went out several times to penetrate the hull of the
_Patricia_ and found some ladies’ frippery, shifts, pinafores,
petticoats, panties. Yes, but when he washes them, won’t he have to hang
everything up on a line, between the trunks of two palms? A dangerous
game! Particularly dangerous in that, though Snibbins is no longer on
the island as a servant, he has not dropped completely out of the
picture. Robinson can almost hear his heavy breathing, can guess what he
is thinking: Your Lordship, begging your pardon, never washed anything
for _me._ While he existed, Snibbins never would have dared utter words
so audaciously insinuating, but, missing, he turns out to be devilishly
loose of tongue! Snibbins is gone, that is true; but he has left his
absence. He is not to be seen in any concrete place, but even when he
served he modestly lay low, kept out of the Master’s way and dared not
show himself. Now, Snibbins haunts: his pathologically obsequious,
goggle-eyed stare, his screechy voice, it all returns; the distant
quarrels with Boomer shrill through the screams of the least gull; and
now Snibbins bares his hairy chest among the ripe coconuts (to what
leads the shamelessness of such hints?!), he bends to the curve of the
scaled palm trunks and with fisheyes (the goggle!) looks at Robinson
like a drowned man from beneath the waves. Where? There, over there,
where that rock is, on the point—for he had his own little hobby, did
Snibbins: he loved to sit on the promontory and hurl croaking curses at
the aged and infirm whales, who loose their spouts sedately, within the
confines of their families, on the bounding main.

 If only it were possible to come to an understanding with Wendy Mae and
thereby make the relationship, already very unbusinesslike, more
settled, more restricted, more decorous as regards obedience and
command, with the sternness and the maturity of the masculine Master!
Ah, but it’s really such a simple-minded girl; she’s never heard of
Snibbins; to speak to her is like talking to a wall. Even if she
actually thinks some thought of her own, it’s certain that she’ll never
say a word. This, it would seem, out of simplicity, timidity (she’s a
servant, after all!), but in fact such little-girlishness is
instinctively crafty: she knows perfectly well for what—no, _against_
what—the Master is dry, calm, controlled, and high-flown! Moreover she
vanishes for hours on end, nowhere to be seen till nightfall. Could it
be Boomer? Because it couldn’t be Snibbins—no, that’s out of the
question! Snibbins definitely isn’t on the island!

 The naïve reader (alas, there are many such) will by now probably have
concluded that Robinson is suffering hallucinations, that he is slipping
into insanity. Nothing of the sort! If he is a prisoner, it is only of
his own creation. For he may not say to himself the one thing that would
act upon him, in a radical way, therapeutically—namely, that Snibbins
never existed at all, and likewise Boomer. In the first place, should he
say it, she who now _is_—Wendy Mae—would succumb, a helpless victim, to
the destructive flood of such manifest negation. And furthermore, this
explanation, once made, would completely and permanently paralyze
Robinson as Creator. Therefore, regardless of what may yet happen, he
can no more admit to himself the _nothingness_ of his handiwork than the
real Creator can ever admit to the creation—in His handiwork—of _spite._
Such an admission would mean, in both cases, total defeat. God has not
created evil; nor does Robinson, by analogy, work in any kind of void.
Each being, as it were, a captive of his own myth.

So Robinson is delivered up, defenseless, to Snibbins. Snibbins exists,
but always beyond the reach of a stone or a club, and it does not help
to set out Wendy Mae, tied in the dark to a stake, for him as bait
(already Robinson has resorted to this! ). The dismissed servant is
nowhere, and therefore everywhere. Poor Robinson, who wanted so to avoid
shoddiness, who intended to surround himself with chosen ones, has
befouled his nest, for he has ensnibbined the entire island.

 Our hero suffers the torments of the damned. Particularly good are the
descriptions of the quarrels at night with Wendy Mae, those dialogues,
conversations rhythmically punctuated by her sullen, female, seductively
swollen silences, in which Robinson throws all moderation, restraint, to
the winds. His lordliness falls from him; he has become simply her
chattel—dependent on her least nod, wink, smile. And through the
darkness he feels that small, faint smile of the girl; however, when,
fatigued and covered with sweat, he turns over on his hard bed to face
the dawn, dissolute and mad thoughts come to him; he begins to imagine
what else he might do with Wendy Mae ... something paradisiacal,
perhaps? From this we get—in his threshing out of the matter—allusions,
through feather stoles and boas, to the Biblical serpent (note, too:
servant—serpent), and we have the attempted anagrammatic mutilation of
birds to obtain Adam’s rib, which is Eve (note, too: _Aves_—Eva).
Robinson, naturally, would be her Adam. But he well knows that if he
cannot rid himself of Snibbins, in whom he took no personal interest
whatever during the latter’s tenure as lackey, then surely a scheme to
put Wendy Mae out of the way must spell disaster. Her presence in any
form is preferable to parting with her: that much is clear.

What follows is a tale of degeneration. The nightly washing of the
fluffs and frills becomes a sort of sacramental rite. Awakened in the
middle of the night, he listens intensely for her breathing. At the same
time he knows that now he can at least struggle with himself _not_ to
leave his place, _not_ to stretch his hand forth in that direction—but
if he were to drive away the little tormentor, ah, that would be the
end! In the first rays of the sun her underthings, scrubbed so, bleached
by the sun, full of holes (oh, the locality of those holes!), flap
frivolously in the wind; Robinson comes to know all the possibilities of
those most hackneyed agonies which are the privilege of the lovelorn.
And her chipped hand mirror, and her little comb ... Robinson begins to
flee his cave-home, no more does he spurn the reef from which Snibbins
abused the old, phlegmatic whales. But things cannot go on like this
much longer, and so: let them not. There he is now, hastening to the
beach to wait for the great white hulk of the _Caryatid,_ a
transatlantic steamer which a storm (very likely also conveniently
invented) will be casting up on the leaden, foot-scorching sand covered
with the gleam of dying chambered nautili. But what does it mean, that
some of the chambered nautili contain within them bobby pins, while
others in a soft-slimy slurp spit out—at Robinson’s feet—soaked butts of
Camels? Do not such signs clearly indicate that even the beach, the
sand, the trembling water, and its sheets of foam sliding back into the
deep, are likewise no longer part of the material world? But whether
this is the case or not, surely the drama that begins upon the beach,
where the wreck of the _Caryatid,_ ripped open on the reef with a
monstrous rumble, spills its unbelievable contents before the dancing
Robinson—that drama is entirely real, it is the wail of feelings
unrequited....

 From this point on, we must confess, the book grows more and more
difficult to understand and demands no little effort on the part of the
reader. The line of development, precise till now, becomes entangled and
doubles back upon itself. Can it be that the author deliberately sought
to disturb the eloquence of the romance with dissonances? What purpose
is served by the pair of barstools to which Wendy Mae has given birth?
We assume that their three-leggedness is a simple family trait—that’s
clear, fine; but who was the father of those stools? Can it be that we
are faced with the immaculate conception of furniture?? Why does
Snibbins, who previously only spat at the whales, turn out to be their
ardent admirer, even to the point of requesting metamorphosis (Robinson
says of him, to Wendy Mae, “He wants whaling”)? And further: at the
beginning of the second volume Robinson has from three to five children.
The uncertainty of the number we can understand. It is one of the
characteristics of a hallucinated world that has grown too complicated:
the Creator is no longer able to keep straight in his memory all the
details of the creation simultaneously. Well and good. But with whom did
Robinson have these children? Did he create them by a pure act of will,
as previously he did Snibbins, Wendy Mae, Boomer, or—instead—did he
beget them in an act imagined indirectly, i.e., with a woman? There is
not one word in the second volume that refers to Wendy Mae’s third leg.
Might this amount to a kind of anticreational deletion? In Chapter Eight
our suspicions would appear to be confirmed by a fragment of
conversation with the tomcat of the _Caryatid,_ in which the latter says
to Robinson, “You’re a great one for pulling legs.” But since Robinson
neither found the tomcat on the ship nor in any other way created it,
the animal having been thought up by that aunt of Snibbins’s whom
Snibbins’s wife refers to as the _“accoucheuse_ of the Hyperboreans,” it
is not known, unfortunately, whether Wendy Mae had any children in
addition to the stools or not. Wendy Mae does not admit to children, or
at least she does not answer any of Robinson’s questions during the
great jealousy scene, in which the poor devil goes so far as to weave
himself a noose out of coconut fibers.

 “Cock Robinson” is what the hero calls himself in this scene,
ironically, and then, “Mock Robinson.” How are we to understand this?
That Wendy Mae is “killing” him? And that he holds all that he has done
(created) to be counterfeit? Why, too, does Robinson say that although
he is not nearly so threelegged as Wendy Mae, still in this regard he
is, to some extent, similar to her? This may more or less allow of an
explanation, but the remark, closing the first volume, has no
continuation in the second, neither anatomically nor artistically.
Furthermore, the story of the aunt from the Hyperboreans seems rather
tasteless, as does the children’s chorus which accompanies her
metamorphosis: “There are three of us here, there are four and a half,
Old Fried Eggs.” Fried Eggs, incidentally, is Wendy Mae’s uncle
(Friday?); the fish gurgle about him in Chapter Three, and again we have
some allusions to a leg (via fillet of sole), but it is not known whose.

The deeper we get into the second volume, the more perplexing it
becomes. In the second half of it, Robinson no longer speaks to Wendy
Mae directly: the last act of communication is a letter, at night, in
the cave, written by her in the ashes of the fireplace, by feel, a
letter to Robinson, who will read it at the crack of dawn—but he
trembles in advance, able to guess its message in the darkness when he
passes his fingers over the cold cinders.... “Do leave me be!” she
wrote, and he, not daring to reply, fled with his tail between his legs.
To do what? To organize a Miss Chambered Nautilus Pageant, to belabor
the palm trees with a cudgel, reviling them in the most opprobrious
terms, to shout out, on the promenade of the beach, his program for
harnessing the island to the tails of the whales! And then, in the
course of one morning, arise those throngs which Robinson calls into
existence off the cuff, carelessly, writing names, first and last, and
nicknames, on whatever comes to hand. After this, complete chaos, it
seems, is ushered in: e.g., the scenes of the putting together of the
raft and the tearing asunder of the raft, of the raising up of the house
for Wendy Mae and the pulling of it down, of the arms that fatten as the
legs grow thin, of the impossible orgy without beets, where the hero
cannot tell black eyes from peas or blood from borscht!

 All this—nearly 170 pages, not counting the epilogue!—produces the
impression that either Robinson abandoned his original plans, or else
the author himself lost his way in the book. Jules Nefastes, in _Figaro
Littéraire_, states that the work is “plainly clinical.” Sergius N., in
spite of his praxiological plan of Creation, _could not avoid_ madness.
The result of any truly consistent solipsistic creation _must be_
schizophrenia. The book attempts to illustrate this truism. Therefore,
Nefastes considers it intellectually barren, albeit entertaining in
places, owing to the author’s inventiveness.

Anatole Fauche, on the other hand, in _La Nouvelle Critique,_ disputes
the verdict of his colleague from _Figaro Littéraire,_ saying—in our
opinion, entirely to the point—that Nefastes, quite aside from what _The
Robinsonad_ propounds, is not qualified as a psychiatrist (following
which there is a long argument on the lack of any connection between
solipsism and schizophrenia, but we, considering the question to be
wholly immaterial to the book, refer the reader to _The New Criticism_
in this regard). Fauche sets forth the philosophy of the novel thus: the
work shows that the act of creation is _asymmetrical,_ for in fact
anything may be created in thought, but not everything (almost nothing)
may then be erased. This is rendered impossible by the memory of the one
creating, and memory is not subject to the will. According to Fauche the
novel has nothing in common with a clinical case history (of a
particular form of insanity on a desert island) but, rather, exemplifies
the principle of aberrance in creation. Robinson’s actions (in the
second volume) are senseless only in that he personally gains nothing by
them, but psychologically they are quite easily explained. Such flailing
about is characteristic of a man who has got himself into a situation he
only partially anticipated; the situation, taking on solidity in
accordance with laws of its own, holds him captive. From real
situations—emphasizes Fauche—one may in reality escape; from those
imagined, however, there is no exit. Thus _The Robinsonad_ shows only
that for a man the true world is indispensable (“the true external world
is the true internal world”). Monsieur Coscat’s Robinson was not in the
least mad; it was only that his scheme to build himself a synthetic
universe on the uninhabited island was, in its very inception, doomed to
failure.

 On the strength of these conclusions Fauche goes on to deny _The
Robinsonad_ any underlying value, for, thus interpreted, the work indeed
appears to offer little. In the opinion of this reviewer, both critics
here cited went wide of the mark; they failed to read the book’s
contents properly.

The author has, in our opinion, set forth an idea far less banal than,
on the one hand, the history of a madness on a desert island, or, on the
other, a polemic against the thesis of the creative omnipotence of
solipsism. (A polemic of the latter type would in any case be an
absurdity, since in formal philosophy no one has ever promulgated the
notion that solipsism grants creative omnipotence; each to his own, but
in philosophy there is no percentage in tilting at windmills.)

 To our mind, what Robinson does when he “goes mad” is no
derangement—and neither is it some sort of polemical foolishness. The
original intention of the novel’s hero is sane and rational. He knows
that the limitation of every man is Others; the idea, too hastily drawn
from this, which says that the elimination of Others provides the self
with unlimited freedom, is psychologically false, corresponding to the
physical falsehood which would have us believe that since shape is given
to water by the shape of the vessel that contains it, the breaking of
all vessels provides that water with “absolute freedom.” Whereas, just
as water, when deprived of a vessel, will spread out into a puddle, so,
too, will a totally isolated man explode, that explosion taking the form
of a complete deculturalization. If there is no God and if, moreover,
there are neither Others nor the hope of their return, one must save
oneself through the construction of a system of some faith, a system
that, with respect to the one creating it, _must_ be external. The
Robinson of Monsieur Coscat understood this simple precept.

And further: for the common man the beings who are the most desired, and
at the same time entirely real, are beings _beyond reach._ Everyone
knows of the Queen of England, of her sister the Princess, of the former
wife of the President of the United States, of the famous movie stars;
that is to say, no one who is normal doubts for a minute the actual
existence of such persons, even though he cannot directly (by touch)
substantiate their existence. In turn, he who can boast of a direct
acquaintance with such persons will no longer see in them phenomenal
paragons of wealth, femininity, power, beauty, etc., because, in
entering into contact with them, he experiences—by dint of everyday
things—their completely ordinary, normal, human imperfection. For such
persons, up close, are not in the least godlike beings or otherwise
extraordinary. Beings that are truly at the pinnacle of perfection, that
are therefore truly boundlessly desired, yearned for, longed after, must
be _remote_ even to full unattainability. It is their elevation above
the masses that lends them their magnetic glamour; it is not qualities
of body or soul but an unbridgeable social distance that accounts for
their seductive halo.

 This characteristic of the real world, then, Robinson attempts to
reproduce on his island, within the realm of beings of his own
invention. Immediately he errs, because he _physically_ turns his back
on the creation, the Snibbinses, Boomers, et al., and that distance,
natural enough between Master and Servant, he is only too willing to
break down when he acquires a woman. Snibbins he could not, nor did he
wish, to take into his arms; now—with a woman—he only _cannot._ The
point is not (for this is no intellectual problem!) that he was unable
to embrace a woman not there. Of course he was unable! The thing was to
create _mentally_ a situation whose own natural _law_ would forever
stand in the way of erotic contact—and at the same time it had to be a
law that would totally ignore the _nonexistence_ of the girl. This _law_
was to restrain Robinson, and not the banal, crude fact of the female
partner’s nonexistence! For to take simple cognizance of her
nonexistence would have been to ruin everything.

And so Robinson, seeing what must be done, sets to work—that is, the
establishment on the island of an entire, imaginary society. It is this
that will stand between him and the girl; this that will throw up a
system of obstacles and thus provide that impassable distance from which
he will be able to love her, to desire her continually—no longer exposed
to any mundane circumstance, as, for example, the urge to stretch out
his hand and feel her body. He realizes—he must—that if he yields but
once in the struggle waged against himself, if he attempts to feel her,
the whole world that he has created will, in that bat of an eye,
crumble. And this is the reason he begins to “go mad,” in a frenzied
scramble to pull multitudes out of the hat of his imagination—thinking
up and writing in the sand all those names, cognomens, and sobriquets,
ranting and raving about the wives of Snibbins, the Hyperborean aunts,
the Old Fried Eggses, and so on and so forth. And since this swarm is
necessary to him _only_ as a certain insurmountable space (to lie
between Him and Her), he creates indifferently, sloppily, chaotically;
he works in haste, and that haste discredits the thing created, lays
bare its incoherence, its lack of thought, its cheapness.

 Had he succeeded, he would have become the eternal lover, a Dante, a
Don Quixote, a Werther, and in so doing would have had his way. Wendy
Mae—is it not obvious?—would then have been a woman no less real than
Beatrice, than Lotte, than any queen or princess. Being completely real,
she would have been at the same time unattainable. And this would have
allowed him to live and dream of her, for there is a profound difference
between a situation in which a man from reality pines after his own
dream, and one in which reality lures reality—precisely by its
inaccessibility. Only in this second case is it still possible to
cherish hope, since now it is the social distance alone, or other,
similar barriers, that rule out the chance for the love to be
consummated. Robinson’s relationship to Wendy Mae could therefore have
undergone normalization only if she at one and the same time had taken
on _realness_ and _inapproachability_ for him.

To the classic tale of the star-crossed lovers united in the end, Marcel
Coscat has thus opposed an ontological tale of the necessity of
permanent separation, this being the only guarantee of a plighting of
the spirits that is permanent. Comprehending the full boorishness of the
blunder of the “third leg,” Robinson (and not the author, that’s plain!)
quietly “forgets” about it in the second volume. Mistress of her world,
princess of the ice mountain, untouchable inamorata—this is what he
wished to make of Wendy Mae, that same Wendy Mae who began her education
with him as a simple little servant girl, a domestic to replace the
uncouth Snibbins.... And it was precisely in this that he failed. Do you
know now, have you guessed why? The answer could not be simpler: because
Wendy Mae, unlike any queen, _knew_ of Robinson and loved him. She had
no desire to become the vestal goddess, and this division drove the hero
to his ruin. If it were only _he_ that loved _her,_ bah! But she
returned his feelings.... Whoever does not understand this simple truth,
whoever believes, as our grandfathers were instructed by their Victorian
governesses, that we are able to love others, but not ourselves in those
others, would do better not to open this mournful romance that Monsieur
Coscat has vouchsafed us. Coscat’s Robinson dreamed himself a girl whom
he did not wish to give up completely to reality, since _she_ was _he,_
since from that reality that never releases its hold on us, there
is—other than death—no awakening.



 GIGAMESH


Patrick Hannahan

  _(Transworld Publishers, London)_

 

Here is an author who covets the laurels of James Joyce. _Ulysses_
condensed the _Odyssey_ into a single Dublin day, made Circe’s infernal
palace from the dirty laundry of _la belle epoque,_ tied the bloomers of
Gerty McDowell into a hangman’s noose for Bloom the traveling salesman,
and with an army of four hundred thousand words descended upon
Victorianism, which was demolished with all the stylistics that lay at
the disposal of the pen, from stream of consciousness to trial
deposition. Was this not already the culmination of the novel, and at
the same time the monumental laying of it to rest in the family
sepulcher of the arts (in _Ulysses_ there is music, too!)? Apparently
not; apparently Joyce himself did not think so, inasmuch as he decided
to go further, writing a book that is supposed to be not only the
focusing of civilization into a single language, but also an
_omnilinguistic_ lens, a descent to the foundations of the Tower of
Babel. As to the brilliance of _Ulysses_ and _Finnegan’s Wake,_ which
attempts the infinite with double-barreled audacity, we neither affirm
it here nor deny it. A solitary review can now be nothing but a grain
cast upon that mountain of homages and imprecations that has grown over
both books. It is certain, however, that Patrick Hannahan, Joyce’s
countryman, never would have written his _Gigamesh_ if not for the great
example, which he took as a challenge.

 One would think that such an idea would be doomed to failure from the
beginning. Doing a second _Ulysses_ is as worthless as doing a second
_Finnegan._ At the summits of art only the first achievements count,
just as, in the history of mountain climbing, it is only the first
surmounting of walls unsealed.

Hannahan, tolerant enough of _Finnegan's Wake,_ thinks little of
_Ulysses._ “What an idea,” he says, “packing the nineteenth century of
Europe, and Ireland, into the sarcophagal form of the _Odyssey_! Homer’s
original itself is of doubtful value. Why, it is your comic book of
antiquity, with Ulysses as Superman, and the happy end. _Ex ungue
leonem_: in the choice of his model we see the caliber of the writer.
The _Odyssey_ is a pirating of _Gilgamesh,_ and bastardized to suit the
tastes of the Greek hoi polloi. What in the Babylonian epic represented
the tragedy of a struggle crowned with defeat, the Greeks turn into a
picturesque adventure tour of the Mediterranean. ‘_Navigare necesse
est_‘life is a journey’—great gems of wisdom, these. The _Odyssey_ is a
_dégringolade_ in plagiarism; it ruins all the greatness of the fight of
Gilgamesh.”

One has to admit that _Gilgamesh,_ as Sumerology teaches us, did in fact
contain themes that Homer used—the themes of Odysseus, of Circe, of
Charon—and is perhaps the oldest version we have of a tragic ontology,
because it manifests what Rainer Maria Rilke, thirty-six centuries
later, was to call a growing, which consists in this: “_der Tiefbesiegte
von immer Grösserem zu sein.”_ Man’s fate as a battle that leads
inescapably to defeat—this is the final sense of _Gilgamesh._

It was on the Babylonian cycle, then, that Patrick Hannahan decided to
spread his epic canvas—a curious enough canvas, let us note, because his
_Gigamesh_ is a story extremely limited in time and space. The notorious
gangster, hired killer, and American soldier (of the time of the last
world war) “GI Joe” Maesch, unmasked in his criminal activity by an
informer, one N. Kiddy, is to be hanged—by sentence of the military
tribunal—in a small town in Norfolk County, where his unit is stationed.
The whole action takes thirty-six minutes, the time required to
transport the condemned man from his cell to the place of execution. The
story ends with the image of the noose, whose black loop, seen against
the sky, falls upon the neck of the calmly standing Maesch. This Maesch
is of course Gilgamesh, the semidivine hero of the Babylonian epos, and
the one who sends him to the gallows—his old buddy N. Kiddy—is
Gilgamesh’s closest friend, Enkidu, created by the gods in order to
bring about the hero’s downfall. When we present it thus, the similarity
in creative method between _Ulysses_ and _Gigamesh_ becomes immediately
apparent. But justice demands that we concentrate on the differences
between these two works. Our task is made easier in that Hannahan—unlike
Joyce!—provided his book with a commentary, which is twice the size of
the novel itself (to be exact, _Gigamesh_ runs 395 pages, the Commentary
847). We learn at once how Hannahan’s method works: the first,
seventy-page chapter of the Commentary explains to us all the divergent
allusions that emanate from a single, solitary word—namely, the title.
Gigamesh derives first, obviously, from Gilgamesh: with this is revealed
the mythic prototype, just as in Joyce, for his _Ulysses_ also supplies
the classical referent before the reader comes to the first word of the
text. The omission of the letter L in the name Gigamesh is no accident;
L is Lucifer, Lucipherus, the Prince of Darkness, present in the work
although he puts in no personal appearance. Thus the letter (L) is to
the name (Gigamesh) as Lucifer is to the events of the novel: he is
there, but _invisibly._ Through “Logos” L indicates the Beginning (the
Causative Word of Genesis); through Laocoon, the End (for Laocoon’s end
is brought about by serpents: he was _strangled,_ as will be
strangled—by the rope—the hero of _Gigamesh_). L has ninety-seven
further connections, but we cannot expound them here.

 To continue, Gigamesh is a GIGAntic MESS; the hero is in a mess indeed,
one hell of a mess, with a death sentence hanging over his head. The
word also contains: GIG, a kind of rowboat (Maesch would drown his
victims in a gig, after pouring cement on them); GIGgle (Maesch’s
diabolical giggle is a reference—reference No. 1—to the musical
leitmotif of the descent to hell in _Klage Dr. Fausti_ [more on this
later]); GIGA, which is (a) in Italian, “fiddle,” again tying in with
the musical substrates of the novel, and (b) a prefix signifying the
magnitude of a billion (as in the word GIGAwatts), but here the
magnitude of _evil_ in a technological civilization. _Geegh_ is Old
Celtic for “avaunt” or “scram.” From the Italian _giga_ through the
French _gigue_ we arrive at _geigen,_ a slang expression in German for
copulation. For lack of space we must forgo any further etymological
exposition. A different partitioning of the name, in the form of
Gi-GAME-sh, foreshadows other aspects of the work: GAME is a game
played, but also the quarry of a hunt (in Maesch’s case, we have a
manhunt). This is not all. In his youth Maesch was a GIGolo; AME
suggests the Old German _Amme,_ a wet nurse; and MESH, in turn, is a
net—for instance, the one in which Mars caught his goddess wife with her
lover—and therefore a gin, a snare, a _trap_ (under the scaffold), and,
moreover, the engagement of gear teeth (e.g., “synchroMESH”).

A separate section is devoted to the title read backward, because during
the ride to the place of execution Maesch in his thoughts reaches
_back,_ seeking the memory of a crime so monstrous that it will _redeem_
the hanging. In his mind, then, he plays a game(!) for the highest
stakes: if he can recall an act infinitely vile, this will match the
infinite Sacrifice of the Redemption; that is, he will become the
Antisaviour. This—on the metaphysical level; obviously Maesch does not
consciously undertake any such antitheodicy; rather—psychologically—he
seeks some heinousness that will render him impassive in the face of the
hangman. GI J. Maesch is therefore a Gilgamesh who in defeat attains
perfection_—negative_ perfection. We have here a high symmetry of
asymmetry with regard to the Babylonian hero.

 So, then, when read in reverse, “Gigamesh” becomes “Shemagig.” _Shema_
is the ancient Hebraic injunction taken from the Pentateuch _(“Shema
Yisrael_!"—“Hear 0 Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One!”). Because
it is in reverse, we are dealing here with the Antigod, that is, the
personification of evil. “Gig” is of course now seen to be “Gog” (Gog
and Magog). From _Shema_ derives the name “Simeon” (Hebrew Shimeon), and
immediately we think of Simeon Stylites; but if the Saint sits atop the
pillar, the halter hangs down from it; therefore Maesch, dangling
beneath, will become a stylite _a rebours._ This is a further step in
the antisymmetry. Enumerating in this fashion, in his exegesis, 2,912
expressions from the Old Sumerian, Babylonian, Chaldean, Greek, Church
Slavonic, Hottentot, Bantu, South Kurile, Sephardic, the dialect of the
Apaches (the Apaches, as everyone knows, commonly exclaim “Igh” or
“Ugh”), along with their Sanskrit roots and references to underworld
argot, Hannahan stresses that this is no haphazard rummage, but a
precise semantic wind rose, a multidimensional compass card and map of
the work, its cartography—for the object is the plotting of all those
ties and links which the novel will realize polyphonically.

In order to go beyond what Joyce did—to go Joyce one better—Hannahan
decides to make the book an intersecting point
(nexus—node—_nodus_—knot—noose!) not only of all cultures, _ethoi_ and
_ethnoi,_ but also of all languages. Such analysis is necessary (the
letter M in “GigaMesh,” for instance, directs us to the history of the
Mayans, to the god Vitzi-Putzli, to the entire Aztec cosmogony, and also
their irrigation system), but it is by no means sufficient! For the book
is woven out of the _sum total_ of human knowledge. And again, involved
here is not only current knowledge, but also the history of science, and
therefore the cuneiform arithmetics of the Babylonians, the models of
the world—now extinct, reduced to ashes—of the Chaldeans and the
Egyptians, and those from the Ptolemaic to the Einsteinian, and the
abacus and the calculus, algebras of groups and of tensors, the methods
of firing Ming Dynasty vases, the flying machines of Lilienthal,
Hieronymus, Leonardo, the suicide balloon of André and the balloon of
General Nobile. (The incidence of cannibalism during Nobile’s expedition
has its own deep, special significance in the novel; it represents, as
it were, a place in which a certain fatal weight has fallen into water
and disturbed the mirror surface; so, then, the spreading concentric
circles of the waves surrounding _Gigamesh_ are the “sum total” of man’s
existence on Earth, going back to Homo javanensis and the Paleopithecus.
) All this information lies inside _Gigamesh,_ concealed, but
retrievable, as in the real world.

 We understand the compositional idea of Hannahan thus: with an eye
toward outdoing his great countryman and predecessor, he wishes to
encompass in a belletristic work not only the accumulated
linguistic-cultural wealth of the past, but in addition its
universal-cognitive and universal-instrumental heritage (pangnosis).

The preposterousness of such an objective would appear to be
self-evident; it smacks of the pretensions of an idiot, for how can a
single novel, the story of the hanging of some gangster, possibly become
the distillation, the matrix, the key, and the repository of that which
swells the libraries of the globe?! Perfectly aware of this cold, even
sneering skepticism on the part of the reader, Hannahan does not confine
himself to making claims, but proves his case in the Commentary.

It is impossible to summarize it; we can only demonstrate Hannahan’s
method of creation with a small, rather peripheral example. The first
chapter of _Gigamesh_ consists of eight pages, wherein the condemned man
relieves himself in the latrine of the military prison, reading—over the
urinal—the countless graffiti with which other soldiers, before him,
have ornamented the walls of that sanctuary. His attention rests on the
inscriptions only in passing. Their extreme obscenity turns out to be,
precisely through his intermittent awareness of them, a false bottom,
since we pass through them straight into the sordid, hot, enormous
bowels of the human race, into the inferno of its coprolalia and
physiological symbolism, which goes back, through the Kamasutra and the
Chinese “war of flowers,” to the dark caves, with the steatopygous
Aphrodites of primitive peoples, for it is _their_ naked parts that look
out from underneath the filthy acts scrawled awkwardly across the wall.
At the same time, the phallic explicitness of some of the drawings
points to the East, with its ritual sanctification of Phallos-Lingam,
while the East denotes the place of the primeval Paradise, revealed to
be a thin lie incapable of hiding the truth—that in the beginning there
was poor information. Yes, exactly: for sex and “sin” arose when the
protoamoebas lost their virgin unisexuality; because the equipollence
and bipolarity of sex must be derived directly from the Information
Theory of Shannon; and now the purpose of the last two letters (SH) in
the name of the epic becomes apparent! And thus the path leads from the
walls of the latrine to the depths of natural evolution ... for which
countless cultures have served as a fig leaf. Yet this is but a drop in
the bucket, because in the chapter we also find:

 (a) The Pythagorean quantity pi, symbolizing the feminine principle
(3.14159265359787...), is expressed by the number of letters to be found
in the thousand words of the chapter.

(b) When we take the numbers designating the dates of birth of Weismann,
Mendel, and Darwin and apply them to the text as a key to a code, it
turns out that the seeming chaos of that lavatory scatology is an
exposition of sexual mechanics, where pairs of colliding bodies are
replaced by pairs of copulating bodies; meanwhile this entire sequence
of meanings now begins to interlock (synchroMESH!) with other sections
of the work, and so through Chapter III (the Trinity!) it relates to
Chapter X (pregnancy lasts ten lunar months!), and the latter, if read
backward, turns out to be Freudianism explained _in Aramaic._ That is
not all: as is shown by Chapter III—if we overlay it on IV and turn the
book upside down—Freudianism, that is, the doctrine of psychoanalysis,
constitutes a naturalistically secularized version of Christianity. The
state prior to the Neurosis equals Paradise; the Trauma of Childhood is
the Fall; the Neurotic is the Sinner, the Psychoanalyst the Saviour, and
Freudian treatment Salvation through Grace.

 (c) Leaving the latrine at the end of Chapter I, J. Maesch whistles a
sixteen-bar tune (sixteen being the age of the girl he raped and
strangled in the rowboat); its words—extremely vulgar—he only thinks to
himself. This excess has psychological justification at the particular
moment; in addition, the song, when considered syllabotonically, gives
us an orthogonal matrix of transformations for the next chapter (it has
two different meanings, depending on whether or not we apply the matrix
to it).

Chapter II is the development of the blasphemous song whistled by Maesch
in the first, but upon application of the matrix the blasphemies are
transformed into hosannas. The entirety has three referents: (1) the
_Faust_ of Marlowe (Act II, Scene _6ff.), (2)_ the _Faust_ of Goethe
_(“Alles Vergängliche ist nur ein Gleichnis”),_ and (3) the _Doctor
Faustus_ of Thomas Mann. The allusion to Mann’s _Faustus_ is a master
stroke! Because the whole second chapter, when to each and all of the
_letters_ of its words we assign notes according to the Old Gregorian
clef, turns out to be a musical composition, into which Hannahan has
translated _back_ (going by Mann’s description) the _Apoca-lypsis cum F
iguris,_ a work attributed, as we know, from Mann, to the composer
Adrian Leverkühn. That diabolical music is in Hannahan’s novel both
present and absent (obvious it certainly is not), like Lucifer (the
letter L, left out in the title). Chapters IX, X, and XI (the descent
from the van, spiritual comfort, the preparation of the gallows) also
have a musical subtext (the _Klage Dr. Fausti),_ but only, so to speak,
incidentally. Because, when treated as an adiabatic system a la
Sadi-Carnot, they prove to be a cathedral (built based on Boltzmann’s
constant) in which is celebrated a Black Mass. (The silent meditations
are Maesch’s reminiscences in the prison van, concluded with a curse
whose suspended glissandi cut short Chapter VIII.) These chapters are
truly a cathedral, since the interclausal and phraseological proportions
of the prose have a syntactic skeleton that is a _blueprint_—in a Monge
projection onto an imaginary plane—of the Notre Dame Cathedral with all
its pinnacles, cantilevers, buttresses, with its monumental portal and
the famous Gothic rose window, and so forth. So, then, in _Gigamesh_ we
also have architecture, inspired by a theodicy. In the Commentary the
reader will find (p. 397 et seq.) a complete diagram of the cathedral as
it is contained in the text of the afore-mentioned chapters, on a scale
of 1:1000. If, however, instead of a stereometric Monge projection we
use a projection that is nonorthogonal, with an initial displacement
according to the matrix from Chapter I, we obtain Circe’s Palace, and at
the same time the Black Mass changes into a caricature of a lecture on
the Augustinian doctrine (again, iconoclasm: Augustinianism in Circe’s
Palace, while in the cathedral, the Black Mass). The cathedral and
Augustinianism are thus not mechanically inserted into the work; they
constitute elements of the argument.

 This single example may serve to explain how the author, with true
Irish pertinacity, united in one novel the entire world of man, man’s
myths, symphonies, churches, and physics, and the annals of world
history. The example returns us once more to the title, because—to take
that path of meanings—the “gigantic mess” of _Gigamesh_ acquires an
unexpectedly profound sense. The Cosmos, after all, is tending,
according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, to ultimate chaos.
Entropy _must_ increase, and for that reason the end of each and every
being is failure. And so “a gigantic mess” is not only what happens to
some former gangster; “a gigantic mess” is the Universe itself (the
“disorder” of the Cosmos is symbolized by all the “disorderly houses,”
the brothels, which Maesch remembers on the way to the gibbet). But at
the same time there is the celebration of “a Gigantic Mass”—in German,
_Messe_—of the transubstantiation of Form into final Void. Hence the
connection between Sadi-Carnot and the cathedral, hence the embodiment,
in it, of Boltzmann’s constant: Hannahan _had to_ do this, for _chaos_
will be the Last Judgment! Of course the Gilgamesh myth itself finds
full expression in the work, but this fidelity of Hannahan’s—to the
Babylonian model—is child’s play compared to the interpretational chasms
that open up beneath each of the 241,000 words of the novel. The
betrayal that N. Kiddy (Enkidu) commits against Maesch-Gilgamesh is a
cumulative massing of all the betrayals in history; N. Kiddy is _also_
Judas, GI Joe Maesch is _also_ the Redeemer (and MESSiah!), and so on,
and so on.

 Opening the book at random, we find on [>], fourth line from the top,
the exclamation “Bah!” With it Maesch refuses the Camel offered him by
the driver. In the index of the Commentary we find twenty-seven
different _bahs,_ but to the one from [>] corresponds the following
sequence: Baal, Bahai, Baobab, Bahleda (one might think that Hannahan
was in error here, giving us an incorrect spelling of the name of the
Polish mountaineer, but no, not at all! The omission of the _c_ in that
name refers, by the principle already known to us, to the Cantorian c as
a symbol of the Continuum in its transfinite-ness!), Baphomet, Babelisks
(Babylonian obelisks—a neologism typical of the author), Babel (Isaac),
Abraham, Jacob, ladder, hook and ladder, fire department, hose, riot,
Hippies _(h!),_ badminton, racket, rocket, moon, mountains,
Berchtesgaden—the last, since the _h_ in “Bah” also signifies a
worshiper of the Black Mass, as was, in the twentieth century, Hitler.
_[Berchtesgaden was Hitler's mountain retreat in Bavaria._—ED.]

 So functions on every height and breadth _one single_ word, a common
exclamation, so innocent enthymematically, one would have thought!
Consider, then, what vast semantic labyrinths await us on the upper
levels of the linguistic edifice that is _Gigamesh!_ Theories of
preformation do battle there with theories of epigenesis (Ch. Ill, p.
240ff.); the hand movements of the hangman who ties the loop of the
noose have as syntactic accompaniment the Hoyle-Milne hypothesis of the
_looping_ of two time scales in spiral galaxies. Maesch’s
reminiscences—his crimes—are a complete register of all the villainies
of mankind (the Commentary shows how against his transgressions are
marshaled the Crusades, the empire of Charles the Hammer, the slaughter
of the Albigenses, the slaughter of the Armenians, the burning at the
stake of Giordano Bruno, the witch trials, mass hysteria (Mass!),
Flagellantism, the Plague (Black!), Holbein’s dances of death, Noah’s
ark, Arkansas, _ad calendas graecas, ad nauseam,_, etc.). The
gynecologist whom Maesch stomps in Cincinnati is called Andrew B. Cross:
acronymically alphabetic (atomic, biological, and chemical warfare), the
name is a conglomeration of allusions—to the Passion, anthropomorphism
(android), the BAHamas (the island Andros), and Ulysses (Johnson
preceding Grant as president)—while the middle initial, again, is the
key of B minor, “The Lament of Dr. Faust,” which this passage of the
text incorporates.

Indeed yes: this novel is a bottomless pit; in whatever place you touch
it, roads open up, no end of roads (the pattern of the commas in Chapter
VI is an analogue of the map of Rome!), and roads not every which way,
for they all, with their innumerable outbranchings, interweave
harmoniously to form a single whole (which Hannahan proves employing
topological algebra—see the Commentary, the Metamathematical Appendix,
p. 81 Iff.). And thus everything achieves its realization.

Only one doubt arises, and that is: has Patrick Hannahan reached the
mark of his great predecessor, or has he overshot that mark, thereby
calling into question not only himself—but his predecessor as well!—in
the realm of Art? There are rumors to the effect that Hannahan was
assisted in his creation by a battery of computers furnished him by IBM.
And even if this be true, I see no offense in it; these days composers
make common use of computers—why should writers be denied? Some say that
books so fashioned can be read only, in turn, by other digital machines,
since no man is capable of encompassing, in his mind, such an ocean of
facts and their correlations. Permit me one question: does the man exist
who is able thus to encompass _Finnegan’s Wake_ or even _Ulysses_? I do
not mean on the literal level, but all the allusions, all the
associations and cultural-mythic symbolisms, all the combined paradigms
and archetypes on which these works stand and grow in glory? Certainly
no one could manage it alone. No one, for that matter, could wade
through the entire body of criticism that the prose of James Joyce has
accumulated to date! And therefore the question as to the validity of
computer participation in fiction is wholly immaterial.

 Hostile reviewers say that Hannahan has produced the largest logogriph
in literature, a semantic monster rebus, a truly infernal charade or
crossword puzzle. They say that the cramming of those million or billion
allusions into a work of belles-lettres, that the flaunting play with
etymological, phraseological, and hermeneutic complications, that the
piling up of layers of never-ending, perversely antinomial meanings, is
not literary creativity, but the composing of brain teasers for
peculiarly paranoiac hobbyists, for enthusiasts and collectors
fanatically given to bibliographical digging. That this is, in a word,
utter perversion, the pathology of a culture and not its healthy
development.

Excuse me, gentlemen—but where exactly is one to draw the line between
the multiplicity of meaning that marks the integration of a genius, and
the sort of enriching of a work with meanings that represents the pure
schizophrenia of a culture? I suspect that the anti-Hannahan group of
literary experts fears being put out of work. For Joyce provided
brilliant charades but did not tack onto them any explanation of his
own; consequently the critic who contributes commentary to _Ulysses_ and
_Finnegan_ is able to display his intellectual biceps, his far-reaching
perspicacity, or his imitative genius. Hannahan, on the other hand, did
everything _himself_. Not content merely to create the work, he added
reference materials, an _apparatus criticus_ twice its size. In this
lies the crucial difference, and not in such circumstances as, for
example, the fact that Joyce “thought up everything on his own,” whereas
Hannahan relied on computers hooked up to the Library of Congress
(twenty-three million volumes). So, I see no way out of the trap into
which we have been driven by the murderously meticulous Irishman: either
_Gigamesh_ is the crowning achievement of modern literature, or else
neither it nor the tale of Finnegan together with the Joycean Odyssey
can be granted admission to literary Olympus.



 SEXPLOSION


Simon Merrill

  _(Walker & Company, New York)_

 

If one is to believe the author—and more and more they tell us to
believe the authors of science fiction!—the current surge of sex will
become a deluge in the 1980’s. But the action of the novel _Sexplosion_
begins twenty years later, in a New York buried in snowdrifts during a
severe winter. An old man of unknown name, wading through the drifts,
bumping into the hulks of snow-covered cars, reaches a lifeless office
building; he pulls a key from his breast pocket, warm with the last of
his body heat, opens the iron gate, and goes down to the basement. His
roaming there and the snatches of memory that intrude upon it—this is
the whole novel.

The silent vaults of the basement, through which wanders the beam of the
flashlight unsteady in the old man’s hand, may have been a museum once,
or the shipping division of a powerful concern in the years when America
once again carried out the successful invasion of Europe. The still
half-handmade trade of the Europeans had clashed with the implacable
march of conveyor-belt production, and the
scientific-technological-postindustrial colossus instantly emerged the
victor.

 On the field of battle remained three corporations—General Sexotics,
Cybordelics, and Intercourse International. When the production of these
giants was at its peak, sex, from a private amusement, a spectator
sport, group gymnastics, a hobby, and a collector’s market, turned into
a philosophy of civilization. McLuhan, who as a hale and hearty old
codger had lived to see these times, argued in his _Genitocracy_ that
this precisely was the destiny of mankind from the moment it entered on
the path of technology; that even the ancient rowers, chained to the
galleys, and the woodsmen of the North with their saws, and the steam
engine of Stephenson with its cylinder and piston, all traced the
rhythm, the shape, and the meaning of the movements of which the sex of
man—that is to say, the sense of man—consists. The impersonal industry
of the U.S.A., having appropriated the situational wisdoms of East and
West, took the fetters of the Middle Ages and made of them unchastity
belts, harnessed Art to the designing of sexercisers, incubunks, copul
cots, push-button clitters, porn cones, and phallo-phones, set in motion
antiseptic assembly lines off of which began to roll sadomobiles,
succubuses, sodomy sofas for the home, and public gomorrarcades, and at
the same time it established research institutes and science foundations
to take up the fight to liberate sex from the servitude of the
perpetuation of the species. Sex ceased to be a fashion, for it had
become a faith; the orgasm was regarded as a constant duty, and its
meters, with their red needles, took the place of telephones in the
office and on the street.

But who, then, is this old man prowling the passageways of the basement
halls? The legal adviser of General Sexotics? For he recalls the
celebrated cases brought before the Supreme Court, the battle for the
right to duplicate with manikins the physical appearance of famous
people, beginning with the First Lady. General Sexotics had won, at the
cost of twenty million dollars—and now the wandering beam of the
flashlight plays on the dusty plastic bell jars under which stand frozen
the leading film stars and the world’s foremost women of society,
princesses and queens in splendid dress, for by the decision of the
courts it was forbidden to exhibit them otherwise.

 In the course of the decade, synthetic sex came a long way from the
first models, the inflatables and the hand-windups, to the prototypes
with thermostats and feedback. The originals of these copies are long
dead, or else are now decrepit crones, but teflon, nylon, dralon, and
Sexofix have withstood the wear of time; like waxwork figures in a
museum, leaping from the darkness into the light, elegant ladies smile
immobilely at the old man, and they hold in their raised hands
cassettes, each with its siren text (by Supreme Court ruling, the seller
was not permitted to place the tape inside the manikin, but the buyer,
of course, could do so in the privacy of his home).

The slow, shaky step of the old hermit raises clouds of dust, through
which glimmer from across the room, in pale pinks, scenes of group
erotica, some of them thirty-membered, resembling giant pretzels or
intricately braided breads. Could this be the president of General
Sexotics himself who walks the aisles among these high gomorrarcades and
cozy sodomy sofas, or perhaps the chief designer of the company, the man
who made all America, and then the world, crotch-aware? Here are videos
(“viewrinals”) with their controls and programs, and with that lead seal
of the censor over which lawsuits ran through six courts; and here are
stacks of containers ready for shipment overseas, filled with Japanese
spheres, dildos, precoital creams, and a thousand similar articles,
complete with instructions and service manuals.

That was the era of democracy come true at last: one could do
anything—with anyone. Heeding the advice of their own futurologists, the
corporations, having quietly divided up among themselves the global
market in contravention of the antitrust act, went into specialization.
General Sexotics worked on equal rights for deviants, and the remaining
two companies invested in automation. Flagellashes, batterabusers,
black-n-blue’s appeared as prototypes, to assure the public that there
could be no talk of a glut on the market, for a great industry—if it be
truly a great industry—does not simply meet needs: it creates them! The
old methods of home fornication—the time had come for them to be laid to
rest alongside the flints and clubs of the Neanderthals. Scholarly
bodies offered six- and eight-year courses of study, then graduate work
and advanced degrees in the higher and lower eroticisms; the
neurosexator was developed, then throttles, mufflers, insulating
materials, and special sound absorbers, in order that one tenant not
disturb another’s peace or pleasure with uncontrolled outcries.

 But they had to go on, further, fearlessly, and ever forward, because
stagnation is the death of production. Already in the works was an
Olympus for individual use; already the first androids in the shape of
Greek gods and goddesses were being fashioned out of plastic in the
blazing ateliers of Cybordelics. There was talk, too, of angels, and a
financial reserve was set up for legal battles with the churches.
However, certain technical problems still had to be ironed out: what
should the wings be made of; feathers might irritate the nose; should
they be movable, or would that get in the way; how about the halo, what
sort of switch to turn it on, where to put the switch, etc. And then the
lightning struck.

A chemical substance—code name Nosex—had been synthesized some time
before, possibly as early as the 1970’s. Only a small group of experts,
security-cleared, knew of its existence. The drug was immediately
recognized to be a type of secret weapon, and was manufactured by the
laboratories of a small firm connected with the Pentagon. The use of
Nosex in aerosol form could in fact decimate the population of any
country, because the drug, taken in quantities of fractions of a
milligram, eliminated all sensation accompanying the sex act. The act,
true, continued to be possible, but only as a variety of physical labor,
fairly fatiguing, like wringing out clothes, scouring pots, scrubbing
floors. Later on, consideration was given to the idea of using Nosex to
check the population explosion in the Third World, but the plan was
thought to be dangerous.

 No one knows how the world-wide catastrophe came about. Was it true, as
some said, that a stockpile of Nosex blew up as the result of a short
circuit, a fire, and a tank of ether? Or did there come into play here a
move on the part of the industrial enemies of the three corporations
that controlled the market? Or, then again, did some subversive
organization—reactionary or religious—possibly have a hand in it? We are
not told.

Wearied by his trek through the miles of vaults, the old man takes a
seat on the smooth knees of a plastic Cleopatra, but not before pulling
her brake, and his thoughts travel back, as to the edge of a precipice,
to the Crash of 1998. Overnight, in an instinctive feeling of revulsion,
the public turned its back on all the products then flooding the market.
That which yesterday enticed, today was what an ax is to a tired logger,
a washboard to a laundress. The eternal (it had seemed) enchantment, the
spell cast by biology on the human race, was broken. Thereafter, breasts
brought to mind only the fact that people are mammalian; legs, that they
have with what to walk; buttocks, that there is something also with
which to sit. Nothing more, but nothing more! How lucky McLuhan, that he
did not live to witness this catastrophe, he who in his later works had
interpreted the cathedral and the spaceship, the jet engine, the
turbine, the windmill, the saltcellar, the hat, the theory of
relativity, the brackets in mathematical equations, zeros, and
exclamation points as surrogates and substitutes for that single
function which alone is the experiencing of existence in the pure state.

This line of reasoning lost its validity in a matter of hours. The
specter of extinction hung over humanity. It began with an economic
crisis compared to which the one of 1929 was as nothing. The entire
editorial staff of _Playboy,_ in the forefront as ever, set fire to
itself and died in flames; employees of striptease clubs and topless
bars went hungry, and many leaped from windows; magazine publishers,
film producers, huge advertising combines, beauty schools went bankrupt;
the entire cosmetic-perfume industry was shaken, as was lingerie. In the
year 1999, there were thirty-two million jobless in America.

 What now was still capable of exciting the public’s interest? Trusses,
fake humps, gray wigs, a palsied figure in a wheelchair, for only these
did not suggest the strain of sex, that onus, that curse, that grind;
only these seemed to guarantee protection from the erotic threat, hence
respite and peace. The governments, aware of the danger, were mobilizing
all their forces to save the species. In newspaper columns there were
appeals to reason, to a sense of responsibility; clergymen of every
faith appeared on television with sublime exhortations and admonitions,
reminding their flocks of higher ideals, but this chorus of authorities
was listened to by the general public with little enthusiasm. Nor did
the sounding of the official trumpets help, the proclamations enjoining
people to get a grip on themselves. The results were negligible; only
one unusually law-abiding nation, Japan, gritted its teeth and followed
these injunctions. Then special material incentives began to be
instituted, honorary degrees and distinctions, prizes, awards,
citations, medals, and fornication competitions (the trophies were
loving cups); when this tack also failed, repressive measures were
taken. But then the populations of whole provinces began to evade their
procreative obligation, teen-age draft dodgers lay low in the
surrounding forests, older men presented forged certificates of
impotence, and the public boards of enforcement and supervision became
riddled with graft, for everyone was ready—if need be—to keep tabs on
his neighbor, to see that he wasn’t shirking, though he himself avoided
that dreary labor as much as he could.

The time of the catastrophe is now only a memory sifting through the
mind of the lonely old man as he sits on Cleopatra’s knees in the
basement. Mankind has not perished; fertilization now takes place in a
way that is sanitary and hygienic; it is not unlike inoculation; after
years of ordeal a stabilization of sorts has taken over. But culture
abhors a vacuum, and the terrifying suction of that emptiness caused by
the implosion of sex has drawn, into the vacated place, food. The
gastronomy of the day is divided into normal and obscene; there exist
perversions of gluttony, glossy restaurant publications with
centerfolds, and the partaking of meals in certain positions is
considered unspeakably depraved. It is not permitted, for example, to
consume fruit while kneeling (but for this very freedom a sect of knee
deviates is fighting) ; it is not permitted to eat spinach or scrambled
eggs with one’s feet propped up. But there exist—of course!—private
clubs in which connoisseurs and epicures are treated to indecent floor
shows; before the eyes of the spectators special champions gorge
themselves, and the drool trickles down the audience’s collective chin.
From Denmark are smuggled pornoculinary magazines containing things
unbelievably gross. One picture shows the ingestion of scrambled eggs
through a straw, during which the ingester, sinking his fingers into
heavily garlicked spinach and at the same time sniffing paprika goulash,
lies on the table, wrapped in the tablecloth, his feet bound with a cord
hooked up to a percolator which in this orgy serves as the chandelier.
The Prix Femina that year went to a novel about a character who first
smeared the floor with truffle paste, then licked it clean, after having
wallowed his fill in spaghetti. The ideal of beauty also has changed:
the thing now is to be a two-hundred-and-ninety-pound butterball, for
this attests to uncommon ability on the part of the alimentary canal.
Changes have taken place in fashion as well, and it is generally
impossible to distinguish women from men by their dress. In the
parliaments of the more enlightened countries, however, the question is
being debated whether or not schoolchildren should be instructed in the
facts of life, i.e., the digestive processes. So far, this subject,
because it is indecent, has been placed under a strict taboo.

 And at last the biological sciences are nearing the complete
elimination of sexual reproduction, that superfluous and prehistoric
relic. Embryos will be conceived synthetically and grown according to
programs of genetic engineering. From them will come neuter individuals,
and this finally will put an end to the terrible memories that linger in
the minds of all who have lived through the catastrophe of sex. In
bright laboratories, those temples of progress, there will arise the
magnificent hermaphrodite or, rather, the neutrone, and then humanity,
cut free of its former disgrace, will be able, with ever-increasing
relish, to bite into every fruit—now only gastronomically forbidden.



 GRUPPENFÜHRER LOUIS XVI


Alfred, Zellermann

  _(Suhrkampf Verlag, Frankfurt)_

 

_Gruppenführer Louis XVI_ (or _Nazi Squad Leader Louis the Sixteenth)_
is the fiction debut of Alfred Zellermann. Zellermann, practically in
his sixties, is a well-known literary historian and a doctor of
anthropology. He spent the _regnum Hitleri-anum_ in Germany, in the
country with his wife’s parents, having at the time been relieved of his
university position; therefore, he was a passive observer of the life of
the Third Reich. We venture to call this novel an excellent work, and
add that probably only such a German, with such a fund of practical
experience—and with such theoretical knowledge of literature!—could have
written it.

Despite the title, it is no work of fantasy we have before us. The
setting: Argentina in the first decade after the conclusion of the war.
The fifty-year-old Gruppenführer Siegfried Taudlitz, a fugitive from the
crushed and occupied Reich, makes his way to South America, carrying
with him a part of the “treasure” amassed by the notorious Academy of
the SS (“_Ahnen-erbe_”), a trunk bound with steel bands and filled with
dollar bills. Gathering about himself a group of other fugitives from
Germany, including various drifters and adventurers, and moreover having
taken on a dozen or so women of doubtful character for services
unspecified for the time being (some of these women Taudlitz himself
buys out of brothels in Rio de Janeiro), the former SS General organizes
an expedition deep into the Argentine interior. This, with a skill that
reveals his talents as a staff officer.

 In a region several hundred miles removed from the last outposts of
civilization, the expedition comes upon ruins that are at least twelve
centuries old, ruins of buildings that were raised in all likelihood by
Aztecan crews; the expedition takes up residence in these. Attracted by
the possibility of earning money, Indians and mestizos of the area show
up at this site, which has been immediately named by Taudlitz (for
reasons not yet disclosed) “Parisia.” The former Gruppenführer makes
efficient work brigades out of them and sets his armed men over them as
taskmasters. Several years pass, and from such activity emerges the
shape of the realm that Taudlitz had envisioned for himself. In his
person he combines a ruthlessness that stops at nothing with the addled
idea of re-creating—in the heart of the jungle—the French State in its
heyday of monarchical splendor, for he himself is to be the
reincarnation of none other than Louis XVI.

An aside here. The above does not summarize the novel, nor does what
follows, for the progression of the action in the novel does not conform
to the calendar chronology given in our account. We are well aware of
the demands of artistic composition that governed the author; however,
we wish to reconstruct in chronicle fashion, as it were, the train of
events, so that the central concept, the idea of the work, will stand
out clearly and with particular force. At the same time, we are passing
over, in our “chronologized” recapitulation of the work, a multitude of
side issues and minor episodes, because it is plainly impossible to
contain in any capsule form a whole, when that whole runs to two volumes
of over 670 pages. But we will attempt in the present discussion to deal
as well with the sequence of events that Alfred Zellermann implements in
his epic.

 Thus is created—to return to the story—a royal court, with a host of
courtiers, knights, clergy, lackeys, and a palace chapel and ballrooms
amid the fortress battlements, into which have been transformed the
venerable ruins of the Aztec buildings, their rubble rebuilt in a manner
architecturally absurd. Having at his side three men blindly loyal to
him—Hans Mehrer, Johann Wieland, and Erich Palatzky (soon they become
Cardinal Richelieu, the Duc de Rohan, and the Duc de Montbazon)—the “new
Louis” manages not only to maintain himself on his bogus throne, but
also to shape the life going on about him in accordance with his own
designs. At the same time—and this is important in the novel—the
historical knowledge of the former Gruppenführer is fragmentary at best
and full of gaps. One can hardly say he possesses such knowledge at all;
his head is filled not so much with bits and pieces of the history of
seventeenth-century France as with tripe carried over from his boyhood
days, when he would lose himself in the adventures of Dumas, beginning
with _The Three Musketeers,_ and later, as an adolescent with
“monarchistic” leanings (that is what he called them; in fact they were
merely sadistic), would pore over the books of Karl May. And since onto
the memories of this reading cheap romances were afterward added,
voraciously devoured and thumbed, it is not the history of France that
he is able to bring to life, but only the brutally primitivized,
outright imbecilic hodgepodge that in his mind stands for it, and that
has become for him a profession of faith.

Actually—as far as one can gather from the numerous details and
references scattered throughout the work—Hitlerism was for Taudlitz only
a choice of necessity, the alternative that, relatively speaking, suited
him the most, being the closest to his “monarchistic” fantasies.
Hitlerism, in his eyes, came close to the Middle Ages—granted, not half
so close as he would have liked! But it was, in any event, more welcome
than any form of institutional democracy. On the other hand, having his
own private, secret “dream of the crown” in the Third Reich, Taudlitz
never succumbed to Hitler’s magnetism; he never believed in Hitler’s
doctrine, and for this reason was not obliged to mourn the fall of
“Great Germany.” Instead, having wit enough to see it coming,
particularly since he had never identified himself with the élite of the
Third Reich ( though belonging to it), he prepared himself for the
disaster appropriately. His cult of Hitler, universally known, was not
even the product of self-deception; for ten years Taudlitz played a
cynical comedy, for he had his own myth, which gave him a resistance to
Hitler’s, and this proved especially convenient for him, because those
disciples of _Mein Kampf_ who made even a small attempt to take the
doctrine seriously, more than once—as in the case of Albert Speer—felt
themselves alienated from Hitler later on, whereas Taudlitz, as a man
who only outwardly professed each day the views prescribed for that day,
was immune to any heresy.

 Taudlitz believes implicitly and without reservation only in the power
of money and force; he knows that with material goods people can be
persuaded to go along with any plan of a sufficiently openhanded master,
provided that master be also duly resolute and uncompromising in the
carrying out of commitments once made. Taudlitz does not in the least
trouble himself about whether his “courtiers,” that many-colored throng
made up of Germans, Indians, mestizos, and Portuguese, really take
seriously the vast spectacle imposed over many years, which he has
staged in a manner that is—would be, to an outside observer—unspeakably
insipid, uninspired, crass, or whether any of the actors believe in the
reasonableness of the court of the Louis, or are instead only playing a
comedy, reckoning on the payment, possibly also on making off with the
“King’s bundle” after the death of the ruler. The problem does not
appear to exist for Taudlitz.

The life of the court community is so patent a forgery, and a clumsy one
at that, it is such a piece of unauthenticity, that at least the more
clearheaded of the people, those who came later to Parisia, as well as
all who with their own eyes saw the origination of the pseudo-monarch
and the pseudo-princes, cannot—even for a minute—have any doubt in this
regard. And therefore, particularly in its early days, the kingdom
resembles, as it were, a person schizophrenically split in two: one
speaks one way at the palace audiences and balls, especially in the
vicinity of Taudlitz, and quite another way in the absence of the
monarch and his three confidants, who ensure in a most ruthless manner
(with torture, even) the continuation of the imposed game. And it is a
game decked out in rare splendor, bathed in a glitter now not false, for
a stream of caravan supplies, paid for with hard currency, has in the
space of twenty months raised castle walls, covered them with frescoes
and Gobelins, dressed the parquet floors with elegant carpeting, set out
endless pieces of furniture, mirrors, gilt clocks, commodes, built
secret doors and hiding places in the walls, alcoves, pergolas,
terraces, encircled the castle with an enormous, magnificent park, and,
beyond, with a palisade and a moat. Every German is an overseer and
keeps the Indian slaves under thumb (it is by Indian sweat and toil that
the artificial kingdom comes into being); he parades attired like a true
seventeenth-century knight, but wears on his gold belt a military
handgun of the “Parabellum” make, the final argument in all disputes
between feudal capital and labor.

 But the monarch and his confidants slowly, and at the same time
systematically, eliminate from their surroundings every manifestation,
every sign that would immediately unmask the fictitiousness of the court
and the kingdom. So first a special language comes into use; in it may
be worded any news that makes its way—roundabout, to be sure—in from the
outside world, such as the possibility that the “nation” may be
threatened by intervention on the part of the Argentine government;
meanwhile these wordings, conveyed to the King by his high officials,
dare not lay bare—that is, state point-blank—the unsovereignty of the
monarch and the throne. Argentina, for example, is always called “Spain”
and treated as a neighboring country. Gradually they all become so much
at home inside their artificial skins, and learn to move about so
naturally in splendid robes, to wield the sword and the tongue with such
address, that the lie sinks deeper—into the very warp and woof of this
fabric, this living picture. The picture remains a humbug, but a humbug
now that throbs with the blood of authentic desires, hatreds, quarrels,
rivalries; for at the unreal court are hatched real intrigues, courtiers
strive to undo others, to draw nearer the throne over the bodies of
their rivals, that they may receive from the hands of the King the high
ranks and honors of the toppled; therefore the innuendo, the cup of
poison, the informer’s whisper, the dagger, begin their hidden,
altogether genuine work; yet only so much of the monarchistic and feudal
element continues to inhere in all of this as Taudlitz, the new Louis
XVI, is able to breathe into it from his own dream of absolute power, a
dream dramatized by a pack of former SS men.

 Taudlitz believes that somewhere in Germany lives his nephew, the last
of the line, Bertrand Gülsenhirn, whose age was thirteen at the time of
the fall of Germany. To seek out this youth (now twenty-one) Louis XVI
sends the Due de Rohan, or Johann Wieland, the only “intellectual” among
his men, for Wieland had been a physician in the Waffen SS and had
carried out, in the camp at Mauthausen, “scientific studies.” The scene
where the King entrusts the Due with the secret mission to find the boy
and bring him to the court as the Infante is among the finest in the
novel. First the monarch is gracious enough to explain how he is much
troubled by his own childlessness, out of consideration for the good of
the throne, that is, the succession; these opening phrases help him
continue in this vein; the insane savor of the scene lies in this, that
now the King cannot admit even to himself that he is not a real king. He
does not, in fact, know French, but, employing German, which prevails at
court, he maintains—as does everyone after him, when the subject
arises—that it is French he is speaking, seventeenth-century French.

 This is not madness, for madness would be—now—to admit to Germanness,
even if only in language; Germany does not exist, inasmuch as France’s
only neighbor is Spain (that is, Argentina)! Anyone who dares utter
words in German, letting it be understood that he is speaking _thus,_
stands in peril of his life: from the conversation between the
Archbishop of Paris and the Due de Salignac (Vol. I, p. 311), it may be
inferred that the Prince de Chartreuse, beheaded for “high treason,” in
reality had drunkenly called the palace not simply a “whorehouse,” but a
“German whorehouse.” _Nota bene_: the abundance of French names in the
novel, which bear a striking similarity to the names of cognacs and
wines—take, for example, the “Marquis Châteauneuf du Pape,” the master
of ceremonies!—undoubtedly derives from the fact (though nowhere does
the author say it) that in the brain of Taudlitz there clamor, for
readily understandable reasons, far more names of liquors and liqueurs
than those of the French aristocracy.

In addressing his emissary, then, Taudlitz speaks as he imagines King
Louis might speak to a trusted agent being sent on such a mission. He
does not tell Monsieur le Due to put aside his sham apparel, but, on the
contrary, to “disguise himself as an Englishman or a Dutchman,” which
simply means to try for a normal, up-to-date appearance. The word
“up-to-date,” however, may not be uttered—it belongs among those
expressions that would dangerously weaken the fiction of the kingdom.
Even dollars are called, always, “thalers.”

Provided with a considerable amount of ready money, Wieland goes to Rio,
where the commercial agent of the “court” operates; after acquiring good
false identity papers, Taudlitz’s emissary sails for Europe. The book
passes in silence over the peregrinations of his search. We know only
that they are crowned with success after eleven months, and the novel,
in its actual form, characteristically opens with the second
conversation between Wieland and the young Gülsenhirn, who is working as
a waiter in a large Hamburg hotel. Bertrand (he will be allowed to keep
the name: it has, in the opinion of his uncle Taudlitz, a good ring) is
first told only of his millionaire uncle who is prepared to adopt him as
a son, and for Bertrand this is reason enough to leave his job and go
off with Wieland. The journey of this curious pair serves as an
introduction to the novel and performs its function brilliantly, because
we have here a moving forward in space which at the same time is, as it
were, a retreating back into historical time: the travelers change from
a transcontinental jet to a train, later to an automobile, from the
automobile to a horse-drawn wagon, and finally cover the last 145 miles
on horseback.

 As Bertrand’s clothes wear out piece by piece, his spare things
“vanish,” and in their place appear archaic garments, providently
supplied and laid out for such occasions by Wieland; meanwhile, the
latter is turning into the Due de Rohan. This metamorphosis is by no
means Machiavellian; it takes place, from stopping point to stopping
point, with strange simplicity. One gathers (later on, this is
confirmed) that Wieland has gone through such costume changes (only not
quite in these installments) numerous times as the factotum envoy of
Taudlitz. And so, while Wieland, who embarked for Europe as Mr. Heinz
Karl Muller, becomes the armed and mounted Due de Rohan, an analogous
transformation—at least externally—is undergone by Bertrand.

Bertrand is flabbergasted, stupefied. He is going to his uncle, the
owner—so he has been informed—of a vast estate; he has forsaken the life
of a waiter to become heir to millions, and now they lead him into the
circle of some costume comedy or farce he cannot comprehend. The
instructions Wieland-Miil-ler-de Rohan gives him on the way only serve
to increase the muddle in his head. Sometimes it seems to him that his
companion is merely pulling his leg; sometimes, that he is leading him
to his doom, or on the other hand that he, Bertrand, is being let in on
some unimaginable skulduggery, whose entirety cannot be revealed all at
once. There will be moments in which he will feel he has gone mad. The
instructions, of course, never call a thing by its name; this
instinctive wisdom is the common property of the court.

 “You must,” de Rohan tells him, “observe the formalities your uncle
requires” (“your uncle,” then “His Lordship,” finally “His Highness”!);
“his name is ‘Louis,’ not ‘Siegfried’—it is not permitted _ever_ to say
the latter. He has put it aside—such is his will!” declares Muller,
becoming _le due._ “His estate” is altered to “his latifundium,” then to
“his realm”; thus Bertrand, little by little, during the long days spent
in the saddle, riding through the jungle, and then, in the final hours,
inside a gilded sedan chair borne by eight naked, muscular mestizos, and
observing from its window a retinue of mounted knights in casques—thus
Bertrand is convinced of the truth of the words of his enigmatic
companion. Then he shifts his suspicions of insanity from himself to the
companion and places all his hope on the meeting with his uncle, whom,
however, he hardly remembers—he saw him last as a nine-year-old boy. But
the meeting is the center of a magnificent, impressive celebration,
which represents an amalgam of all the ceremonies, rituals, and customs
Taudlitz was able to recall. So the choir sings and silver fanfares are
played, the King enters in his crown, but first the footmen cry
drawlingly, “The King! The King!” as they open the carved double doors;
Taudlitz is surrounded by twelve “Peers of the Realm” (which he borrowed
by error, from _the_ wrong source), and the sublime moment arrives—Louis
greets his nephew with the sign of the cross, names him his Infante, and
permits him to kiss his ring, his hand, and his scepter. But when they
are alone together at breakfast, where they are waited on by Indians in
tails, with a marvelous panorama spread out before them from the heights
of the castle down to the park and its sparkling, spouting rows of
fountains, Bertrand, looking upon that splendor, and again upon the
distant belt of jungle that surrounds the entire estate with its
glimmering of cruel green, simply cannot find the courage to ask his
uncle anything. When the latter gently admonishes him to speak, Bertrand
begins: “Your Majesty...” “Yes, that is the way ... higher reasons
require it ... my welfare lies in this, and yours...” kindly says to him
the former SS Gruppenführer in the crown.

 The unusualness of this book stems from the fact that it unites
elements that would appear to be totally irreconcilable. Either
something is authentic or it is unauthentic, it is either false or true,
make-believe or spontaneous life; yet here we are faced with a
prevaricated truth and an authentic fake, hence a thing that is at once
the truth and a lie. Had the courtiers of old Taudlitz merely played
their roles, stammering out their conned lines, we would have had before
us a lifeless puppet pageant; but they assimilated the form, each in his
own way growing into it, and have grown so at home with it over the
years that when, shortly after Bertrand’s arrival, they begin conspiring
against Taudlitz, they are unable entirely to shake off the imposed
patterns, so that the conspiracy itself is also a grotesque potpourri of
psychologies, like a layer cake with jelly, lumps of dough, macaroni,
and the corpses of mice that have choked to death on the nuts. For it
was an _authentic_ passion, an honest lust for ruling, that the
Gruppenführer clothed in a conglomeration of garbled memories pertaining
to the history of the French Louis, a history taken thirdhand—from penny
dreadfuls and dime novels. At the beginning he did not insist on
obedience to his mania—he could not—but simply paid for it, and during
that time had to pretend not to hear what the former chauffeurs,
noncoms, and sentries of the SS were saying about him, and about the
whole “production,” behind his back; but he possessed enough sense to
bear it all patiently until the moment when finally it became easy for
him to achieve discipline through fear, compulsion, torture; that was
also when dollars, hitherto the only lure, became “thalers”...

 This primitive phase (in a manner of speaking, the prehistory of the
kingdom) is shown in the novel only in snatches of incidental
conversation, and it should be kept in mind that for such references to
the past one can pay dearly. The action begins in Europe, when an
unknown emissary wins the confidence of the young waiter Bertrand, but
it is only in the second part of the novel that the narrative allows us
to figure out what, until then, we were struggling to reconstruct.
Obviously, to have former MPs, camp guards, camp doctors, the drivers
and the gunners of the SS panzer division _Grossdeutschland,_ as
courtiers, nobles, and priests of the court of Louis XVI, is as ghastly
and insane a hash, a mismatching of roles, as ever there could be. On
the other hand, they are not so much playing well-defined roles
poorly—for such roles never existed—as they are doing their best, in
their own way, often moronically, to cope with a difficult task, since
they can do nothing else.... That which was false in its very inception
is now played by them falsely and dully; the result should therefore be
a miscellany that turns the book into a pile of nonsense.

However, it is not that way at all. Those Hitlerite butchers may once
have felt ridiculous wriggling into the cardinal’s scarlet, the bishop’s
violet, and gilt plates of armor, but then they felt less ridiculous—for
it was amusing—taking prostitutes from seaport brothels and renaming
them consorts (in the case of the secular lords) or princesses and
countess-concubines (in the case of the priesthood of King Louis). And
these roles captured the fancy of the prostitutes themselves; immersed
in spurious stateliness, each such creature luxuriated and put on airs,
but at the same time would improve herself, emulating whatever ideal of
the great lady she was capable of imagining. Thus the passages of the
novel where the former thugs in ecclesiastical hats and lace
throat-ruffles are given the floor are simply incredible exhibitions of
the author’s psychological skill. The wretches derive from their
positions a pleasure alien to true aristocrats, for it is enhanced
twofold by what might be most simply described as an ennobling or
outright legalizing of crime. A scoundrel consumes the fruits of evil
with the greatest delight only when he does so in the majesty of the
law; the professionals in concentration-camp sadism are provided a
distinct satisfaction by the possibility of repeating more than one of
the old practices now in the aura and glory of the court’s splendor, in
its light, which seems to magnify every filthy act. It is for this
reason that, while doing disgraceful things, they all of them, now of
their own free will, try, at least in their words, not to step out of
character, out of the bishop’s or the prince’s role. For thus they are
able to disgrace as well the whole majestic symbolism of those high
honors with which they have bedecked themselves. This is why, too, the
slow-witted among them, such as Mehrer, envy the Due de Rohan, who can
so adroitly justify his weakness for abusing Indian children, who has
turned the torturing of them into an activity in all respects “courtly,”
that is to say, to the highest degree seemly. (Note, by the way, that
the Indians are routinely called “Negroes,” for Negroes as slaves are
“in better taste.”)

 We can understand, too, Wieland’s (the Due de Rohan’s) exertions to
obtain the cardinal’s hat: this is now the only thing he lacks; it will
enable him to play his degenerate little games as one of God’s vicars on
earth. But Taudlitz denies him the privilege, as if aware of the chasm
of villainy that lies behind this ambition of Wieland’s. Because
Taudlitz, in that game, fancies differently: he does not wish to be
conscious of _both_ the present eminence _and_ the old past of the
Schutzstaffeln, because he has “another dream, another myth”; he craves
the royal purple in earnest and therefore spurns with true indignation
the Wieland method of exploiting the situation. The author’s mastery
lies in showing the extraordinary variety of human knavishness, that
wealth, that multifariousness of evil which cannot be reduced to any
single, simple formula. For Taudlitz is not one whit “better” than
Wieland; he is merely taken up with something else, for he aspires to an
impossible—for a total—transfiguration. Hence his “puritanism,” which
his closest associates hold so much against him.

 As for the courtiers, we have seen that they strove to be courtiers
indeed—for different reasons.... But later, when ten of them took to
plotting against the monarch-Gruppenführer, with the idea of robbing him
of his chest full of dollars and of murdering him besides, they
nonetheless regretted having to part with the senatorial chairs, titles,
decorations, distinctions, and thus found themselves in a true quandary.
They did not want to cut the old man’s throat and flee with the loot;
they did not and yet they did; and it was not merely the matter of
appearances that interfered with their plotting. There were moments now
when they themselves believed in the possibility of their eminence, for
that possibility answered their needs to the highest degree. What
hampered them the most (and this is madness indeed, but perfectly
logical, psychologically consistent) was no longer the recognition, in
the form of memory, that they were not what they pretended to be, but
the arbitrary cruelty of Taudlitz-as-monarch: had not the monarch been
so much—every inch—the SS Gruppenführer, had he not made it so very
clear to them—silently!—that they were his creatures, existing by the
act of his will and momentary favor, then the France of the Angevins in
the Argentine interior would definitely have proven more stable, viable.
And so, in truth, the actors now held against the impresario of the show
... his insufficient authenticity. That band of thieves desired to be
_plus monarchique_ than the monarch himself would allow.

Of course, they were in error, for they could not compare themselves, in
these roles, with the true, better authenticity of a magnificent court;
unable to raise themselves befittingly to the level of the roles, they
nevertheless made those roles their own, and brought life to them; each
put into his own what he had and could, what his heart dictated. There
is no affectation or stiltedness here; we see, after all, and more than
once, how these _dues_ address their _duchesses,_ how the Marquis de
Beaujolais (the onetime Hans Wehrholz) pounds his spouse and how he
throws up to her her whorish past. In such scenes the aim of the writer
is to make credible that which seems so incredible when only summarized.
True, the wretches sometimes weary of the performances they must give,
but what tops everything are those who play the high clergy of the Roman
Catholic Church.

 There are no Catholics whatever in the colony, and it is impossible to
speak of any sort of religious feeling among the former SS men; it
becomes generally accepted, then, for the so-called services held in the
palace chapel to be extremely brief, and they are reduced to the
chanting of a few verses from the Bible; one or two people, in fact,
suggest to the monarch that even these divine duties could really be
dispensed with, but Taudlitz is unbending. On the other hand, both
cardinals, the Archbishop of Paris, and the other bishops in this way
“justify” their high titles, because those few minutes each week—an
atrocious parody of Mass—legitimize primarily in their own eyes their
rank in the church hierarchy; thus they put up with it all and remain at
their altars for minutes on end, in order later to reward themselves
with hours spent at the banquet tables and beneath the canopies of
sumptuous beds. Therefore, too, the idea of the projector smuggled into
the palace (without the King’s knowledge!) from Montevideo and used to
show stag films in the castle cellar—where the Archbishop of Paris (the
quondam Gestapo chauffeur Hans Schaeffert) does the honors as
projectionist, and Cardinal du Sauterne (ex-commissary) helps change the
reels—that idea has at one and the same time a macabre humor and a
verisimilitude, as do all the other elements of this tragicomedy, which
continues because nothing is able to challenge it from within.

To these people all things are now reconcilable with all things, to them
everything goes with everything else, and it should come as no surprise
when, for example, mention is made of the dreams of some of them—for did
not the commandant of Block III at Mauthausen have “the biggest
collection of canaries in all Bavaria,” which he recalls wistfully, and
did he not try feeding these canaries according to the advice of a
certain camp foreman who assured him that canaries sang, best when fed
on human flesh? This, then, is criminality taken to such a degree of
self-ignorance that we would be dealing with _innocent_ former
murderers, were the criterion of criminality in man to be based
exclusively on autodiagnosis, on the individual’s independent
recognition of sin. It is possible that in some sense Cardinal du
Sauterne knows that a real cardinal does not behave thus, that a real
cardinal believes in God and most probably does not go about raping the
Indian boys who assist at Mass in surplices, but since within a radius
of four hundred miles there are no other cardinals, such a thought does
not trouble him unduly.

 Falsehood feeding on falsehood produces in consequence this
proliferating fertility of form, which surpasses any authentic court as
a mirror of human behavior, for it is true to life in two ways at once.
The author does not permit himself the least exaggeration, and the
realism of the subject remains uncompromised; when the general
drunkenness goes beyond a certain point, the royal Gruppenführer always
retires to his chambers, for he knows the old prison-guard ways will win
out over the veneer of refinement and from drunken hiccupping there will
soon escape those grotesque and gruesome locutions whose power derives
from the boggling contrast between _the_ adopted mentality and the real.
The whole genius of Taudlitz—if one may use that term—lies in his having
the courage and the consequentially to “close” the system he created.

This system, frightfully crippled, functions thanks only to its
insularity; one puff from the real world would topple it. And just such
a potential toppler is young Bertrand, though he does not feel in
himself the strength to speak out with that genuine voice of dismay that
calls things by their name. The simplest possibility, which explains the
totality of the situation, Bertrand dares not contemplate. What, only a
vulgar lie, kept going for years, maintained methodically, thumbing its
nose at common sense—a lie and nothing more? No, never; sooner a
communal paranoia or some inconceivable, secret game of unknown purpose,
yet rational at core, complete with bona fide and fully cogent motives;
anything, anything but simple lying, lying enamored of itself,
self-absorbed, self-inflated without bound. The thesis we have been
presenting is beyond his grasp.

 Bertrand, then, capitulates at once: he lets them dress him in the
garments of the heir to the throne, lets them instruct him in court
etiquette—that is to say, in that rudimentary repertoire of bows,
gestures, and words which all seem strangely familiar to him. There is
nothing strange about it; he, too, has read the cheap romances and
pseudo-historical rubbish that were the inspiration of the King and his
master of ceremonies. Bertrand, however, is recalcitrant, unaware that
his inertness, his passivity—which aggravates not merely the courtiers
but the King himself—is an instinctive resistance to a situation that
forces on him submissive idiocy. Bertrand does not want to be buried in
lies, though he himself does not know the source of his opposition;
therefore he limits himself to making gibes, ironical remarks, those
lordly half-witted utterances of honored guests. During the second big
banquet, it happens that the King, stung by an insinuation behind
Bertrand’s seemingly casual words—words whose hidden malice the boy
himself does not immediately realize—in a fit of genuine rage begins
hurling at him scraps of a partly eaten roast, whereat half the hall
seconds the fury with a gleeful howl of approbation, throwing at the
poor wretch greasy bones off their silver plates, while the rest
preserve an uneasy silence, wondering whether Taudlitz might not be
laying a trap of some sort for those present, as he is fond of doing,
whether he might not be acting in concert with the Infante.

 The most difficult thing for us to convey here is that, for all the
obtuseness of the game, for all the flatness of the performance, which,
put on at one time indifferently, now has grown so in power that it does
not want to end, and does not want to because it cannot, and cannot
because beyond it there awaits now only utter _nothingness_ (they cannot
quit being bishops, princes of the blood, marquises, since they cannot
go back to their former posts of Gestapo chauffeur, crematorium guard,
camp commandant, just as the King, even if he wished, could not become
again SS Gruppenführer Taudlitz)—for all the banal and atrocious
flatness (to repeat) of this kingdom and this court, there vibrates in
it at the same time, like a single vigilant, taut nerve, a ceaseless
cunning, a mutual suspicion, which permits one to conduct, albeit in
counterfeit forms, real battles and campaigns, to undercut the favorites
of the throne, and write denunciations, and in silence wrest for oneself
the favor of the lord. In fact it is not the cardinals’ hats, not
ribbons and medals, laces, ruffs, suits of armor that warrant such
underground labor, these tunnelings of intrigue—for what, really, do
veterans of a hundred battles and a thousand murders want with the
trappings of fictitious glory? It is the ambushes themselves, the
machinations, the traps set for one’s foes so that they will betray
themselves before the King, falling flat on their faces from their
strutting roles—that constitute the greatest common passion....

So this jockeying for position, seeking the right moves on the court
parquet, in the shining halls whose mirrors reflect their decked-out
silhouettes, this incessant yet bloodless warfare (not always bloodless
in the cellars of the castle) is their reason for being; it gives
meaning to what would be, otherwise, only a children’s carnival,
suitable perhaps for beardless youths, not for men who know the taste of
blood.... Poor Bertrand meanwhile can no longer endure being alone with
his unuttered dilemma; as a drowning man grasps at straws he seeks a
kindred spirit, one to whom he can unburden himself of the purpose that
is growing within him.

 Because—and this is another of the author’s merits—Bertrand gradually
becomes the Hamlet of this mad court. He is here, by instinct, the last
righteous man (he never read _Ham-let!_), and hence concludes that his
duty is to go mad. He does not suspect them all of cynicism—for that he
has indeed too little intellectual courage. Bertrand, not knowing this
himself, wishes to do something that would be realistic, certainly, at a
less sordid court: his desire is to say what constantly rushes to his
lips and burns his tongue, but he knows by now that as a normal person
he cannot do so with impunity. But if he were to go insane, ah, that is
quite a different matter! He begins, then, not to simulate madness
cold-bloodedly, like Shakespeare’s Hamlet: no, as a simpleton, naive, a
bit of a hysteric, he simply tries to go insane, with all good faith in
the necessity for his own madness! Thus he will utter the words of truth
that oppress him.... But the Duchesse de Clicot, an old prostitute from
Rio, having taken a fancy to the young man, gets him into bed with her
and there, educating him in the ways remembered from the time of her
unhighborn past, ways learned at the hand of a certain madam, adjures
him sternly not to say things that might cost him his neck. For she
knows well that such a thing as respect for the unaccountability of
mental illness has no place here; at heart, as we can see, the old woman
wishes Bertrand well. But that conversation between the sheets, in which
the Duchesse proves a truly accomplished whore, though at the same time
she is no longer completely able to address the youth as a whore
(because her limited intellect has been steeped in the court seven years
and taken on a good deal of pseudo-polish and etiquette)—that
conversation does not succeed in changing Bertrand’s mind. He is beyond
caring now. He will either go mad or run away. A dissection of the
subconscious of the others would probably reveal that their awareness of
the outside world, which awaits them with sentences _in absentia_,
prison terms, and tribunals, is an invisible force spurring them to
continue with the game; but Bertrand, who has nothing in common with
such a past, has no wish to.

 Meanwhile, the conspiracy enters the phase of action: now not ten, but
fourteen courtiers, ready for anything, having gained an accomplice in
the captain of the palace guard, break into the royal bedroom after
midnight. Their main objective is torpedoed at the culminating moment:
it turns out that the good dollars have long since been spent, and all
that remain, in the famous “second compartment of the trunk,” are the
counterfeit. The King knew this well. Therefore there is really nothing
to fight for, but they have burned their bridges: they must kill the
King, who so far has only been watching from his bonds on the bed as
they turn upside down the “treasury” hidden underneath it. They were
going to have beaten him to death out of practical considerations, in
order that he not be able to pursue them; now they kill him out of
hatred, because he has enticed them with false treasure.

Execrable as it sounds, I must say that the murder scene is marvelous;
in the unerring strokes of the brush one recognizes the master. For in
order to get at the old man as painfully as possible, before he is quite
strangled with the cord, the conspirators begin to roar at him in the
language of camp cooks and Gestapo chauffeurs, the language that had
been anathematized, banished eternally from the kingdom. But then, as
the body of the victim still is twitching on the floor (the brilliant
motif of the towel!), the murderers, regaining their composure, _return_
to the language of the court, indeed without design, it is only that
they now have no alternative: the dollars are counterfeit, there is
nothing with which to flee, nor any reason, Taudlitz has bound and tied
them; though lifeless himself, he will let no one leave his State! They
must consent, then, to the continuation of the game, in keeping with the
motto _“Le roi est mort, vive le roi_!"—and there, at once, over the
corpse, they must choose a new king.

 The next chapter (Bertrand in hiding at his “Duchesse’s”) is much
weaker. But the final one, in which a patrol of mounted police comes
knocking at the castle gate, that great, silent scene, the last in the
novel, is a magnificent close. The drawbridge, the policemen in rumpled
uniforms with Colts in shoulder holsters, wearing wide hats turned up on
one side, and opposite them guards in half armor, with halberds, each
side staring at the other in amazement, like two times, two worlds
impossibly brought to a single place ... on either side of the
portcullis, which slowly, heavily begins to lift, with an infernal
grinding sound ... a finale worthy of the work! But unfortunately the
author lost sight of his Hamlet, Bertrand; he did not make use of the
tremendous opportunity that lay within that character. I will not say he
should have had him killed off—Shakespeare’s play need not serve here as
a paradigm—but it is a shame, this lost chance, this greatness oblivious
of itself but present in the everyday, well-meaning heart of man. A
shame.



 RIEN DU TOUT, OU LA CONSÉQUENCE


Solange Marriot

  _(Editions du Midi, Paris)_

 

_Nothing, or the Consequence_ is not only Mme Solange Marriot’s first
book; it is also the first novel ever to have reached the limit of what
writing can do. Not that it is a masterpiece of art; if I had to call it
anything, I would call it a masterpiece of decency. The need for decency
is the thorn in the side of all our literature today. Because our
literature’s main malaise is the disgrace that one cannot be a writer
and at the same time a man who is completely, that is, in full
seriousness, decent. The initiation into the true essence of literature
brings about a malaise quite similar to that which afflicts a sensitive
child when it is for the first time informed of the facts of life. The
child’s shock is a form of internal rebellion against the genital
biology of our bodies, which seems to call for condemnation from the
standpoint of good taste, and the shame and shock of the writer come
from the realization of the inevitable lie that one commits in writing.
There exist necessary lies, e.g., those that are morally defensible
(thus the doctor lies to his terminally ill patient), but literary lies
do not belong in this category. Someone has to be a doctor, consequently
someone has to lie as a doctor, but no necessity brings the pen into
proximity with the clean page. The past knew not this embarrassment, for
it was not free; literature in an age of faith does not lie, it only
serves. Its emancipation from what was necessary service gave rise to a
crisis whose manifestations today are often pitiful, if not outright
obscene.

 Pitiful, because a novel that depicts its own origination is half
confession and half humbug. It, too, contains a residue, and even a good
amount, of the lie. Sensing this, the next literati wrote gradually more
and more about _how_ one writes, to the detriment of the thing written,
the story, and this method followed a falling curve down to works,
finally, that were manifestoes of epic impotence. And so the novel
invited us to step into its dressing room. But such invitations must
always be suspect—if they do not actually amount to propositioning, then
they turn out to be coquetry, and to flirt instead of lie—it is like
going from the frying pan to the fire.

The antinovel strove to become more radical; that is, it made every
effort to demonstrate that it was no illusion of anything. While the
“self-novel” was like a magician who reveals to the public all that he
is holding up his sleeve, the antinovel was to become a pretense of
nothing, not even of the self-unmasking magician. What then? It promised
to communicate nothing, to tell of nothing, to signify not a thing, but
merely _to be,_ as a cloud is, a table, a tree. Fine in theory. It
failed, however, because not everyone can be Lord God _tout court,_ a
creator of autonomous worlds, and a writer most certainly cannot. What
decides the defeat is the issue of contexts: on them—on that which is
completely _inexpressible_—depends the sense of what we say. The world
of the Lord God has no contexts, hence it can be successfully replaced
only by a world that is equally self-sufficient. You may stand on your
head if you like, but it will never work—not in language.

What then was left to literature after the fatal knowledge of its own
indecency? The self-novel is a partial striptease; the antinovel, ipso
facto, is (alas) a form of autocastration. Like the Skoptsi who,
outraged in their moral conscience by their own genitality, performed
upon themselves horrid operations, the antinovel has mutilated the
unfortunate body of traditional literature. What then was left? Nothing
except a romance with nothingness. For he who lies (and, as we know, a
writer must lie) about _nothing_ surely ceases to be a liar.

 It was necessary, then—and herein is the consequence—to write
_nothing._ But can such a task make sense? To write _nothing_—is it not
the same as to write nothing? What then?...

Roland Barthes, the author of the now not-so-new essay “Le Degré zéro de
l’écriture,” had not an inkling of this (but for all its famous wit, his
is a shallow intellect). He did not comprehend that literature always is
parasitic on the mind of the reader. Love, a tree, a park, a sigh, an
earache—the reader understands, because the reader has experienced it.
It is possible, of course, with a book to rearrange the furniture inside
a reader’s head, but only to the extent that there is some furniture
there already, before the reading.

He is no parasite on anything, whose work is real: a mechanic, a doctor,
a builder, a tailor, a dishwasher. What, in comparison, does a writer
produce? Semblances. This is a serious occupation? The antinovel wished
to pattern itself after mathematics; mathematics, surely, yields nothing
real! Yes, but mathematics does not lie, for it does only what it must.
It operates under the constraint of necessities that it does not invent
on the spur of the moment; the method is given to it, which is why the
discoveries of mathematicians are genuine, and why, too, their horror is
genuine when the method leads them to a contradiction. The writer,
because he does not operate under such necessity, because he is so free,
can only enter into his quiet negotiations with the reader; he urges the
reader kindly to assume ... to believe ... to accept as good coin ...
but this is a game, and not the blessed bondage in which mathematics
thrives. Total freedom is total paralysis in literature.

 Of what are we speaking? Of Mme Solange’s novel. Let us begin with the
observation that this pretty name may be read variously, depending on
the context in which it is placed. In French it can be Sun and Angel
_(Sol, Ange)._ In German it will be merely the name of an interval of
time (so _lange_—so long). The absolute autonomy of language is arrant
nonsense; humanists have believed in it out of naïveté—to which naïveté,
however, the cybernetics people had no right. Machines to translate
faithfully, indeed! No word, no whole sentence has meaning in itself,
within its own trench and boundary. Borges came close to this state of
affairs when, in his story “Pierre Menard, the Author of _Don Quixote_,”
he described a literary fanatic, the eccentric Menard, who after a great
number of intellectual preparations wrote _Don Quixote a second time,_
word for word, not copying down Cervantes but—as it were—immersing
himself totally in the latter’s creative milieu. But the place in which
Borges’s short story touches on the secret is this following passage:

“A comparison of the pages of Menard and Cervantes is highly revealing.
The latter, for example, wrote _(Don Quixote,_ Part One, Chapter XIX):
‘...truth, whose mother is history, who is the rival of time, the
repository of deeds, the witness of the past, the pattern and the
caution for the present day, and the lesson for future ages.’

“This catalogue, published in the seventeenth century, penned by the
‘layman genius’ Cervantes, is simply a rhetorical encomium to history.
Menard, on the other hand, writes: '...truth, whose mother is history,
who is the rival of time, the repository of deeds, the witness of the
past, the pattern and the caution for the present day, and the lesson
for future ages.’

“History as the mother of truth; the idea is extraordinary. Menard, a
contemporary of William James, does not characterize history as the
study of reality but as its source. Historical truth, for him, is not
that which has taken place; it is that which we believe has taken place.
The concluding phrases—the pattern and the caution for the present day,
the lesson for future ages—are unabashedly pragmatic.”

 This is something more than a literary joke and poking fun; it is the
pure and simple truth, which the absurdity of the idea itself (to write
_Don Quixote a second time!)_ in no way lessens. For in fact what fills
every sentence with meanings is the context of the given period; that
which was “innocent rhetoric” in the seventeenth century is, in our age,
truly cynical in its meanings. Sentences mean nothing _in themselves_;
it was not Borges who jokingly decided thus; the moment in history
shapes the meanings of language, such is the inalterable reality.

And now, literature. Whatsoever it relates to us must prove a lie, not
being the literal truth. Balzac’s Vautrin is as nonexistent as Faust’s
devil. When it speaks the honest truth, literature ceases to be itself
and becomes a diary, a news item, a denunciation, an appointment book, a
letter, whatever you like, only not artistic writing.

At this juncture appears Mme Solange with her _Rien du tout, ou la
conséquence._ The title? Nothing, or the consequence? The consequence of
what? Literature, obviously; for literature to be decent, that is, not
to lie, is the same as for literature not to be. _Only_ of this is it
still possible today to write a _decent_ book. The blush of indecency no
longer works; it was good yesterday, but now we recognize it for what it
is: a common pose, the trick of the experienced stripper who knows that
her feigned modesty, her lowered lashes, her fake schoolgirl
embarrassment as she removes her panties, excites the house even more!

And so the theme has been defined. But how is one to write about
nothing? It is necessary, yet impossible. By saying “nothing”? By
repeating the word a thousand times? Or by beginning with the words “He
was not born, consequently he was not named, either; on account of this
he neither cheated in school nor later got mixed up in politics”? Such a
work could have arisen, but it would have been a stunt and not a work of
art, rather like those numerous books written in the second person
singular; any of them can easily be booted out of such “originality” and
forced to return to its proper place. All one need do is turn the second
person back into the first. It does no violence whatever to the book; in
no way does it change it. Similarly with our fictitious example: remove
the negations, all those wearisome nots and nors that like a
pseudo-nihilistic smallpox have bespotted the text, the text we invented
extempore, and it becomes evident that here is yet another story, one of
many, about the Marquise who left the house at five. To say she _didn't_
leave—some revelation!

 Mme Solange was not taken in by this sort of trick. For she understood
(she must have understood!) that one may indeed describe a particular
story (a love story, say) with nonevents no worse than with events, but
that the first device is merely an artifice. Instead of a print we
obtain an exact negative, that is all. The nature of an innovation must
be ontological, and not simply grammatical!

When we say, “He was not named because he was not born,” we are, to be
sure, moving beyond being, but only in that thinnest membrane of
nonexistence that adheres tightly to reality. He was not born, although
he could have been born, did not cheat, although he could have cheated.
He could have done everything, had he been. The work will stand entirely
on that “could have.” Out of such flour one cannot bake bread. One
cannot go bounding from being to unbeing using such ploys. It is
necessary, therefore, to leave the membrane of primitive denials, or of
the negatives of actions, in order to plunge into nothingness, plunge
deeply, hurling oneself headlong into it, but of course not blindly; to
_enminus_ nonbeing more and more powerfully—which must be a considerable
labor, a great effort; and here is salvation for art, because what is
involved is a full expedition into the abyss of ever more precise and
ever greater Nothing, and therefore a _process,_ whose dramatic
peripeteia, whose struggle may be depicted—so long as it succeeds!

 The first sentence of _Rien du tout, ou la conséquence_ reads, “The
train did not arrive”; in the next sentence we find “He did not come.”
We meet, then, with negations, but of what exactly? From the standpoint
of logic these are total negations, since the text affirms absolutely
nothing existentially; indeed, it confines itself exclusively to what
did _not_ occur.

The reader, however, is a creature more frail than a perfect logician.
So, although the text says nothing of this, there is conjured up
involuntarily in his imagination a scene taking place at some railway
station, a scene of waiting for someone who has not arrived, and since
he knows the sex of the author (authoress), the waiting for the
nonarrival immediately carries the anticipation of an erotic encounter.
What of this? Everything! Because the whole responsibility for these
conjectures, from the very first words, falls on the reader. With not a
single word does the novel confirm his expectations; the novel is and
remains decent in its method, I have heard some say that in places it is
downright pornographic. Well, but there is not a single word in it that
would assert sex in any form; and indeed, how could such an assertion be
possible when it is expressly stated that in the home there is neither
the Kamasutra nor any person’s reproductive organs (and those are denied
most specifically! ).

Nonbeing is already known to us in literature, but only as a certain
Lack—of Something—for Someone. For example—of water, for one thirsty.
The same applies to hunger (including the erotic), loneliness (the lack
of others), etc. The exquisitely beautiful nonbeing of Paul Valéry is a
lack of being that is bewitching for the poet; on such nothingnesses
more than one poetic work has been built. But always it is exclusively a
matter of Nothingness for Someone, or of nonbeing purely private,
experienced on the individual level, therefore particular, chimerical,
and not ontological (when I, thirsty, cannot have a drink of water, this
does not mean, after all, the absence of water—as though water did not
in general exist!). Such unobjective nothingness cannot be the theme of
a radical work: Mme Solange understood this also.

 In the first chapter, following the nonarrival of the train and the
nonappearance of the Someone, the narration, continuing in its
subjectless way, reveals that it is not spring, or winter, or summer.
The reader decides on autumn, but again only because that last climatic
possibility has not been disavowed (it, too, will be, but later!). The
reader therefore is constantly thrown back on himself, but that is the
problem of his own anticipations, conjectures, his hypotheses ad hoc. In
the novel there is not so much as a hint of these. The contemplation of
the unbeloved heroine in nongravitational space (i.e., space in which
there is no force of attraction), which concludes the first chapter,
might seem, it is true, obscene—but, again, only to one who will think
_certain things_ himself, on his own. The work relates only what such an
unbeloved would _not_ be able to do, and not what she _would_ be able to
do, in particular positions. This second part, the suppositional, is
again the personal contribution of the reader, his completely private
gain (or loss, depending on how one looks at it). The work even goes so
far as to stress that the unbeloved does _not_ find herself in the
presence of any kind of male. Anyway, the beginning of the next chapter
discloses, straightaway, that this unbeloved is unbeloved for the simple
reason that she _does not exist._ An entirely logical situation—is it
not?

Then begins that drama of the diminution of space, of phallic-vaginal
space also, which was not to the liking of a certain critic, a member of
the Academy. The academician found it to be “an anatomical bore, if not
a vulgarity.” He found it, let us note, on his own and by himself,
because in the text we have only further, progressive denials, of a more
and more general nature. If the _lack_ of a vagina can still offend
someone’s sensibilities, then we have gone far indeed. How can a thing
be in bad taste which _is not there at all?!_

 Then the pit of nothingness, still shallow, begins to increase
disquietingly. The middle of the book—from the fourth to the sixth
chapter—is consciousness. Yes, its stream, but, as we begin to realize,
this is not a stream of thoughts about nothing, old-fashioned, passé.
This is a stream of _no thoughts._ The syntax itself remains intact,
untouched, inviolate, and it carries us over the depths like a
perilously buckling bridge. What a void ! But—we reason—even
consciousness that is unthinking is still consciousness, is it not?
Since that unthinkingness has limits ... but this is a delusion, for the
limitations are created by the reader himself! The text does not think;
it gives us nothing. On the contrary, it takes away in succession that
which was still our property, and the emotions in reading it are
precisely the result of the ruthlessness of such subtraction: _horror
vacui_ smites us, at the same time entices; the reading turns out to be
not so much the destruction of the world of lies of the novel as a form
of annihilation of the reader himself as a psychic being! A woman wrote
this book? Difficult to believe, considering its merciless logic.

In the last section of the work comes the doubt whether it can possibly
continue: it has, after all, been saying nothing for so long! Any
further progress to the center of nonexistence seems impossible. But no
! Again a trap, again an explosion—or, rather, an implosion, the caving
in of yet another nothingness! The narrator—as we know, there is no
narrator; he is replaced by the language, that which itself speaks _by
means of him,_ like an imaginary “it” (the “it” in “it is thundering” or
“it is lightning”). In the next-to-last chapter we observe with
dizziness that the negative absolute has now been reached. The business
of the nonappearance of some man, by some train, the unbeing of the
seasons of the year, of the weather, of the walls of the house, of the
apartment, of the face, the eyes, the air, the bodies—all this lies far
behind us, on the surface, the surface that, eaten away by our further
progress, by that all-consuming cancerlike Nothing, has ceased to exist
_even as negation._ We see how simple-minded, naïve, how positively
comical it was of us to expect that we would he given facts of some sort
here, that here something or other would happen!

 It is, therefore, a reduction, to zero only to begin with; later,
sinking into the abyss with projections of negative transcendence, it is
a reduction also of transcendental entities, since by now no
metaphysical systems are possible, and the neantic center still looms
before us. A vacuum, then, surrounds the narrative on every side; and
behold, there are now its first incursions, intrusions, in the language
itself. For the narrating voice begins to doubt itself. No, I put that
poorly: “that which by itself tells of itself” collapses and vanishes
somewhere; it already knows that it _is not._ If it still exists, it
exists as a shadow, which is the simple lack of light; thus are these
sentences the lack of existence. It is not the lack of water in the
desert, not the maiden’s lack of a lover, it is the _lack of self._ Had
this been a novel written in the classical, traditional fashion, it
would have been easy for us to say what took place: the hero would have
been the sort of someone who begins to harbor suspicions that he neither
manifests himself nor dreams himself, but is dreamt and manifested_—by_
someone, and through hidden intentional acts (as if he is appearing to
someone in a dream and only thanks to the dreamer may exist
provisionally). From this would have come the rushing fear that these
acts would stop, and surely they could stop at any moment—whereupon he
would then fade away!

Thus it would have been in a more ordinary novel, but not with Mme
Solange: the narrator cannot take fright of anything, because, you see,
there is no narrator. What, then, occurs? The language itself begins to
suspect, and then to understand, that there is no one besides itself,
that, having meaning (to the extent that it has meaning) for anyone, for
everyone, it thereby is not and never was or ever could have been a
personal expression; cut off from all mouths at once, as a universally
ejected tapeworm, as an adulterous parasite that has devoured its hosts,
that has slain them so long ago that in it all memory of the crime,
unknowingly committed, has been erased and obliterated, this language,
like the skin of a balloon, till now'resilient, firm, from which
invisibly and faster and faster the air escapes, begins to shrivel. This
eclipse of speech, however, is not a babel; and it is not fear (again,
only the reader fears, experiencing _per procura,_ as it were, that
alien, totally depersonalized torment) ; for a few pages yet, for a few
moments, there remains the machinery of grammar, the millstones of the
nouns, the cogwheels of syntax grinding out more and more slowly—yet
precise to the last—nothingness, which corrodes them through; and that
is how it ends, in mid-sentence, mid-word.... The novel does not end: it
ceases. The language, at the start, sure of itself in the first pages,
naïve, healthily-commonsensically believing in its own sovereignty,
eroded by a silent undertow of treachery, or, rather, arriving at the
truth of its external, illegitimate origins, of its corruption and abuse
( for this is the Last Judgment of literature), the language, having
come to realize that it represents a form of incest—the incestuous union
of nonbeing with being—suicidally disowns itself.

 A woman wrote this book? Extraordinary. It ought to have been written
by some mathematician, but one only who with his mathematics proved—and
cursed—literature.



 PERICALYPSIS


Joachim F ersengeld

  _(Editions de Minuit, Paris)_

 

Joachim F ersengeld, a German, wrote his _Pericalypse_ in Dutch (he
hardly knows the language, which he himself admits in the Introduction)
and published it in France, a country notorious for its dreadful
proofreading. The writer of these words also does not, strictly
speaking, know Dutch, but going by the title of the book, the English
Introduction, and a few understandable expressions here and there in the
text, he has concluded that he can pass muster as a reviewer after all.

Joachim F ersengeld does not wish to be an intellectual in an age when
anyone can be one. Nor has he any desire to pass for a man of letters.
Creative work of value is possible when there is resistance, either of
the medium or of the people at whom the work is aimed; but since, after
the collapse of the prohibitions of religion and the censor, one can say
everything, or anything whatever, and since, with the disappearance of
those attentive listeners who hung on every word, one can howl anything
at anyone, literature and all its humanistic affinity is a corpse, whose
advancing decay is stubbornly concealed by the next of kin. Therefore,
one should seek out new terrains for creativity, those in which can be
found a resistance that will lend an element of menace and risk—and
therewith importance and responsibility—to the situation.

 Such a field, such an activity, can today be only prophecy. Because he
is without hope—that is, because he knows in advance that he will be
neither heard out nor recognized nor accepted—the prophet ought to
reconcile himself a priori to a position of muteness. And he who, being
a German, addresses Frenchmen in Dutch with English introductions is as
mute as he who keeps silent. Thus F ersengeld acts in accordance with
his own assumptions. Our mighty civilization, he says, strives for the
production of commodities as impermanent as possible in packaging as
permanent as possible. The impermanent product must soon be replaced by
a new one, and this is good for the economy; the permanence of the
packaging, on the other hand, makes its disposal difficult, and this
promotes the further development of technology and organization. Thus
the consumer copes with each consecutive article of junk on an
individual basis, whereas for the removal of the packagings special
antipollution programs are required, sanitary engineering, the
coordination of efforts, planning, purification and decontamination
plants, and so on. Formerly, one could depend on it that the
accumulation of garbage would be kept at a reasonable level by the
forces of nature, such as the rains, the winds, rivers, and earthquakes.
But at the present time what once washed and flushed away the garbage
has itself become the excrement of civilization: the rivers poison us,
the atmosphere burns our lungs and eyes, the winds strew industrial
ashes on our heads, and as for plastic containers, since they are
elastic, even earthquakes cannot deal with them. Thus the normal scenery
today is civilizational droppings, and the natural reserves are a
momentary exception to the rule. Against this landscape of packagings
that have been sloughed off by their products, crowds bustle about,
absorbed in the business of opening and consuming, and also in that last
natural product, sex. Yet sex, too, has been given a multitude of
packagings, for this and nothing else is what clothes are, displays,
roses, lipsticks, and sundry other advertising wrappings. Thus
civilization is worthy of admiration only in its separate fragments,
much as the precision of the heart is worthy of admiration, the liver,
the kidneys, or the lungs of an organism, since the rapid work of those
organs makes good sense, though there is no sense whatever in the
activity of the body that comprises these perfect parts—if it is the
body of a lunatic.

 The same process, declares the prophet, is taking place in the area of
spiritual goods as well, since the monstrous machine of civilization,
its screws having worked loose, has turned into a mechanical milker of
the Muses. Thus it fills the libraries to bursting, inundates the
bookstores and magazine stands, numbs the television screens, piling
itself high with a superabundance of which the numerical magnitude alone
is a deathblow. If finding forty grains of sand in the Sahara meant
saving the world, they would not be found, any more than would the forty
messianic books that have already long since been written but were lost
beneath strata of trash. And these books have unquestionably been
written; the statistics of intellectual labor guarantees it, as is
explained—in Dutch—mathematically—by Joachim F ersengeld, which this
reviewer must repeat on faith, conversant with neither the Dutch
language nor the mathematical. And so, ere we can steep our souls in
those revelations, we bury them in garbage, for there is four billion
times more of the latter. But then, they are buried already. Already has
come to pass what the prophecy proclaimed, only it went unnoticed in the
general haste. The prophecy, then, is a retrophecy, and for this reason
is entitled Pericalypse, and not Apocalypse. Its progress (retrogress)
we detect by Signs: by languidity, insipidity, and insensitivity, and in
addition by acceleration, inflation, and masturbation. Intellectual
masturbation is the contenting of oneself with the _promise_ in place of
the _delivery._ first we were onanized thoroughly by advertising (that
degenerate form of revelation which is the measure of the Commercial
Idea, as opposed to the Personal), and then self-abuse took over as a
method for the rest of the arts. And this, because to believe in the
saving power of Merchandise yields greater results than to believe in
the efficacy of the Lord God.

 The moderate growth of talent, its innately slow maturation, its
careful weeding out, its natural selection in the purview of solicitous
and discerning tastes—these are phenomena of a bygone age that died
heirless. The last stimulus that still works is a mighty howl; but when
more and more people howl, employing more and more powerful amplifiers,
one’s eardrums will burst before the soul learns anything. The names of
the geniuses of old, more and more vainly invoked, already are an empty
sound; and so it is _mene mene tekel upharsin,_ unless what Joachim F
ersengeld recommends is done. There should be set up a Save the Human
Race Foundation, as a sixteen-billion reserve on a gold standard,
yielding an interest of four percent per annum. Out of this fund moneys
should be dispensed to all creators—to inventors, scholars, engineers,
painters, writers, poets, playwrights, philosophers, and designers—in
the following way. He who writes nothing, designs nothing, paints
nothing, neither patents nor proposes, is paid a stipend, for life, to
the tune of thirty-six thousand dollars a year. He who does any of the
afore-mentioned receives correspondingly less.

_Pericalypse_ contains a full set of tabulations of what is to be
deducted for each form of creativity. For one invention or two published
books a year, you receive not a cent; by three titles, what you create
comes out of your own pocket. With this, only a true altruist, only an
ascetic of the spirit, who loves his neighbor but not himself one bit,
will create anything, and the production of mercenary rubbish will
cease. Joachim F ersengeld speaks from personal experience, for it was
at his own expense—at a loss!—that he published his _Pericalypse._ He
knows, then, that total unprofitability does not at all mean the total
elimination of creativity.

 Egoism manifests itself as a hunger for mammon combined with a hunger
for glory: in order to scotch the latter as well, the Salvation Program
introduces the complete anonymity of the creators. To forestall the
submission of stipend applications from untalented persons, the
Foundation will, through the appropriate organs, examine the
qualifications of the candidates. The actual merit of the idea with
which a candidate comes forward is of no consequence. The only important
thing is whether the project possesses commercial value, that is,
whether it can be sold. If so, the stipend is awarded immediately. For
underground creative activity, there is set up a system of penalties and
repressive measures within the framework of legal prosecution by the
apparatus of the Safety Control; also introduced is a new form of
police, namely, the Anvil (Anticreative Vigilance League). According to
the penal code, whosoever clandestinely writes, disseminates, harbors,
or even if only in silence publicly communicates any fruit of creative
endeavor, with the purpose of deriving from said action either gain or
glory, shall be punished by confinement, forced labor, and, in the case
of recidivism, by imprisonment in a dark cell with a hard bed, and a
caning on each anniversary of the offense. For the smuggling into the
bosom of society of such ideas, whose tragic effect on life is
comparable to the bane of the automobile, the scourge of cinematography,
the curse of television, etc., the law provides capital punishment as
the maximum and includes the pillory and a life sentence of the
compulsory use of one’s own invention. Punishable also are attempted
crimes, and premeditation carries with it badges of shame, in the form
of the stamping of the forehead with indelible letters arranged to spell
out “Enemy of Man.” However, graphomania, which does not look for gain,
is called a Disorder of the Mind and is not punishable, though persons
so afflicted are removed from society, as constituting a threat to the
peace, and placed in special institutions, where they are humanely
supplied with great quantities of ink and paper.

 Obviously world culture will not at all suffer from such state
regulation, but will only then begin to flourish. Humanity will return
to the magnificent works of its own history; for the number of
sculptures, paintings, plays, novels, gadgets, and machines is great
enough already to meet the needs of many centuries. Nor will anyone be
forbidden to make so-called epochal discoveries, on the condition that
he keep them to himself.

Having in this way set the situation to rights—that is, having saved
humanity—Joachim F ersengeld proceeds to the final problem: what is to
be done with that monstrous glut which has _already_ come about? As a
man of uncommon civil fortitude, F ersengeld says that what has so far
been created in the twentieth century, though it may contain great
pearls of wisdom, is worth nothing when tallied up in its entirety,
because you will not find those pearls in the ocean of garbage.
Therefore he calls for the destruction of everything in one lump, all
that has arisen in the form of films, illustrated magazines, postage
stamps, musical scores, books, scientific articles, newspapers, for this
act will be a true cleaning out of the Augean stables—with a full
balancing of the historical credits and debits in the human ledger.
(Among other things, the destruction will claim the facts about atomic
energy, which will eliminate the current threat to the world.) Joachim F
ersengeld points out that he is perfectly aware of the infamy of burning
books, or even whole libraries. But the autos-da-fe enacted in
history—such as in the Third Reich—were infamous because they were
reactionary. It all depends on the grounds on which one does the
burning. He proposes, then, a life-saving auto-da-fe, progressive,
redemptive; and because Joachim F ersengeld is a prophet consistent to
the end, in his closing word he bids the reader first tear up and set
fire to this very prophecy!



 IDIOTA


Gian Carlo Spallanzani

  _(Mondadori Editore, Milan)_

 

The Italians, then, have a young writer of the type we have missed so,
one who speaks with a full voice. And I feared the young would be
infected by the cryptonihilism of the experts, who declare that all
literature has “already been written,” and that now one can only glean
scraps from the table of the old masters, scraps called myths or
archetypes. These prophets of inventive barrenness (there is nothing new
under the sun) preach their line not out of resignation, but as if the
prospect of wide empty centuries awaiting Art in vain filled them with a
sort of perverse satisfaction. For they hold against today’s world its
technological ascent, and hope for evil, much as maiden aunts look
forward with malicious glee to the wreck of a marriage foolishly entered
into out of love. And so we now have jewelry engravers (for Italo
Calvino is descended from Benvenuto Cellini, not from Michelangelo), and
the naturalists who, ashamed of naturalism, pretend to be writing
something other than what lies within their means (Alberto Moravia), but
we have no men of mettle. They are hard to come by, now that anyone can
play the rebel, provided his physiognomy supplies him with a fierce crop
of beard.

 The young prose writer Gian Carlo Spallanzani is audacious to the point
of impudence. He pretends to take the opinions of the experts as gospel,
only later to sling mud at them. For his _Idiot_ alludes to the novel of
Dostoevsky not merely in its title: it reaches further. I do not know
about others, but personally I find it easier to write about a book when
I have seen the face of the author. Spallanzani is not prepossessing in
his photo; he is an ungainly youth with a low forehead and puffy eyes,
the small dark pupils of which are peevish, and the dainty chin makes
one uneasy. An _enfant terrible_, a knave of low cunning and with a mean
streak, an outspoken wolf in sheep’s clothing? I cannot find the right
term, but I stick with my impression from the first reading of _The
Idiot:_ such perfidiousness is in a class by itself. Can he have written
under a pseudonym? Because the great, historical Spallanzani was a
vivisectionist, and this thirty-year-old is one also. I find it hard to
believe that such a coincidence of names is completely accidental. The
young author has cheek: he furnishes his _Idiot_ with an introduction in
which, with seeming candor, he tells why he abandoned his original
idea—that of writing _Crime and Punishment_ a second time, as “Sonya’s,”
the story told in the first person by the daughter of Marmeladov.

There is effrontery, not without its charm, in his explanation of how he
restrained himself because he did not wish to do injury to the original.
Albeit against his will—he would have had to (so he says) chip away at
the statue that Dostoevsky raised up in honor of his shining prostitute.
Sonya in _Crime and Punishment_ appears intermittently, being a “third
person”; a narrative in the first person would require her constant
presence, even during her working hours, and that is the sort of work
that affects the soul as no other. The axiom of her spiritual purity
untouched by the experiences of the fallen body could not emerge whole.
Defending himself in this devious way, the author does not ever address
himself to the real question—of _The Idiot._ This already is
double-dealing: he accomplished what he wanted, for he has shown us the
general drift; his impudence lies in his having made no mention of the
necessity, of the imperative, that compelled him to take up a theme
after Dostoevsky !

 The story, realistic, matter-of-fact, at first seems set on a rather
prosaic level. A very ordinary, moderately well-to-do family, an
average, respectable couple—upright, but uninspired—has a mentally
retarded child. Like any child, it showed delightful promise; its first
words, those unintentionally original expressions which are the side
effects of one’s growing into speech, have been preserved with loving
care in the reliquary of the parents’ reminiscences. Those blissful,
diapered simplicities, in the framework of the present nightmare, mark
out the amplitude between what could have been and what has happened.

The child is an idiot. Living with him, caring for him, is an anguish
all the more cruel in that it has grown out of love. The father is
almost twenty years older than the mother; there are couples who in a
similar situation would try again; here it is not known what hinders
such an act, physiology or psychology. But for all that, it is probably
love. Under normal circumstances the love could never have undergone
such magnification. Precisely because he is an idiot, the child makes
prodigies of his parents. He improves them to the very degree to which
he lacks normality. This could be the sense of the novel, its theme, but
it is merely the premise.

In their contacts with the outside world, with relatives, doctors,
lawyers, the father and mother are ordinary people, deeply troubled but
restrained, for indeed this situation has been going on for years: there
has been sufficient time to acquire self-control! The period of despair,
of hope, of trips to various capitals, to the finest specialists, has
long since passed. The parents realize that nothing can be done. They
have no illusions. Their visits to the doctor, to the attorney, are now
to ensure some decent, endurable _modus vivendi_ for the idiot when his
natural protectors are gone. They must see to a will, safeguard the
inheritance. This is done slowly, soberly, with due deliberation.
Tedious and scrupulous: nothing more natural under the sun. When they
return home, however, and when the three are by themselves, the
situation changes in a flash. I would say: as when actors make their
entrance on stage. Fine, but we do not know where the stage is. This is
now to be revealed. Without ever making any arrangement between
themselves, without ever exchanging so much as a single word—that would
be a psychological impossibility—the parents have created, over the
years, a system of interpreting the actions of the idiot in such a way
as to find them intelligent, in every instance and in every respect.

 Spallanzani found the germ of such conduct in normal behavior. It is
known, surely, that the circle of those who dote upon a small child
emerging from the infant state makes as much as it can of the child’s
responses and words. To its mindless echolalia are attributed meanings;
in its incoherent babbling is discovered intelligence, even wit; the
inaccessibility of the child’s psyche allows the observer enormous
freedom, especially the doting observer. It must have been in this way
that the rationalization of the idiot’s actions first began. No doubt
the father and mother vied with each other in finding signs to indicate
that their child was speaking better and better, more and more clearly,
that he was doing better all the time, positively radiating good nature
and affection. I have been saying “child,” but when the scene opens he
is already a fourteen-year-old boy. What sort of system of
misinterpretation must it be, what subterfuges, what
explanations—frantic to the point of being outright comical—must be
called into play to save the fiction, when the reality so unremittingly
contradicts it? Well, all this can be done, and of such acts consists
the parental sacrifice in behalf of the idiot.

Their isolation must be complete. The world has nothing to offer him and
will not help him; it is of no use to him, therefore —yes, the world to
him, not he to the world. The sole interpreters of his behavior must be
the initiated, the father and mother: in this way, everything can be
transformed. We do not learn whether the idiot killed, or put out of her
misery, his ailing grandmother; one can, however, set out side by side
the different points of circumstantial evidence. His grandmother did not
believe in him (that is, in that version of him which the parents had
established—true, we cannot know how much of her “unbelief” the idiot
was able to sense); she had asthma; her wheezing and rattling during the
attacks were not shut out even by the felt-padded door; he could not
sleep when the attacks intensified; they drove him into a rage; he was
found sleeping peacefully in the room of the dead woman, at the foot of
her bed, on which her body had already grown cold.

 First he is carried to the nursery, and only then does the father
attend to his own mother. Did the father suspect something? This we
never know. The parents do not refer to the topic, for certain things
are done without being named; as if they realize that any improvisation
has its limits, when irrevocably now they must set about doing “those
things,” they sing. They do what is indispensable, but at the same time
conduct themselves like Mommy and Daddy, singing lullabies if it is
evening, or the old songs of their childhood if intervention becomes
necessary during the day. Song has proved a better extinguisher of the
intellect than silence. We hear it at the very beginning; that is, the
servants hear it, the gardener. “A sad song,” he says, but later we
begin to guess what gruesome work was likely done to the accompaniment
of precisely that song: it was early morning when the body was found.
What an infernal refinement of feelings!

The idiot behaves dreadfully, with an inventiveness sometimes
characteristic of a profound dementia that is capable of cunning; in
this way he spurs his parents on ever more, for they must find
themselves equal to every task. Now and then their words are fitted
exactly to their actions, but that is rare; the eeriest effects of all
occur when they say one thing while doing another, for here one type of
resourcefulness, the cretinoid, is pitted against another, a devotedly
ministering resourcefulness—loving, giving—and only the distance that
perforce separates the two turns these acts of sacrifice into the
macabre. But the parents by now probably do not see this: it has, after
all, gone on for years! In the face of each new surprise (a euphemism:
the idiot spares them nothing), there is first a fraction of a second in
which, along with them, we experience a thrill of fear, a piercing dread
that _this_ will not only shatter the present moment but will overturn,
in a single blow, the entire edifice that has been raised with tender
care by the father and mother in the course of long months and years.

 We are wrong; an exchange of glances, purely reflexive, a few laconic
remarks to shift gears, and in the tone of a natural conversation begins
the lifting of this new burden, the fitting of it into the created
structure. An eerie humor and an arresting nobility are in such scenes,
thanks to the psychological accuracy. The words they venture to use when
it is no longer possible not to put on the “little smock”! When they do
not know what to do with the razor; or when the mother, jumping from the
tub, must barricade herself in the bathroom, and later, having made a
short circuit in the entire house, so that darkness descends, by feel
removes the barricade of furniture, since its presence is—to her version
of the child, which binds her—more damaging than a defect in the
electrical installation. In the vestibule, dripping wet and wrapped in a
thick rug, no doubt on account of the razor, she waits for the father to
come home. It sounds coarse and awkward—worse, unbelievable—summarized
like this, taken out of context. The parents act in the knowledge that
to reconcile such incidents to the norm, through completely arbitrary
interpretations, is an impossibility; therefore it was a little at a
time, themselves not knowing when, that they passed beyond the boundary
of that norm and entered a realm inaccessible to ordinary office or
kitchen mortals. Not in the direction of madness, not at all: it is not
true that everyone can go insane. But everyone can believe. To keep from
becoming a family defiled, they became a family sacred.

 That word does not appear in the book; nor is the idiot, according to
the faith of the parents (for faith it must be called), either God or a
lesser deity; he is merely other than all creatures, a thing unto
himself, unlike any child or youth; and in that otherness he is theirs,
irrevocably loved, their one and only. Farfetched? Then read _The Idiot_
yourself; you will see that faith is not merely a metaphysical capacity
of the mind. The situation is in all its substance so constantly rooted
in harshness that only the absurdity of faith can save it from
damnation, which here means: from psychopathological nomenclature. If
the saints of the Lord have been taken by psychiatrists for paranoiacs,
then why can it not also be the other way around? Idiot? The word does
make its appearance in the action, but only when the parents go among
other people. They speak of the child in the language of those others,
of the doctors, attorneys, relatives, but for themselves they know
better. Thus they lie to others because their faith has not the mark of
a mission, and therefore not the aggressiveness that demands the
conversion of the heathen. The father and mother are, anyway, too
level-headed to believe for even a second in the possibility of such
conversion: it does not concern them, and besides, it is not the whole
world that needs saving, but only three people. While they live, they
have their mutual church. It is not a matter of shame or of prestige, or
of the insanity of an aging couple, called _folie a deux,_ but merely an
earthly, transitory thing, taking place in a house with central heating;
it is the triumph of love, whose motto reads _Credo quia absurdum est._
If this be madness, every faith can be reduced to that level.

Spallanzani walks a narrow line throughout, for the greatest danger for
the novel was to become a caricature of the Holy Family. The father is
old? Then that is Joseph. The mother is much younger? Mary. And in that
case the child ... Well, I think that if Dostoevsky had not written his
_Idiot,_ this line of allegorization never would have presented itself,
or would have remained so veiled as to be hardly noticeable, and only to
a few. If one can put it thus, Spallanzani has absolutely nothing
against the Gospel; nor has he the least desire to make free with the
Holy Family; and if, in spite of everything, there does arise—one cannot
altogether avoid it—precisely such a connotative ricochet, then the
“blame” must be borne entirely by Dostoevsky and his _Idiot._ Yes, of
course: to this end alone was the demolition charge of the work primed
and set, as an attack leveled at the great writer! Prince Myshkin, the
saintly epileptic, the misunderstood innocent-ascetic, the Jesus with
the stigmata of grand mal—he serves here as a link, a relay point.
Spallanzani’s idiot resembles him at times, but with the signs reversed!
This is, you might say, the maniac variant, and exactly thus might one
picture the adolescence of the pale youth Myshkin, when the epileptic
seizures, with their mystic aura, with their bestial spasms, for the
first time knock to pieces the image of angelic little-darlingness. The
tyke is a cretin? Incessantly, yes, yet we get the communion of his
vacant mind with sublimity, as when, suffocated by the music, he smashes
the phonograph record, wounding himself, and tries to devour it along
with his own blood. Well, you see, this is a form of—an attempt
at-—transubstantiation: something of Bach must have knocked upon the
door of his dim consciousness, if he sought to make it a part of
himself—by eating it.

 Had the parents turned the whole thing over to the institutional Lord
God, or had they simply created a three-person substitute for religion,
a kind of sect with a mentally deficient stand-in for God, their defeat
would have been certain. But not for a moment do they cease to be
ordinary, literal, maltreated parents; they never even considered the
way of holy ambitions—they permitted themselves none, nothing that was
not of immediate, on-the-spot necessity. Therefore, they did not
actually build any system at all; instead, through the situation, a
system was born and revealed itself to them, not wanted, not planned,
not even suspected. They received no revelation; they were themselves in
the beginning, and themselves they remained. And so it is only an
earthly love. We have grown unaccustomed to its power in literature, a
literature which, schooled in cynicism, its old romantic back broken by
the blows of psychoanalytic doctrines, has become blind to that part of
the amplitude of human destiny on which thrived—and which cultivated for
us—the classics of the past.

 A cruel novel: it tells, first, of the boundless talent for
compensation, and so of the creativity that resides in everyone, anyone,
no matter who he is, if fate afflicts him with the torment of an
appropriate labor. And then it tells of the forms in which love
manifests itself when stripped of hope, when brought to the depths of
despair, yet never relinquishing its object. In this context the words
_Credo quia absurdum_ are the worldly equivalent of the words _Finis
vitae, sed non amoris._ The novel is about (this is already the
anthropological exegesis, and not the tragedy of a father and a mother)
how there comes into being, in microscopic mechanisms, a world-creating
intentionality that names, and therefore it is not simply transcendence.
No, the idea is that the world, while undisturbed in its arbitrarily
violent shame and ugliness, can be altered—or what is conveyed by the
words “transformed,” “transfigured.” Were we not able to reshape the
monstrous into the correlates of the angelic, we could not endure, and
this is what this book is all about. A faith in transcendence may be
completely unnecessary; and without it, one can attain the grace (or the
agony) of a theodicy, for it is not in the recognition of the state of
things but in their alterability that the freedom of man lives. If this
freedom is not a true freedom (indeed, involved is an utter
subjugation—by love!), then there can be no other. Spallanzani’s _The
Idiot_ is not the androgynous allegory of the Christian myth, but an
atheistic heterodoxy.

Spallanzani, like a psychologist performing experiments on rats,
subjected his heroes to a test that was designed to prove his
anthropological hypothesis. At the same time, the book is a broadside
against Dostoevsky, as if the latter were living and writing today.
Spallanzani wrote his _Idiot_ in order to demonstrate to Dostoevsky a
_weak_ heresy. I cannot say that the assault succeeds, but I understand
the intent: to break out of that magic circle of issues and ideas in
which the great Russian writer confined his own and the following age.
Art cannot look only backward, or content itself with tightrope walking;
new eyes are needed, new ways of seeing, and most of all a new idea. Let
us keep in mind that this is a first book. I await Spallanzani’s next
novel as I have not awaited any in a long time.



 U-WRITE-IT


A book that told the story of the rise and fall of _U-Write-It_ would
make most instructive reading. That neoplasm of the publishing world
became the subject of such heated debate that the debate obscured the
phenomenon itself. Therefore the factors that led to the failure of the
enterprise to this day remain unclear. No one made an attempt to carry
out public-opinion research in this regard. Perhaps rightly so; perhaps
the public that decided the fate of the venture did not itself know what
it was doing.

The invention had been in the air a good twenty years, and one can only
wonder that it was not implemented earlier. I recall the first model of
that “literary erector set.” It was a box in the shape of a thick book,
containing directions, a prospectus, and a kit of “building elements.”
These elements were strips of paper of unequal width, printed with
fragments of prose. Each strip had holes punched along the margin to
facilitate binding, and several numerals stamped in different colors.
Arranging the strips according to the numbering of the base color,
black, one obtained the “starting text,” which consisted usually of at
least two works of world literature, suitably abridged. Had the set been
made only for the purpose of such reconstruction, it would have been
devoid of sense and commercial value. This lay in the possibility of
shuffling the elements. The instructions usually supplied several
illustrative variants of recombination, and the colored numerals in the
margins referred to these. The idea was patented by Universal, who used
books to which all authors’ rights had expired. Such were the works of
the greats, of Balzac, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, duly abridged by the
publisher’s anonymous staff. Without fail the inventors directed this
concoction at a certain class of people, one that could derive enjoyment
from the deformation and distortion of masterpieces (or, rather, of
crude versions of them). You take _Crime and Punishment_ in hand, or
_War and Peace,_ and do whatever you please with the characters. Natasha
can go astray before the wedding and after it, too; Svidrigailov can
marry Raskolnikov’s sister, and Raskolnikov can escape justice and go
off with Sonya to Switzerland; Anna Karenina will betray her husband not
with Vronsky, but with the footman, etc. In one voice the critics
attacked such desecration; the publisher defended himself as best he
could, and fairly adroitly at that.

 The instructions that came with the set claimed that in this way one
could learn the rules of literary composition (“Perfect for beginning
writers!”), and one could also use the set as a text for psychological
projection (“Tell me what you have done with _Anne of Green Gables_ and
I will tell you who you are”). In a word—a training device for literary
hopefuls and an amusement for every literary amateur.

It was not hard to see that the publishers were guided by
less-than-honorable intentions. In their instructions, World Books
cautioned the buyer against the use of “improper” combinations, meaning
the rearrangement of passages in the text so as to impart a contrary
sense to scenes originally pure as the driven snow: by the insertion of
a single sentence, an innocent conversation between two women took on
Lesbian overtones; it was also possible, in the worthy families of
Dickens, to have incest practiced—whatever your heart desired. The
caution was, of course, an incitement, worded in such a way that no one
could accuse the publisher of offending against decency. Well, if he
clearly said in the instructions that this _should not_ be done...

 Infuriated by helplessness (on legal grounds the thing was not open to
attack; the publishers had seen to that), the well-known critic Ralph
Summers wrote at the time: “And so modern pornography is no longer
enough. It is necessary in analogous fashion to besmirch everything that
arose in the past, that which was not only without obscene intent but
actually in opposition to it. This paltry surrogate for the Black Mass,
which anyone can conduct in the seclusion of his home, for four dollars,
on the defenseless body of the murdered classics, is a true disgrace.”

It soon turned out that Summers had exaggerated in his Cassandra-like
pronouncement: the venture did not prosper half so well as the
publishers had expected. Before long they came up with a new version of
the “erector set,” a volume composed entirely of empty sheets on which
one could arrange by hand the strips with the texts, since both the
strips and the pages of the volume were coated with a monomolecular
magnetic foil. Thereby the “binding” work was greatly simplified. But
this innovation did not catch on, either. Could it be, as some idealists
(very rare nowadays) surmised, that the public was refusing to
participate in “the abusing of the great works”? To presume an attitude
so high-minded is, in my opinion, alas, unwarranted. The quiet hope of
the publishers had been that a considerable number of people would
develop a taste for the new game. Certain passages of the instructions
give an indication of this line of thought: “_U-Write-lt_ allows you to
acquire that same power over human lives, godlike, which till now has
been the exclusive privilege of the world’s greatest geniuses!” Which
Ralph Summers, in one of his diatribes, interpreted as follows:
“Singlehanded you can drag down any loftiness, sully all that is clean,
and your efforts will be accompanied by the pleasant awareness that you
are not now obliged to sit and listen to what some Tolstoy, what some
Balzac had to say, because in this you are boss and call the shots!”

 And yet there were surprisingly few who wanted to be such “defilers.”
Summers foresaw the spread of “a new sadism, taking the form of
aggression against the permanent values of our culture,” but meanwhile
_U-Write-It_ was barely selling. It would be nice to believe that the
public was prompted by “that natural grain of sense and rectitude which
subcultural convulsions have succeeded in obscuring from our view” (L.
Evans in the _Christian Science Monitor_). This writer does not
share—much as he would like to!—Evans’s opinion.

What, then, took place? Something a great deal simpler, I daresay. For
Summers and Evans, for me, for a few hundred critics tucked away among
university quarterlies, and in addition for another several thousand
eggheads throughout the land, Svidrigailov, Vronsky, Sonya Marmeladov,
or for that matter Vautrin, Anne of Green Gables, Rastignac, are
characters extremely well known, familiar, close, sometimes actually
more vivid than many real acquaintances. But for the public at large
they are empty sounds, names without content. Thus for Summers and
Evans, for me, the union of Svidrigailov with Natasha would be a
horrendous thing, but for the public it would mean no more or less than
the marriage of Mr. X and Mrs. Y. Because for the public at large they
have no fixed symbolic value—be it that of nobility of feeling or
dissolute wickedness—such characters do not offer a perverse or any
other type of entertainment. They are completely neutral. Of no concern
to anyone. The publishers, cynical as they were, did not divine this,
not being truly attuned to the situation in the literary market place.
If a man finds enormous value in a particular book, then the use of that
book as a doormat for the wiping of shoes will seem to him an act not
just of vandalism, but of the “Black Mass”—which is precisely what
Summers thought, for that is how he wrote.

 The growing indifference in our world to such cultural values had
progressed a good deal beyond what the authors of the enterprise
imagined. No one cared to play _U-Write-It_, not because he nobly
forbore to pervert quality, but for the simple reason that between the
book of a fourth-rate hack and the epic of Tolstoy he saw no difference
whatever. The one left him as cold as the other. Even if there was in
the public “the desire to trample,” there was—from its point of
view—nothing interesting to trample.

Did the publishers grasp this particular lesson? Yes, in a sense. I
doubt that they became aware of the state of affairs in so many words,
but, led by instinct, intuition, by their noses, they all the same began
to put on the market variants of the “erector set” that did much better,
since these permitted the assembling of purely pornographic and obscene
compositions. The last diehard esthetes heaved a sigh of relief, since
at least now the venerable remains of the masterpieces would be left
alone. Immediately the problem ceased to interest them, and from the
pages of the élite literary quarterlies there disappeared those articles
in which robes were rent and (egg)heads heaped with ashes. Because what
happens in the nonélite circles of readers does not, not one bit,
concern the Olympus of the arts and its Zeuses.

That Olympus was roused a second time, when Bernard de la Taille, having
constructed from _The Big Party_—a set translated into French—a novel,
received for it the Prix Femina. This led to a scandal, because the
shrewd Frenchman had neglected to inform the judges that his novel was
not entirely original but represented the product of an assembly. De la
Taille’s novel ( _War in the Dark)_ is not without merit; its
construction called for both talents and interests normally not found in
the buyers of _V-Write-It_ sets. But this isolated incident changed
nothing; from the start it was clear that the venture would oscillate
between a stupid joke and commercial pornography. No one struck it rich
with _U-Write-It._ The esthetes, schooled in minimalism, today are glad
that characters out of gutter romances no longer trespass on the
parquets of Tolstoyan salons, and that virtuous maidens like
Raskolnikov’s sister no longer have to let themselves go with ruffians
and degenerates.

 In England a farcical version of _U-Write-It_ still ekes out an
existence; there they publish sets that enable one to build brief texts
on the principle of “fun”; the home-grown litterateur is tickled that in
his micro-short story the whole company is poured into the bottle
instead of the juice, that Sir Galahad ogles his own horse, that during
Mass the priest sets off electric trains on the altar, etc. This
evidently amuses the English, since a few of their newspapers even run a
regular column for such lucubrations. On the Continent, however,
_U-Write-It_ has to all intents and purposes been discontinued. If we
may cite a certain Swiss critic who has interpreted the failure of that
business venture differently from us: “The public,” he says, “is grown
too lazy to want even to rape, undress, or torture anyone itself. All
_that_ is now done for it by professionals. _U-Write-It_ might possibly
have been a success had it appeared sixty years earlier. Conceived too
late, it was stillborn.” What is there to add to this statement—but a
heavy sigh?



 ODYSSEUS OF ITHACA


Kuno Mlatje

The full name of the hero of this novel (written by an American) runs
Homer Maria Odysseus; Ithaca, where he came into the world, is a
jerkwater town of four thousand in the state of Massachusetts.
Nonetheless the issue is the quest of Odysseus of Ithaca, a quest not
without deeper meaning and thereby linked to its august prototype. True,
the beginning does not seem to promise this. Homer M. Odysseus is hauled
into court for setting fire to a car belonging to Professor E. G.
Hutchinson of the Rockefeller Foundation. The reasons for which he _had
to_ set fire to the car he will reveal only on condition that the
Professor appear personally in the courtroom. When this takes place,
Odysseus, making as if to whisper something of tremendous importance to
the Professor, bites him in the ear. All hell breaks loose; the counsel
for the defense demands a psychiatric examination; the judge wavers;
meanwhile Odysseus, from the dock, delivers a speech in which he
explains that he had had Herostrates in mind, for cars are the temples
of our time, and he bit the Professor in the ear because Stavrogin did
this and became famous by it. He, too, requires notoriety, and this for
the money it carries with it. The money will enable him to finance a
project he has hammered out for the good of humanity.

 Here the judge cuts off his oration. Odysseus is sentenced to two
months in prison for the destruction of the car and another two months
for contempt of court. He can also expect a civil action on the part of
Hutchinson, whose concha he has injured. However, Odysseus succeeds in
handing his brochure to the reporters present. In this way he attains
his end: the press will write about him.

The ideas contained in Homer M. Odysseus’s brochure, _The Quest for the
Fleece of the Spirit,_ are simple enough. Humanity owes its progress to
geniuses. Above all, its progress of thought, because collectively one
might hit upon a way of hewing flint, but one cannot through joint
effort invent the zero. He who conceived it was the first genius in
history. “Could the zero—is it likely—have been thought up by four
individuals together, each contributing a quarter?” asks Homer Odysseus
with his characteristic sarcasm. Humanity is not wont to deal kindly
with its geniuses. _“Es ist schlecht Geschäft, einer Genius zu sein!”_
declares Odysseus in dreadful German. Geniuses have a rough time of it.
Some more than others, because geniuses are not all equal. Odysseus
postulates the following classification of them. First come your
run-of-the-mill and middling geniuses, that is, of the third order,
whose minds are unable to go much beyond the horizon of their times.
These, relatively speaking, are threatened the least; they are often
recognized and even come into money and fame. The genuises of the second
order are already too difficult for their contemporaries and therefore
fare worse. In antiquity they were mainly stoned, in the Middle Ages
burned at the stake; later, in keeping with the temporary amelioration
of customs, they were allowed to die a natural death by starvation, and
sometimes even were maintained at the community’s expense in madhouses.
A few were given poison by the local authorities, and many went into
exile. Meanwhile, the powers that be, both secular and ecclesiastical,
competed for first prize in “geniocide,” as Odysseus calls the manifold
activity of exterminating genuises. Nonetheless, recognition awaits the
geniuses of the second order, in the form of a triumph beyond the grave.
By way of compensation, libraries and public squares are named after
them, fountains and monuments are raised to them, and historians shed
decorous tears over such lapses of the past. In addition, avers
Odysseus, there exist, for there must exist, geniuses of the highest
category. The intermediate types are discovered either by the succeeding
generation or by some later one; the geniuses of the first order are
never known—not by anyone, not in life, not after death. For they are
creators of truths so unprecedented, purveyors of proposals so
revolutionary, that not a soul is capable of making head or tail of
them. Therefore, permanent obscurity constitutes the normal lot of the
Geniuses of the Highest Class. But even their colleagues of weaker
intellect are discovered usually as a result of pure accident. For
example, on scrawled-over sheets of paper that fishwives use at the
market to wrap the herring, you will make out theorems of some sort, or
poems, and as soon as these see print, there is a moment of general
enthusiasm, then everything goes on as before. Such a state of affairs
should not be allowed to continue. At stake, surely, are irretrievable
losses to civilization. One must create a Society for the Preservation
of Geniuses of the First Order and from it appoint an Exploration
Committee that will take up the task of systematic searches. Homer M.
Odysseus has already drafted all the statutes of the Society, and also a
plan for the Quest for the Fleece of the Spirit. He distributes these
documents to numerous scientific societies and philanthropic
institutions, calling for funding.

 When these efforts produce no result, he publishes a brochure at his
own expense and sends the first copy, with a dedication, to Professor
Evelyn G. Hutchinson of the Science Council of the Rockefeller
Foundation. By not deigning to respond to this, Professor Hutchinson
became culpable before humanity. He showed obtuseness; that is, he
showed himself unfit to occupy the position entrusted to him. For this
he had to be punished, which is what Odysseus did.

 While still serving his sentence, Odysseus receives the first
contributions. He opens an account in the name of the Quest for the
Fleece of the Spirit, and when he leaves the prison, a tidy sum of
money, to the tune of $26,528.00, permits him to commence organizational
activity. Odysseus recruits volunteers by placing ads in the
classifieds; at the first meeting of the enthusiast-amateurs he delivers
a speech and hands out a new brochure, this one containing exploration
instructions. After all, they must know where, how, and what exactly it
is they are supposed to seek. The quest will have an altruistic
character, for—Odysseus makes no bones about it—there is little money
and enormous labor ahead.

_Spiritus flat, ubi vult;_ therefore, geniuses even of the highest order
may be born among the small tribes that constitute the exotic outskirts
of the world. Genius does not present itself to humanity directly and
personally, going out on the street and seizing passers-by by the toga
or buttonhole. Genius operates via appropriate experts who are supposed
to recognize it, revere it, and expand upon its thought, as if setting
their countryman swinging, the clapper of a bell that peals out to
humanity the beginning of a new age. As usual, what should take place
does not. The specialists in general believe they know all there is to
know; they are willing to teach others, but themselves are unwilling to
learn from anyone. Only when there are an awful lot of them does one
find, as is usual in crowds, two, perhaps three persons of sense.
Consequently, in a small land genius receives the response that a beggar
gets from talking to a wall, whereas in larger lands the chance of a
genius’s being heard is greater. Hence the questers set sail for the
lesser peoples and the towns of the out-of-the-way provinces of the
globe. There, who knows, they may even succeed in finding
yet-unrecognized second-order geniuses. The case of Bosković of
Yugoslavia is characteristic: he met with false recognition, for what he
wrote and thought centuries ago was noticed when similar things began to
be thought and written in the present. Such pseudo-discoveries are not
what Odysseus has in mind.

 The search ought to include all the libraries of the world, with their
collections of rare editions, incunabula, and manuscripts, but primarily
their basements and cellars, into which are stuffed all sorts of paper
ballast. However, one should not count too much on success there. On the
map that Odysseus has hung up in his study, red circles indicate, as the
first priority, psychiatric sanatoria. Also among excavated sewer
systems and cesspools of outdated lunatic asylums Odysseus places high
hopes. One must likewise dig up the garbage dumps near old prisons, comb
the trash cans as well as other rubbish receptacles, ferret through
stores of wastepaper; it would also be well to examine carefully
dunghills and sumps, mainly their fossils, since it is precisely there
that one finds everything humanity has held in contempt and swept beyond
the perimeter of existence. And so Odysseus’s intrepid heroes must sally
forth for the Fleece of the Spirit full of self-denial, with pitchfork,
pickax, crowbar, dark lantern, and rope ladder, having also on hand
geologists’ hammers, gas masks, strainers, and magnifying glasses. The
search for treasures considerably more precious than gold or diamonds is
to take place in petrified excrement, in crumbled, cluttered wells, in
the former dungeons of every inquisition, in ruined castles; meanwhile,
the coordinator of these world-wide operations, Homer M. Odysseus, will
remain at his headquarters. One must take as a signpost, as the
trembling needle of a compass, every sort of echo of gossip and rumor
about completely unique cretins and screwballs, about maniacal,
persistent cranks, stubborn dimwits and idiots, because humanity,
conferring such names upon genius, is only reacting within the limits of
its own natural capacities.

Odysseus, having caused several additional scandals, owing to which he
accumulates five new convictions and an additional $16,741.00, betakes
himself, after doing two years, southward. He makes for Majorca, where
he will have his headquarters, because the climate there is good and his
health has been seriously impaired by his sojourns in various jails. He
freely admits that he is not averse to combining the public interest
with his private interest. Besides, if according to his theory one can
expect the appearance of first-order geniuses anywhere, then why should
not there be any in Majorca?

 The life of Odysseus’s heroes is rich in extraordinary adventures,
which take up a good portion of the novel. Odysseus sustains more than
one bitter disappointment, such as when he learns that three of his
favorite explorers, working in the Mediterranean region, are agents of
the CIA, which organization has been making use of the Quest for the
Fleece of the Spirit for its own ends. Or, again, when another seeker,
who brings to Majorca an inestimably valuable document from the
seventeenth century—a work by the mameluke Kardyoch on the parageometric
structure of Being—turns out to be a forger. He himself is the author of
this work; unable to publish it anywhere, he wormed his way into the
ranks of the expedition in order to avail himself of Odysseus’s funds
and thereby give publicity to his concept. The enraged Odysseus flings
the manuscript into the fire, kicks out the forger, and only afterward,
when he has calmed down, does he begin to wonder: might he not have
destroyed, with his own hands, the work of a first-class genius?! Ridden
with remorse, he calls the author back by advertising in the
newspapers—alas, in vain. Another explorer, one Hans Zokker, without
Odysseus’s knowledge auctions off extremely valuable documents which he
found among the old libraries of Montenegro, and, absconding to Chile
with the cash, there commits himself to fortune. But even so, many
extraordinary works do find their way into Odysseus’s hands, many
rarities, manuscripts generally regarded as lost, or else entirely
unknown to the body of world learning. From the historical archives in
Madrid, for example, come the first eighteen parchment leaves of a
manuscript that, written in the middle of the sixteenth century,
foretells—relying on a system of “trisexual arithmetic”—the dates of
birth of eighty famous men of science. The dates contained in that
document in fact agree with the dates of birth of such persons as Isaac
Newton, Harvey, Darwin, Wallace, and are accurate _to the month!_
Chemical analysis and the appraisals of experts confirm the authenticity
of this work, but what of that, when the entire mathematical apparatus
which the anonymous author made use of has perished? It is known only
that his point of departure was the acceptance of a premise totally at
odds with common sense, that of the “three sexes” of the human race.
Odysseus finds some solace in the fact that the sale of this manuscript
by bid in New York significantly replenishes his expeditionary budget.

 After seven years of labor, the archives of the headquarters on Majorca
are full of the most remarkable writings. There is, among them, the
bulging tome of a certain Miral Essos of Boeotia, who outdid Leonardo da
Vinci in inventiveness; he left behind a plan for the creation of a
system of logic based on the spinal columns of frogs; long before
Leibniz, he arrived at the concept of monads and of harmony
pre-established; he applied trivalent logic to certain physical
phenomena; and he maintained that living creatures begot those similar
to themselves because in their seminal fluid were messages written in
microscopic letters, and from the combination of such “messages”
resulted the aspect of the mature individual; all this in the fifteenth
century. And there is a formal-logical proof of the impossibility of a
theodicy based on rational argument, because the underlying premise of
any theodicy must be a logical contradiction. The author of this work,
Bauber the Catalonian, was burned alive at the stake after the
preliminary severing of his extremities, the pulling out of his tongue,
and the filling of his bowels, by a funnel, with molten lead. “A
powerful counterargument, albeit on a different plane, for the
nonlogical,” observed the young doctor of philosophy who discovered the
manuscript. The study of Sophus Brissengnade, who, proceeding from the
axioms of “two-zero arithmetic,” demonstrated the possibility of a
noncontradictory construction of a theory of plurality that is purely
transfinite, did receive the approbation of the scientific world; but
then Brissengnade’s work coincided with much of current mathematics.

 And so Odysseus sees that recognition goes, as it has always gone, only
to the forerunners, to those whose ideas later are discovered anew by
others, to—in other words—the geniuses of the second order. But where,
then, are the traces of the labor of the first? Despair never enters
Odysseus’s heart—only the fear that an early death (for already he is on
the threshold of old age) will prevent his continuing his search. At
last comes the affair of the Florentine manuscript. This roll of
parchment from the middle of the eighteenth century, found in a section
of the big library in Florence, at first appears to be—filled as it is
with cryptic marks—the worthless work of some alchemist-copyist. But
certain expressions remind the discoverer, a young mathematics student,
of series of functions that in those times no one could possibly have
known. The work, when submitted to the experts, yields conflicting
opinions. No one understands it in its entirety; some see it as
gibberish with rare moments of logical lucidity, others as the product
of a diseased mind; the two most eminent mathematicians, to whom
Odysseus sends photocopies of the manuscript, also cannot agree in their
views. Only one of them, after going to a great deal of trouble, manages
to decipher about a third of the scribbles, piecing out the gaps with
his own conjectures, and he writes to Odysseus that, yes, it does in
fact deal with a concept that is—on the face of it—exceptional, but also
useless. “Because you would have to toss out three-quarters of existing
mathematics and set it on its feet again in order to be able to accept
the idea. This is simply a proposition of a mathematics _other_ than the
one we have built up. As to whether it is _better_—that I cannot tell
you. Possibly it is, but to find this out, a hundred of our best people
would have to dedicate their lives; they would have to become for this
anonymous Florentine what Bolyai, Riemann, Lobachevsky were for Euclid.”

 At this point the letter falls from the hands of Homer Odysseus, who
with a cry of “Eureka!” begins to run about the room, which looks out,
with its glass windows, upon the blue of the bay. In that moment
Odysseus realizes that it is not that humanity has lost forever its
geniuses of the first order—the geniuses, rather, have lost sight of
humanity, for they have moved away from it. It is not that these
geniuses simply do not exist: rather, with each passing year they do not
exist _to a greater and greater degree._ The works of unrecognized
geniuses of the second category can always be saved. All one need do is
dust them off and hand them over to presses or universities. But the
works of the first order nothing can preserve, because these stand
apart—outside the current of history.

Collective human effort carves out a trench in historical time. A genius
is one whose effort is exerted at the very limit of that trench, at its
verge, who proposes to his or to the next generation a particular change
of course, a different curve of the bed, the angling of the slopes, the
deepening of the bottom. But the genius of the first order does not
participate thus in the labors of the spirit. He does not stand in the
first ranks; nor has he gone a step ahead of the rest; he is simply
somewhere else—in thought. If he postulates a different form of
mathematics or a different methodology, whether for philosophy or the
natural sciences, it will be from a standpoint in no way similar to
those existing—no, without a scintilla of similarity! If he is not
noticed and given a hearing by the first, by the second generation, it
is altogether impossible for him to be noticed thereafter. For, in the
meantime, the river of human endeavor and thought has been digging its
trench, has gone its way, and therefore between its movement and the
solitary invention of the genius the gap widens with each century. Those
proposals—unappreciated, ignored—truly could have changed the trend of
things in the arts, _Odysseus of Ithaca_ in the sciences, in the whole
history of the world, but because it did not happen thus, humanity let
slip by much more than a particular curious individual with his
particular intellectual equipment. It let slip by, at the same time, a
particular _other_ history _of its own,_ and for this there is now no
remedy. Geniuses of the first order are roads not taken, roads now
completely desolate and overgrown; they are those prizes in the lottery
of incredible luck which the player did not show up to claim, the purses
he did not collect—until their capital evaporated and turned to nothing,
the nothing of opportunities missed. The lesser geniuses do not part
with the common stream but stay within its current, altering the law of
its movement without ever stepping outside the margin of the
community—or without stepping outside it totally, all the way. For this
they are revered. The others, because they are so great, remain
invisible forever.

 Odysseus, profoundly moved by this revelation, immediately sits down
and writes a new brochure, whose gist—given above—is no less plain than
the idea of the Quest. That Quest, after thirteen years and eight days,
has reached its end. It was not a labor made in vain, since the modest
inhabitant of Ithaca (Massachusetts), venturing down into the depths of
the past with his team of votaries, has found that the single living
genius of the first order is Homer M. Odysseus: for the greatest
greatness of history can be recognized only by a greatness that is equal
to it.

I recommend Kuno Mlatje’s book to those who think that if man were not
invested with sex there could be no literature or art. As to whether or
not the author is kidding, each reader will have to answer that question
for himself.



 TOI


Raymond Seurat

  _(Editions Denoël, Paris)_

 

The novel is pulling back into the author; that is, from the position of
the fiction of the _only_ reality it retreats to the position of the
_origin_ of that fiction. This, at least, is what has been taking place
in the vanguard of European prose. Fiction has grown odious to the
writers; it sickens them; they have lost faith in its necessity and
therefore have become atheists of their own omnipotence. No longer do
the writers believe that when they say, “Let there be light,” genuine
radiance dazzles the reader. (The fact that they speak thus, that they
_can_ speak thus, is definitely no fiction. )

The novel that depicted its own creation was merely the first step of
the withdrawal to the rear. Nowadays one does not write works that show
how those works arose, for the protocol account of a concrete creation
is also too confining! One writes about what _might_ be written. From
the infinite possibilities awhirl in the brain one pulls out isolated
outlines, and the rambling among these fragments, which never become
regular texts, is the present line of defense. Not the last line, it is
to be feared, because among the literati the feeling is growing that
these successive retreats have a limit, that they are leading by way of
retrogressions, one close upon the next, to the place where vigil is
kept by the hidden, mysterious “absolute embryo” of creativity—of all
creativity—that fecund germ from which could spring the myriad works
that will not be written. But the image of this embryo is an illusion,
because there can be no Genesis without a world made, and no literary
creation without a belles-lettres as its product. “First causes” are so
inaccessible as to be nonexistent: to retreat to them is to fall into
the error of infinite regress; one writes a book about how one essays to
write a book about the wish to write a book, and so on.

 Raymond Seurat’s _You_ is an attempt to break out of the impasse in a
different direction, not by yet another retreat-beating maneuver but by
a forward charge. To date, authors have always addressed the reader, yet
not for the purpose of speaking _about him:_ this is precisely what
Seurat decided to do. A novel about the reader? Yes, about the reader,
but no longer is it a novel. Since to address the addressee has meant to
tell him something, to speak, if not _about_ something (the antinovel!),
then nevertheless, always, _for_ him. And therefore, in this way, to
serve him. Seurat thought it high time to put an end to this everlasting
servitude; he decided to rebel.

An ambitious idea, no question of that. The work-as-rebellion against
the “singer-listener,” “narrator-reader” relation? Mutiny? A challenge?
But in the name of what? At first glance it seems nonsense: If you,
writer, do not wish to serve by narrating, then you must be silent, and,
silent, you must cease to be a writer. There is no alternative. What
kind of squaring of the circle, then, is Raymond Seurat’s work?

I suspect that the further detailing of his plan Seurat learned from de
Sade. De Sade created first a closed world—the world of his castles,
palaces, convents—in order then to divide the throng locked within into
villains and victims; annihilating the victims in acts of torture that
afforded the executioners pleasure, the villains soon found themselves
alone and, in order to proceed further, were obliged in turn to begin
that mutual devouring which in the epilogue produces the hermetic
solitude of the most vital of the villains—he who devoured, consumed all
the rest, who reveals then that he is not the mere _porteparole_ of the
author, but the author himself, the selfsame Comte Donatien Alphonse
François de Sade imprisoned in the Bastille. He alone remains, for he
alone is not a creature of fiction. Seurat turned this account around,
as it were. Besides the author, there surely is and must always be a
nonfictional someone vis-à-vis the work: the reader. He therefore made
this very reader his hero. But of course it is not the reader himself
who speaks; any such oration would be a trick only, a ventriloquist’s
deception. The author addresses the reader—to give him notice.

 We are speaking here of literature as spiritual prostitution;
prostitution because, to write it, one must serve. One must ingratiate
oneself, pay court, display oneself, show off one’s stylistic muscles,
make confession, confide in the reader, render unto him what one holds
most dear, compete for his attention, keep alive his interest—in a word,
one has to suck up to, wheedle, and wait upon, one has to sell oneself.
Disgusting! When the publisher is the pimp, the literary man the whore,
and the reader the customer in the bawdyhouse of culture, when this
state of affairs reaches one’s awareness, it brings on a bad case of
moral indigestion. Not daring, however, to quit in so many words, the
writers begin to shirk their duties: they serve, but grudgingly; rather
than clownishly amuse, they wax unintelligible and tedious; rather than
show pretty things, to spite the reader they will treat him to
abomination. It is as if an insubordinate cook were to befoul, by
design, the dishes going to the master’s table; if the master and the
mistress don’t like it, they don’t have to eat it! Or as if a woman of
the street, fed up with her trade yet not strong enough to break with
it, were to cease accosting men, cease putting on makeup, dressing up,
giving fetching smiles. But what of that, when she continues standing at
her place on the corner, ready to go off with any customer, sour as she
is, sullen, sarcastic? Hers is no true revolt, it is a simulated,
half-measure rebellion, full of hypocrisy, self-deception; who knows
whether it is not worse than normal, straightforward prostitution, which
at least does not put on airs, pretending to high condition,
untouchability, precious virtue!

 And so? One must give notice; the prospective customer, who opens the
volume like the door of a brothel and barges in with such assurance,
confident that here his needs will be attended to with servility, this
overgrown pig of a philistine, this lowlife—one must punch him in the
mouth, call him every name in the book, and—kick him downstairs? No, no,
that would be too good for him, too easy, too simple; he would only pick
himself up, wipe the spittle from his face, dust of! his hat, and take
himself to a competitor’s establishment. What one has to do is yank him
inside and give him a proper hiding. Only then will he remember well his
former amour with literature, those endless illicit _Seitensprungen_
from book to book. And so _“Crève, canaille!”_ as Raymond Seurat says on
one of the first pages of _Toi_: die, dog, but do not die too soon, you
must conserve your strength, for you will have to go through much; you
will pay here for your arrogant promiscuity !

Entertaining as an idea, and perhaps even as a possibility for an
original book—which book Raymond Seurat, however, has not written. He
did not bridge the distance between the rebellious conception and the
artistically validated creation; his book has no structure; it is
outstanding primarily, alas, even in these days, by virtue of the
phenomenal foulness of its language. Indeed, we do not deny the author
his verbal invention; his baroque is, in places, imaginative. (“Yes,
loose brainsucking leech of a letch you, yes, turdy rot-toothed trull,
yes, you candidate you for a whopping decomposition and
oh-may-you-molder, be treated you shall to rack and ruin in here, for
ruined on the rack, and if you think that all coddly cow’s-eyes and
cajolery, _you’ll_ see, I’ll cook you your wagon good I will.
Unpleasant? No doubt. But necessary.”) And so we are promised tortures
here _—painted_ tortures. This already is suspect.

In his “Literature as Tauromachy,” Michel Leiris correctly emphasized
the importance of the _resistance_ which a literary creation must
overcome if it is to acquire the weight of action. Thus Leiris took the
risk of compromising himself in his biography. But in heaping curses on
the reader’s head there is no real risk, for the contractual nature of
the invective becomes undeniable. By declaring that he will no longer
serve and that _even now_ he is not serving, surely Seurat amuses us—and
so, in this very refusal to serve, he serves.... He made the first step
but instantly foundered. Can it be that the task he set himself was
insoluble? What else could have been done here? Hoodwink the reader with
a narrative that would lead him down whatever primrose path one liked?
That has been done a hundred, a thousand times. And anyway, it is always
easy for the reader to conclude that the dislocated, mistaken, and
misleading text does not constitute a deliberate maneuver, that it is
the product not of perfidy but of ineptitude. Any efficacious
book-as-invective, to be an authentic insult, to be an affront that
carries with it the risk proper to such an act, can be written only with
a concrete, single addressee in mind. But then it becomes a letter. By
attempting to affront us all, as readers, to tear down that very
role—that of the consumer of literature—Seurat has offended no one; he
has merely performed a series of linguistic acrobatic tricks, which very
quickly cease to be even amusing. When one writes about all, or to all,
at once, one writes about no one, to no one. Seurat failed because the
only really consistent way for a writer to rise up against the service
of literature is silence; any other sort of revolt amounts to making
monkey faces. Raymond Seurat will undoubtedly write another book and
with it wholly annul this first one—unless he begins going to bookstores
and slapping his readers in the face. Were that to happen, I would
respect the consequentiality of his action, but only on the personal
level, for nothing will salvage the washout that is _Toi._



 BEING INC.


Alastair Waynewright

  _(American Library, New York)_

 

When one takes on a servant, his wages cover—besides the work—the
respect a servant owes a master. When one hires a lawyer, beyond
professional advice one is purchasing a sense of security. He who buys
love, and not merely strives to win it, also expects caresses and
affection. The price of an airplane ticket has for some time included
the smiles and seemingly genial courtesy of attractive stewardesses.
People are inclined to pay for the “private touch,” that feeling of
being _intime,_ taken care of, liked, which constitutes an important
ingredient in the packaging of services rendered in every walk of life.

But life itself does not, after all, consist of personal contacts with
servants, lawyers, employees of hotels, agencies, airlines, stores. On
the contrary: the contacts and relationships we most desire lie outside
the sphere of services bought and sold. One can pay to have computer
assistance in selecting a mate, but one cannot pay to have the behavior
one chooses in a wife or husband after the wedding. One can buy a yacht,
a palace, an island, if one has the money, but money cannot provide
longed-for events—on the order of: displaying one’s heroism or
intelligence, rescuing a divine creature in mortal danger, winning at
the races, or receiving a high decoration. Nor can one purchase good
will, spontaneous attraction, the devotion of others. Innumerable
stories bear witness to the fact that the desire for precisely such
freely given emotions gnaws at mighty rulers and men of wealth; in fairy
tales he who is able to buy or use force to obtain anything, having the
means for this, abandons his exceptional position so that in
disguise—like Harun al Rashid, who went as a beggar—he may find human
genuineness, since privilege shuts it out like an impenetrable wall.

 So, then, the one area that has not yet been turned into a commodity is
the unarranged substance of everyday life, intimate as well as official,
private as well as public, with the result that each and every one of us
is exposed continually to those small reversals, ridiculings,
disappointments, animosities, to the snubs that can never be paid back,
to the unforeseen; in short, exposed—within the scope of our personal
lot—to a state of affairs that is intolerable, in the highest degree
deserving a change; and this change for the better will be initiated by
the great new industry of life services. A society in which one can
buy—with an advertising campaign—the post of president, or a herd of
albino elephants painted with little flowers, or a bevy of beauties, or
youth through hormones, such a society ought to be able to put to rights
the human condition. The qualm that immediately surfaces—that such
purchased forms of life, being unauthentic, will quickly betray their
falseness when placed alongside the surrounding authenticity of
events—that qualm is dictated by a naïveté totally lacking in
imagination. When all children are conceived in the test tube, when then
no sexual act has as its consequence, once natural, procreation, there
disappears the difference between the normal and the aberrant in sex,
seeing as no physical intimacy serves any purpose but that of pleasure.
And where every life finds itself under the solicitous eye of powerful
service enterprises, there disappears the difference between authentic
events and those secretly arranged. The distinction between natural and
synthetic in adventures, successes, failures, ceases to exist when one
can no longer tell what is taking place by pure accident, and what by
accident paid for in advance.

 This, more or less, is the idea of A. Waynewright’s novel, _Being Inc._
The mode of operation of that corporate entity is to act at a distance:
its base cannot be known to anyone; clients communicate with Being Inc.
exclusively by correspondence, in an emergency by telephone. Their
orders go into a gigantic computer; the execution of these is dependent
on the size of the client’s account, that is, on the amount of the
remittance. Treachery, friendship, love, revenge, one’s own good fortune
and another’s adversity may be obtained also on the installment plan,
through a convenient credit system. The destinies of children are shaped
by the parents, but on the day he comes of age each person receives in
the mail a price list, a catalogue of services, and in addition the
firm’s instruction booklet. The booklet is a clearly but substantively
written treatise, philosophical and sociotechnological—not the usual
advertising material. Its lucid, elevated language states what in an
unelevated way may be summarized as follows.

All people pursue happiness, but not all in the same way. For some,
happiness means pre-eminence over others, self-reliance, situations of
permanent challenge, risk, and the great gamble. For others it is
submission, faith in authority, the absence of all threat, peace and
quiet, even indolence. Some love to display aggression; some are more
comfortable when they can be on the receiving end of it. Many find
satisfaction in a state of anxiety and distress, which can be observed
in their inventing for themselves, when they have no real worries,
imaginary ones. Research shows that ordinarily there are as many active
individuals as passive in society. The misfortune of society in the
past—asserts the booklet—lay in the fact that society was not able to
effect harmony between the natural inclinations of its citizens and
their path in life. How often did blind chance decide who would win and
who lose, to whom would fall the role of Petronius, and to whom the role
of Prometheus. One must seriously doubt the story that Prometheus did
not expect the vulture. It is far more likely, according to modern
psychology, that it was entirely for the purpose of being pecked in the
liver that he stole the fire of heaven. He was a masochist; masochism,
like eye coloring, is an inborn trait and nothing to be ashamed of; one
should matter-of-factly indulge it and utilize it for the good of
society. Formerly—explains the text in scholarly tones—blind fate
decided for whom pleasures would be in store, and for whom privation;
men lived wretched lives, because he who, fond of beating, is beaten, is
every bit as miserable as he who, desirous of a good thrashing, must
himself—forced by circumstances—thrash others.

 The principles of operation of Being Inc. did not emerge in a vacuum:
matrimonial computers have for some time now been using similar rules in
matchmaking. Being Inc. guarantees each client the full arrangement of
his life, from the attaining of his majority until his death, in keeping
with the wishes expressed by him on the form enclosed. The Company, in
its work, avails itself of the most up-to-date cybernetic,
socioengineering, and informational methods. Being Inc. does not
immediately carry out the wishes of its clients, for people often do not
themselves know their own nature, do not understand what is good for
them and what is bad. The Company subjects each new client to a
remote-monitor psychotechnological examination; a battery of
ultrahigh-speed computers determines the personality profile and all the
proclivities of the client. Only after such a diagnosis will the Company
accept his order.

One need not be ashamed of the content of the order; it remains forever
a Company secret. Nor need one fear that the order might, in its
realization, cause harm to anyone. It is the Company’s job to see that
this does not happen; let it trouble its electronic head over that. Mr.
Smith here would like to be a stern judge handing out sentences of
death, and so the defendants who come before him will be people
deserving nothing less than capital punishment. Mr. Jones wishes he
could flog his children, deny them every pleasure, and in addition
persist in the conviction that he is a just and upright father? Then he
shall have cruel and wicked children, the castigation of whom will
require half his lifetime. The Company grants all requests; sometimes,
however, one must wait on line, as when the desire is to kill a person
by one’s own hand, since there are a surprising number of such fanciers.
In different states the condemned are dispatched differently; in some
they are hanged, in others poisoned with hydrogen cyanide, in still
others electricity is used. He who has a predilection for hanging finds
himself in a state where the legal instrument of execution is the
gallows, and before he knows it he has become the temporary hangman. A
plan to enable clients to murder with impunity in an open field, on the
grass, in the privacy of the home, has not as yet been sanctioned by the
law, but the Company is patiently working for the institution of this
innovation as well. The Company’s skill in arranging events,
demonstrated in millions of synthetic careers, will surmount the
numerous difficulties that presently bar the way to these murders on
order. The condemned man, say, notices that the door of his cell on
death row is open; he flees; the Company agents, on the lookout, so
influence the path of his flight that he stumbles on the client in
circumstances the most suitable for both. He might, for example, attempt
to hide in the home of the client while the latter happens to be engaged
in loading a hunting rifle. But the catalogue of possibilities which the
Company has compiled is inexhaustible.

 Being Inc. is an organization the like of which is unknown in history.
This is essential. The matrimonial computer united a mere _two_ persons
and did not concern itself with what would happen to them after the
tying of the knot. Being Inc., on the other hand, must orchestrate
enormous groupings of events involving thousands of people. The Company
cautions the reader that its actual methods of operation are _not_
mentioned in the brochure. The examples given are purely fictitious! The
strategy of the arranging must be kept in absolute secrecy; the client
must never be allowed to find out what is happening to him naturally and
what by the aid of the Company computers that watch unseen over his
destiny.

 Being Inc. possesses an army of employees; these make their appearance
as ordinary citizens—as chauffeurs, butchers, physicians, engineers,
maids, infants, dogs, and canaries. The employees must be anonymous. An
employee who at any time betrays his incognito, i.e., who discloses that
he is a bona fide member of the team of Being Inc., not only loses his
post but is pursued by the Company to his grave. Knowing his habits and
tastes, the Company will arrange for him such a life that he will curse
the hour in which he perpetrated the foul deed. There is no appealing a
punishment for the betrayal of a Company secret—not that the Company
intends this statement as a threat. No, the Company includes its _real_
ways of dealing with bad employees among its trade secrets.

The reality shown in the novel is different from the picture painted in
the promotional pamphlet of Being Inc. The advertisements are silent
about the most important thing. Antitrust legislation in the U.S.A.
forbids monopolies; consequently Being Inc. is not the only life
arranger. There are its great competitors, Hedonica and the Truelife
Corporation. And it is precisely this circumstance that leads to events
unprecedented in history. For when persons who are clients of different
companies come into contact with one another, the implementation of the
orders of each may encounter unforeseen difficulties. Those difficulties
take the form of what is called “covert parasitizing,” which leads to
cloak-and-dagger escalation.

Suppose that Mr. Smith wishes to shine before Mrs. Brown, the wife of a
friend, to whom he feels an attraction, and he selects item No. 396b on
the list: saving a life in a train wreck. From the wreck both are to
escape without injury, but Mrs. Brown thanks only to the heroism of Mr.
Smith. Now, the Company must arrange a railway accident with great
precision and in addition set up an entire situation in order that the
named parties, as the result of a series of apparent coincidences, ride
in the same compartment; monitors located in the walls, the floor, and
the backs of the seats in the coach, feeding data to the computer
that—concealed in the lavatory—is programming the action, will see to it
that the accident takes place exactly according to plan. It must take
place in such a way that Smith _cannot not_ save the life of Mrs. Brown.
So that he will not know what he is doing, the side of the overturned
coach will be ripped open in the very place where Mrs. Brown is sitting,
the compartment will fill with suffocating smoke, and Smith, in order to
get out, will first have to push the woman through the opening, thereby
saving her from death by asphyxiation. The whole operation presents no
great difficulty. Several dozen years ago it took an army of computers,
and another of specialists, to land a lunar shuttle meters from its
goal; nowadays a single computer, following the action with the aid of a
concert of monitors, can solve the problem set it with no trouble.

 If, however, Hedonica or Truelife has accepted an order from the
husband of Mrs. Brown, which asks that Smith reveal himself to be a
scoundrel and a coward, complications ensue. Through industrial
espionage Truelife learns of the railway operation planned by Being; the
most economical thing is to hook into someone else’s arrangemental plan,
and it is precisely in this that “covert parasitizing” consists.
Truelife introduces into the moment of the wreck a small deviation
factor that will be sufficient to have Smith, when he shoves Mrs. Brown
out of the hole, give her a black eye, tear her dress, and break both
her legs into the bargain.

Should Being Inc., thanks to its counterintelligence, learn of this
parasitizing plan, it will take corrective measures, and thus will begin
the process of operational escalation. In the overturning coach
inevitably it comes to a duel between two computers—the one belonging to
Being, in the lavatory, and the one belonging to Truelife, hidden
perhaps under the floor of the coach. Behind the potential deliverer of
the woman and behind her, the potential victim, stand two Molochs of
electronics and organization. During the accident there is unleashed—in
fractions of a second—a monstrous battle of computers; it is difficult
to conceive what colossal forces will be intervening on one side in
order that Smith push heroically and rescuingly, and, on the other, that
he push ungallantly and tramplingly. More and more reinforcements are
brought in, till what was to have been a small exhibition of manliness
in the presence of a woman turns into a cataclysm. Company records note
the occurrence, over a period of nine years, of two such disasters,
called GASPs (Galloping Arrangementive Spirals). After the last GASP,
which cost the parties involved nineteen million dollars for the
electrical energy, steam, and water power expended in the course of
thirty-seven seconds, an agreement was reached on the strength of which
an upper limit to arrangementing was set. It may not consume more than
10¹² joules per client-minute; excluded also from the actualization of
services are all forms of atomic energy.

 Against this background runs the action proper of the novel. The new
president of Being Inc., young Ed Hammer III, is personally to look into
the case of the order submitted by Mrs. Jessamine Chest the eccentric
heiress-millionairess, since her demands, of an outre nature, not to be
found in any catalogue, go beyond the reach of all the rungs in the
Company’s administrative ladder. Jessamine Chest desires life in its
full authenticity, purged of all arranging interference; for the
fulfillment of this wish she is prepared to pay any price. Ed Hammer,
against the advice of his advisers, accepts the assignment; the task,
which he puts before his staff—how to arrange the total absence of
arranging—proves more difficult than any so far tackled. Research
reveals that nothing like an elemental spontaneity in life has existed
for a long time. Eliminating the preparations for any particular
arrange-plan brings to light the remnants of other, earlier ones; events
unscenarioed are not to be found even in the bosom of Being Inc. For, as
it turns out, the three rival enterprises have thoroughly and
reciprocally arranged one another; that is, they have filled with their
own trusted men key positions in the administration and on the board of
directors of each competitor. Aware of the danger created by such a
discovery, Hammer turns to the chairmen of both the other enterprises,
whereupon there is a secret meeting in which specialists having access
to the main computers serve as advisers. This confrontation makes it
possible, finally, to ascertain the true state of affairs.

 In the year 2041, throughout the length and breadth of the U.S.A., not
a man can eat a chicken, fall in love, heave a sigh, have a whiskey,
refuse a beer, nod, wink, spit—without higher electronic planning, which
for years in advance has created a pre-established disharmony. Without
realizing it, in the course of their competition the three
billion-dollar corporations have formed a One in Three Persons, an
All-Powerful Disposer of Destiny. The programs of the computers make up
a Book of Fate; arranged are political parties, arranged is the weather,
and even the coming into the world of Ed Hammer III was the result of
specific orders, orders that in turn resulted from other orders. No one
any longer can be born or die spontaneously; no one any longer can on
his own, by himself, from beginning to end, live anything, because his
every thought, his every fear, his every pain, is a short sequence of
algebraic calculations run through the computer. Empty now are the
concepts of sin, retribution, moral responsibility, good and evil,
because the full arrangementation of life excludes nonnegotiable values.
In the computerized paradise created thanks to the hundred-percent
utilization of all the human qualities and their incorporation into an
infallible system, only one thing was missing—the awareness of the
inhabitants that this was precisely how things stood. And therefore the
meeting of the three corporate heads has been planned also by the main
computer, which—providing them with this information—presents itself now
as the Tree of Knowledge lit up with electricity. What will happen next?
Should this perfectly arranged existence be abandoned in a new, second
flight from Eden, in order to “start once more from the beginning”? Or
should man accept it, renouncing once and for all the burden of
responsibility? The book offers no answer. It is, therefore, a
metaphysical burlesque, whose fantastic elements nevertheless have some
connection with the real world. When we disregard the humoristic humbug
and the elephantiasis of the author’s imagination, there remains the
problem of the manipulation of minds, and particularly of that kind of
manipulation which does not lessen the full subjective sense of
spontaneity and freedom. The thing will certainly not come about in the
form shown in _Being Inc.,_ but who can say whether fate will spare our
descendants other forms of this phenomenon—forms perhaps less amusing in
description but not, it may be, any less oppressive.



 DIE KULTUR ALS FEHLER


Wilhelm Klopper

  _(Universitas Verlag, Berlin)_

 

_Civilization as Mistake_ by Privatdozent W. Klopper is a work without
doubt remarkable—as an original hypothesis in anthropology. I cannot
refrain, however, before I proceed to the discussion, from indulging in
a comment as regards the form of the discourse. This book—only a German
could have written it! A fondness for classification, for that
scrupulous t-crossing and _i_-dotting that has begotten innumerable
_Handbücher,_ makes the German mind resemble a pigeonhole desk. When one
beholds the consummate order displayed by the table of contents of this
book, one cannot help thinking that if the Lord God had been of German
blood our world would perhaps not necessarily have turned out better
existentially, but would have for sure embodied a higher notion of
discipline and method. The perfection of this orderliness quite
overwhelms one, although it may arouse reservations of a substantive
nature. I cannot here go into the question of whether that purely formal
penchant for muster and array, for symmetry, for front-and-center and
forward-march, might not have exerted a real influence also on certain
conceptions that typify German philosophy —its ontology in particular.
Hegel loved the Cosmos as a kind of Prussia, for in Prussia there was
order! Even the esthetics-inflamed thinker that was Schopenhauer showed
what an expository drill looks like in his treatise “Uber die vierfache
Wurzel des Satzes vom zureichenden Grunde.” And Fichte? But I must deny
myself the pleasure of digression, which is all the more difficult for
me in that I am not a German. To business, to business!

 Klopper has provided his two-volume work with a foreword, a preface,
and an introduction. (The ideal of form: a triad!) Going into the merits
of the matter, he first takes up that understanding of civilization as
mistake which he considers to be false. According to that misguided
(says the author) view, typical of the Anglo-Saxon school and
represented—notably—by Whistle and Sadbottham, any form of behavior of
an organism that neither helps nor hinders the organism’s survival is a
mistake. For the sole criterion of sensibleness of behavior is, in
evolution, survivability. An animal that behaves in such a fashion that
it survives more capably than others is behaving, in the light of this
criterion, more sensibly than those that die out. Toothless herbivores
are senseless evolutionarily, for hardly are they born before they must
perish from hunger. Analogously, herbivores that indeed possess teeth
but employ them to chew stones instead of grass are also evolutionarily
without sense, for they, too, must disappear. Klopper goes on to quote
Whistle’s famous example: let us suppose, says the English author, that
in some herd of baboons a certain old male, the leader of the herd, by
sheer accident acquires the habit of addressing the birds he devours
from the left side. He had, say, an injured finger on the right hand,
and when he brought the bird to his mouth he found it more comfortable
to hold the prey by the left. The young baboons, watching the leader’s
behavior, which for them is a model, imitate it, and before long—that
is, after a single generation—every baboon in the herd is starting in on
his captured bird from the left. From the point of view of adaptation
this behavior is senseless, for baboons can with equal advantage to
themselves attack their meal from either side; nevertheless, precisely
this pattern of behavior has. established itself in the group. What is
it? It is the beginning of a culture (protoculture), being behavior
adaptationally senseless. As is known, this idea of Whistle’s was
developed not by another anthropologist, but by a philosopher of the
English logical-analytical school, J. Sadbottham, whose views our
author—before taking exception to them—summarizes in the next chapter
(“Das Fehlerhafte der Kulturfehlertheorie von Joshua Sadbottham”).

 In his major work, Sadbottham declared that human communities produce
cultures through mistakes, false steps, failures, blunders, errors, and
misunderstandings. Intending to do one thing, people in reality do
another; desiring to understand the mechanism of a phenomenon through
and through, they interpret it for themselves wrongly; seeking truth,
they arrive at falsehood; and thus do customs come into being, mores,
faith, sanctification, mystery, mana; thus come into being injunctions
and interdictions, totems and taboos. People form a false classification
of the surrounding world, and totemism results. They make false
generalizations and thus arrive first at the notion of mana, and
afterward at that of the Absolute. They create mistaken representations
of their own physical construction, and thus arise the concepts of
virtue and sin; had the genitalia been similar to butterflies and
insemination to song (the transmitter of hereditary information being
specific vibrations in the air), these concepts would have taken a
completely different form. People create hypostases, and thus arise
concepts of divinities; they make plagiarisms, and thus arise eclectic
interpolations of myths—or doctrinal religions. In other words, in
behaving any which way, inappropriately, _imperfectly_ with respect to
adaptation, in misinterpreting the behavior of other people, and their
own bodies, and the objects in Nature, in considering things that happen
accidentally to be things that aie determined, and things that are
determined, to be accidental—that is, in inventing a growing number of
fictitious existences, peopie wall themselves in with the edifice of
culture, they alter their model of the world to fit its conclusions and
then, after millennia pass, they are surprised that in such a prison
they do not feel altogether comfortable. The beginnings are always
innocent and even, on the face of it, trivial—take, for example, the
baboons who eat birds always from the left side. But when from such odds
and ends emerges a system of meanings and values, when the mistakes and
misunderstandings accumulate enough so that they can, by their totality,
in their entirety, _close_—to use the language of mathematics—then man
himself already has become imprisoned in what, though it is the most
fortuitous sort of miscellany, appears to him as the highest necessity.

 A scholar of much erudition, Sadbottham backs his assertions with a
multitude of examples drawn from ethnology; his tabulations, too, as we
recall, caused quite a commotion in their day, especially those charts
of “chance versus determinism,” on which he juxtaposed all the different
cultures’ mistaken explanations of natural phenomena. (And in fact, a
great number of cultures consider the mortality of man to be the
consequence of a particular instance of bad luck: man was, according to
them, originally immortal, but he either deprived himself of this
attribute by a fall, or else was deprived of it through the intervention
of some evil power. Conversely, that which is the work of chance—the
physical appearance of man, shaped in evolution—all cultures have
provided with the name of inevitability; to this day the leading
religions teach that man is in the aspect of his body unaccidental,
since fashioned in God’s image, after His likeness.

The criticism to which Herr Dozent Klopper submits the hypothesis of his
English colleague is neither original nor the first. As a German,
Klopper has divided his criticism into two parts: immanent and positive.
In the immanent he only negates Sadbottham’s thesis; this section of the
work we pass over as being less material, since it repeats the
objections already known from the professional literature. In the second
half of the criticism, the positive, Wilhelm Klopper finally proceeds to
set forth his own counterhypothesis of “Civilization as Mistake.”

 The exposition begins, in our opinion effectively arid aptly, with the
supplying of an illustrative example. Different birds build their nests
out of different materials. What is more, the same species of bird in
different localities will not nest-build using exactly the same
materials, because it must rely on what it finds in the vicinity. As to
which material, in the form of blades of grass, flakes of bark, leaves,
little shells, pebbles, the bird is going to find most readily, that
depends on chance. And so in some nests you will have more shells and in
some, more pebbles; some will be stuck together primarily out of little
strips of bark, some, out of pinfeathers and moss. But whatever building
material makes its unmistakable contribution toward the shaping of the
form of the nest, one cannot with any sense say that nests are the work
of pure chance. A nest is an instrument of adaptation, howsoever
constructed out of randomly found fragments of this and that; and
culture also is an instrument of adaptation. But—and here is the
author’s new idea—it is an adaptation fundamentally different from that
typical of the plant and animal kingdoms.

_“Was ist der Fall_?” asks Klopper. “What is the situation?” The
situation is this: in man, considered as a physical being, there is
nothing inevitable. According to the knowledge of modem biology, man
could be constructed other than he is; he could live six hundred and not
sixty years on the average; he could possess a differently shaped trunk
or limbs, have a different reproductive system, a different digestive
system; he could, for example, be exclusively herbivorous, he could be
oviparous, he could be amphibious, he could be able to breed only once a
year, in a period of rut, and so on. Man, it is true, does possess one
characteristic that is inevitable, to the extent, at least, that without
it he would not be man. He possesses a brain that is able to produce
speech and reflection; and, gazing upon his own body and upon his fate,
which is circumscribed by that body, man leaves the realm of such
reflection greatly discontented. He lives but briefly; on top of this
his powerless childhood is of long duration; his time of ablest maturity
is a small portion of his entire life; hardly does he achieve his prime
when he begins to age, and, unlike all other creatures, he knows to what
end aging will lead him. In the natural habitats of evolution life is
lived under incessant threat; one must be on one’s toes in order to
survive; it is for this reason that the gauges of _pain,_ the organs of
_suffering_—as signaling devices to stimulate the development of
self-preserving activity—have been by evolution very strongly pronounced
in all living things. On the other hand, there has been no evolutionary
reason, no organism-shaping force, to balance this situation “fairly,”
endowing life forms with a corresponding quantity of organs of enjoyment
and pleasure.

 Everyone will admit, says Klopper, that pangs of hunger, the torments
caused by thirst, the agonies of suffocation, are incomparably keener
than the satisfaction one experiences in eating, drinking, or breathing
normally. The sole exception to this general rule of asymmetry between
anguish and delight is sex. But this is understandable: were we not
bisexual beings, had we a genital system arranged along the lines of,
say, the flowers, then it would function apart from any positive sensory
experience, for a goad to action would then be totally unnecessary. The
fact that sexual pleasure exists and that above it have spread the
invisible edifices of the Kingdom of Love (Klopper, when he ceases being
dry and factual, immediately turns sentimentally poetic!) derives
entirely from the circumstance of bisexuality. Erroneous is the
supposition that Homo hermaphroditicus, were such a being to exist,
would love himself erotically. Nothing of the sort; he would care for
himself strictly within the bounds of the instinct for
self-preservation. That which we call narcissism and picture to
ourselves as the attraction a hermaphrodite might feel for himself is a
secondary projection, the result of a ricochet: such an individual
mentally connects with his own body the image of an external, ideal
lover. (Here follow about seventy pages of profound cogitation on the
question of uni-, bi-, and multisexual facultative possibilities for
shaping human erotic nature; this large digression, too, we pass over.)

 What has culture to do with all of this? queries Klopper. Culture is an
instrument of adaptation of a new type, for it does not so much _itself_
arise from accident as it serves this purpose, to wit, that everything
which in our condition is de facto _accidental_ stand bathed in the
light of a higher, ultimate necessity. And therefore: culture acts
through established religion, through custom, law, interdiction and
injunction, in order to convert _insufficiencies_ into _idealities_,
minuses into pluses, shortcomings into acmes of perfection, defects into
virtues. Suffering is distressful? Yes, but it ennobles and even
redeems. Life is short? Yes, but the life beyond is everlasting.
Childhood is toilsome and inane? Yes, but for all that—halcyon, idyllic,
positively sacred. Old age is horrid? Yes, but this is the preparation
for eternity, and besides, old people are to be respected, by virtue of
the fact that they are old. Man is a monster? Yes, but he is not to
blame; it was his primogenitors who brought on the evil—or else a demon
interfered in the Divine Act. Man does not know what to want, he seeks
the meaning of life, he is unhappy? Yes, but this is the consequence of
freedom, which is the highest value; that one must pay through the nose
for its possession is therefore of no great significance: a man deprived
of freedom would be more unhappy than if he were not! Animals, Klopper
observes, make no distinction between feces and carrion: they steer
clear of both the one and the other as the evacuations of life. For a
consistent materialist the equating of a corpse with excrement ought to
be just as valid; but the latter we dispose of furtively, and the former
with pomp, loftily, equipping the remains with a number of costly and
complicated wrappings. This is required by culture, as a system of
appearances that help us reconcile ourselves to the despicable facts.
The solemn ceremony of burial serves as a sedative for the natural
outrage and revolt roused in us by the infamy of mortality. For it _is_
an infamy, that the mind, filled in the course of a lifetime with ever
more extensive knowledge, should come to this, that it dissolves into a
putrid puddle of corruption.

 Thus culture is the mitigator of all the objections, indignations,
grievances that man might address to natural evolution, to those
physical characteristics haphazardly created, haphazardly fatal, which
he—without being asked for his opinion or consent—has inherited from a
billion-year process of ad hoc accommodations. To all that vile
patrimony, to that ragtag-and-bobtail mob of infirmities and blemishes
inserted into the cells themselves, knit into the bones, sewn into the
sinews and the muscles—culture, wearing its picturesque toga of
appointed public defender, attempts to reconcile us. It uses innumerable
weasel words, it resorts to arguments that contradict themselves
internally, that appeal now to the feelings, now to the reason, for any
and all methods of persuasion are acceptable to culture, so long as it
achieves its goal—the transformation of negative quantities into
positive, of our wretchedness, our deformity, our frailty, into virtue,
perfection, and manifest necessity.

With a monumental diapason of style, in measure sublime, in measure
professorial, concludes the first part of the treatise of Dozent
Klopper, here given fairly laconically by us. The second part explains
the vital importance of understanding the true function of culture, so
that man may be able properly to receive the portents of the future, a
future he has prepared for himself by building a science-and-technology
civilization.

Culture is a mistake! announces Klopper, and the brevity of this
assertion brings to mind the Schopenhauerian _“Die Welt ist Wille!”_
Culture is a mistake, not in the sense or to suggest that it arose by
chance; no, it arose by necessity, for—as shown in Part One—it serves
adaptation. But it serves adaptation only _mentally_: surely it does
not, with its dogmas of faith and its precepts, transform man into an
_actually_ immortal being; it does not tack onto accidental man, _homini
fortuito,_ a _real_ Creator-Deity; it does not _really_ annul a single
atom of an individual’s sufferings, griefs, agonies (here, too, Klopper
is true to Schopenhauer! )—what it does, it does entirely on the plane
of the spirit, on the level of interpretation, making meaning out of
that which in immanence has no meaning; it divides sin from virtue,
grace from damnation, humiliation from exaltation.

 But now technological civilization, in steps imperceptible at first,
creeping along with its scrap iron of primitive machines, has worked its
way underneath culture. The building is shaken, the walls of the crystal
rectifier crack: for technological civilization promises to _correct_
man, both his body and his brain, and quite literally to _optimize_ his
soul. This tremendous and unexpectedly welling force (of the
information, stored up for centuries, which in the twentieth century
exploded) heralds a chance for long life, with the limit, perhaps, in
immortality; a chance for swift maturation and no senescence; a chance
for a legion of physical pleasures and a reduction to zero of torments,
of tribulations both “natural” (senility) and “accidental” (disease) ;
it heralds the chance for _freedom_ where previously hazard was wed to
inevitability (freedom meaning the power to choose the qualities of
human nature; meaning the possibility of amplifying talent, knowledge,
intelligence; meaning the opportunity to give to human limbs, the face,
the body, the senses, whatever forms and functions one desires, even
those that are well-nigh everlasting, etc. ).

What, then, ought to be done in the face of these promises, promises
verified by fulfillments already brought about? Why, throw oneself into
a triumphal dance! Culture, that cane of the lame, crutch of the
crippled, wheelchair for the paralytic, that system of patches placed
over the shame of our body, over the deformity of our toilsome
condition, culture, that helpmate that has seen much service and
outserved, ought to be pronounced an anachronism and nothing but. For
are artificial limbs necessary to those who can grow new? Must a blind
man clutch the white cane to his breast, when we return him his sight?
Is he to request benightedness anew who has had the scales lifted from
his eyes? Should not one, rather, lay to rest that useless lumber in the
museum of the past, and set out with a springing step toward the
awaiting, difficult yet magnificent tasks and goals ahead? So long as
the nature of our bodies, of their sluggish growth and all-too-swift
decay, was an impervious wall, an implacable barrier, the limit of
existence—for that long did culture facilitate, unto the thousandth
generation, our adaptation to this wretched _status quo._ It reconciled
us to it; more, as the author shows, it actually converted the flaws
into merits, the drawbacks into advantages. It is as if someone
condemned to a broken-down, ugly, and worthless vehicle were gradually
to conceive an affection for its failings, to find in its ungainliness
evidence of a higher ideal, and in its endless defects a Law of Nature,
of Creation; he perceives the hand of the Lord God Himself in the
sputtering carburetor and the chattering gears. So long as there is not
another vehicle in sight, this is perfectly proper, very suitable, the
only right and even sensible policy, one should think. But now, when a
new vehicle gleams on the horizon? To cling to the broken spokes, bewail
the ugliness with which it will be necessary soon to part, cry out
“Help, save me!” from the streamlined beauty of the new model?
Understandable psychologically, indeed yes. For too long—millennia!—has
the process been going on of man’s bending himself to his own
evolutionarily piecemeal nature, that colossal straining—from century to
century—to love the given condition in all its misery, squalor,
unattractiveness, in its destitutions and physiological nooks and
crannies.

 So much has man, in all his successive cultural formations, slaved away
at this, so much has he striven to sway himself, to have himself believe
in the absolute necessity, supremity, uniqueness, and most of all the
inalterability of his fate, that now, at the sight of his deliverance,
he recoils, quakes, hides his eyes, utters cries of terror, turns away
from the technological Saviour, wishing to flee somewhere, anywhere,
even to the forest on all fours, wishing he could take that flower of
knowledge, that wonder of science, and smash it with his own two hands,
trample it underfoot, if only not to surrender his ancient values to the
junk heap, values he nourished with his own blood, nurtured waking and
sleeping, till he forced upon himself ... love for them! But such absurd
conduct, this shock, this panic, is above all, from any rational
standpoint, stupidity.

 Yes, culture is a mistake! But only in the sense that it is a mistake
to shut the eyes to the light, to push away medicine in illness, to call
for incense and magic spells when an enlightened doctor is standing by
the bed. This mistake did not exist at all until the moment when our
knowledge, growing, reached the required level; this mistake—it is the
resistance, the balky, mulish, pigheaded opposition, the obstinate
aversion, it is the tremor of dread our modern “thinkers” like to call
an intellectual assessment of the present changes in the world. Culture,
that system of prostheses, must be discarded, so that we may entrust
ourselves to the knowledge that will remake us, endow us with
perfection; nor will the perfection be Active, a thing we are talked
into or sold, a thing educed from the sophistry of tortuous,
self-contradictory establishings and dogmas. It will be purely material,
factual, a perfectly objective perfection: existence _itself_ will be
perfect—not merely its exposition, not merely its interpretation!
Culture, defender of Evolution’s Causal Imbecilities, shifty pettifogger
of a lost cause, shyster mouthpiece of primitivism and somatic
slapdashery, must remove itself, since man’s case is entering other,
higher courts, since the wall of inviolable necessity, inviolable only
hitherto, now crumbles. Technological development means the ruin of
culture? It provides freedom where hitherto reigned the constraint of
biology? But of course it does! And instead of shedding tears over the
loss of our captivity, we should hasten our step to leave its dark
house. And therefore (the finale begins, in cadenced conclusions):
everything that has been said about the threat to time-honored culture
by the new technology is true. But one need not be concerned about this
threat; one need not patch together a culture coining apart at the
seams, or fasten down its dogmas with clamps, or hold out valiantly
against the invasion of our bodies and our lives by superior knowledge.
Culture, still a value today, will tomorrow become another value:
namely, anachronistic. For culture was the great hatchery, the womb, the
incubator in which discoveries bred and gave agonizing birth to science.
Indeed, just as the developing embryo consumes the inert, passive
substance of the egg white, so does the developing technology consume,
digest, and turn into its own stuff—culture. Such is the way of embryos
and eggs.

 We live in an era of transition, says Klopper, and never is it so
unutterably difficult to make out the road traveled and the road that
extends into the future as in periods of transition, for they are times
of conceptual confusion. However, the process is inexorably under way.
One must not in any case think that the transition from the realm of
biological captivity to the realm of self-creative freedom can be an act
of a single moment. Man will not be able to perfect himself once and for
all, and the process of self-alteration will go on through centuries.

“I make bold,” says Klopper, “to assure the reader that the dilemma over
which the traditional thought of the humanist, flustered by the
scientific revolution, lacerates itself, is the yearning of the dog for
its removed collar. This dilemma boils down to the faith that man is a
skein of contradictions which cannot be got rid of, not even were the
ridding technologically possible. In other words, it is forbidden us to
change the shape of the body, weaken the lust for aggression, strengthen
the intellect, balance the emotions, rearrange sex, liberate man from
old age, from the labors of procreation, and this is forbidden for the
reason that it has never been done, and what has never been done must
surely be, by that fact, most evil. The humanist is not allowed to
conceive—a la science—of the present human mind and body as the
resultant vector of a long series of random draws, intramillennial
convulsions in the evolutionary process, a process that was hurled in
all directions by geological upheavals, great glaciations, the
explosions of stars, the changes of the magnetic poles, and countless
other accidents. What the evolution of the lower animals first, and of
the anthropoids later, deposited in lottery style, what then was swept
into a single pile by selection, and what day by day was fixed in the
genes as in dice thrown at the gaming table, we are to hold untouchable,
sacrosanct, inviolable for all time, world without end—only without
knowing why it has to be this way and not another. It is as if culture
takes umbrage at our diagnosis of its work, noble at least in intent,
and our exposure of that greatest, most difficult, most fantastic, and
falsest of all the falsehoods Homo sapiens ever fashioned for
himself—ever latched onto—he who was thrust suddenly into the open air
of intelligent existence from out that murky gambling den where the
cheating at genes still goes on, where the evolutionary process sets
down its cardsharper’s tricks in the chromosomes. That the game is a
foul fraud, never guided by any higher value or goal, is shown by the
fact that in that cave the thing is only to survive _today_—not giving
one hoot in heaven or hell about what will become of the one who
survives so compromisingly, so opportunistically, therefore
dishonorably, _tomorrow._ But because everything is proceeding exactly
in reverse of what our humanist, shaking in his boots, imagines to
himself, that dimwit, that boob—he has no right to call himself a
rationalist—culture will be cleared away, cleaned up, parceled out,
pulled down, and drained, in step with the changes to which man shall
submit. Where the hook and crook of genes, where adaptational
opportunism decides existence, there is no mystery, there is only the
_Katzenjammer_ of the swindled, the awful hangover from the monkey
ancestor, the climb skyward up that imaginary ladder from which you
always end up falling, biology dragging you down by the seat of your
pants, whether you tack onto yourself bird feathers, halos, or
immaculate conceptions, or grit your teeth with homemade heroism. And so
nothing vital-inevitable will be destroyed, but there will disappear,
withering away bit by bit, the scaffolding of superstition,
justification, equivocation, the pulling of the wool over the eyes—in a
word, that whole sophistry to which the miserable human race has for
ages resorted in order to make palatable its odious condition. In the
next century, from out of the dust of the information explosion will
emerge Homo optimisans se ipse, Autocreator, Self-Maker, who will laugh
at our Cassandras (assuming he has with what to laugh). One ought to
applaud such an opportunity, acclaim it an incredibly fortunate turn of
cosmic-planetary events, and not tremble in the face of the power that
will bring our species down from the scaffold and sunder the chains each
of us drags with him, as he waits for the potential of his bodily forces
to be finally exhausted, when he will know the self-strangling of the
death agony. And even should the whole world still continue to acquiesce
in that state with which evolution has branded us far worse than we
brand the worst criminals, I personally shall never consent to it and
yea even from my dying bed rasp out: Down with Evolution, Vivat
Autocreation!”

 It is instructive, this voluminous discourse, the quotation from which
we have used to crown our discussion. Instructive, because it shows
there is simply no thing appearing to some as evil incarnate and
misfortune itself that others will not at the very same time consider a
positive godsend and raise to the pinnacle of perfection. This reviewer
is of the opinion that technoevolution cannot be declared the
existential panacea for humanity, if only because the criteria of
optimization are too intricately relativistic for them to be regarded as
a universal pattern (that is, as a code of salvational procedure that is
unerring, couched in the language of empiricism). In any case, we
recommend to the reader _Civilization as Mistake,_ since it is, typical
of the time, yet another attempt to limn the future—still dark, despite
the combined efforts of the futurologists and such thinkers as Klopper.



 DE IMPOSSIBILITATE VITAE AND, DE IMPOSSIBILITATE PROGNOSCENDI


Cezar Kouska

  _(2 Volumes Statni Nakladatelství N. Lit., Prague)_

 

The author is Cezar Kouska on the cover, but signs the Introduction
inside the book as Benedykt Kouska. A misprint, an oversight in the
proofreading, or an inconceivably devious device? Personally I prefer
the name Benedykt, therefore I will stick with that. So, then, it is to
Professor B. Kouska that I owe some of the most delightful hours of my
life, hours spent in the perusal of his work. The views it expounds are
unquestionably at odds with scientific orthodoxy; we are not, however,
dealing here with pure insanity; the thing lies halfway in between, in
that transitional zone where there is neither day nor night, and the
mind, loosening the bonds of logic, yet does not tear them so asunder as
to fall into gibberish.

For Professor Kouska has written a work that demonstrates that the
following relationship of mutual exclusion obtains: either the theory of
probability, on which stands natural history, is false to its very
foundations, or the world of living things, with man at its head, does
not exist. After which, in the second volume, the Professor argues that
if prognostication, or futurology, is ever to become a reality and not
an empty illusion, not a conscious or unconscious deception, then that
discipline cannot avail itself of the calculus of probability, but
demands the implementation of an entirely different reckoning, namely—to
quote Kouska—“a theory, based on antipodal axioms, of the distribution
of ensembles in actual fact unparalleled in the space-time continuum of
higher-order events” (the quote also serves to show that the reading of
the work—in the theoretical sections—does present certain difficulties).

 Benedykt Kouska begins by revealing that the theory of empirical
probability is flawed in the middle. We employ the notion of probability
when we do not know a thing with certainty. But our uncertainty is
either purely subjective (we do not know what will take place, but
someone else may know) or objective (no one knows, and no one can know).
Subjective probability is a compass for an informational disability; not
knowing which horse will come in first and guessing by the number of
horses (if there are four, each has one chance in four of winning the
race), I act like one who is sightless in a room full of furniture.
Probability is, so to speak, a cane for a blind man; he uses it to feel
his way. If he could see, he would not need the cane, and if I knew
which horse was the fastest, I would not need probability theory. As is
known, the question of the objectivity or the subjectivity of
probability has divided the world of science into two camps. Some
maintain that there exist two types of probability, as above, others,
that only the subjective exists, because regardless of what is supposed
to take place, _we_ cannot have full knowledge of it. Therefore, some
lay the uncertainty of future events at the door of our knowledge of
them, whereas others place it within the realm of the events themselves.

That which takes place, if it really and truly takes place, takes place
indeed: such is Professor Kouska’s main contention. Probability comes in
only where a thing has not yet taken place. So saith science. But
everyone is aware that two duelists firing two bullets which flatten
each other in midair, or that breaking one’s tooth, while eating a fish,
on a ring which by accident one had dropped overboard at sea six years
before and which was swallowed by that exact same fish, or—for that
matter—that the playing, in three-four time, of Tchaikovsky’s Sonatina
in B Minor in a kitchen-utensil store by bursting shrapnel during a
siege, because the shrapnel’s metal balls strike the larger and smaller
pots and pans exactly as the composition requires—that any of this, were
it to happen, would constitute a happening most improbable. Science says
in this regard that these are facts occurring with a very negligible
frequency in the sets of occurrences to which the facts belong, that is,
in the set of all duels, in the set of eating fish and finding lost
objects in them, and in the set of bombardments of stores selling
housewares.

 But science, says Professor Kouska, is selling us a line, because all
its twaddle about sets is a complete fiction. The theory of probability
can usually tell us how long we must wait for a given event, for an
event of a specified and unusually low probability, or, in other words,
how many times it will be necessary to repeat a duel, lose a ring, or
fire at pots and pans before the afore-mentioned remarkable things come
about. This is rubbish, because in order to make a highly improbable
thing come about it is not at all necessary that the set of events to
which it belongs represent a continuous series. If I throw ten coins at
once, knowing that the chance of ten heads coming up at the same time,
or ten tails, works out to barely 1:796, I certainly do not need to make
upward of 796 throws in order that the probability of ten heads turning
up, or ten tails, become equal to one. For I can always say that my
throws are a continuation of an experiment comprising all the past
throws of ten coins at once. Of such throws there must have been, in the
course of the last five thousand years of Earth’s history, an inordinate
number; therefore, I really ought to expect that straightaway all my
coins are going to land heads up, or tails up. Meanwhile, says Professor
Kouska, just you try and base your expectations on such reasoning! From
the scientific point of view it is entirely correct, for the fact of
whether one throws the coins nonstop or puts them aside for a moment to
eat _knedlach_ in the intermission or go for a quick one at the corner
bar, or whether—for that matter—it is not the same person who does the
throwing, but a different one each time, and not all in one day but each
week or each year, has not the slightest effect or bearing on the
distribution of the probability; thus the fact that ten coins were
thrown by the Phoenicians sitting on their sheepskins, and by the Greeks
after they burned Troy, and by the Roman pimps in the time of the
Caesars, and by the Gauls, and by the Teutons, and by the Ostrogoths,
and the Tartars, and the Turks driving their captives to Stamboul, and
the rug merchants in Galata, and those merchants who trafficked in
children from the Children’s Crusade, and Richard the Lion-Hearted, and
Robespierre, as well as a few dozen tens of thousands of other gamblers,
also is wholly immaterial, and consequently, in throwing the coins, we
can consider that the set is extremely large, and that our chances of
throwing ten heads or ten tails at once are positively enormous! Just
you try and throw, says Professor Kouska, gripping some learned
physicist or other probability theorist by the elbow so he can’t escape,
for such as they do not like having the falsity of their method pointed
out to them. Just you try, you’ll see that nothing comes of it.

 Next, Professor Kouska undertakes an extensive thought experiment that
relates not to some hypothetical phenomenon or other, but to a part of
his own biography. We repeat here, in condensed form, some of the more
interesting fragments of this analysis.

A certain army doctor, during the First World War, ejected a nurse from
the operating room, for he was in the midst of surgery when she entered
by mistake. Had the nurse been better acquainted with the hospital, she
would not have mistaken the door to the operating room for the door to
the first-aid station, and had she not entered the operating room, the
surgeon would not have ejected her; had he not ejected her, his
superior, the regiment doctor, would not have brought to his attention
his unseemly behavior regarding the lady (for she was a volunteer nurse,
a society miss), and had the superior not brought this to his attention,
the young surgeon would not have considered it his duty to go and
apologize to the nurse, would not have taken her to the café, fallen in
love with her, and married her, whereby Professor Benedykt Kouska would
not have come into the world as the child of this same married couple.

 From this it would appear to follow that the probability of the coming
into the world of Professor Benedykt Kouska (as a newborn, not as the
head of the Analytical Philosophy Department) was set by the probability
of the nurse’s confusing or not confusing the doors in the given year,
month, day, and hour. But it is not that way at all. The young surgeon
Kouska did not have, on that day, any operations scheduled; however, his
colleague Doctor Popichal, who wished to carry the laundry from the
cleaners to his aunt, entered the aunt’s house, where because of a blown
fuse the light over the stairwell was not working, because of which he
fell off the third step and twisted his ankle; and because of this,
Kouska had to take his place in surgery. Had the fuse not blown,
Popichal would not have sprained his ankle, Popichal would have been the
one operating and not Kouska, and, being an individual known for his
gallantry, he would not have used strong language to remove the nurse
who entered the operating room by mistake, and, not having insulted her,
he would not have seen the need to arrange a tête-à-tête with her; but
tête-à-tête or no tête-à-tête, it is absolutely certain in any case that
from the possible union of Popichal and the nurse the result would have
been not Benedykt Kouska but someone altogether different, with whose
chances of coming into the world this study does not concern itself.

Professional statisticians, aware of the complicated state of the things
of this world, usually wriggle out of having to deal with the
probability of such events as someone’s coming into the world. They say,
to be rid of you, that what we have here is the coincidence of a great
number of divaricate-source causal chains and that consequently the
point in space-time in which a given egg merges with a given sperm is
indeed determined in principle, _in abstracto;_ however, _in concreto_
one would never be able to accumulate knowledge of sufficient power,
that is to say all-embracing, for the practical formulation of any
prognosis (with what probability there will be born an individual X of
traits Y, or in other words _how long_ people must reproduce before it
is certain that a certain individual, of traits Y, will with absolute
certainty come into the world) to become feasible. But the impossibility
is technical only, not fundamental; it rests in the difficulties of
collecting information, and not in the absence in the world (to hear
them talk) of such information to collect. This lie of statistical
science Professor Benedykt Kouska intends to nail and expose.

 As we know, the question of Professor Kouska’s being able to be born
does not reduce itself merely to the alternative of “right door, wrong
door.” Not with regard to one coincidence must one reckon the chances of
his birth, but with regard to many: the coincidence that the nurse was
sent to that hospital and not another; the coincidence that her smile in
the shadow cast by her cornet resembled, from a distance, the smile of
Mona Lisa; the coincidence, too, that the Archduke Ferdinand was shot in
Sarajevo, for had he not been shot, war would not have broken out, and
had war not broken out, the young lady would not have become a nurse;
moreover, since she came from Olomouc and the surgeon from Moravská
Ostrava, they most likely would never have met, neither in a hospital
nor anywhere else. One therefore has to take into account the general
theory of the ballistics of shooting at archdukes, and since the hitting
of the Archduke was conditioned by the motion of his automobile, the
theory of the kinematics of automobile models of the year 1914 should
also be considered, as well as the psychology of assassins, because not
everyone in the place of that Serb would have shot at the Archduke, and
even if someone had, he would not have hit, not if his hands were
shaking with excitement; the fact, therefore, that the Serb had a steady
hand and eye and no tremors also has its place in the probability
distribution of the birth of Professor Kouska. Nor ought one to ignore
the overall political situation of Europe in the summer of 1914.

 But the marriage in any case did not come about in that year, or in
1915, when the young couple became acquainted in good earnest, for the
surgeon was detailed to the fortress of Przemyśl. From there he was to
travel later to Lwów, where lived the young maiden Marika, whom his
parents had chosen to be his wife out of financial considerations.
However, as a result of Samsonov’s offensive and the movements of the
southern flank of the Russian forces, Przemyśl was besieged, and before
long, instead of repairing to his betrothed in Lwów, the surgeon
proceeded into Russian captivity when the fortress fell. Now, he
remembered the nurse better than he did his fiancee, because the nurse
not only was fair but also sang the song “Sleep, Love, in Thy Bed of
Flowers” much more sweetly than did Marika, who had an unremoved polyp
on her vocal cords and from this a constant hoarseness. Marika was, in
fact, to have undergone an operation to remove the polyp in 1914, but
the otorhinolaryngologist who was supposed to remove the polyp, having
lost a great deal of money in a Lwów casino and being unable to pay off
his debt of honor (he was an officer), instead of shooting himself in
the head, robbed the regimental till and fled to Italy; this incident
caused Marika to conceive a great dislike for otorhinolaryngologists,
and before she could decide on another she became betrothed; as a
betrothed she was obliged to sing “Sleep, Love, in Thy Bed of Flowers,”
and her singing, or, rather, the memory of that hoarse and wheezy voice,
in contrast—detrimental to the betrothed—with the pure timbre of the
Prague nurse, was responsible for the latter’s gaining ascendancy, in
the mind of doctor-prisoner Kouska, over the image of his fiancee. So
that, returning to Prague in the year 1919, he did not even think to
look up his former fiancee but immediately went to the house in which
the nurse was living as a marriageable miss.

 The nurse, however, had four different suitors; all four sought her
hand in marriage, whereas between her and Kouska there was nothing
concrete except for the postcards he had sent her from captivity, and
the postcards in themselves, smudged with the stamps of the military
censor, could not have been expected to kindle in her heart any lasting
feeling. But her first serious suitor was a certain Hamuras, a pilot who
did not fly because he always got a hernia when he moved the airplane’s
rudder bar with his feet, and this because the rudder bars in the
airplanes of those days were hard to move—it was, after all, a very
primitive era in aviation. Now, Hamuras had been operated on once, but
without success, for the hernia recurred, recurred because the doctor
performing the operation had made a mistake in the catgut sutures; and
the nurse was ashamed to wed the sort of flier who, instead of flying,
spent his time either sitting in the reception room of the hospital or
searching the newspaper ads for places to obtain a genuine prewar truss,
since Hamuras figured that such a truss would enable him to fly after
all; on account of the war, however, a good truss was unobtainable.

One should note that at this juncture Professor Kouska’s “to be or not
to be” ties in with the history of aviation in general, and with the
airplane models used by the Austro-Hungarian Army in particular.
Specifically, the birth of Professor Kouska was positively influenced by
the fact that in 1911 the Austro-Hungarian government acquired a
franchise to build monoplanes whose rudder bars were difficult to
operate, planes that were to be manufactured by a plant in
Wiener-Neustadt, and this in fact took place. Now, in the course of the
bidding, the French firm Antoinette competed with this plant and its
franchise (coming from an American firm, Farman), and the French firm
had a good chance, because Major General Prchl, of the Imperial Crown
Commissariat, would have turned the scales in favor of the French model,
because he had a French mistress, the governess of his children, and on
account of this secretly loved all things French; that, of course, would
have altered the distribution of chance, since the French machine was a
biplane with sweptback ailerons and a rudder blade that had an easily
movable control bar, so the bar would not have caused Hamuras his
problem, owing to which the nurse might have married him after all.
Granted, the biplane had a hard-to-work _exhaust hammer,_ and Hamuras
had rather delicate shoulders; he even suffered from what is called
_Schreibkrampf,_ which gave him difficulty signing his name (his full
name ran Adolf Alfred von Messen-Weydeneck zu Oryola und Münne-sacks,
Baron Hamuras). So, then, even without the hernia Hamuras _could_ have,
by reason of his weak arms, lost his appeal in the eyes of the nurse.

 But there popped up in the governess’s path a certain two-bit tenor
from an operetta, with remarkable speed he gave her a baby, Lieutenant
General Prchl drove her from his door, lost his affection for all things
French, and the army stayed with the Farman franchise held by the
company from Wiener-Neustadt. The tenor the governess met at the Ring
when she went there with General Prchl’s oldest daughters—the youngest
had the whooping cough, so they were trying to keep the healthy children
away from the sick one—and if it had not been for that whooping cough
brought in by that acquaintance of the Prchls’ cook, a man who carried
coffee to a smoking room and was wont to drop in on the Prchls in the
morning, that is, drop in on their cook, there would have been no
illness, no taking of the children to the Ring, no meeting the tenor, no
infidelity; and thereby Antoinette would have won out in the bidding
after all. But Hamuras was jilted, married the daughter of a purveyor by
appointment to His Majesty the King, and had three children by her, one
of which he had without the hernia.

 There was nothing wrong with the nurse’s second suitor, Captain Miśnia,
but he went to the Italian front and came down with rheumatism (this was
in the winter, in the Alps). As for the cause of his demise, accounts
differ; the Captain was taking a steam bath, a .22-caliber shell hit the
building, the Captain went flying out naked straight into the snow, the
snow took care of his rheumatism, they say, but he got pneumonia.
However, had Professor Fleming discovered his penicillin not in 1941
but, say, in 1910, then Miśnia would have been pulled out of the
pneumonia and returned to Prague as a convalescent, and the chances of
Professor Kouska’s coming into the world would have been, by that,
greatly diminished. And so the calendar of discoveries in the field of
antibacterial drugs played a large role in the rise of B. Kouska.

The third suitor was a respectable wholesale dealer, but the young lady
did not care for him. The fourth was about to marry her for certain, but
it did not work out on account of a beer. This last beau had enormous
debts and hoped to pay them off out of the dowry; he also had an
unusually checkered past. The family went, along with the young lady and
her suitor, to a Red Cross raffle, but Hungarian veal birds were served
for lunch, and the father of the young lady developed a terrific thirst,
so he left the pavilion where they all were listening to the military
band and had a mug of beer on draft, in the course of which he ran into
an old schoolmate who was just then leaving the raffle grounds, and had
it not been for the beer, they would certainly not have come together;
this schoolmate knew, through his sister-in-law, the entire past of the
young lady’s suitor and was not averse to telling her father everything
and in full detail. It appears he also embellished a little here and
there; in any event, the father returned most agitated, and the
engagement, having been all but made official, fell irretrievably to
pieces. Yet had the father not eaten Hungarian veal birds, he would not
have felt a thirst, would not have stepped out for a beer, would not
have met his old schoolmate, would not have learned of the debts of the
suitor; the engagement would have gone through, and, seeing it would
have been an engagement in wartime, the wedding also would have followed
in short order. An excessive amount of paprika in the veal birds on May
19, 1916, thus saved the life of Professor B. Kouska.

 As for Kouska the surgeon, he returned from captivity in the rank of
battalion doctor and proceeded to enter the lists of courtship. Evil
tongues informed him of the suitors, and particularly of the late
Captain Miśnia, R.I.P., who presumably had achieved a more-than-passing
acquaintance with the young lady, though at the same time she had been
answering the postcards from the prisoner of war. Being by nature fairly
impetuous, the surgeon Kouska was prepared to break off the engagement
already made, particularly since he had received several letters which
the young lady had written to Miśnia (God knows how they ended up in the
hands of a malicious person in Prague), along with an anonymous letter
explaining how he, Kouska, had been serving the young lady as a fifth
wheel, that is, kept in reserve as a stand-by. The breaking off of the
engagement did not come about, due to a conversation the surgeon had
with his grandfather, who had really been a father to him from childhood
because the surgeon’s own father, a profligate and ne’er-do-well, had
not raised him at all. The grandfather was an old man of unusually
progressive views, and he considered that a young girl’s head was easily
turned, especially when the turner wore a uniform and pleaded the
soldier’s death that could befall him at any moment.

Kouska thus married the young lady. If, however, he had had a
grandfather of other persuasions, or if the old liberal had passed away
before his eightieth year, the marriage most certainly would not have
taken place. The grandfather, it is true, led an exceedingly healthy
mode of life and rigorously took the water cure prescribed by Father
Kneipp; but to what extent the ice-cold shower each morning, lengthening
the grandfather’s life, increased the chances of Professor B. Kouska’s
coming into the world, it is impossible to determine. The father of
surgeon Kouska, a disciple of misogyny, would definitely not have
interceded in behalf of the maligned maiden; but he had no influence
over his son from the time when, having made the acquaintance of Mr.
Serge Mdivani, he became the latter’s secretary, went with him to Monte
Carlo, and came back believing in a system of breaking the bank in
roulette shown him by a certain widow-countess; thanks to this system he
lost his entire fortune, was placed under custody, and had to give up
his son to the care of his own father. Yet had the surgeon’s father not
succumbed to the demon of gambling, _his_ father would then not have
disowned him, and—again—the coming to pass of Professor Kouska would not
have come to pass.

 The factor that tipped the scales in favor of the Professor’s birth was
Mr. Serge _vel_ Sergius Mdivani. Sick of his estate in Bosnia, and of
his wife and mother-in-law, he engaged Kouska (the surgeon’s father) as
his secretary and took off with him for the waters, because Kouska the
father knew languages and was a man of the world, whereas Mdivani,
notwithstanding his first name, knew no language besides Croatian. But
had Mr. Mdivani in his youth been better looked after by _his_ father,
then instead of chasing after the chambermaids he would have studied his
languages, would not have needed a translator, would not have taken the
father of Kouska to the waters, the latter would not have returned from
Monte Carlo as a gambler, and thereupon would not have been cursed and
cast out by his father, who, not taking the surgeon under his wing as a
child, would not have instilled liberal principles in him, the surgeon
would have broken off with the young lady, and—once more—Professor
Benedykt Kouska would not have made his appearance in this world. Now,
Mr. Mdivani’s father was not disposed to keep an eye on the progress of
his son’s education when the latter was supposed to be studying
languages, because this son, by his looks, reminded him of a certain
dignitary of the church concerning whom Mr. Mdivani Sr. harbored the
suspicion that he, the dignitary, was the true father of little Sergius.
Feeling, therefore, a subconscious dislike for little Sergius, he
neglected him; as a result of this neglect Sergius did not learn, as he
should have, his languages.

 The question of the identity of the boy’s father was in fact
complicated, because even the mother of little Sergius was not certain
whether he was the son of her husband or of the parish priest, and she
did not know for sure whose son he was because she believed in stares
that affected the unborn. She believed in stares that affected the
unborn because her authority in all things was her Gypsy grandmother. We
are now speaking, it should be noted, of the relation between the
grandmother of the mother of little Sergius Mdivani and the chances of
the birth of Professor Benedykt Kouska. Mdivani was born in the year
1861, his mother in 1832, and the Gypsy grandmother in 1798. So, then,
matters that transpired in Bosnia and Herzegovina toward the close of
the eighteenth century—in other words, 130 years before the birth of
Professor Kouska—exerted a very real influence on the probability
distribution of his coming into the world. But neither did the Gypsy
grandmother appear in a void. She did not wish to marry an Orthodox
Croat, particularly since at that time all Yugoslavia was under the
Turkish Yoke, and marriage to a giaour would bode no good for her. But
the Gypsy maid had an uncle much older than she; he had fought under
Napoleon; it was said that he had taken part in the retreat of the Grand
Army from the environs of Moscow. In any case, from his soldiering under
the Emperor of the French he returned home with the conviction that
interdenominational differences were of no great matter, for he had had
a close look at the differences of war, therefore he encouraged his
niece to marry the Croat, for, though a giaour, it was a good and comely
youth. In marrying the Croat, the grandmother on Mr. Mdivani’s mother’s
side thus increased the chances of Professor Kouska’s birth. As for the
uncle, he would not have fought under Napoleon had he not been living
during the Italian campaign in the region of the Apennines, whither he
was sent by his master, a sheep farmer, with a consignment of sheepskin
coats. He was waylaid by a mounted patrol of the Imperial Guard and
given the choice of enlisting or becoming a camp follower; he preferred
to bear arms. Now, if the Gypsy uncle’s master had not raised sheep, or
if, raising them, he had not made sheepskin coats, for which there was a
demand in Italy, and if he had not sent this uncle to Italy with the
coats, then the mounted patrol would not have seized the Gypsy uncle,
whereupon, not fighting his way across Europe, this uncle, his
conservative opinions intact, would not have encouraged his niece to
marry the Croat. And therewith the mother of little Sergius, having no
Gypsy grandmother and consequently not believing in stares that affected
the unborn, would not have thought that merely from watching the parish
priest spread his arms as he sang in a bass at the altar one could bear
a son—the spit and image of the priest; and so, her conscience
completely clear, she would not have feared her husband, she would have
defended herself against the charges of infidelity, the husband, no
longer seeing evil in the looks of little Sergius, would have minded the
boy’s education, Sergius would have learned his languages, would not
have needed anyone as a translator, whereat the father of Kouska the
surgeon would not have gone off with him to the waters, would not have
become a gambler and a wastrel, would (being a misogynist) have urged
his surgeon son to throw over the young lady for her dalliance with the
late Captain Miśnia, R.I.P., as a result of which there would have been,
again, no Professor B. Kouska in the world.

 But now observe. So far we have examined the probability spectrum of
the birth of Professor Kouska on the assumption that both his
facultative parents existed, and we reduced the probability of that
birth only by introducing very small, perfectly credible changes in the
behavior of the father or mother of Professor Kouska, changes brought
about by the actions of third parties (General Samsonov, the Gypsy
grandmother, the mother of Mdivani, Baron Hamuras, the French governess
of Major General Prchl, Emperor Francis Joseph I, the Archduke
Ferdinand, the Wright brothers, the surgeon for the Baron’s hernia,
Marika’s otorhinolaryngologist, etc.). But surely the very same type of
analysis can be applied to the chances of the coming into the world of
the young lady who as a nurse married the surgeon Kouska, or for that
matter to the surgeon himself. Billions, trillions of circumstances had
to occur as they did occur for the young lady to come into the world and
for the future surgeon Kouska to come into the world. And in analogous
fashion, innumerable multitudes of occurrences conditioned the coming
into the world of their parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, etc.
It would seem to require no argumentation that, for example, had the
tailor Ylastimil Kouska, born in 1673, not come into the world, there
could not have been, by virtue of that, his son, or his grandson, or his
great-grandson, or thus the great-grandfather of Kouska the surgeon, or
thus Kouska the surgeon himself, or indeed Professor Benedykt.

 But the same reasoning holds for those ancestors of the line of the
Kouskas and the line of the nurse who were not at all human yet, being
creatures who led a quadrumanous and arboreal existence in the Lower
Eolithic, when the first Paleopithecanthropus, having overtaken one of
these quadrumanes and perceiving that it was a female with which he had
to deal, possessed her beneath the eucalyptus tree that grew in the
place where today stands the Mala Strana in Prague. As a result of the
mixing of the chromosomes of that lubricious Paleopithecanthropus and
that quadrumanous protohuman primatrice, there arose that type of
meiosis and that linkage of gene loci which, transmitted through the
next thirty thousand generations, produced on the visage of the young
lady nurse that very smile, faintly reminiscent of the smile of Mona
Lisa, from the canvas of Leonardo, which so enchanted the young surgeon
Kouska. But this same eucalyptus could have grown, could it not, four
meters away, in which case the quadrumaness, fleeing from the
Paleopithecanthropus that pursued her, would not have stumbled on the
tree’s thick root and gone sprawling, and therewith, clambering up the
tree in time, would not have got pregnant, and if she had not got
pregnant, then, transpiring a bit differently, Hannibal’s crossing of
the Alps, the Crusades, the Hundred Years’ War, the taking by the Turks
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Moscow campaign of Napoleon, as well as
several dozen trillion like events, undergoing minimal changes, would
have led to a situation in which in no wise could Professor Benedykt
Kouska any longer have been born, from which we can see that the range
of the chances of his existence contains within it a subclass of
probabilities that comprises the distribution of all the eucalyptus
trees that grew in the location of modern-day Prague roughly 349,000
years ago. Now, those eucalyptuses grew there because, while fleeing
from sabertoothed tigers, great herds of weakened mammoths had eaten
their fill of eucalyptus flowers and then, suffering indigestion from
them (the flower sorely stings the palate), had drunk copious quantities
of water from the Vltava; that water, having at the time purgative
properties, caused them to evacuate en masse, thanks to which eucalyptus
seeds were planted where previously eucalypti had never been; but had
the water not been sulfurized by the influx of a mountain tributary of
the then Vltava, the mammoths, not getting the runs from it, would not
have occasioned the growing of the eucalytpus grove on the site of what
is now Prague, the quadrumanal female would not have gone sprawling in
her flight from the Paleopithecanthropus, and there would not have
arisen that gene locus which imparted to the face of the young lady the
Mona Lisa-like smile that captivated the young surgeon; and so, but for
the diarrhea of the mammoths, Professor Benedykt Kouska also would have
not come into the world. It should be noted, moreover, that the water of
the Vltava underwent sulfurization approximately two and a half million
years B.C., this on account of a displacement in the main geosyncline of
the tectonic formation that was then giving rise to the center of the
Tatra Mountains; this formation caused the expulsion of sulfurous gases
from the marlacious strata of the Lower Jurassic, because in the region
of the Dinaric Alps there was an earthquake, which was caused by a
meteor that had a mass on the order of a million tons; this meteor came
from a swarm of Leonids, and had it fallen not in the Dinaric Alps but a
little farther on, the geosyncline would not have buckled, the sulfurous
deposit would not have reached the air and sulfurized the Vltava, and
the Vltava would not have caused the diarrhea of the mammoths, from
which one can see that had a meteor not fallen 2.5 million years ago on
the Dinaric Alps, Professor Kouska then, too, could not have been born.

 Professor Kouska calls attention to the erroneous conclusion which some
people are inclined to draw from his argument. They think that from what
has just been set forth it follows that the entire Universe, mind you,
is something in the nature of a machine, a machine so assembled and
working in such a way as to enable Professor Kouska to be born.
Obviously, this is complete nonsense. Let us imagine that, a billion
years before its genesis, an observer wishes to compute the chances of
the Earth’s coming into being. He will not be able to foresee exactly
what shape the planet-making vortex will give to the nucleus of the
future Earth; he can compute neither its future mass nor its chemical
composition with any degree of precision. Nonetheless he predicts, on
the basis of his knowledge of astrophysics, and of his familiarity with
the theory of gravitation and the theory of star structure, that the Sun
will have a family of planets and that among these planets there will
revolve about it a planet No. 3, counting from the center of the system
out; and this same planet may be considered Earth, though it look
different from what the prediction has declared, because a planet ten
billion tons heavier than the Earth or having two small moons instead of
one large, or covered with oceans over a higher percentage of its
surface, would still be, surely, an Earth.

On the other hand, a Professor Kouska predicted by someone half a
million years B.C., should he be born as a two-legged marsupial or as a
yellow-skinned woman, or as a Buddhist monk, would obviously no longer
be Professor Kouska, albeit—perhaps—still a person. For objects such as
suns, planets, clouds, rocks, are not in any way unique, whereas all
living organisms are unique. Each man is, as it were, the first prize in
a lottery, in the kind of lottery, moreover, where the winning ticket is
a teragigamegamulticentillion-to-one shot. Why, then, do we not daily
feel the astronomically monstrous minuteness of the chance of our own or
another’s coming into the world? For the reason, answers Professor
Kouska, that even in the case of that which is most unlikely to happen,
if it happens, then it happens! And also because in an ordinary lottery
we see the vast number of losing tickets along with the single one that
wins, whereas in the lottery of existence the tickets that miss are
nowhere to be seen. “The chances that lose in the lottery of being are
invisible!” explains Professor Kouska. For, surely, to lose in that
sweepstakes amounts to not being born, and he who has not been born
cannot be said to be, not a whit. We quote the author now, starting on
line 24 on page 619 of Volume I _(De Impossibilitate Vitae):_

 “Some people come into the world as the issue of unions that were
arranged long in advance, on both the spear and distaff sides, so that
the future father of the given individual and his future mother, even
when children, were destined for each other. A man who sees the light of
day as a child of such a marriage might receive the impression that the
probability of his existence was considerable, in contradistinction to
one who learns that his father met his mother in the course of the great
migrations of wartime, or that quite simply he was conceived because
some hussar of Napoleon, while making his escape from the Berezina, took
not only a mug of water from the lass he came upon at the edge of the
village but also her maidenhead. To such a man it might seem that had
the hussar hurried more, feeling the Cossack hundreds at his back, or
had his mother not been looking for God knows what at the edge of the
village, but stayed at home by the chimney corner as befitted her, then
he would never have been, or in other words that the chance of his
existence hung on a thread in comparison with the chance of him whose
parents had been destined for each other in advance.

 “Such notions are mistaken, because it makes absolutely no sense to
assert that the calculation of the probability of anyone’s birth has to
be begun from the coming into the world of the future father and the
future mother of the given individual. Making _that_ the zero point on
the probability scale. If we have a labyrinth composed of a thousand
rooms connected by a thousand doors, then the probability of going from
the beginning to the end of the labyrinth is determined by the sum of
all the choices in all the consecutive rooms through which passes the
seeker of the way, and not by the isolated probability of his finding
the right door in some single room. If he takes a wrong turn in room No.
100, then he will be every bit as lost and as likely not to regain his
freedom as if he took the wrong turn in the first or the thousandth
room. Similarly, there is no reason to assert that only my birth was
subject to the laws of chance, whereas the births of my parents were not
so subject, or those of their parents, grandfathers, great-grandfathers,
grandmothers, greatgrandmothers, etc., back to the birth of life on
Earth. And it makes no sense to say that the fact of any specific human
individual’s existence is a phenomenon of very low probability. Very
low, relative to what? From where is the calculation to be made? Without
the fixing of a zero point, i.e., of a beginning place for a scale of
computation, measurement—and therefore the estimation of
probability—becomes an empty word.

“It does not follow, from my reasoning, that my coming into the world
was assured or predetermined back before the Earth took form; quite the
contrary, what follows is that I could not have been at all and no one
would have so much as noticed. Everything that statistics has to say on
the subject of the prognostication of individual births is rubbish. For
it holds that every man, howsoever unlikely he be in himself, is still
possible as a realization of certain chances; meanwhile, I have
demonstrated that, having before one any individual whatever—Mucek the
baker, for example—one can say the following: it is possible to select a
moment in the past, a moment prior to his birth, such that the
prediction of Mucek the baker’s coming to be, made at that moment, will
have a probability _as near zero as desired._ When my parents found
themselves in the marriage bed, the chances of my coming into the world
worked out to, let us say, one in one hundred thousand (taking into
account, among other things, the infant mortality rate, fairly high in
wartime). During the siege of the fortress of Przemyśl the chances of my
being born equaled only one in a billion; in the year 1900, one in a
trillion; in 1800, one in a quadrillion, and so on. A hypothetical
observer computing the chances of my birth under the eucalyptus, at the
Mala Strana in the time of the Interglacial, after the migration of the
mammoths and their stomach disorder, would set the chances of my ever
seeing the light of day at one in a centillion. Magnitudes of the order
of giga appear when the point of estimation is moved back a billion
years, of the order of tera, back three billion years, etc.

 “In other words, one can always find a point on the time axis from
which an estimate of the chances of any person’s birth yields an
improbability as great as one likes, that is to say, an impossibility,
because a probability that approaches zero is the same thing as an
improbability that approaches infinity. In saying this, we do not
suggest that neither we nor anyone else exists in this world. On the
contrary: neither in our own being nor in another’s do we entertain the
least doubt. In saying what we have said, we merely repeat what physics
claims, for it is from the standpoint of physics and not of common sense
that in the world not a single man exists or ever did. And here is the
proof: physics maintains that that which has one chance in a centillion
is impossible, because that which has one chance in a centillion, even
assuming that the event in question belongs to a set of events that take
place every second, cannot be expected to happen in the Universe.

 “The number of seconds that will elapse between the present day and the
end of the Universe is less than a centillion. The stars will give up
all their energy much sooner. And therefore the time of duration of the
Universe in its present form must be shorter than the time needed to
await a thing that takes place once in one centillion seconds. From the
standpoint of physics, to wait for an event so little likely is
equivalent to waiting for an event that most definitely will not come to
pass. Physics calls such phenomena ‘thermodynamic miracles.’ To these
belong, for example, the freezing of water in a pot standing over a
flame, the rising from the floor of fragments of a broken glass and
their joining together to make a whole glass, etc. Calculation shows
that such ‘miracles’ are nevertheless more probable than a thing whose
chance is one in one centillion. We should add now that our estimate has
so far taken into account only half of the matter, namely the
macroscopic data. Besides these, the birth of a specific individual is
contingent on circumstances which are microscopic, i.e., the question of
which sperm combines with which egg in a given pair of persons. Had my
mother conceived me at a different day and hour from what took place,
then I would have been born not myself but someone other, which can be
seen from my mother’s having in fact conceived at a different day and
hour, namely a year and a half before my birth, and given birth then to
a little girl, my sister, regarding whom it should require no proof, I
think, to say that she is not myself. This microstatistics also would
have to be considered in the estimation of the chances of my arising,
and when included in the reckoning it raises the centillions of
improbability to the myriaillions.

“So, then, from the standpoint of thermodynamic physics, the existence
of any man is a phenomenon of cosmic impossibility, since so improbable
as to be unforeseeable. When it assumes as given that certain people
exist, physics may predict that these people will give birth to other
people, but as to which specific individuals will be born, physics must
either be silent or fall into complete absurdity. And therefore either
physics is in error when it proclaims the universal validity of its
theory of probability, or people do not exist, and likewise dogs,
sharks, mosses, lichens, tapeworms, bats, and liverworts, since what is
said holds for all that fives. _Ex physicali positione vita impossibilis
est, quod erat demonstrandum_.”

 With these words concludes the work _De Impossibilitate Vitae,_ which
actually represents a huge preparation for the matter of the second of
the two volumes. In his second volume the author proclaims the futility
of predictions of the future that are founded on probabilism. He
proposes to show that history contains no facts but those that are the
most thoroughly improbable from the standpoint of probability theory.
Professor Kouska sets an imaginary futurologist down on the threshold of
the twentieth century and endows him with all the knowledge that was
then available, in order to put to this figure a series of questions.
For instance: “Do you consider it probable that soon there will be
discovered a silvery metal, similar to lead, capable of destroying life
on Earth should two hemispheres composed of this metal be brought
together by a simple movement of the hands, to make of them something
resembling a large orange? Do you consider it possible that this old
carriage here, in which Karl Benz, Esq. has mounted a rattling
one-and-a-half-horsepower engine, will before long multiply to such an
extent that from its asphyxiating fumes and combustion exhausts day will
turn into night in the great cities, and the problem of placing this
vehicle somewhere, when the drive is finished, will grow into the main
misfortune of the mightiest metropolises? Do you consider it probable
that owing to the principle of fireworks and kicking, people will soon
begin taking walks upon the Moon, while their perambulations will at the
very same moment be visible to hundreds of millions of other people in
their homes on Earth? Do you consider it possible that soon we will be
able to make artificial heavenly bodies, equipped with instruments that
enable one from cosmic space to keep track of the movement of any man in
a field or on a city street? Do you think it likely that a machine will
be built that plays chess better than you, composes music, translates
from language to language, and performs in the space of a few minutes
calculations which all the accountants, auditors, and bookkeepers in the
world put together could not accomplish in a lifetime? Do you consider
it possible that very shortly there will arise in the center of Europe
huge industrial plants in which living people will be burned in ovens,
and that these unfortunates will number in the _millions_?”

 It is clear—states Professor Kouska—that in the year 1900 only a
lunatic would have granted all these events even the remotest
credibility. And yet they have come to pass. If, then, nothing but
improbabilities have taken place, why exactly should this pattern
suddenly undergo a radical change, so that from now on only what we
consider to be credible, probable, and possible will come true? Predict
the future however you will, gentlemen—he says to the futurologists—so
long as you do not rest your predictions on the computation of maximal
chances....

The imposing work of Professor Kouska without a doubt merits
recognition. Still, this scholar, in the heat of the cognitive moment,
fell into an error, for which he has been taken to task by Professor
Bedřich Vrchlicka in a lengthy critical article appearing in the pages
of Z_ëmledëlské Noviny._ Professor Vrchlicka contends that Professor
Kouska’s whole antiprobabilistic line of reasoning is based on an
assumption both unstated and mistaken. For behind the façade of Kouska’s
argumentation lies concealed a “metaphysical wonderment at existence,”
which might be couched in these words: “How is it that I exist now of
all times, in this body of all bodies, in such a form and not another?
How is it that I was not any of the millions of people who existed
formerly, nor will be any of those millions who have yet to be born?”
Even assuming that such a question makes sense, says Professor
Vrchlicka, it has nothing at all to do with physics. But. on the surface
it appears that it has and that one could rearticulate it thus: “Every
man who has existed, i.e., lived till now, was the corporeal realization
of a particular pattern of genes, the building blocks of heredity. We
could in principle reproduce all the patterns that have been realized up
to the present day; we would then find ourselves before a gigantic table
filled with rows of genotypic formulas, each one of which would exactly
correspond to a particular man who arose from it through embryonic
growth. The question then leaps to one’s lips: in what way precisely
does that one genetic pattern in the table which corresponds to _me,_ to
_my_ body, differ from all the others, that as a result of this
difference it is _I_ who am the living incarnation of that pattern into
matter? That is, what _physical_ conditions, what _material_
circumstances ought I to take into account to arrive at an understanding
of this difference, to comprehend why it is I can say of all the
formulas on the table, ‘Those refer to Other People,’ and only of one
formula, ‘This refers to me, this is I AM’?”

 It is absurd to think—Professor Vrchlicka explains—that physics, today
or in a century, or in a thousand years, could provide an answer to a
question so framed. The question has no meaning whatever in physics,
because physics is not itself a person; consequently, when engaged in
the investigation of anything, whether it be bodies heavenly or human,
physics makes no distinction between me and you, this one and that one;
the fact that I say of myself “I,” and of another “he,” physics
contrives in its own way to interpret (relying on the general theory of
logical automata, the theory of self-organizing systems, etc.), but it
does not actually perceive the existential dissimilarity between “I” and
“he.” To be sure, physics does reveal the _uniqueness_ of individual
people, because every man is (omitting twins!) the incarnation of a
different genetic formula.

 But Professor Kouska is not at all interested in the fact that each of
us is constructed somewhat differently, that each has a physical and
psychological individuality. The metaphysical wonderment inherent in
Kouska’s line of reasoning would not be diminished one jot were all
people incarnations of one and the same genetic formula, were humanity
to be made up entirely, so to speak, of identical twins. For one could
then still ask what brings about the fact that “I” am not “someone
else,” that I was born not in the time of the Pharaohs or in the Arctic,
but now, but here, and still it would not be possible to obtain an
answer to such a question from physics. The differences that occur
between me and other people begin for me with this, that I am myself,
that I cannot jump outside myself or exchange existences with anyone,
and it is only afterward and secondarily that I notice that my
appearance, my nature, is not the same as that of all the rest of the
living (and the dead). This most important difference, primary for me,
simply does not exist for physics, and nothing more remains to be said
on the subject. And therefore what causes the blindness of physics and
physicists to this problem is not the theory of probability.

By introducing the issue of the estimation of his chances of coming into
the world, Professor Kouska has led himself and the reader astray.
Professor Kouska believes that physics, to the question “What conditions
had to be met in order that I, Kouska, could be born?,” will answer with
the words “The conditions that had to be met were, physically,
improbable in the extreme!” Now, this is not the case. The question
really is: “I see I am a living man, one of millions. I would like to
learn in what way it is I differ _physically_ from all other people,
those who were, who are, and who are to be, that I was—or am—not any of
them, but represent only myself and say of myself ‘I.’ ” Physics does
not answer this question by resorting to probabilisms; it declares that
from its point of view there is, between the asker and all other people,
no _physical_ difference. And thus Kouska’s proof neither assails nor
upsets the theory of probability, for it has nothing whatever to do with
it!

 The present reviewer’s reading of such conflicting opinions from two
such illustrious thinkers has thrown him into great perplexity. He is
unable to resolve the dilemma, and the only definite thing he has
carried away with him from reading the work of Professor B. Kouska is a
thoroughgoing knowledge of the events that led to the rise of a scholar
of so interesting a family history. As for the crux of the quarrel, it
had best be turned over to specialists more qualified.



 NON SERVIAM


Professor Dobb’s book is devoted to personetics, which the Finnish
philosopher Eino Kaikki has called “the cruelest science man ever
created.” Dobb, one of the most distinguished personeticists today,
shares this view. One cannot escape the conclusion, he says, that
personetics is, in its application, immoral; we are dealing, however,
with a type of pursuit that is, though counter to the principles of
ethics, also of practical necessity to us. There is no way, in the
research, to avoid its special ruthlessness, to avoid doing violence to
one’s natural instincts, and if nowhere else it is here that the myth of
the perfect innocence of the scientist as a seeker of facts is exploded.
We are speaking of a discipline, after all, which, with only a small
amount of exaggeration, for emphasis, has been called “experimental
theogony.”. Even so, this reviewer is struck by the fact that when the
press played up the thing, nine years ago, public opinion was stunned by
the personetic disclosures. One would have thought that in this day and
age nothing could surprise us. The centuries rang with the echo of the
feat of Columbus, whereas the conquering of the Moon in the space of a
week was received by the collective consciousness as a thing practically
humdrum. And yet the birth of personetics proved to be a shock.

 The name combines Latin and Greek derivatives: “persona” and
“genetic”—“genetic” in the sense of formation, or creation. The field is
a recent offshoot of the cybernetics and psychonics of the eighties,
crossbred with applied intellectronics. Today everyone knows of
personetics; the man in the street would say, if asked, that it is the
artificial production of intelligent beings—an answer not wide of the
mark, to be sure, but not quite getting to the heart of the matter. To
date we have nearly a hundred personetic programs. Nine years ago
identity schemata were being developed—primitive cores of the “linear”
type—but even that generation of computers, today of historical value
only, could not yet provide a field for the true creation of personoids.

The theoretical possibility of creating sentience was divined some time
ago, by Norbert Wiener, as certain passages of his last book, _God and
Golem,_ bear witness. Granted, he alluded to it in that half-facetious
manner typical of him, but underlying the facetiousness were fairly grim
premonitions. Wiener, however, could not have foreseen the turn that
things would take twenty years later. The worst came about—in the words
of Sir Donald Acker—when at MIT “the inputs were shorted to the
outputs.”

At present a “world” for personoid “inhabitants” can be prepared in a
matter of a couple of hours. This is the time it takes to feed into the
machine one of the full-fledged programs (such as BAAL 66, CREAN IV, or
JAHVE 09). Dobb gives a rather cursory sketch of the beginnings of
personetics, referring the reader to the historical sources; a confirmed
practitioner-experimenter himself, he speaks mainly of his own
work—which is much to the point, since between the English school, which
Dobb represents, and the American group, at MIT, the differences are
considerable, both in the area of methodology and as regards
experimental goals. Dobb describes the procedure of “6 days in 120
minutes” as follows. First, one supplies the machine’s memory with a
minimal set of givens; that is—to keep within a language comprehensible
to laymen—one loads its memory with substance that is “mathematical.”
This substance is the protoplasm of a universum to be “habitated” by
personoids. We are now able to supply the beings that will come into
this mechanical, digital world—that will be carrying on an existence in
it, and in it only—with an environment of nonfinite characteristics.
These beings, therefore, cannot feel imprisoned in the physical sense,
because the environment does not have, from their standpoint, any
bounds. The medium possesses only one dimension that resembles a
dimension given us also—namely, that of the passage of time (duration).
Their time is not directly analogous to ours, however, because the rate
of its flow is subject to discretionary control on the part of the
experimenter. As a rule, the rate is maximized in the preliminary phase
(the so-called creational warm-up), so that our minutes correspond to
whole eons in the computer, during which there takes place a series of
successive reorganizations and crystallizations—of a synthetic cosmos.
It is a cosmos completely spaceless, though possessing dimensions, but
these dimensions have a purely mathematical, hence what one might call
an “imaginary” character. They are, very simply, the consequence of
certain axiomatic decisions of the programmer, and their number depends
on him. If, for example, he chooses a ten-dimensionality, it will have
for the structure of the world created altogether different consequences
from those where only six dimensions are established. It should be
emphasized that these dimensions bear no relation to those of physical
space but only to the abstract, logically valid constructs made use of
in systems creation.

 This point, all but inaccessible to the nonmathematician, Dobb attempts
to explain by adducing simple facts, the sort generally learned in
school. It is possible, as we know, to construct a geometrically regular
three-dimensional solid—say, a cube—which in the real world possesses a
counterpart in the form of a die; and it is equally possible to create
geometrical solids of four, five, _n_ dimensions (the four-dimensional
is a tesseract). These no longer possess real counterparts, and we can
see this, since in the absence of any physical dimension No. 4 there is
no way to fashion genuine four-dimensional dice. Now, this distinction
(between what is physically constructible and what may be made only
mathematically) is, for personoids, in general nonexistent, because
their world is of a purely mathematical consistency. It is built of
mathematics, though the building blocks of that mathematics are
ordinary, perfectly physical objects (relays, transistors, logic
circuits—in a word, the whole huge network of the digital machine).

 As we know from modern physics, space is not something independent of
the objects and masses that are situated within it. Space is, in its
existence, determined by those bodies; where they are not, where nothing
is—in the material sense—there, too, space ceases, collapsing to zero.
Now, the role of material bodies, which extend their “influence,” so to
speak, and thereby “generate” space, is carried out in the personoid
world by systems of a mathematics called into being for that very
purpose. Out of all the possible “maths” that in general might be made
(for example, in an axiomatic manner), the programmer, having decided
upon a specific experiment, selects a particular group, which will serve
as the underpinning, the “existential substrate,” the “ontological
foundation” of the created universum. There is in this, Dobb believes, a
striking similarity to the human world. This world of ours, after all,
has “decided” upon certain forms and upon certain types of geometry that
best suit it—best, since most simply (three-dimensionality, in order to
remain with what one began with). This notwithstanding, we are able to
picture “other worlds” with “other properties”—in the geometrical and
not only in the geometrical realm. It is the same with the personoids:
that aspect of mathematics which the researcher has chosen as the
“habitat” is for them exactly what for us is the “real-world base” in
which we live, and live perforce. And, like us, the personoids are able
to “picture” worlds of different fundamental properties.

 Dobb presents his subject using the method of successive approximations
and recapitulations; that which we have outlined above, and which
corresponds roughly to the first two chapters of his book, in the
subsequent chapters undergoes partial revocation—through complication.
It is not really the case, the author advises us, that the personoids
simply come upon a readymade, fixed, frozen sort of world in its
irrevocably final form; what the world will be like in its specificities
depends on them, and this to a growing degree as their own activeness
increases, as their “exploratory initiative” develops. Nor does the
likening of the universum of the personoids to a world in which
phenomena exist only to the extent that its inhabitants observe them
provide an accurate image of the conditions. Such a comparison, which is
to be found in the works of Sainter and Hughes, Dobb considers an
“idealist deviation”—a homage that personetics has rendered to the
doctrine, so curiously and so suddenly resurrected, of Bishop Berkeley.
Sainter maintained that the personoids would know their world after the
fashion of a Berkeleyan being, which is not in a position to distinguish
“esse” from “_percipi_”—to wit, it will never discover the difference
between the thing perceived and that which occasions the perception in a
way objective and independent of the one perceiving. Dobb attacks this
interpretation of the matter with a passion. _We,_ the creators of their
world, know perfectly well that what is perceived by them indeed exists;
it exists inside the computer, independent of them—though, granted,
solely in the manner of mathematical objects.

And there are further clarifications. The personoids arise germinally by
virtue of the program; they increase at a rate imposed by the
experimenter—a rate only such as the latest technology of information
processing, operating at near-light speeds, permits. The mathematics
that is to be the “existential residence” of the personoids does not
await them in full readiness but is still “in wraps,” so to
speak—unarticulated, suspended, latent—because it represents only a set
of certain prospective chances, of certain pathways contained in
appropriately programmed subunits of the machine. These subunits, or
generators, in and of themselves contribute nothing; rather, a specific
type of personoid activity serves as a triggering mechanism, setting in
motion a production process that will gradually augment and define
itself; in other words, the world surrounding these beings takes on an
unequivocalness only in accordance with their own behavior. Dobb tries
to illustrate this concept with recourse to the following analogy. A man
may interpret the real world in a variety of ways. He may devote
particular attention—intense scientific investigation—to certain facets
of that world, and the knowledge he acquires then casts its own special
light on the remaining portions of the world, those not considered in
his priority-setting research. If first he diligently takes up
_mechanics,_ he will fashion for himself a _mechanical_ model of the
world and will see the Universe as a gigantic and perfect clock that in
its inexorable movement proceeds from the past to a precisely determined
future. This model is not an accurate representation of reality, and yet
one can make use of it for a period of time historically long, and with
it can even achieve many practical successes—the building of machines,
implements, etc. Similarly, should the personoids “incline themselves,”
by choice, by an act of will, to a certain type of relation to their
universum, and to that type of relation give precedence—if it is in this
and only in this that they find the “essence” of their cosmos—they will
enter upon a definite path of endeavors and discoveries, a path that is
neither illusory nor futile. Their inclination “draws out” of the
environment what best corresponds to it. What they first perceive is
what they first master. For the world that surrounds them is only
partially determined, only partially established in advance by the
researcher-creator; in it, the personoids preserve a certain and by no
means insignificant margin of freedom of action—action both “mental” (in
the province of what they think of their own world, of how they
understand it) and “real” (in the context of their “deeds”—which are
not, to be sure, literally real, as we understand the term, but are not
merely imagined, either). This is, in truth, the most difficult part of
the exposition, and Dobb, we daresay, is not altogether successful in
explaining those special qualities of personoid existence—qualities that
can be rendered only by the language of the mathematics of programs and
creational interventions. We must, then, take it somewhat on faith that
the activity of the personoids is neither entirely free—as the space of
our actions is not entirely free, being limited by the physical laws of
nature—nor entirely determined—just as we are not train cars set on
rigidly fixed tracks. A personoid is similar to a man in this respect,
too, that man’s “secondary qualities”—colors, melodious sounds, the
beauty of things—can manifest themselves only when he has ears to hear
and eyes to see, but what makes possible hearing and sight has been,
after all, previously given. Personoids, perceiving their environment,
give it from out of themselves those experiential qualities which
exactly correspond to what for us are the charms of a beheld
landscape—except, of course, that they have been provided with purely
mathematical scenery. As to “how they see it,” one can make no
pronouncement, for the only way of learning the “subjective quality of
their sensation” would be for one to shed his human skin and become a
personoid. Personoids, one must remember, have no eyes or ears,
therefore they neither see nor hear, as we understand it; in their
cosmos there is no light, no darkness, no spatial proximity, no
distance, no up or down; there are dimensions there, not tangible to us
but to them primary, elemental; they perceive, for example—as
equivalents of the components of human sensory awareness—certain changes
in electrical potential. But these changes in potential are, for them,
not something in the nature of, let us say, pressures of current but,
rather, the sort of thing that, for a man, is the most rudimentary
phenomenon, optical or aural—the seeing of a red blotch, the hearing of
a sound, the touching of an object hard or soft. From here on, Dobb
stresses, one can speak only in analogies, evocations.

 To declare that the personoids are “handicapped” with respect to us,
inasmuch as they do not see or hear as we do, is totally absurd, because
with equal justice one could assert that it is we who are deprived with
respect to them—unable to feel with immediacy the phenomenalism of
mathematics, which, after all, we know only in a cerebral, inferential
fashion. It is only through reasoning that we are in touch with
mathematics, only through abstract thought that we “experience” it.
Whereas the personoids _live_ in it; it is their air, their earth,
clouds, water, and even bread—yes, even food, because in a certain sense
they take nourishment from it. And so they are “imprisoned,”
hermetically locked inside the machine, solely from our point of view;
just as they cannot work their way out to us, to the human world, so,
conversely—and symmetrically—a man can in no wise enter the interior of
their world, so as to exist in it and know it directly. Mathematics has
become, then, in certain of its embodiments, the life-space of an
intelligence so spiritualized as to be totally incorporeal, the niche
and cradle of its existence, its element.

The personoids are in many respects similar to man. They are able to
imagine a particular contradiction (that _a_ is and that not-_a_ is) but
cannot bring about its realization, just as we cannot. The physics of
our world, the logic of theirs, does not allow it, since logic is for
the personoids’ universum the very same action-confining frame that
physics is for our world. In any case—emphasizes Dobb—it is quite out of
the question that we could ever fully, introspectively grasp what the
personoids “feel” and what they “experience” as they go about their
intensive tasks in their nonfinite universum. Its utter spacelessness is
no prison—that is a piece of nonsense the journalists latched onto—but
is, on the contrary, the guarantee of their freedom, because the
mathematics that is spun by the computer generators when “excited” into
activity (and what excites them thus is precisely the activity of the
personoids)—that mathematics is, as it were, a self-realizing infinite
field for optional actions, architectural and other labors, for
exploration, heroic excursions, daring incursions, surmises. In a word:
we have done the personoids no injustice by putting them in possession
of precisely such and not a different cosmos. It is not in this that one
finds the cruelty, the immorality of personetics.

 In the seventh chapter of _Non Serviam_ Dobb presents to the reader the
inhabitants of the digital universum. The personoids have at their
disposal a fluency of thought as well as of language, and they also have
emotions. Each of them is an individual entity; their differentiation is
not the mere consequence of the decisions of the creator-programmer but
results from the extraordinary complexity of their internal structure.
They can be very like, one to another, but never are they identical.
Coming into the world, each is endowed with a “core,” a “personal
nucleus,” and already possesses the faculty of speech and thought,
albeit in a rudimentary state. They have a vocabulary, but it is quite
spare, and they have the ability to construct sentences in accordance
with the rules of the syntax imposed upon them. It appears that in the
future it will be possible for us not to impose upon them even these
determinants, but to sit back and wait until, like a primeval human
group in the course of socialization, they develop their own speech. But
this direction of personetics confronts two cardinal obstacles. In the
first place, the time required to await the creation of speech would
have to be very long. At present, it would take twelve years, even with
the maximization of the rate of intracomputer transformations (speaking
figuratively and very roughly, one second of machine time corresponds to
one year of human life). Secondly, and this is the greater problem, a
language arising spontaneously in the “group evolution of the
personoids” would be incomprehensible to us, and its fathoming would be
bound to resemble the arduous task of breaking an enigmatic code—a task
made all the more difficult by the fact that such a code would not have
been created by people for other people in a world shared by the
decoders. The world of the personoids is vastly different in qualities
from ours, and therefore a language suited to it would have to be far
removed from any ethnic language. So, for the time being, linguistic
evolution _ex nihilo_ is only a dream of the personeticists.

 The personoids, when they have “taken root developmentally,” come up
against an enigma that is fundamental, and for them paramount—that of
their own origin. To wit, they set themselves questions—questions known
to us from the history of man, from the history of his religious
beliefs, philosophical inquiries, and mythic creations: Where did we
come from? Why are we made thus and not otherwise? Why is it that the
world we perceive has these and not other, wholly different properties?
What meaning do we have for the world? What meaning does it have for us?
The train of such speculations leads them ultimately, unavoidably, to
the elemental questions of ontology, to the problem of whether existence
came about “in and of itself,” or whether it was the product, instead,
of a particular creative act—that is, whether there might not be, hidden
behind it, invested with will and consciousness, purposively active,
master of the situation, a Creator. It is here that the whole cruelty,
the immorality of personetics manifests itself.

But before Dobb takes up, in the second half of his work, the account of
these intellectual strivings—these struggles of a mentality made prey to
the torment of such questions—he presents in a series of successive
chapters a portrait of the “typical personoid,” its “anatomy,
physiology, and psychology.”

A solitary personoid is unable to go beyond the stage of rudimentary
thinking, since, solitary, it cannot exercise itself in speech, and
without speech discursive thought cannot develop. As hundreds of
experiments have shown, groups numbering from four to seven personoids
are optimal, at least for the development of speech and typical
exploratory activity, and also for “culturization.” On the other hand,
phenomena corresponding to social processes on a larger scale require
larger groups. At present it is possible to “accommodate” up to one
thousand personoids, roughly speaking, in a computer universum of fair
capacity; but studies of this type, belonging to a separate and
independent discipline—sociodynamics—lie outside the area of Dobb’s
primary concerns, and for this reason his book makes only passing
mention of them. As was said, a personoid does not have a body, but it
does have a “soul.” This soul—to an outside observer who has a view into
the machine world (by means of a special installation, an auxiliary
module that is a type of probe, built into the computer)—appears as a
“coherent cloud of processes,” as a functional aggregate with a kind of
“center” that can be isolated fairly precisely, i.e., delimited within
the machine network. (This, _nota bene,_ is not easy, and in more than
one way resembles the search by neurophysiologists for the localized
centers of many functions in the human brain.) Crucial to an
understanding of what makes possible the creation of the personoids is
Chapter 11 of _Non Serviam,_ which in fairly simple terms explains the
fundamentals of the theory of consciousness. Consciousness—all
consciousness, not merely the personoid—is in its physical aspect an
“informational standing wave,” a certain dynamic invariant in a stream
of incessant transformations, peculiar in that it represents a
“compromise” and at the same time is a “resultant” that, as far as we
can tell, was not at all planned for by natural evolution. Quite the
contrary; evolution from the first placed tremendous problems and
difficulties in the way of the harmonizing of the work of brains above a
certain magnitude—i.e., above a certain level of complication—and it
trespassed on the territory of these dilemmas clearly without design,
for evolution is not a deliberate artificer. It happened, simply, that
certain very old evolutionary solutions to problems of control and
regulation, common to the nervous system, were “carried along” up to the
level at which anthropogenesis began. These solutions ought to have
been, from a purely rational, efficiency-engineering standpoint,
canceled or abandoned, and something entirely new designed—namely, the
brain of an intelligent being. But, obviously, evolution could not
proceed in this way, because disencumbering itself of the inheritance of
old solutions—solutions often as much as hundreds of millions of years
old—did not lie within its power. Since it advances always in very
minute increments of adaptation, since it “crawls” and cannot “leap,”
evolution is a dragnet “that lugs after it innumerable archaisms, all
sorts of refuse,” as was bluntly put by Tammer and Bovine. (Tammer and
Bovine are two of the creators of the computer simulation of the human
psyche, a simulation that laid the groundwork for the birth of
personetics,) The consciousness of man is the result of a special kind
of compromise. It is a “patchwork,” or, as was observed, e.g., by
Gebhardt, a perfect exemplification of the well-known German saying:
_“Aus einer Not eine Tugend machen”_ (in effect: “To turn a certain
defect, a certain difficulty, into a virtue”). A digital machine cannot
of itself ever acquire consciousness, for the simple reason that in it
there do not arise hierarchical conflicts of operation. Such a machine
can, at most, fall into a type of “logical palsy” or “logical stupor”
when the antinomies in it multiply. The contradictions with which the
brain of man positively teems were, however, in the course of hundreds
of thousands of years, gradually subjected to arbitrational procedures.
There came to be levels higher and lower, levels of reflex and of
reflection, impulse and control, the modeling of the elemental
environment by zoological means and of the conceptual by linguistic
means. All of these levels cannot, do not “want” to tally perfectly or
merge to form a whole.

 What, then, is consciousness? An expedient, a dodge, a way out of the
trap, a pretended last resort, a court allegedly (but only allegedly!)
of highest appeal. And, in the language of physics and information
theory, it is a function that, once begun, will not admit of any
closure—i.e., any definitive completion. It is, then, only a _plan_ for
such a closure, for a total “reconciliation” of the stubborn
contradictions of the brain. It is, one might say, a mirror whose task
it is to reflect other mirrors, which in turn reflect still others, and
so on to infinity. This, physically, is simply not possible, and so the
_regressus ad infinitum,_ represents a kind of pit over which soars and
flutters the phenomenon of human consciousness. “Beneath the conscious”
there goes on a continuous battle for full representation—in it—of that
which cannot reach it in fullness, and cannot for simple lack of space;
for, in order to give full and equal rights to all those tendencies that
clamor for attention at the centers of awareness, what would be
necessary is infinite capacity and volume. There reigns, then, around
the conscious a never-ending crush, a pushing and shoving, and the
conscious is not—not at all—the highest, serene, sovereign helmsman of
all mental phenomena but more nearly a cork upon the fretful waves, a
cork whose uppermost position does not mean the mastery of those
waves.... The modern theory of consciousness, interpreted
informationally and dynamically, unfortunately cannot be set forth
simply or clearly, so that we are constantly—at least here, in this more
accessible presentation of the subject—thrown back on a series of visual
models and metaphors. We know, in any case, that consciousness is a kind
of dodge, a shift to which evolution has resorted, and resorted in
keeping with its characteristic and indispensable _modus operandi,_
opportunism—i.e., finding a quick, extempore way out of a tight corner.
If, then, one were indeed to build an intelligent being and proceed
according to the canons of completely rational engineering and logic,
applying the criteria of technological efficiency, such a being would
not, in general, receive the gift of consciousness. It would behave in a
manner perfectly logical, always consistent, lucid, and well ordered,
and it might even seem, to a human observer, a genius in creative action
and decision-making. But it could in no way be a man, for it would be
bereft of his mysterious depth, his internal intracacies, his
labyrinthine nature....

 We will not here go further into the modern theory of the conscious
psyche, just as Professor Dobb does not. But these few words were in
order, for they provide a necessary introduction to the structure of the
personoids. In their creation is at last realized one of the oldest
myths, that of the homunculus. In order to fashion a likeness of man, of
his psyche, one must deliberately introduce into the informational
substrate specific contradictions; one must impart to it an asymmetry,
acentric tendencies; one must, in a word, both _unify_ and _make
discordant._ Is this rational? Yes, and well-nigh unavoidable if we
desire not merely to construct some sort of synthetic intelligence but
to imitate the thought and, with it, the personality of man.

Hence, the emotions of the personoids must to some extent be at odds
with their reason; they must possess self-destructive tendencies, at
least to a certain degree; they must feel internal tensions—that entire
centrifugality which we experience now as the magnificent infinity of
spiritual states and now as their unendurably painful disjointedness.
The creational prescription for this, meanwhile, is not at all so
hopelessly complicated as it might appear. It is simply that the _logic_
of the creation (the personoid) must be disturbed, must contain certain
antinomies. Consciousness is not only a way out of the evolutionary
impasse, says Hilbrandt, but also an escape from the snares of
Gôdelization, for by means of paralogistic contradictions this solution
has sidestepped the contradictions to which every system that is perfect
with respect to logic is subject. So, then, the universum of the
personoids is fully rational, but they are not fully rational
inhabitants of it. Let that suffice us—Professor Dobb himself does not
pursue further this exceedingly difficult topic. As we know already, the
personoids have souls but no bodies and, therefore, also no sensation of
their corporeality. “It is difficult to imagine,” has been said of that
which is experienced in certain special states of mind, in total
darkness, with the greatest possible reduction in the inflow of external
stimuli—but, Dobb maintains, this is a misleading image. For with
sensory deprivation the function of the human brain soon begins to
disintegrate; without a stream of impulses from the outside world the
psyche manifests a tendency to lysis. But personoids, who have no
physical senses, hardly disintegrate, because what gives them cohesion
is their mathematical milieu, which they do experience. But how? They
experience it, let us say, according to those changes in their own
states which are induced and imposed upon them by the universum’s
“externalness.” They are able to discriminate between the changes
proceeding from outside themselves and the changes that surface from the
depths of their own psyche. How do they discriminate? To this question
only the theory of the dynamic structure of personoids can supply a
direct answer.

 And yet they are like us, for all the awesome differences. We know
already that a digital machine can never spark with consciousness;
regardless of the task to which we harness it, or of the physical
processes we simulate in it, it will remain forever apsychic. Since, to
simulate man, it is necessary that we reproduce certain of his
fundamental contradictions, only a system of mutually gravitating
antagonisms—a personoid—will resemble, in the words of Canyon, whom Dobb
cites, a “star contracted by the forces of gravity and at the same time
expanded by the pressure of radiation.” The gravitational center is,
very simply, the personal “I,” but by no means does it constitute a
unity in either the logical or the physical sense. That is only our
subjective illusion! We find ourselves, at this stage of the exposition,
amid a multitude of astounding surprises. One can, to be sure, program a
digital machine in such a way as to be able to carry on a conversation
with it, as if with an intelligent partner. The machine will employ, as
the need arises, the pronoun “I” and all its grammatical inflections.
This, however, is a hoax! The machine will still be closer to a billion
chattering parrots—howsoever brilliantly trained the parrots be—than to
the simplest, most stupid man. It mimics the behavior of a man on the
purely linguistic plane and nothing more. Nothing will amuse such a
machine, or surprise it, or confuse it, or alarm it, or distress it,
because it is psychologically and individually No One. It is a Voice
giving utterance to matters, supplying answers to questions; it is a
Logic capable of defeating the best chess player; it is—or, rather, it
can become—a consummate imitator of everything, an actor, if you will,
brought to the pinnacle of perfection, performing any programmed
role—but an actor and an imitator that is, within, completely empty. One
cannot count on its sympathy, or on its antipathy. It works toward no
self-set goal; to a degree eternally beyond the conception of any man it
“doesn’t care,” for as a person it simply does not exist....It is a
wondrously efficient combinatorial mechanism, nothing more. Now, we are
faced with a most remarkable phenomenon. The thought is staggering that
from the raw material of so utterly vacant and so perfectly impersonal a
machine it is possible, through the feeding into it of a special
program—a personetic program—to create authentic sentient beings, and
even a great many of them at a time! The latest IBM models have a top
capacity of one thousand personoids. (The number is mathematically
precise, since the elements and linkages needed to carry one personoid
can be expressed in units of centimeters-grams-seconds.)

 Personoids are separated one from another within the machine. They do
not ordinarily “overlap,” though it can happen. Upon contact, there
occurs what is equivalent to repulsion, which impedes mutual “osmosis.”
Nevertheless, they are able to interpenetrate if such is their aim. The
processes making up their mental substrates then commence to superimpose
upon each other, producing “noise” and interference. When the area of
permeation is thin, a certain amount of information becomes the common
property of both partially coincident personoids—a phenomenon that is
for them peculiar, as for a man it would be peculiar, if not indeed
alarming, to hear “strange voices” and “foreign thoughts” in his own
head (which does, of course, occur in certain mental illnesses or under
the influence of hallucinogenic drugs). It is as though two people were
to have not merely the same, but _the same_ memory; as though there had
occurred something more than a telepathic transference of
thought—namely, a “peripheral merging of the egos.” The phenomenon is
ominous in its consequences, however, and ought to be avoided. For,
following the transitional state of surface osmosis, the “advancing”
personoid can destroy the other and consume it. The latter, in that
case, simply undergoes absorption, annihilation—it ceases to exist (this
has already been called murder). The annihilated personoid becomes an
assimilated, indistinguishable part of the “aggressor.” We have
succeeded—says Dobb—in simulating not only psychic life but also its
imperilment and obliteration. Thus we have succeeded in simulating death
as well. Under normal experimental conditions, however, personoids
eschew such acts of aggression. “Psychophagi” (Castler’s term) are
hardly ever encountered among them. Feeling the beginnings of osmosis,
which may come about as the result of purely accidental approaches and
fluctuations—feeling this threat in a manner that is of course
nonphysical, much as someone might sense another’s presence or even hear
“strange voices” in his own mind—the personoids execute active avoidance
maneuvers; they withdraw and go their separate ways. It is on account of
this phenomenon that they have come to know the meaning of the concepts
of “good” and “evil.” To them it is evident that “evil” lies in the
destruction of another, and “good” in another’s deliverance. At the same
time, the “evil” of one may be the “good” (i.e., the gain, now in the
nonethical sense) of another, who would become a “psychophage.” For such
expansion—the appropriation of someone else’s “intellectual
territory”—increases one’s initially given mental “acreage.” In a way,
this is a counterpart of a practice of ours, for as carnivores we kill
and feed on our victims. The personoids, though, are not obliged to
behave thus; they are merely able to. Hunger and thirst are unknown to
them, since a continuous influx of energy sustains them—an energy whose
source they need not concern themselves with (just as we need not go to
any particular lengths to have the sun shine down on us). In the
personoid world the terms and principles of thermodynamics, in their
application to energetics, cannot arise, because that world is subject
to mathematical and not thermodynamic laws.

 Before long, the experimenters came to the conclusion that contacts
between personoid and man, via the inputs and outputs of the computer,
were of little scientific value and, moreover, produced moral dilemmas,
which contributed to the labeling of personetics as the crudest science.
There is something unworthy in informing personoids that we have created
them in enclosures that only _simulate_ infinity, that they are
microscopic “psychocysts,” capsulations in our world. To be sure, they
have their own infinity; hence Sharker and other psychoneticians (Falk,
Wiegeland) claim that the situation is fully symmetrical: the personoids
do not need our world, our “living space,” just as we have no use for
their “mathematical earth.” Dobb considers such reasoning sophistry,
because as to who created whom, and who confined whom existentially,
there can be no argument. Dobb himself belongs to that group which
advocates the principle of absolute nonintervention—“noncontact”—with
the personoids. They are the behaviorists of personetics. Their desire
is to observe synthetic beings of intelligence, to listen in on their
speech and thoughts, to record their actions and their pursuits, but
never to interfere with these. This method is already developed and has
a technology of its own—a set of instruments whose procurement presented
difficulties that seemed all but insurmountable only a few years ago.
The idea is to hear, to understand—in short, to be a constantly
eavesdropping witness—but at the same time to prevent one’s
“monitorings” from disturbing in any way the world of the personoids.
Now in the planning stage at MIT are programs (APHRON II and erot) that
will enable the personoids—who are currently without gender—to have
“erotic contacts,” make possible what corresponds to fertilization, and
give them the opportunity to multiply “sexually.” Dobb makes clear that
he is no enthusiast of these American projects. His work, as described
in _Non Serviam_, is aimed in an altogether different direction. Not
without reason has the English school of personetics been called “the
philosophical Polygon” and “the theodicy lab.” With these descriptions
we come to what is probably the most significant and, certainly, the
most intriguing part of the book under discussion—the last part, which
justifies and explains its peculiar title.

 Dobb gives an account of his own experiment, in progress now for eight
years without interruption. Of the creation itself he makes only brief
mention; it was a fairly ordinary duplicating of functions typical of
the program JAHVE VI, with slight modifications. He summarizes the
results of “tapping” this world, which he himself created and whose
development he continues to follow. He considers this tapping to be
unethical, and even, at times, a shameful practice. Nevertheless, he
carries on with his work, professing a belief in the necessity, for
science, of conducting such experiments _also_—experiments that can in
no way be justified on moral—or, for that matter, on any other
non-knowledge-advancing—grounds. The situation, he says, has come to the
point where the old evasions of the scientists will not do. One cannot
affect a fine neutrality and conjure away an uneasy conscience by using,
for example, the rationalization worked out by vivisectionists—that it
is not in creatures of full-dimensional consciousness, not in sovereign
beings that one is causing suffering or only discomfort. In the
personoid experiments we are accountable twofold, because we create and
then enchain the creation in the schema of our laboratory procedures.
Whatever we do and however we explain our action, there is no longer an
escape from full accountability.

 Many years of experience on the part of Dobb and his coworkers at
Oldport went into the making of their eight-dimensional universum, which
became the residence of personoids bearing the names ADAN, ADNA, ANAD,
DANA, DAAN, and NAAD. The first personoids developed the rudiment of
language implanted in them and had “progeny” by means of division. Dobb
writes, in the Biblical vein, “And ADAN begat ADNA. ADNA in turn begat
DAAN, and DAAN brought forth EDAN, who bore EDNA....” And so it went,
until the number of succeeding generations had reached three hundred;
because the computer possessed a capacity of only one hundred personoid
entities, however, there were periodic eliminations of the “demographic
surplus.” In the three-hundredth generation, personoids named ADAN,
ADNA, ANAD, DANA, DAAN, and NAAD again make an appearance, endowed with
additional numbers designating their order of descent. (For simplicity
in our recapitulation, we will omit the numbers.) Dobb tells us that the
time that has elapsed inside the computer universum works out to—in a
rough conversion to our equivalent units of measurement—from 2 to 2.5
thousand years. Over this period there has come into being, within the
personoid population, a whole series of varying explanations of their
lot, as well as the formulation by them of varying, and contending, and
mutually excluding models of “all that exists.” That is, there have
arisen many different philosophies (ontologies and epistemologies), and
also “metaphysical experiments” of a type all their own. We do not know
whether it is because the “culture” of the personoids is too unlike the
human or whether the experiment has been of too short duration, but, in
the population studied, no faith of a form completely dogmatized has
ever crystallized—a faith that would correspond to Buddhism, say, or to
Christianity. On the other hand, one notes, as early as the eighth
generation, the appearance of the notion of a Creator, envisioned
personally and monotheistically. The experiment consists in alternately
raising the rate of computer transformations to the maximum and slowing
it down (once a year, more or less) to make direct monitoring possible.
These changes in rate are, as Dobb explains, totally imperceptible to
the inhabitants of the computer universum, just as similar
transformations would be imperceptible to us, because when at a single
blow the whole of existence undergoes a change (here, in the dimension
of time), those immersed in it cannot be aware of the change, because
they have no fixed point, or frame of reference, by which to determine
that it is taking place.

 The utilization of “two chronological gears” permitted that which Dobb
most wanted—the emergence of a personoid history, a history with a depth
of tradition and a vista of time. To summarize all the data of that
history recorded by Dobb, often of a sensational nature, is not
possible. We will confine ourselves, then, to the passages from which
came the idea that is reflected in the book’s title. The language
employed by the personoids is a recent transformation of the standard
English whose lexicon and syntax were programmed into them in the first
generation. Dobb translates it into essentially normal English but
leaves intact a few expressions coined by the personoid population.
Among these are the terms “godly” and “ungodly,” used to describe
believers in God and atheists.

ADAN discourses with DAAN and ADNA (personoids themselves do not use
these names, which are purely a pragmatic contrivance on the part of the
observers, to facilitate the recording of the “dialogues”) upon a
problem known to us also—a problem that in our history originates with
Pascal but in the history of the personoids was the discovery of a
certain EDAN 197. Exactly like Pascal, this thinker stated that a belief
in God is in any case more profitable than unbelief, because if truth is
on the side of the “ungodlies” the believer loses nothing but his life
when he leaves the world, whereas if God exists he gains all eternity
(glory everlasting). Therefore, one should believe in God, for this is
dictated very simply by the existential tactic of weighing one’s chances
in the pursuit of optimal success.

 ADAN 300 holds the following view of this directive: EDAN 197, in his
line of reasoning, assumes a God that requires reverence, love, and
total devotion, and not only and not simply a belief in the fact that He
exists and that He created the world. It is not enough to assent to the
hypothesis of God the Maker of the World in order to win one’s
salvation; one must in addition be grateful to that Maker for the act of
creation, and divine His will, and do it. In short, one must serve God.
Now, God, if He exists, has the power to prove His own existence in a
manner at least as convincing as the manner in which what can be
directly perceived testifies to His being. Surely, we cannot doubt that
certain objects exist and that our world is composed of them. At the
most, one might harbor doubts regarding the question of what it is they
do to exist, how they exist, etc. But the fact itself of their existence
no one will gainsay. God could with this same force provide evidence of
His own existence. Yet He has not done so, condemning us to obtain, on
that score, knowledge that is roundabout, indirect, expressed in the
form of various conjectures—conjectures sometimes given the name of
revelation. If He has acted thus, then He has thereby put the “godlies”
and the “ungodlies” on an equal footing; He has not compelled His
creatures to an absolute belief in His being but has only offered them
that possibility. Granted, the motives that moved the Creator may well
be hidden from His creations. Be that as it may, the following
proposition arises: God either exists or He does not exist. That there
might be a third possibility (God did exist but no longer does, or He
exists intermittently, in oscillation, or He exists sometimes “less” and
sometimes “more,” etc.) appears exceedingly improbable. It cannot be
ruled out, but the introduction of a multivalent logic into a theodicy
serves only to muddle it.

So, then, God either is or He is not. If He Himself accepts our
situation, in which each member of the alternative in question has
arguments to support it—for the “godlies” prove the existence of the
Creator and the “ungodlies” disprove it—then from the point of view of
logic we have a game whose partners are, on one side, the full set of
the “godlies” and “ungodlies,” and, on the other, God alone. The game
necessarily possesses the logical feature that for unbelief in Him God
may not punish anyone. If it is definitely unknown whether or not a
thing exists—some merely asserting that it does and others, that it does
not—and if in general it is possible to advance the hypothesis that the
thing never was at all, then no just tribunal can pass judgment against
anyone for denying the existence of this thing. For in all worlds it is
thus: when there is no full certainty, there is no full accountability.
This formulation is by pure logic unassailable, because it sets up a
symmetrical function of reward in the context of the theory of games;
whoever in the face of uncertainty demands _full accountability_
destroys the mathematical symmetry of the game; we then have the
so-called game of the non-zero sum.

 It is therefore thus: either God is perfectly just, in which case He
cannot assume the right to punish the “ungodlies” by virtue of the fact
that they are “ungodlies” (i.e., that they do not believe in Him); or
else He will punish the unbelievers after all, which means that from the
logical point of view He is not perfectly just. What follows from this?
What follows is that He can do whatever He pleases, for when in a system
of logic a single, solitary contradiction is permitted, then by the
principle of _ex falso quodlibet_ one can draw from that system whatever
conclusion one will. In other words: a just God may not touch a hair on
the head of the “ungodlies,” and if He does, then by that very act He is
not the universally perfect and just being that the theodicy posits.

ADNA asks how, in this light, we are to view the problem of the doing of
evil unto others.

ADAN 300 replies: Whatever takes place here is entirely certain;
whatever takes place “there”—i.e., beyond the world’s pale, in eternity,
with God—is uncertain, being but inferred according to the hypotheses.
Here, one should not commit evil, despite the fact that the principle of
eschewing evil is not logically demonstrable. But by the same token the
existence of the world is not logically demonstrable. The world exists,
though it could not exist. Evil may be committed, but one should not do
so, and should not, I believe, because of our agreement based upon the
rule of reciprocity: be to me as I am to thee. It has naught to do with
the existence or the nonexistence of God. Were I to refrain from
committing evil in the expectation that “there” I would be punished for
committing it, or were I to perform good, counting upon a reward
“there,” I would be predicating my behavior on uncertain ground. Here,
however, there can be no ground more certain than our mutual agreement
in this matter. If there be, “there,” other grounds, I do not have
knowledge of them as exact as the knowledge I have, here, of ours.
Living, we play the game of life, and in it we are allies, every one.
Therewith, the game between us is perfectly symmetrical. In postulating
God, we postulate a continuation of the game beyond the world. I believe
that one should be allowed to postulate this continuation of the game,
so long as it does not in any way influence the course of the game here.
Otherwise, for the sake of someone who perhaps does not exist we may
well be sacrificing that which exists here, and exists for certain.

 NAAD remarks that the attitude of ADAN 300 toward God is not clear to
him. ADAN has granted, has he not, the possibility of the existence of
the Creator: what follows from it?

ADAN: Not a thing. That is, nothing in the province of obligation. I
believe that—again for all worlds—the following principle holds: a
temporal ethics is always independent of an ethics that is
transcendental. This means that an ethics of the here and now can have
outside itself no sanction which would substantiate it. And this means
that he who does evil is in every case a scoundrel, just as he who does
good is in every case righteous. If someone is prepared to serve God,
judging the arguments in favor of His existence to he sufficient, he
does not thereby acquire _here_ any additional merit. It is his
business. This principle rests on the assumption that if God is not,
then He is not one whit, and if He is, then He is almighty. For, being
almighty, He could create not only another world but likewise a logic
different from the one that is the foundation of my reasoning. Within
such another logic the hypothesis of a temporal ethics could be of
necessity dependent upon a transcendental ethics. In that case, if not
palpable proofs, then logical proofs would have compelling force and
constrain one to accept the hypothesis of God under the threat of
sinning against reason.

 NAAD says that perhaps God does not wish a situation of such compulsion
to believe in Him—a situation that would arise in a creation based on
that other logic postulated by ADAN 300. To this the latter replies:

An almighty God must also be all-knowing; absolute power is not
something independent of absolute knowledge, because he who can do all
but knows not what consequences will attend the bringing into play of
his omnipotence is, ipso facto, no longer omnipotent; were God to work
miracles now and then, as it is rumored He does, it would put His
perfection in a most dubious light, because a miracle is a violation of
the autonomy of His own creation, a violent intervention. Yet he who has
regulated the product of his creation and knows its behavior from
beginning to end has no need to violate that autonomy; if he does
nevertheless violate it, remaining all-knowing, this means that he is
not in the least correcting his handiwork (a correction can only mean,
after all, an initial non-omniscience), but instead is providing—with
the miracle—a sign of his existence. Now, this is faulty logic, because
the providing of any such sign must produce the impression that the
creation is nevertheless improved in its local stumblings. For a logical
analysis of the new model yields the following: the creation undergoes
corrections that do not proceed from it but come from without (from the
transcendental, from God), and therefore miracle ought really to be made
the norm; or, in other words, the creation ought to be so corrected and
so perfected that miracles are at last no longer needed. For miracles,
as ad hoc interventions, cannot be _merely_ signs of God’s existence:
they always, after all, besides revealing their Author, indicate an
addressee (being directed to someone _here_ in a helpful way). So, then,
with respect to logic it must be thus: either the creation is perfect,
in which case miracles are unnecessary, or the miracles are necessary,
in which case the creation is not perfect. (With miracle or without, one
may correct only that which is somehow flawed, for a miracle that
meddles with perfection will simply disturb it, more, worsen it.)
Therefore, the signaling by miracle of one’s own presence amounts to
using the worst possible means, logically, of its manifestation.

 NAAD asks if God may not actually want there to be a dichotomy between
logic and belief in Him: perhaps the act of faith should be precisely a
resignation of logic in favor of a total trust.

ADAN: Once we allow the logical reconstruction of something (a being, a
theodicy, a theogony, and the like) to have internal self-contradiction,
it obviously becomes possible to prove absolutely anything, whatever one
pleases. Consider how the matter lies. We are speaking of creating
someone and of endowing him with a particular logic, and then demanding
that this same logic be offered up in sacrifice to a belief in the Maker
of all things. If this model itself is to remain noncontradictory, it
calls for the application, in the form of a metalogic, of a totally
different type of reasoning from that which is natural to the logic of
the one created. If that does not reveal the outright imperfection of
the Creator, then it reveals a quality that I would call mathematical
inelegance—a _sui generis_ unmethodicalness (incoherence) of the
creative act.

 NAAD persists: Perhaps God acts thus, desiring precisely to remain
inscrutable to His creation—i.e., nonreconstructible by the logic with
which He has provided it. He demands, in short, the supremacy of faith
over logic.

ADAN answers him: I follow you. This is, of course, possible, but even
if such were the case, a faith that proves incompatible with logic
presents an exceedingly unpleasant dilemma of a moral nature. For then
it is necessary at some point in one’s reasonings to suspend them and
give precedence to an unclear supposition—in other words, to set the
supposition above logical certainty. This is to be done in the name of
unlimited trust; we enter, here, into a _circuius vitiosus,_ because the
postulated existence of that in which it behooves one now to place one’s
trust is the product of a line of reasoning that was, in the first
place, _logically correct_; thus arises a logical contradiction, which,
for some, takes on a positive value and is called the Mystery of God.
Now, from the purely constructional point of view such a solution is
shoddy, and from the moral point of view questionable, because Mystery
may satisfactorily be founded upon infinity (infiniteness, after all, is
a characteristic of our world), but the maintaining and the reinforcing
of it through internal paradox is, by any architectural criterion,
perfidious. The advocates of theodicy are in general not aware that this
is so, because to certain parts of their theodicy they continue to apply
ordinary logic and to other parts, not. What I wish to say is this, that
if one believes in contradiction,* one should then believe _only_ in
contradiction, and not at the same time still in some noncontradiction
(i.e., in logic) in some other area. If, however, such a curious dualism
is insisted upon (that the temporal is always subject to logic, the
transcendental only fragmentarily), then one thereupon obtains a model
of Creation as something that is, with regard to logical correctness,
“patched,” and it is no longer possible for one to postulate its
perfection. One comes inescapably to the conclusion that perfection is a
thing that must be logically patched.

 EDNA asks whether the conjunction of these incoherencies might not be
love.

ADAN: And even were this to be so, it can be not any form of love but
only one such as is blinding. God, if He is, if He created the world,
has permitted it to govern itself as it can and wishes. For the fact
that God exists, no gratitude to Him is required; such gratitude assumes
the prior determination that God is able not to exist, and that this
would be bad—a premise that leads to yet another kind of contradiction.
And what of gratitude for the act of creation? This is not due God,
either. For it assumes a compulsion to believe that to be is definitely
better than not to be; I cannot conceive how that, in turn, could be
proven. To one who does not exist surely it is not possible to do either
a service or an injury; and if the Creating One, in His omniscience,
knows beforehand that the one created will be grateful to Him and love
Him or that he will be ungrateful and deny Him, He thereby produces a
constraint, albeit one not accessible to the direct comprehension of the
one created. For this very reason nothing is due God: neither love nor
hate, nor gratitude, nor rebuke, nor the hope of reward, nor the fear of
retribution. Nothing is due Him. A God who craves such feelings must
first assure their feeling subject that He exists beyond all question.
Love may be forced to rely on speculations as to the reciprocity it
inspires; that is understandable. But a love forced to rely on
speculations as to whether or not the beloved exists is nonsense. He who
is almighty could have provided certainty. Since He did not provide it,
if He exists, He must have deemed it unnecessary. Why unnecessary? One
begins to suspect that maybe He is not almighty. A God not almighty
would be deserving of feelings akin to pity, and indeed to love as well;
but this, I think, none of our theodicies allow. And so we say: We serve
ourselves and no one else.

 We pass over the further deliberations on the topic of whether the God
of the theodicy is more of a liberal or an autocrat; it is difficult to
condense arguments that take up such a large part of the book. The
discussions and deliberations that Dobb has recorded, sometimes in group
colloquia of ADAN 300, NAAD, and other personoids, and sometimes in
soliloquies (an experimenter is able to take down even a purely mental
sequence by means of appropriate devices hooked into the computer
network), constitute practically á third of _Non Serviam._ In the text
itself we find no commentary on them. In Dobb’s Afterword, however, we
find this statement:

“ADAN’s reasoning seems incontrovertible, at least insofar as it
pertains to me: it was I, after all, who created him. In his theodicy I
am the Creator. In point of fact, I produced that world (serial No. 47)
with the aid of the ADONAI IX program and created the personoid gemmae
with a modification of the program JAHVE VI. These initial entities gave
rise to three hundred subsequent generations. In point of fact, I have
not communicated to them—in the form of an axiom—either these data or my
existence beyond the limits of their world. In point of fact, they
arrived at the possibility of my existence only by inference, on the
basis of conjecture and hypothesis. In point of fact, when I create
intelligent beings, I do not feel myself entitled to demand of them any
sort of privileges—love, gratitude, or even services of some kind or
other. I can enlarge their world or reduce it, speed up its time or slow
it down, alter the mode and means of their perception; I can liquidate
them, divide them, multiply them, transform the very ontological
foundation of their existence. I am thus omnipotent with respect to
them, but, indeed, from this it does not follow that they owe me
anything. As far as I am concerned, they are in no way beholden to me.
It is true that I do not love them. Love does not enter into it at all,
though I suppose some other experimenter might possibly entertain that
feeling for his personoids. As I see it, this does not in the least
change the situation—not in the least. Imagine for a moment that I
attach to my BIX 310 092 an enormous auxiliary unit, which will be a
‘hereafter.’ One by one I let pass through the connecting channel and
into the unit the ‘souls’ of my personoids, and there I reward those who
believed in me, who rendered homage unto me, who showed me gratitude and
trust, while all the others, the ‘ungodlies,’ to use the personoid
vocabulary, I punish—e.g., by annihilation or else by torture. (Of
eternal punishment I dare not even think—that much of a monster I am
not!) My deed would undoubtedly be regarded as a piece of fantastically
shameless egotism, as a low act of irrational vengeance—in sum, as the
final villainy in a situation of total dominion over innocents. And
these innocents will have against me the irrefutable evidence of
_logic,_ which is the aegis of their conduct. Everyone has the right,
obviously, to draw from the personetic experiments such conclusions as
he considers fitting. Dr. Ian Combay once said to me, in a private
conversation, that I could, after all, assure the society of personoids
of my existence. Now, this I most certainly shall not do. For it would
have all the appearance to me of soliciting a sequel—that is, a reaction
on their part. But what exactly could they do or say to me, that I would
not feel the profound embarrassment, the painful sting of my position as
their unfortunate Creator? The bills for the electricity consumed have
to be paid quarterly, and the moment is going to come when my university
superiors demand the ‘wrapping up’ of the experiment—that is, the
disconnecting of the machine, or, in other words, the end of the world.
That moment I intend to put off as long as humanly possible. It is the
only thing of which I am capable, but it is not anything I consider
praiseworthy. It is, rather, what in common parlance is generally called
‘dirty work.’ Saying this, I hope that no one will get any ideas. But if
he does, well, that is his business.”



 THE NEW COSMOGONY


  _(This is the text of the address delivered by Professor Alfred Testa
  on the occasion of the presentation to him of the Nobel Prize, taken
  from the commemorative volume_ From the Einsteinian to the Testan
  Universe; _we reprint it here with the permission of the publisher,
  Academic Press, Inc.)_

 

Your Highness. Ladies and gentlemen. I would like to take this
opportunity—use this privileged podium—to tell you about the
circumstances that led to the rise of a new model of the Universe and
marked out, in the process, a cosmic position for humanity radically
different from the historical. With these portentous words I refer not
to my own research but to the memory of a man no longer among us, the
one to whom we owe this bit of news. I speak of him because that has
happened which I most hoped would not: my research has eclipsed—in the
eyes of my contemporaries—the work of Aristides Acheropoulos, to such an
extent that a historian of science, Professor Bernard Weydenthal,
therefore an authority whom one would have thought qualified, recently
wrote in his book, _Die Welt als Spiel und Verschwörung,_ that the
magnum opus of Acheropoulos, _A New Cosmogony,_ was no scientific
hypothesis but a literary fantasy in whose reality the author himself
did not believe. By the same token, Professor Harlan Stymington, in _The
New Universe of the Game Theory,_ expressed the opinion that in the
absence of Alfred Testa’s work the idea of Acheropoulos would have
remained only a loose philosophical concept, on the order of the
Leibnizian world of pre-established harmony—a model that the precise
sciences have of course never treated seriously.

 So, then, according to some I took seriously what the creator of the
idea himself did not; according to others I placed on a sound scientific
footing an idea that was entangled in the murky speculativeness of
nonempirical philosophizing. Such erroneous views necessitate an
explanation, one which I am in a position to provide. It is true that
Acheropoulos was a philosopher of nature and no physicist or
cosmogonist, and that he expounded his ideas without mathematics. It is
true, too, that between the intuitive image of his cosmogony and my
formalized theory there are not a few differences. But above all it is
true that Acheropoulos could have managed very nicely without Testa,
whereas Testa owes everything to Acheropoulos. This difference is far
from trivial. To explain it, I must ask your patience and attention.

When, in the middle of the twentieth century, a handful of astronomers
took to considering the problem of so-called cosmic civilizations, their
undertaking was something completely marginal to astronomy. The academic
community looked upon it as the hobby of a few dozen eccentrics, which
are to be found everywhere, therefore in science, too. That community
did not actively oppose the search for signals coming from such
civilizations; at the same time it did not admit the possibility that
the existence of those civilizations could in any way influence the
observable Cosmos. If, then, this or that astrophysicist ventured to
declare that the emission spectrum of pulsars or the energetics of
quasars or a certain phenomenon exhibited by galactic nuclei was
evidence of purposeful activity of inhabitants of the Universum, not one
of the respected authorities in the field considered such a declaration
a scientific hypothesis meriting investigation. Astrophysics and
cosmology remained deaf to the whole issue; this indifference obtained
to an even greater degree in theoretical physics. The sciences of the
time held, more or less, to the following schema: if we wish to know the
mechanism of a clock, the fact of whether or not there are bacteria on
its cogs and counterweights has not the least significance, either for
the structure or for the kinematics of its works. Bacteria certainly
cannot influence the movement of a clock! In precisely the same way it
was considered that intelligent beings could not interfere in the
movement of the cosmic mechanism, and hence that that mechanism should
be studied with complete disregard for the conceivable presence of
beings in it.

 Even were a luminary of the physics of that day to have countenanced
the possibility of a great upheaval in cosmology and physics, an
upheaval, moreover, involving the existence in the Universe of
intelligent beings, it would have been only under the following
condition: provided cosmic civilizations are discovered, provided their
signals are received and from these is gained entirely new information
about the laws of nature, then, yes, in such a way—but only in such a
way!—might there come about fundamental modifications in Earth’s
science. That an astrophysical revolution could take place in the
_absence_ of such contacts—more, that the very _lack_ of such contacts,
signals, manifestations of “astroengineering,” could initiate the
greatest revolution in physics and radically change our views of the
Universe—this certainly never entered the head of any of the authorities
back then.

And yet it was in the lifetime of more than one of those eminent
scholars that Aristides Acheropoulos published his _New Cosmogony._ His
book fell into my hands when I was a doctoral candidate in the
Mathematics Department at the University of Switzerland, the very place
where Albert Einstein once worked as a clerk for the patent office, in
his spare time engaged in laying the foundations of the theory of
relativity. I was able to read this little book because it had been put
out in an English translation—an abominable translation, I might add.
Moreover, it was a title in a science-fiction series whose publisher
printed only such literature and no other. The original text, as I
learned much later, had been subjected to an abridgment practically by
half. Undoubtedly, the circumstances of this edition (over which
Acheropoulos had no control) gave rise to the opinion that although he
had written _A New Cosmogony_ he himself did not take seriously the
theses contained in it.

 I fear that now, in these days of haste and ephemeral fashion, none but
a science historian or a bibliographer will open the pages of _A New
Cosmogony._ An educated man knows the title of the work and has heard of
the author; that is all. Such a man robs himself of a unique experience.
It is not only the substance of _A New Cosmogony_ that has remained as
fresh in my memory as when I read it twenty-one years ago, but all the
emotions that accompanied the reading. It was a moment like no other.
Once he has grasped the scope of the author’s conception, and in his
mind there takes shape, for the first time, the idea of the palimpsest
Cosmos-Game with its unseen Players who are perpetually alien to one
another, the impression will never leave the reader that he is in
communication with something sensationally, staggeringly new—and at the
same time, that here is a plagiaristic repetition, translated into the
language of natural science, of the oldest myths, those myths that make
up the impenetrable bedrock of human history. This unpleasant, even
vexing impression derives, I think, from our regarding any synthesis of
physics and the will to be inadmissible—I would even say, indecent—to
the rational mind. For myths are a projection of the will. The ancient
cosmogonic myths, in solemn tones, and with a simple-hearted innocence
that is the lost paradise of humanity, tell how Being sprang from the
conflict of demiurgic elements, elements clothed by legend in various
forms and incarnations, how the world was born of the love-hate embrace
of god-beasts, god-spirits, or supermen; and the suspicion that
precisely this clash, being the purest projection of anthropomorphism
onto the blank space of the cosmic enigma, that this reducing of Physics
to Desires was the prototype the author made use of—such a suspicion can
never be altogether overcome.

 So viewed, the New Cosmogony proves to be an unutterably Old Cosmogony,
and the attempt to expound it in the language of empiricism smacks of
incest, of a vulgar inability to keep separate concepts and categories
that _have no business_ being joined in an indiscriminate union. The
book, at the time, found its way into the hands of a few prominent
thinkers, and I know now, having heard as much from more than one, that
it was read with impatience, irritation, with a contemptuous shrug;
probably no one read it through to the end. We should not wax too
indignant over such apriority, such inertia of preconceived ideas, for
in fact the thing does at times appear sheer rot, and doubly so: it
presents us with masked gods, gods in the dress of material beings, and
presents them in the dry language of logical propositions; at the same
time, it calls the laws of nature the outcome of their conflict. The
result is that we are stripped of everything at once: both of our faith,
conceived as Transcendence culminating in perfection, and of our
science, in its honest, secular, and objective sobriety. In the end,
nothing is left us; all premises, on either side, reveal themselves to
be completely inapplicable. One gets the feeling that one has been dealt
with barbarously—robbed in the context of a mystery neither religious
nor scientific.

The devastation that this book produced in my mind I cannot describe.
Certainly, the obligation of the scholar is to be a doubting Thomas in
science; he may challenge its every assertion. But surely it is not
possible to call into question everything at once! Acheropoulos eluded
the recognition of his greatness not deliberately, perhaps, but all too
effectively! Completely unknown, the man was the son of a small nation;
he had no professional credentials in either physics or cosmology; and
finally—and this capped everything—he bad no predecessors. A thing
unheard of in history! For every thinker, every revolutionary of the
spirit possesses teachers of some sort, whom he surpasses but, at the
same time, to whom he refers. This Greek, however, appeared on the scene
alone; to the isolation that had to have been the lot of such
precursorship, his entire life is testimony.

 I never knew the man and know little about him. How he earned his bread
was ever a matter of indifference to him; he wrote the first version of
_A New Cosmogony_ at the age of thirty-three, already a Doctor of
Philosophy, but could not publish it anywhere; the failure of his
idea—the failure of his life—he bore stoically; he quickly abandoned his
efforts to publish _A New Cosmogony,_ realizing their futility. He
became a janitor at the same university where he had earned the
doctorate for his brilliant work on the comparative cosmogony of ancient
peoples; then he was a baker’s assistant, then a water carrier, and in
the meantime studied mathematics through a correspondence course; none
of those with whom he came into contact ever heard a word from him about
_A New Cosmogony._ He was secretive and, to all accounts, without regard
for those closest to him or for himself. Now, this very lack of regard
in uttering things to the highest degree profane with respect both to
science and to faith, this panheresy, this universal blasphemousness
that sprang from intellectual courage, could not but cut off all readers
from him. I imagine that he accepted the offer of the English publisher
much as a castaway on a desert island throws into the waves of the sea a
bottle with a call for help inside; he wished to leave behind some trace
of his idea, because he was certain of its truth.

Mutilated as it is by a paltry translation and senseless cuts, _A New
Cosmogony_ is an awesome work. In it Acheropoulos overturns
everything—absolutely everything—that science and faith have established
over the course of centuries; he leaves a waste strewn with the rubble
of the notions he has smashed, in order then to set to work from the
beginning, that is, to build the Universe anew. This hair-raising
spectacle puts us on the defensive: the author has to be, we think,
either a complete madman or a complete ignoramus. His academic titles
simply cannot be believed. Those who dismissed him in this way regained
possession of their mental equilibrium. The only difference between me
and all the other readers of _A New Cosmogony_ was that I was unable to
do so. He who does not reject the book in its entirety, from the first
syllable to the last, is lost: he will never free himself from it. Here,
if ever there was one, is an excluded middle: if Acheropoulos is not a
lunatic and not a dunce, then he must be a genius.

 It is not easy to accept such a diagnosis! The text changes continually
before the reader’s eyes; he cannot help noticing that the matrix of the
conflict-encounter—that is, of the Game—is the formal skeleton of any
religious faith that has not completely cast off its Manichean
elements—and where is the religion with no vestige of those? By
inclination and training I am a mathematician; it was on account of
Acheropoulos that I became a physicist. I am quite sure that any contact
I might have had with physics would have been desultory and tenuous, but
for this man. He converted me; I can even point to the place in _A New
Cosmogony_ that accomplished this. I refer to Section Seventeen of the
sixth chapter of the book, the one which speaks of the marvelment of the
Newtons, Einsteins, Jeanses, and Eddingtons at the fact that the laws of
nature were amenable to mathematical expression, that mathematics—the
fruit of the pure exercise of the logical mind—could prove a match for
the Universe. Some of those greats, like Eddington and Jeans, believed
that the Creator Himself was a mathematician and that we descried, in
the work of creation, the signs of this His characteristic. Acheropoulos
observes that theoretical physics has put the phase of such fascination
well behind itself, having learned that mathematical formalisms tell
either too little of the world or too much at once. Mathematics, an
approximation of the structure of the Universum, somehow never quite
manages to hit the nail squarely on the head but is always just a little
off the mark. We have considered this state of affairs to be temporary,
but Acheropoulos replies: the physicists were unable to create a unified
field theory, they did not succeed in connecting the phenomena of the
macro-and the microworld, yet this will come. Mathematics and the world
will converge, but not owing to further reconstructions of the
mathematical apparatus—nothing of the kind. The convergence will come
about when the work of creation has reached its goal, and it is still in
progress. The laws of nature are not _yet_ what they are “supposed” to
be; they will become such not as a result of the perfecting of
mathematics, but as a result of actual transformations in the Macrocosm!

 Ladies and gentlemen, this greatest of all the heresies I ever came
across in life, it bewitched me. And later in the same chapter
Acheropoulos says nothing more or less than that the physics of the
Universum is the result of its (the Universum’s) sociology.... But to
understand properly such a piece of outrageousness we must go back to a
number of basic matters.

The isolation of Acheropoulos’s idea is without parallel in the history
of thought. The concept of the New Cosmogony breaks with—despite the
appearance of plagiarism, of which I spoke—every metaphysical system, as
well as with every method of natural science. The impression of having
to do with a plagiarism is the fault of the reader, of the reader’s
conceptual inertia. For it is purely by reflex that we think of the
entire material world as yielding to the following sharp logical
dichotomy: either it was created by Someone (and then, standing on the
ground of faith, we name that Someone the Absolute, God, the First
Cause) or, on the other hand, it was created by no one, which means, as
when we deal with the world as scientists, that no one created it. But
Acheropoulos says: _Tertium datur._ The world was created by No One, but
all the same it was created; the Universe possesses Makers.

How is it that Acheropoulos had no predecessor? His basic idea was quite
simple. And it is not consistent with the truth to say that it could not
have been articulated prior to the rise of such disciplines as game
theory or the algebra of conflict structures. His fundamental idea could
have been formulated as early as the first half of the nineteenth
century, if not earlier. Then why did no one do it? For the reason, I
believe, that Science, in the course of emancipating itself from the
yoke of religious dogma, acquired its own conceptual allergy. Originally
Science collided with Faith, which produced well-known, often ghastly
results that the churches to this day are somewhat ashamed of, even
though Science has silently forgiven them those former persecutions. At
last a state of cautious neutrality was reached between Science and
Faith, the one endeavoring not to get in the way of the other. It was as
a result of this coexistence, touchy enough, tense enough, that the
blindness of Science came about, evident in Science’s avoidance of the
ground on which rests the idea of the New Cosmogony. This idea is
closely connected with the notion of intentionality—in other words, with
what is part and parcel of a faith in a personal God. For intentionality
constitutes the foundation of such a faith. According to religion, after
all, God created the world by an act of will and design—that is to say,
by an intentional act. And so Science declared the notion to be suspect
and even forbade it outright. It became, in Science, taboo; one was not
permitted even to make the least mention of it, lest one fall into the
mortal sin of irrationalistic deviation. That fear not only sealed the
lips of the scientists; it sealed their brains as well.

 Let us now go back once more to what might be called the beginning. By
the end of the nineteen-seventies the puzzle of the Silentium Universi
had acquired some measure of fame. The general public took an interest
in it. After the first preliminary attempts to pick up cosmic signals
(the work of Drake at Green Bank), other projects followed—in both the
U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. But the Universum, listened to with the subtlest
electromagnetic instruments, maintained a stubborn silence, a silence
filled only with the buzz and crackle of elemental discharges of stellar
energy. The Universe showed its lifelessness in all its abysses
together. The absence of signals from “Others,” and in addition the lack
of any trace of their “astroengineering feats,” became a worrisome
problem for science. The biologists had discovered the natural
conditions favoring the birth of life from inanimate matter; they even
succeeded in carrying out biogenesis in the laboratory. The astronomists
demonstrated the frequent occurrence of planet formation; a multitude of
stars possessed—it was established incontrovertibly—planetary systems.
So, then, the sciences joined in the unanimous conclusion that life
orginates in the course of natural cosmic changes, that its evolution
ought to be a common event in the Universe; and the crowning of the
evolutionary tree by the intelligence of organic beings was judged to be
dictated by the Physical Order of Things.

 The sciences thus held up the image of a populated Universe; meanwhile,
their conclusions were being obstinately contradicted by observational
fact. The theories said that Earth was surrounded by—granted, at stellar
distances—a throng of civilizations; actual observation said that a
lifeless void yawned on every side of us. The first researchers of the
problem went on the assumption that the average distance between two
cosmic civilizations ran from fifty to one hundred light-years. This
hypothetical distance was later increased to one thousand. In the
seventies, radio astronomy was improved to the point where one could
search for signals coming in from tens of thousands of light-years away,
but there, too, all that could be heard was the static of solar fire. In
seventeen years of continuous monitorings, not a single signal was
detected, not a single sign to give some basis to the supposition that
an intelligent purpose stood behind it.

Acheropoulos then said to himself: The facts must be true, for facts are
the foundation of knowledge. Can it be that it is the theories of all
the sciences that are false? That organic chemistry, and biochemical
synthesis, and biology both theoretical and evolutionary, and
planetology, and astrophysics have been, every last one, in error? No,
they cannot all be so very much mistaken. And therefore the facts that
we observe (say, rather, that we do _not_ observe) clearly do not
contradict the theories. What we need is a reinterpretation of the set
of data and of the set of generalizations. This synthesis Acheropoulos
undertook.

 The age of the Universe and its size had to be revised by Earth’s
science several times in the course of the twentieth century. The
direction of the changes was always the same: both the antiquity and the
dimensions had been underestimated. When Acheropoulos sat down to write
_A New Cosmogony,_ the age and magnitude of the Universe had undergone
yet another revision: its duration was, then, set at about twelve
billion years; its visible dimensions, at ten to twelve billion
light-years. Now, the age of our solar system is five billion years. Our
system, therefore, does not belong to the first generation of stars
begotten by the Universum. The first generation arose far earlier, a
good twelve billion years ago. It is in the interval of time separating
the rise of that first generation from the rise of the subsequent
generations of suns that the key to the mystery lies.

A situation resulted, as peculiar as it was amusing. What a civilization
might look like, what it might occupy itself with, what goals it might
set itself, when that civilization had been prospering for _billions_ of
years (and civilizations “of the first generation” would have to be that
much older than Earth’s!)—this was something no one could picture, not
even in his wildest dreams. That which was beyond anyone’s ability to
imagine, being therefore a thing most inconvenient, was therefore
conveniently ignored. In fact, none of those who studied the problem of
cosmic psychozoics wrote one word about such long-lived civilizations.
The more bold among them sometimes said that the quasars, the pulsars,
were perhaps manifestations of the activity of the most powerful cosmic
civilizations. Yet simple calculation showed that Earth, if it continued
to develop at the present rate, could attain the level of such extreme
“astroengineering” activity within the next several _thousand_ years.
And after that? What might a civilization that lasted _millions_ of
times longer do? The astrophysicists who dealt with such questions
declared that such civilizations did nothing, seeing they did not exist.

 What happened to them? The German astronomer Sebastian von Hoerner
maintained they all committed suicide. And why not, if they were nowhere
to be found! But no, replied Acheropoulos. They are nowhere to be found?
It is only that we do not perceive them, because they are _already
everywhere._ That is, not they, but the fruit of their labor. Twelve
billion years ago, then, yes, at that time space was without life, and
the first seeds of life quickened in it, on the planets of the first
stellar generation. But after the passage of eons, nothing was left of
that cosmic primordium. If one considers “artificial” to be that which
is shaped by an active Intelligence, then the entire Universe that
surrounds us is already _artificial._ So audacious a statement evokes an
immediate protest: surely we know what “artificial” things look like,
things that are produced by an Intelligence engaged in instrumental
activity! Where, then, are the spacecraft, where the Moloch-machines,
where—in short—the titanic technologies of these beings who are supposed
to surround us and constitute the starry firmament? But this is a
mistake caused by the inertia of the mind, since instrumental
technologies are required only—says Acheropoulos—by a civilization still
in the embryonic stage, like Earth’s. A billion-year-old civilization
employs none. Its tools are what _we_ call the Laws of Nature. Physics
itself is the “machine” of such civilizations ! And it is no “ready-made
machine,” nothing of the sort. That “machine” (obviously it has nothing
in common with mechanical machines) is billions of years in the making,
and its structure, though much advanced, has not yet been finished!

 The sheer audacity of the blasphemy, its terribly rebellious flavor,
casts Acheropoulos’s book out of the reader’s hands—so it must have been
in many cases. And yet this is but the first step on the road to further
apostasies by the author, the greatest heresiarch in the history of
science.

Acheropoulos does away with the distinction between “natural” (the work
of Nature) and “artificial” (the work of technology) and goes so far as
to dispense with the unquestioned difference between Established Law
(juridical) and the Law of Nature.... He dismisses the tenet that the
separability of any and all objects into artificial and natural by
origin constitutes an objective property of the world. He considers this
tenet to be a fundamental aberration of the mind, caused by an effect he
calls “the closing in upon itself of the conceptual horizon.”

A man watches nature—he says—and learns to act from it; he pays close
attention to falling bodies, lightning bolts, the process of combustion;
Nature always is the teacher, and he the student; after a certain amount
of time, he begins actually to imitate the processes of his own body.
Later, with biology, he takes private lessons from that body, but even
then, like the cave dweller, continues to regard Nature as the upper
bound of perfection in solutions. He tells himself that maybe
someday—someday—he will come near to matching Nature in its excellence
of action, but this, then, will be the end of the road. To go further is
impossible, for that which exists as atoms, suns, the bodies of animals,
his own brain, is, in its construction, unsurpassable for all time. The
natural thus represents the limit of the series of works that
“artificially” repeat or modify it.

Now, this is an error of perspective, says Acheropoulos, or “the closing
in upon itself of the conceptual horizon.” The very notion of the
“perfection of Nature” is an illusion, as much an illusion as the image
of rails meeting at the vanishing point. Nature may be replaced in
everything, provided, of course, one possesses the requisite knowledge.
One can control atoms, and then one can alter the properties of the
atoms as well. In this, one ought not ask oneself whether the thing that
will be the “artificial” product of such operations will not prove “more
perfect” than the thing that was, hitherto, “natural.” It will be simply
different—according to the design and intention of the Operating
Parties; it will be “superior”—that is, “more perfect”—insofar as it is
fashioned in conformity with the purpose of the Intelligence. Indeed,
what sort of “absolute superiority” could be displayed by cosmic matter
after its total reconstruction? Possible are “various Natures,”
“different Universes,” but only one specific variant was carried out,
this one that has begotten us and in which we have existence; that is
all. The so-called Laws of Nature are inviolable only for a civilization
that is “embryonic,” such as Earth’s. According to Acheropoulos, the
road leads from the level where the Laws of Nature are discovered to the
level where such laws may be laid down.

 This is precisely what has happened—and is happening—these billions of
years. The present Universe _no longer_ is the field of the play of
forces elemental, pristine, blindly giving birth to and destroying suns
and their systems; nothing of the sort. In the Universe it is no longer
possible to distinguish what is “natural” (original) from what is
“artificial” (transformed). Who performed these cosmogonic labors? The
first generation of civilizations. In what manner? That we do not know:
our knowledge is too minute. How, then, and by what can we tell that
such is indeed the case?

Had the first civilizations—replies Acheropoulos—been free in their
actions from the beginning, as was the Creator of the Universe in the
conception of religion, then, truly, we never would have been able to
discern the change that took place. God, after all, created the
world—say the religions—through a pure act of will, in complete freedom;
but the situation in which the Intelligence found itself was different;
the Civilizations that arose were limited by the properties of the
primal matter that begot them; these properties conditioned their
subsequent actions; from the way in which those Civilizations now behave
one can, indirectly, divine the starting conditions for the Psychozoic
Cosmogony. This is no easy thing, for, whatever took place, the
Civilizations did not emerge unchanged from the work of transforming the
Cosmos; being a part of it, they could not touch it without also
touching themselves.

 Acheropoulos employs the following visual model. When on an agar medium
we place colonies of bacteria, we can at once distinguish between the
starting (the “natural”) agar and those colonies. In time, however, the
vital processes of the bacteria change the agar medium, introducing into
it certain substances, consuming others, so that the composition of the
nutrient material—its acidity, its consistency—undergoes
transformations. Now, when as a result of those changes the agar,
endowed with new chemisms, causes the rise of new varieties of bacteria,
altered quite beyond recognition with respect to the parent generations,
these new varieties are nothing more or less than the product of the
“biochemical game” that has gone on between all the colonies
collectively and the culture medium. The later varieties of bacteria
would not have arisen had the earlier ones not changed the environment;
hence, the later ones are creations of the game itself. Meanwhile, it is
not at all necessary for the individual colonies to be in direct contact
with one another; they affect one another, but only through osmosis,
diffusion, the displacements in the acid-base equilibrium of the
nutrient. As one can see, the original game state has a tendency to
disappear, to be supplanted by qualitatively new, initially nonexistent
forms of game interaction. For the agar, substitute the Protocosmos, and
for the bacteria, the Protocivilizations, and you obtain a simplified
view of the New Cosmogony.

What I have said thus far is, from the standpoint of knowledge
accumulated historically, totally insane. Nothing, however, is to
prevent our conducting thought experiments with the most arbitrary
assumptions, provided they be logically consistent. When therefore we
agree to the model of the Universe-Game, there arise a series of
questions, and to these we must provide consistent answers. They are
questions, above all, concerning the initial state: can we infer
anything at all about it, can we by inference arrive at the starting
conditions of the Game? Acheropoulos believes this to be possible. For
the Game to have originated in it, the Protocosmos must have possessed
well-defined properties. It must have been such, for example, as to
allow the first civilizations to come into existence in it, and
therefore it was not a physical chaos, but obeyed certain rules.

 These rules, however, did not have to be universal, that is to say, the
same everywhere. The Protouniverse could have been heterogeneous
physically; it could have represented a sort of miscellany of diverse
physics, physics not in every place identical and even not in every
place equally rigorous (processes occurring under the sovereignty of a
nonrigorous or indefinite physics would not always run the same course,
though their initial conditions might be analogous). Acheropoulos
posited that the Protouniverse was precisely such a physical “patchwork”
and that civilizations were able to arise in it only in a few locations,
at a considerable distance from one another. Acheropoulos conceived of
the Protouniverse as the physical homologue of a honeycomb; what in the
honeycomb are cells would in the Protouniverse be regions of temporarily
stabilized physics, with each physics different from the physics of the
adjoining regions. Each civilization, developing inside such an
enclosure, in isolation from the others, would think itself alone in the
entire Universum, and, growing in power and knowledge, would attempt to
impart stability to its surroundings, and this in an ever-widening
radius. When it succeeded in doing so, after a very long time such a
civilization began to encounter—in its centrifugal industry—phenomena
that were not now simply the natural elementality of the time-space
ambience, but manifestations of the industry of another civilization. So
concluded, according to Acheropoulos, the first stage of the Game, the
preliminary stage. The civilizations could not come into direct contact
with one another, but the physics established by one would always happen
upon, during expansion, the physics of its neighbors.

 These physics could not traverse one another without collision because
they were not identical; and they were not identical because they did
not represent the same initial living conditions for each civilization
considered separately. The individual civilizations for a long time did
not realize that they were no longer penetrating, in their work, a
completely inert element; but that they were, instead, touching upon
realms of intentionally initiated work—the work of other civilizations.
Comprehension was arrived at gradually. These determinations, which
undoubtedly did not take place all at the same time, opened up the next
and second stage of the Game. To give verisimilitude to his hypothesis,
Acheropoulos includes in _A New Cosmogony_ a number of imaginary scenes
depicting that cosmic era when different Physics, dissimilar in their
principal laws, came into conflict. The fronts of their clashes made
gigantic eruptions and fires, for prodigious amounts of energy were
released by annihilations and transformations of various kinds.
Presumably they were collisions so powerful that their echo to this day
reverberates in the Universum, in the form of the residual or background
radiation that astrophysics identified in the sixties, conjecturing that
it was the last vestige of the shock waves produced by the explosive
birth of the Universe from its point source. Such an exploding (“big
bang”) model of creation was at the time considered plausible by many.
But after further eons the civilizations, each, as it were, on its own,
discovered that they had been waging an antagonistic Game not with the
forces of Nature, but—unknowingly—with other civilizations. Now, the
thing that determined their subsequent strategies was the fact of the
fundamental impossibility of communication, of establishing contact,
because one cannot transmit, from the domain of one Physics, any message
into the domain of another.

 Each of them, therefore, had to work alone. A continuation of their
former tactics would have been pointless if not outright perilous;
instead of wasting effort in head-on collisions they had to unite, but
unite without any prior arrangement whatever. Such decisions, made,
again, not at the same time, in any case led finally to the Game’s
passing into its third stage, which is going on even now. For
practically the entire group of psychozoics in the Macrocosm is
conducting a game both solidary and normative. The members of this group
act much like the crews of ships that, during a storm, pour oil on the
turbulent waves; though they have not coordinated this course of action,
it will be—will it not?—to the advantage of all. Each player, then,
operates on the strategic principle of minimax: it changes the existing
conditions in such a way as to maximize the common gain and minimize
harm. For this reason the present Universe is homogeneous and isotropic
(it is governed by the same laws throughout, and in it no one direction
is favored over another). The properties that Einstein discovered in the
Universum are the result of decisions which, though made separately, are
identical, owing to the identical situation of the players; but it was
their _strategic_ situation that was identical in the beginning, and not
necessarily the _physical._ It was not that a uniform Physics gave rise
to the strategy of the Game. Rather, it happened the other way around:
the uniform strategy of minimax gave rise to a single Physics. _Id fecit
Universum, cui prodest._

Ladies and gentlemen, to the best of our knowledge Acheropoulos’s vision
conforms to the broad outlines of reality, although it contains a number
of oversimplifications and mistakes. Acheropoulos postulated that within
the context of different Physics there could originate the same type of
logic. For if civilization A₁, begotten in “cosmic cell” A, had had a
logic other than that of civilization B₁, arisen in “cell” B, then both
would not have been able to employ the same strategy and thereby unify
their Physics. He postulated, then, that nonidentical Physics could
nevertheless cause the emergence of a single Logic—otherwise he could
not have explained what took place cosmically. In this intuition there
is a modicum of truth, but the matter is much more complicated than he
imagined. From him we inherited a plan for the reconstruction of the
strategy of the Game—on the principle of “working backward.” Taking our
present Physics as the point of departure, we attempt to figure out
what—in the form of the decisions of the Players—gave rise to it. The
task is made difficult by the fact that the course of events cannot be
thought of as a linear sequence: as if the Protouniverse determined the
Game and the Game, in turn, determined our present Physics. He who
changes Physics changes himself; that is to say, he creates a feedback
loop between the transformation of his surroundings and his
autotransformation.

 This chief danger of the Game produced a number of _tactical_ maneuvers
on the part of the Players, for they must have been aware of it. They
strove for such transformations as would not be radical universally; in
other words, to avoid universal relativism they made a _hierarchical_
Physics. A hierarchical physics is “nontotal.” There is no doubt, for
example, that _mechanics_ would remain undisturbed even if matter on the
atomic scale were not to possess quantum properties. This means that the
individual “levels” of reality have limited sovereignty, that not all
the laws of a given level need be preserved in order that the next level
above it have existence. It means that Physics may be changed “a little
at a time” and that not every change of a set of laws amounts to
changing all of Physics on all its levels of phenomena. Difficulties of
this nature for the Players make the simple, elegant image of the Game
drawn by Acheropoulos—as a three-stage history—unlikely. Acheropoulos
suspected that the different Physics’ “falling afoul” of one another,
which took place in the course of the Game, must have annihilated a
portion of the Players, for not all the initial states would admit of
homogeneity. The actual intention of destroying Partners who were
situated unfavorably need not have informed the actions of the other
Players. The question of who was to endure, and who perish, was decided
by pure chance, for the various civilizations were endowed with various
environments—on a random basis.

 Acheropoulos believed that the last fires of those terrible “battles”
in which the different Physics came into collision could still be seen
by us in the form of quasars emitting energy on the order of 10⁶³ ergs,
an energy no known physical process can unleash, not in the relatively
small space a quasar occupies. He thought that in looking at the quasars
we were seeing what happened five to six billion years ago, in the
second stage of the Game, for that is the time light takes to travel
from the quasars to us. He was mistaken in this hypothesis. The quasars
we consider to be phenomena of another order. It must be realized that
Acheropoulos lacked the data that would have enabled him to revise such
views. A complete reconstruction of the initial strategy of the Players
is for us impossible; we can look back only to where the Players
proceeded—to put it crudely—more or less as they do today. If the Game
possessed critical points necessitating a fundamental change of
strategy, our retrospection cannot go back beyond the first such point.
And consequently we can learn nothing definite about the Protouniverse
that produced the Game.

However, when we look upon the present Universe, we discern in it,
embodied in its structure, the basic canons of the strategy employed by
the Players. The Universe is constantly expanding; it has a limited
velocity, or barrier, set by light; the laws of its Physics are indeed
symmetrical, but that symmetry is not a perfect one; the Universe is
constructed “hierarchically and coagulatively,” being composed of stars
that concentrate in clusters, which in turn make Galaxies, which are
grouped in localities of condensation, and finally all these
condensations make a Metagalaxy. In addition, the Universe possesses a
total asymmetry of time. Such are the basic features of the structure of
the Universum, and for each of these we find a profound explanation in
the structure of the Cosmogonic Game, a Game that allows us to
understand also why one of its principle canons must be the observance
of the Silentium Universi. And so: why is the Universe arranged
precisely in this way? The Players know that in the course of stellar
evolution new planets and new civilizations must come into being;
therefore, they see to it that these candidates for future Players, the
young civilizations, cannot disturb the equilibrium of the Game. For
this reason the Universe expands: since it is only in such a Universe,
despite the fact that new Civilizations are continually emerging in it,
that the distance separating them remains permanently vast.

 Communication, leading to “collaboration,” to the rise of a local
coalition of new Players, could still take place even in an expanding
Universe, if the latter did not also have a built-in barrier for the
speed of actions at a distance. Let us imagine a Universe with a Physics
that permits an increase in the speed of action propagation in direct
proportion to the energy invested. In such a Universe he who has at his
command five times the energy of all the others can inform himself five
times as rapidly of the state of the others and, with that advantage,
deal them decisive blows. In such a Universe the possibility exists to
monopolize control over its Physics and over all the other partners of
the Game. Such a Universe might be said to encourage rivalry, energy
competition, the acquisition of power. Now, in the real Universe, in
order to exceed the speed of light one needs energy that is infinitely
great: in other words, it is altogether impossible to break that
barrier.

And therefore in the real Universe the stockpiling of energy does not
pay. The reason behind the asymmetry in the flow of time is similar. If
time were reversible and if the reversing of its course could be
realized by dint of sufficient investment of resources and power, again
it would be possible to dominate one’s partners, in this case through
the annulment of their every move. And so, a Universe that does not
expand, as well as a Universe without a barrier of speed, and finally a
Universe with reversible time, do not allow a full stabilization of the
Game. Whereas the whole object was to stabilize it, and stabilize it
_normatively_: to this end do the moves of the Players tend,
incorporated into the structure of matter. It is clear, surely, that the
preventing of all perturbation and all aggression by an _established_
Physics is a measure far more certain and far more radical than any
other means of prophylaxis (for example, the use of laws _imposed,_ of
threats, surveillance, coercion, restriction, punishment).

 The result is that the Universe constitutes an _absorption screen_
against all who attain that level of the Game where they can become
full-fledged participants in it. For they meet with rules to which they
_must_ submit. The Players have rendered impossible for themselves
semantic communication; they make themselves understood by methods that
preclude the breaking of the rules of the Game. The established unity of
physics in itself testifies to their mutual agreement. The Players have
rendered impossible any effective semantic communication by creating and
preserving between themselves such distances that the _time taken to
acquire_ strategically operative information about the state of the
other Players is always greater than the time of the operativeness of
the present tactic of the Game. If, then, one of the Partners were
actually to “converse” with his neighbors, he would obtain news
invariably out of date, out of date from the moment of its obtainment.
Thus, in the Universe there is no opportunity for the formation of
antagonistic groupings, for conspiracy, for the establishment of centers
of local power, coalitions, collusions, etc. For this reason the Players
do not speak to one another; _they themselves have prevented it_; it was
one of the canons of the stabilization of the Game, and therefore of the
Cosmogony. This is the explanation of part of the mystery of the
Silentium Universi. We cannot listen in on the conversations of the
Players because they are silent, silent in keeping with their strategy.

 Acheropoulos’s guess was correct. His thoroughness may be seen, in the
pages of _A New Cosmogony,_ in his anticipation of objections to this
image of the Game. These boil down to pointing out the monstrous
disproportion between the billion-year labor that went into the
restructuring of the entire Cosmos and the purpose of that
restructuring, which is the _pacification_ of the Universe—by means of
the Physics built into it. What?—says his imaginary critic—You mean to
say that billions of years of cultural development _still_ are
insufficient for societies so inconceivably long-lived to renounce, of
their own accord, all forms of aggression, and that, therefore, the Pax
Cosmica must be guaranteed by Laws of Nature remodeled for that express
purpose? You mean to say that an endeavor that is measured in energies
exceeding many millions of Galaxies at once has as its goal nothing but
the institution of _barriers_ and _restrictions_ to military activity?
To this Acheropoulos answered: This type of Physics, which pacified the
Universe, was at the time of the birth of the Game a necessity, for
there was only one strategy that could make the Universe physically
homogeneous; in the opposite case its expanses would have been engulfed
in a chaos of blind cataclysms. Conditions of existence were, in the
Protouniverse, much harsher than today; life could arise in it only as
“the exception to the rule,” and, randomly conceived, it came to random
ends. The expanding Metagalaxy; its asymmetrical flow of time; its
hierarchical structure—all this had to be determined to begin with; it
was the minimum order required to lay the ground for the next
operations.

Acheropoulos realized that if that stage of transformations constituted
the history of existence, the Players should have before them now some
new, far-reaching objectives, and he tried to arrive at these. In this,
unfortunately, he had no success. And here we touch upon the hidden
lapse in his system. For Acheropoulos strove to grasp the Game not
through the reconstruction of its formal structure—i.e., logically—but
by putting himself in the shoes of the Players—i.e., psychologically. A
man, however, cannot come to know the Players’ psychology, or any more
understand their code of ethics; he lacks the data. We cannot picture to
ourselves what the Players think, what they feel, what they desire, just
as one cannot build a Physics by picturing to oneself what it means for
something “to have existence as an electron.”

 The existential immanence of a Player is, for us, as much beyond
knowing as an electron’s existential immanence. The fact that the
electron is a lifeless particle of the processes of matter, and that the
Player is an intelligent being, hence—presumably—such as we, has no real
significance. I speak of a lapse in Acheropoulos’s system, because at
one point in _A New Cosmogony_ Acheropoulos states quite clearly that
the motives of the Players cannot be reproduced on the basis of
introspection. He knew this, yet still succumbed to the style of
thinking that had shaped him, because philosophers attempt first to
understand, and then to generalize; for me, however, it was obvious from
the start that to create a model of the Game in this way was
inadmissible. The “understanding” approach presupposes a view of the
whole of the Game from without, that is, from an observation point that
does not exist and never will. Intentional action should not be equated
with psychological motivation. The ethics of the Players should not be
taken into consideration by an analyst of the Game, just as the personal
ethics of military leaders need not be considered by the battle
historian who studies the strategic logic of front-line moves during a
war. The model of the Game is a decisional structure conditioned by the
state of the Game and the state of the environment; it is not the
resultant vector of the individual codes, values, wants, whims, or norms
held by the separate Players. That they play the same Game does not in
the least mean that in any other respect they must be similar! They
could be no more similar than a man is to a machine when both play
chess. Thus, it is entirely possible that there exist Players who are
not alive in the biological sense, having arisen in the course of some
nonbiological development, and Players, too, who are the synthetic
product of an artificially engendered evolution. But considerations of
this sort have no rightful place in the theory of the Players.

 Acheropoulos’s most troublesome dilemma was the Silentium Universi. His
two rules are generally known. The first says that no civilization of a
lower order can find the Players, not only because they are silent, but
also because their behavior in no way stands out against the cosmic
background, and this because _it is that very background._

The second rule of Acheropoulos says that the Players do not approach
the younger civilizations with communications of a solicitous or
advisory nature, because they cannot specifically address such
communications, and without an address they do not wish to broadcast. In
order to send information to a particular address, one first must know
the state in which the addressee finds himself; but this very thing is
prevented by the first principle of the Game, which establishes a
barrier to action in time and space. As we know, any information that is
acquired—about the state of another civilization—must be a total
anachronism at the moment of its reception. In establishing their
barriers, the Players thereby made it impossible for themselves to learn
the states of other civilizations. On the other hand, the sending of
communications without an address, a directionless broadcast, invariably
produces more harm than good. Acheropoulos demonstrated this with an
experiment. He took two rows of cards; on one he wrote down the latest
scientific discoveries of the sixties, on the other, dates of the
historical calendar in a hundred-year range (1860–1960). Next, he drew
pairs of cards. Pure chance matched up the discoveries with the dates:
this was to simulate the directionless sending of information. In truth,
such a transmission hardly ever is of positive value to the receiver. In
most cases, the arriving communication is either unintelligible (the
theory of relativity in 1860), or unusable (the theory of lasers in
1878), or outright harmful (the theory of atomic energy in 1939).
Therefore, the Players maintain their silence, because—according to
Acheropoulos—they wish the younger civilizations well.

 Such a line of reasoning brings in ethics and is therefore no longer
sound. The assertion that a civilization must become more perfect
ethically the more developed it is instrumentally and scientifically,
immediately is introduced into the theory of the Game from the outside.
But the theory of the Cosmogonic Game cannot be so constructed. Either
the Silentium Universi follows inescapably from the structure of the
Game, or the very existence of the Game must be called into question. Ad
hoc hypotheses cannot save its credibility.

Acheropoulos was well aware of this. The problem vexed him far more than
the total neglect that he had suffered. He adds, to the “moral
hypothesis,” others, but no number of weak hypotheses can substitute for
one that is strong. At this point I must speak about myself. What did I
contribute as a continuator of Acheropoulos? My theory derives from
Physics and ends in Physics, but does not itself belong to Physics.
Obviously, had it resulted only in the Physics from which I derived it,
it would have been a worthless exercise in tautology.

The physicist, to date, has conducted himself like a man observing moves
on a chessboard who knows already how each piece works but does not
think that the moves of the pieces are tending toward any goal. The
Cosmogonic Game proceeds differently from that of chess, for in it the
rules change—that is, the manner of the moves, and the pieces
themselves, and the board. This is why my theory is not a reconstruction
of the entire Game as it has transpired since its inception, but only of
its final part. My theory is but a fragment of the whole, and therefore
something like a re-creation, based on an observation of chess, of the
principle of a gambit. He who has acquainted himself with the principle
of a gambit knows that a valuable piece is sacrificed in order that
something yet more valuable be gained later on, but he may not
necessarily know that the highest gain of all is mate. From the Physics
we have at our disposal it is impossible to educe a coherent structure
of the Game—or of even a part of it. It was only when I had followed
Acheropoulos’s intuition of genius and made the assumption that our
present Physics needed to be “completed” that I was able to reconstruct
the general lines of the play in progress. My procedure was heretical in
the extreme, because science’s first premise is the thesis that the
world comes “ready-made” and “finished” in its laws, whereas I was
assuming that our present Physics represented a transitional stage on
the way to particular transformations.

 The so-called universal constants are not constant. Boltzmann’s
constant, specifically, is not invariable. This means that although the
end state of every initial order in the Universe must be disorder, the
rate of increase in chaos may nevertheless be subject to changes brought
about by the Players. It would appear (this is merely a supposition, not
a deduction from the theory!) that the Players produced the asymmetry of
time by a fairly brutal measure, as if they had been “in a hurry” (on
the cosmic scale, of course). The brutality lies in their having made
the gradient of increasing entropy extremely steep. They used the strong
tendency of disorder to increase to institute in the Universe _a single
order._ If, since that time, everything goes from harmony to disharmony,
the model as a whole proves to be unified, subject to a common principle
and thereby brought into general accord.

That the processes of the microworld are in principle reversible has
been known for some time. Now follows a most remarkable thing:
theoretically, if the energy that Earth’s science invests in
elementary-particle research were to be multiplied 10¹⁹ times, that
research as a _discovering_ of the state of things would turn into a
_changing_ of that state! Instead of examining the laws of Nature we
would be imperceptibly altering them.

 This is a sore point, an Achilles heel in the Physics of the present
Universum. The microworld currently is the main arena of the Players’
construction activity. They have rendered it unstable and control it in
a certain way. It seems to me that a certain portion of Physics, already
stabilized, they have to some extent loosened again from its moorings.
They are making revisions, they are putting laws now moribund back into
service. This is the reason they maintain their silence, which is a
“strategic quiet.” They inform none of the “outsiders” of what they are
doing, or even of the very fact of the Game. A knowledge of the
existence of the Game, after all, places all of Physics in an altogether
different light. The Players say nothing so as to avoid unwanted
disturbances and interventions, and no doubt they will persevere in this
silence until the conclusion of their labors. How long will the
Silentium Universi last? This we do not know; I would guess at least a
hundred million years.

And so the Universe finds itself at a crossroads. Toward what do the
Players aim with this monumental reconstruction? We do not know this,
either. Our theory shows only that Boltzmann’s constant will diminish,
along with other constants, until it acquires a certain specific value
that is necessary to the Players—but necessary for what, we do not know.
We are like one who, understanding at last the principle of a gambit,
fails to grasp the purpose served by such an operation in the entirety
of the chess game. What I am going to say next goes quite beyond the
frontier of our knowledge. We have a true embarrassment of riches in the
wide variety of hypotheses that have been put forth over the last few
years. The Brooklyn group of Professor Bowman holds that the Players
wish to close up the “rift of the reversibility of phenomena” which yet
“remains” within the pale of matter, in the domain of the elementary
particles. Some contend that the weakening of the entropy gradients has
as its goal the Universe’s improved adaptedness for the phenomena of
life, and even that the Players are working for the “psychozoicization”
of the entire Cosmos. These are, in my opinion, hypotheses bold to an
excess, particularly in their resemblance to certain anthropocentric
ideas.

 The notion that the whole Universe is evolving so as to become “one
great Intelligence,” so as to “imbue itself with mind,” is a leitmotif
of many different philosophies, and of many religious faiths of the
past. Professor Ben-Nour has expressed the opinion, in his _Intentional
Cosmogony,_ that several of the Players nearest Earth (one of which may
_be_ located in the Andromeda Nebula) have not coordinated their moves
optimally, and hence Earth remains in a sector of “physics oscillation”;
this would mean that the theory of the Game does not at all reflect the
tactics of the Players at the present stage, but only a local, rather
random recess of it. A certain popularizer has claimed that the Earth
finds itself in a region of “conflict”: two neighboring Players have
undertaken a form of “guerrilla warfare” through the “Covert Alteration
of the Laws of Physics,” and _this_ accounts for the changes in
Boltzmann’s constant.

The thesis that the Players are “weakening” the Second Law of
Thermodynamics is currently very much in vogue. In connection with this,
I consider interesting the view of Academician A. Slysz, who in his
paper “Logic and the New Cosmogony” (“Logika i Novaya Kosmogoniya”)
draws attention to the ambiguity of the interrelation between Physics
and Logic. It is quite possible—says Slysz—that the Universe with a
weakened tendency to entropy would give rise to very large information
systems that would turn out to be very stupid. It seems likely, in the
light of the work of several young mathematicians, that the changes in
Physics already carried out by the Players have led to changes in
mathematics, or—more precisely—to a transformation in the
constructibility of noncontradictory systems in the formal sciences.
From such a standpoint it is not far to the thesis that Godel’s famous
proof, contained in his essay “Uber die unentscheidbaren Sätze der
formalen Systeme,” showing the limits of perfection attainable in system
mathematics, is not valid universally—i.e., “for all possible
Universes”—but holds only for the Universe in its present state. (And
even that once upon a time, say, half a billion years ago, Godel’s proof
could not have been drawn, because then the laws governing the
constructibility of mathematical systems were _different_ from what they
are today.)

 I must confess that, much as I understand the motivation of those who
now are coming forward with their various suppositions concerning the
goals of the Game, the intentions of the Players, the main values
supposedly adhered to by Them, and so forth, still I am at the same time
made rather uneasy by the inaccuracy or even the misleading nature of a
good many such (often frivolous) suppositions. Some people now see the
Universe in the likeness of an apartment, which may have its furniture
rearranged in a moment or two, to suit the tenants. Such a cavalier
attitude to the laws of Physics, to the laws of Nature, cannot be taken
seriously. The tempo of the actual transformations is, within the scope
of our lives, incredibly slow. From which follows, I hasten to add, not
a blessed thing relating to the nature of the Players themselves, such
as their alleged longevity or outright immortality. On this head, too,
nothing is known. Perhaps, as has been written, the Players are not
actually living beings, that is, of biological origin; perhaps the
members of the First Civilizations in general (and this, from time
immemorial) do not attend to the Game themselves but have instead handed
it over to enormous automata of some sort—the helmsmen of the Cosmogony.
Perhaps a great many of the Protocivilizations that initiated the Game
are no longer, and their role is being carried out by self-acting
systems, and these make up a percentage of the Partners of the Game. All
this may be, but to such questions we will obtain an answer neither in a
year nor, I believe, in a hundred.

Still, we have come into the possession of a piece of definite and new
knowledge. As is usually the case with knowledge, it tells us more
concerning the limitations of action than about the power. Certain
theoreticians today maintain that the Players, if they so desired, could
remove the limit to the precision of measurements which is imposed upon
them by Heisenberg’s relation of uncertainty. (Dr. John Command has put
forward the idea that the uncertainty relation is a tactical maneuver
introduced by the Players on the same principle as the rule of the
Silentium Universi: that “no one may manipulate Physics in a manner
undesired if he is not himself a Player.”) Even were this so, the
Players cannot eliminate the bonds that exist between the changes in the
laws of matter and the working of the mind, for the mind is composed of
that same matter. The notion that it would be possible to devise a Logic
or Metalogic valid “for all constructible Universes” is mistaken, and
_even today this has been successfully shown._ I myself think that the
Players, well aware of this state of affairs, are encountering
difficulties—difficulties obviously not on our scale or measure!

 If the realization of the nonomniscience of the Players should cause us
alarm, since through it we become sensible of the immanent risk of the
Cosmogonic Game, by the same token this reflection brings our
existential situation unexpectedly closer to the condition of the
Players, for no one in the Universum is all-powerful. The Highest
Civilizations also are Parts—Parts That-Do-Not-Fully-Know-the-Whole.

Ronald Schuer has gone the furthest in the advancing of bold
conjectures: he states in _The Mind-made Universe: Laws vs. Rules_ that
the more profoundly the Players transform the Universe, the more
markedly do they alter themselves. Change brings about what Schuer calls
“the guillotining of memory.” For, in fact, he who transforms himself in
a very radical way thereby obliterates to some extent the memory of his
own past, his past prior to that operation. The Players, says Schuer, in
acquiring greater and greater cosmometamorphic power, are themselves
effacing the traces of the path by which the Universe has so far
evolved. Creative omnipotence, taken to its limit, spells the paralysis
of retrognosis. The Players, if they strive to impart to the Universe
the property of a cradle of Mind, to this end reduce the force of the
law of entropy; in a billion years, having lost all memory of what was
with them and before them, they bring the Universe to a state of which
Slysz spoke. With the elimination of the “entropy brake” there begins an
explosive growth of biospheres; a great number of undeveloped
civilizations prematurely join the Game and bring about its collapse.
Thus, through the collapse of the Game, chaos ensues ... out of which,
after eons, there emerges a new Collective of Players ... to begin the
Game anew. So, then, according to Schuer, the Game proceeds _in a
circle,_ and therefore the question of the “beginning of the Universum”
is meaningless. An unusual image, but unconvincing. If _we_ can foresee
the inevitability of the collapse, only think of what prognoses the
Players are capable.

 Ladies and gentlemen, the crystal image of the Game, carried on by
Intelligences billions of parsecs apart, who are hidden among the
nebular clusters of stars, I have outlined for you, in order then to
muddy it with a downpour of obscurities, opposing suppositions, and
wholly improbable hypotheses. But such is the normal course of
knowledge. Science currently sees the Universe as a palimpsest of Games,
Games endowed with a memory reaching beyond the memory of any one
Player. This memory is the harmony of the Laws of Nature, which hold the
Universe in a homogeneity of motion. We look upon the Universum, then,
as upon a field of multibillion-year labors, stratified one on the other
over the eons, tending to goals of which only the closest and most
minute fragments are fragmentarily perceptible to us. Is this image
true? May it not be replaced someday by another, a successor, one
radically different, as this model of ours—of the Game of
Intelligences—is radically different from all those arisen in history?
In place of an answer, I should like to quote here the words of
Professor Ernst Ahrens, my teacher. Many years ago, when, still a youth,
I went to him with my first drafts containing the conception of the
Game, to ask him his opinion, Ahrens said: “A theory? A theory, yet?
Maybe it is not a theory. Mankind is going to the stars, yes? Then, even
if there is nothing to it, this thing, maybe what we have here is a
blueprint, maybe it will all come to pass someday, just so!” With these
words of my teacher—not altogether skeptical, I think!—I conclude the
lecture. Thank you.

* _Credo quia absurdum est_ (Prof. Dobb’s note in the text).

[back]
