Highcastle - A Remembrance

By Stanislaw Lem

The Polish Wysoki zamek translated by Michael Kandel

 

 

Contents

    Prologue

    Chapter 1

    Chapter 2

    Chapter 3

    Chapter 4

    Chapter 5

    Chapter 6

    Chapter 7

    Epilogue

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Prologue

 

Now I see how far I strayed from the goal I set myself when I began this
book. I intended to entrust the task to my memory, giving it free rein
and following it obediently. Going on the assumption that if the mind
preserves, then what it preserves must be worth preserving. Perhaps I
hoped that my scattered recollections, like multicolored slivers from a
broken kaleidoscope, would eventually arrange themselves into a pattern.
Or if not a pattern, then an interconnected multitude of patterns you
could order in different ways, albeit primitively and tentatively. And
thus I would be not so much recapitulating, in abbreviated form, my
childhood -- only an abstraction to me now, though my childhood once
took up more than a dozen calendars, progressing through all the dates
in black and red -- not so much recapitulating as drawing, by this
method, a portrait of memory itself. Memory, which is not a receptacle
altogether independent of me, altogether inanimate, the soul's storeroom
with innumerable recesses and cubbyholes, but on the other hand neither
is memory I. It is not I because it has autonomy; it is receptive not
where I am receptive, indifferent not where I am indifferent -- for it
often fails to retain what matters to me, while retaining what I care
nothing about. And so I wanted to have my memory (and not me) give
testimony, and this in turn would reveal what it, my memory, is. I of
course take full responsibility for it, though I have no power over it.

This book, then, was to have been an experiment, whose results I would
await with curiosity, as if I were not the one speaking, the images and
anecdotes issuing instead from the mouth of a stranger. A stranger who,
as it happened, sat hidden inside me the way the inner rings of a tree
trunk -- the days of my childhood and youth -- are hidden by the later
rings and bark of maturity: the sapling of many decades ago contained
within the present tree.

I really don't know when it was that I first experienced the surprise
that I existed, surprise accompanied by a touch of fear that I could
just as easily have not existed, or been a stick, or a dandelion, or a
goat's leg, or a snail. Or even a stone. At times it seems to me that
this happened before the war, and therefore in the period dealt with
here, but I am not sure. In any case the feeling of surprise was never
to leave me, though it did not become an obsession. It was to visit me
in different ways, and I would react to it in different ways, sometimes
dismissing it as nonsense, a thing to be ashamed of, like a deformity.
And the question haunted me: Why are these and not other thoughts
entering my head, and what governs and directs them?

For a while I firmly believed that my soul -- or, rather, my
consciousness -- was located four or five centimeters inside my face,
behind the nose and a little below the eyes. I have no idea why. This
must have been a kind of "pre-philosophy," just as once, earlier yet in
my life, there was a "pre" to thinking. And that, too, I intended to
shake out of the bag of my memory. But it would happen of itself, my
task being only to focus on the past as I held the metaphorical bag
shaken. This didn't work. Remembering, whether I wanted to or no, I
simultaneously imposed an order on what was remembered, an order that
clearly pointed in my direction, to the me of today, the so-called man
of letters -- that is, an adult engaged in one of the least serious and
most embarrassing professions: tremendous mental effort given various
impressive names that mean nothing, such as "the writer's laboratory." I
personally have no such laboratory, or in any case haven't noticed one.
But whatever tumbled from my bag of memory, it was instantly given a
direction, however subtly. I am not speaking of dishonesty, of
alterations made. No, it was spontaneous, unconscious. But I am not
making excuses.

It is only now that I see, after the fact, like a detective following
the clues of a crime, a crime that employed sleight of hand to tamper
even with the evidence that was untouched and did not point in my
direction -- only now that I see the arrow aimed at me across a quarter
of a century. What is even stranger is that I never thought of myself as
a "born writer," that it was hocerat in votis. I still believe that I
was not. In that childhood and the rummage left after it there must have
been a great number of intersecting paths, directions to decipher, to
discover, most of them confused or broken off or blind alleys. Or
perhaps there were no paths at all but only little islands separated
from one another in space and time; not a complete chaos, because there
was after all a home, school, parents, the fact that when I was very
little I stuck a "green wing" to my nose and wore it, and then was
bigger, in a school uniform -- so there was definitely order. But an
order in which you can see, as on an empty chessboard, black-white
stripes that go vertically, horizontally, or diagonally. A little effort
with the eyes, and you find the structure you want. The chessboard
remains a chessboard, and you are not seeing more than what is truly
there -- alternating black and white squares -- yet the perspective, the
orientation, can change suddenly.

Something similar, I think, happened with the chessboard of memory
opened here. I added nothing, but out of the many possible patterns I
favored one. Was this because you automatically look for a theme in a
life, an underlying logic? In order not to admit, even to yourself, that
so many of your paths were abandoned and so many chances wasted? Or is
it simply that you want everything that is and everything that was to
make sense, even though it doesn't? As if you couldn't just live your
life without analyzing it. In the case of adults, an amorphous,
meaningless existence isn't right -- but for a child?

I wished to let the child speak, stepping back, not interfering in any
way -- and instead I exploited him, robbed him, emptied his pockets,
notebooks, drawers, to boast to the adults what promise he showed, and
how even his little faults were virtues in embryo. I turned my theft
into an attractive road sign, practically into a whole highway. And so
wrote yet another book -- as if I had not known from the beginning, had
not guessed, that it could hardly have been otherwise; that all attempts
to arrange memories in a strict protocol and without commentary are an
illusion. I commented, I interpreted, I spoke too much. And spoke of
secrets and toys that were not mine -- for I no longer have secrets and
toys -- and I built a tomb for that young boy and placed him in it, a
meticulous, calm, factual tomb, as if I were writing about someone made
up, someone who never lived, and who with will and planning could be
fashioned according to the rules of aesthetics. It was not playing fair.
You do not treat a child that way.

 

 

 

CHAPTER

1

 

Do you remember the inventory of mysterious things that the Lilliputians
found in Gulliver's pockets? Included were a comb that could be used as
a picket fence, an enormous pocket watch that emitted a disturbing noise
at regular intervals, and many other objects whose use was obscure. I,
too, was once a Lilliputian. The way I got to know my father was by
climbing all over him as he sat in his high-backed chair. I would
rummage through those pockets to which I was allowed access, in his
formal black suit that smelled of both tobacco and the hospital. The
left vest pocket contained a metal cylinder that resembled a cartridge
used for big-game hunting. This cylinder, when unscrewed, revealed a
series of nickel-plated funnels stacked one inside another. These were
speculums. In the neighboring pocket I found a pencil worn to a stump.
It was set in a golden holder which, when pressed with a force greater
than I could muster, gave a click, whereupon more pencil emerged. In the
frock-coat pocket was a metal box that opened with a menacing snap and
had a velvet lining on which sat a minuscule wallet containing nothing
but a patch of suede that unfolded when you unfastened a little button.
There was also a tiny silver box with a snap on the lid; inside it was a
silver piece attached to the bottom by a flat rubber band, dark violet
in color. If you touched it, your fingers would get inky. In the other
pocket of my father's frock coat was a round mirror with a hole in the
middle, cracked, and having an elastic band and buckle. The mirror made
my face huge, turning my eye into a pond where the iris floated like a
large brown fish, and my eyelashes were transformed into the surrounding
reeds. Across the vest was a gold chain anchored to one side; it held a
watch, also golden, with three compartments. The watch had Roman
numerals and a small second hand. I wasn't able, no matter how hard I
tried, to open the back myself, where little wheels with ruby eyes
lived, glittering as they moved.

In this close-up way, I got to know my father. He wore white shirts with
thin black stripes, the cuffs fastened to the sleeves by tiny buttons,
and a stiff collar attached by studs. I found many of these old collars
in our laundry drawers. I enjoyed touching them; their mixture of
stiffness and pliability gave me the vague intimation that one could
make something interesting and useful out of them. My father's tie was
soft in texture and black in color; it looked like a sash and was tied
like an ascot. His hat had a soft, wide brim and a rubber band to hold
it in place, which rubber band I found perfect for snapping. There were
two canes around the house, one of them at times missing; ordinary canes
-- but my uncle had a truly interesting one, with a silver handle in the
shape of a horse's head. And a very old person, hardly able to move, who
visited sometimes, used yet another kind of cane, one with an ivory
knob. I never got a good look at it, because when he came, I would hide,
terrified by his wheezing. I never realized that he wasn't trying to
frighten me. He was some uncle or great-uncle but didn't look at all
like an uncle to me.

We lived on the second floor of Number Four Brajerska Street. Father and
I would take walks to the Jesuit Garden, or up Mickiewicz Avenue toward
Saint Jur's Orthodox Church. I don't know why my father took a cane,
because he never leaned on it. On winter mornings, when there was too
much snow in the Garden, we would stroll up and down Marszalkowska
Street, in front of Jan Casimir University, where I craned my neck to
stare at the enormous, half-naked stone figures in curious hats that
were also stone. Motionless, they performed mysterious duties: one sat,
another held an open book propped on a bare knee. Craning my neck
constantly was too tiring, so mainly I watched what passed my father at
knee level. One time I noticed that he was not wearing his usual shoes
with laces, but something entirely different, smooth shoes with no
laces. His spats, which he always wore, were gone, too.

Surprised, I asked, "Where did you get those funny shoes?" And a voice
came down from above, "What rudeness!" It wasn't my father at all, but a
complete stranger, to whom I had attached myself, I don't know how. My
father was walking a dozen steps behind. I was terrified. This must have
been an unusually unpleasant experience, for me to remember it so well.

The Jesuit Garden was not especially large, and yet I once managed to
get lost in it. This happened so long ago, however, and I was so young
at the time, that I am not sure whether I remember the event or only
heard about it from someone. Between tall shrubs, probably hazel,
because they had red branches, there was an enormous barrel filled with
water. Thirty years later I used that barrel in a story, "The Garden of
Darkness." Yet the Jesuit Garden held no attraction for me, while
Stryjski Park did, because it had a little lake in the shape of a figure
8, and on the right there was a path that led to the end of the world.
Perhaps because no one ever went there, but I don't know. Or possibly
someone told me this, unless I made it up myself and then believed it.
Stryjski Park had a complicated topography and was also wonderfully near
the exhibition grounds of the Eastern Fair. Winter and summer, the park
was dominated by Baczewski Tower, a rectangular structure whose walls
were inlaid with colored bottles. I asked if these bottles were filled
with real liquor or only colored water, but no one seemed to know.

We usually went to Stryjski Park by droshky, and to the Jesuit Garden on
foot, which was a shame, because in front of the university the road was
paved with special wooden bricks that under horses' hoofs made a sound
as if a great space lay beneath. Not that I didn't enjoy walking to the
Jesuit Garden. At the entrance sat a man with a wheel of fortune.
Several times I managed to win a cigarette case with yellow ribbons
inside to keep the cigarettes in place, but most often I won a two-sided
pocket mirror.

There were also ice cream carts, but I was not allowed to eat ice cream.
When I got a little bigger, I would sometimes seek out Anusia, a sweet
old lady not much taller than I. She wore wire-rimmed glasses and
carried a basket of pretzels. The pretzels were either two for five
groszy, and those I preferred, the thick ones, a fiver each. For some
reason a ten-groszy coin was called a "sixer," and that was a lot of
money.

From the Jesuit Garden we went either straight home or by way of Smolka
Square, with its statue of Smolka in the center, in order to stop at
Orenstein's to buy fruit or a can of cherry compote, which was a rare
treat. Always on display in Orenstein's window were pyramids of enticing
red apples, oranges, and bananas with oval stickers that said FYFFES. I
remember the word but have no idea what it meant. A little farther on,
where Jagiellonska Street began, was the Marysienka movie house, which I
really disliked, because my mother would take me there when she didn't
know what else to do with me. I didn't understand what was happening on
the screen and got terribly bored. Sometimes I would slowly slide out of
my seat onto the cold floor and on all fours go exploring between
people's feet, but that, too, soon grew tiresome. I had to sit and wait
for the film to end. The men and women on the screen opened and closed
their mouths without voices, while music played. It was a piano at
first, then later a gramophone, I think.

But we are going home from the Garden. From Smolka Square you took
Podlewski, an uninteresting street, and then two narrow streets, Chopin
and Moniuszko, where the strong aroma of roasted coffee told you that
our building was next. The iron gate was black and heavy, and then stone
steps. I was not supposed to use the back, kitchen stairway, which was
spiral and made a tinny, hollow sound when you walked on it. Something
drew me to this stairway -- perhaps because people said that there were
rats in the courtyard you had to cross to get to it. One rat did in fact
appear in our kitchen, but I was already ten or eleven then. A frightful
thing -- when I went after it with a poker, it jumped on my chest. I
fled, and don't know what the rat did after that.

We lived in six rooms, yet, with all this space, I didn't have my own.
Next to the kitchen was a room that had a bathroom behind a door painted
the same color as the wall, an old couch, an ugly cabinet, and under the
window ledge a cupboard where Mother stored food. Then there was a hall,
the door to the dining room, my father's study, and my parents' bedroom.
Special doors led to the off-limits area: the patients' waiting room and
my father's office. In our apartment I lived everywhere and belonged
nowhere. First I slept with my parents, then on a couch in the dining
room. I tried to settle in one place permanently, but somehow it never
worked out. When the weather was warm, I would occupy a small concrete
balcony off my father's study. From this outpost I would attack the
surrounding buildings, because their smoking chimneys turned into enemy
warships. I also liked to be Robinson Crusoe, or, rather, myself, on a
desert island. As far back as I can remember, I was intensely interested
in eating, so my major concern as a castaway was to secure food -- paper
cones filled with shelled corn or beans, and, when in season, cherries,
whose pits also served as ammunition for small arms or simply to squeeze
with your fingers. Sometimes I replenished my supplies with coffee
grounds or dessert leftovers stolen from the dinner table. I would
surround myself with saucers, bags, and cones, and begin the difficult
and perilous life of a hermit. A sinner, even a criminal, I had much to
brood over and ponder.

I learned how to break into the middle drawer of my mother's dining-room
cupboard, where she kept the cakes and pies; I would remove the top
drawer and with a knife cut off a thin strip from around the edge of the
cake so that no one would notice that it was smaller. Then I gathered
and ate the pieces, and carefully licked the knife clean to cover my
tracks. Sometimes caution struggled with lust within me for the candied
fruit the bakers used to embellish their creations. More than once I
could not control myself and robbed the crust of the candied orange,
lemon, and melon rinds that squeaked so deliciously between my teeth.
Thus I made bald spots impossible to conceal. Afterward, I would await
the consequences of my act with a mixture of despair and stoic
resignation.

The witnesses to my balcony adventures were two oleanders in large
wooden tubs, one white and one pink. I lived with them on terms of
neutrality; their presence neither pleased nor bothered me. Inside,
there were also plants, distant and stunted relatives of the flora of
the south: a rusty palm that kept dying but could not give up the ghost
entirely, a philodendron with shiny leaves, and a tiny pine, or maybe it
was a fir, which once a year produced clusters of fragrant, young,
pale-green needles.

In the bedroom were two things that fed my earliest imaginings: the
ceiling and a large iron chest. Lying on my back when I was very small,
I would look at the ceiling, at its plaster relief of oak leaves and,
between the leaves, bumps of acorns. Drifting into sleep, I thought
about these acorns. They occupied an important place in my mental life.
I wanted to pick them, but not really, as if I understood, even at that
age, that the intensity of a wish is more important than its
fulfillment. Something of this infant mysticism passed to real, ordinary
acorns; removing their caps seemed to me, for years, a portentous thing,
a kind of transformation. My attempt to explain how important this was
to me -- it is probably in vain.

In the bed in which I slept, my grandparents died. It was Grandfather
who left the iron chest, a large, heavy, useless object, a kind of
family strongbox from the days before professional safecrackers, when
robbers used nothing more sophisticated than a club or a crowbar. The
chest, always placed against the door between my parents' bedroom and
the waiting room, had flexible handles, a flat lid with flowers carved
in it, and in the center a square piece which, when pressed on the side
in the right way, popped open to reveal a keyhole. Such cunning today
seems touchingly naive, but at the time I thought the black chest was
the work of a master craftsman. And I was in complete awe of the key
itself, as big as my forearm. I had to wait a long time, impatiently, to
grow until the moment when, using both hands and superhuman effort, I
was able to turn that key in the lock.

I knew of course that there was no treasure in the chest. What lay at
the bottom were a few yellowed newspapers, documents, and a wooden box
filled with beautiful thousand-mark notes. I played with this money, and
with the cheerful blue hundred-ruble notes, too, which were even more
beautiful than the marks, whose brownish color brought to mind dingy
wallpaper. There was an incomprehensible story behind the money,
something that had suddenly taken away its power. If I had not been
allowed to do with the notes as I pleased, I might have thought that
some of their power -- asserted by ciphers, seals, watermarks, and oval
portraits of men in crowns and beards -- remained in them and was only
slumbering. But since I was allowed to play with them, I had contempt
for them, as one has contempt for a splendid thing that turns out to be
empty of truth. So I could not rely on the notes for excitement, but
only on what might take place inside the black chest when it was long
locked -- and it was almost always locked, with my silent permission,
which of course no one asked me for. Yes, in that darkness inside,
something could take place. That was why the opening of the chest was a
matter of great weight -- literally, too, since the lid was tremendously
heavy. From three sides came long bars, and you had to lift them and
prop them with a series of special levers; otherwise, I was told, and I
believed it, the lid, falling, could chop off a head. Which was what you
would expect from such a chest. It was not pretty or pleasant; a gloomy,
ungainly thing; yet I long relied on its inner strength. It had a row of
holes in its bottom, so the chest could be bolted tight to the floor; an
excellent idea. But there were no bolts, none needed now. As time
passed, the chest was covered with an old rug and thus reduced to the
level of everyday household furniture. Humbled, it no longer counted. On
occasion I showed one of my friends the key -- it could have been the
key to the city gates. But the key got lost somewhere.

Beyond the bedroom was my father's study, which had a big bookcase
enclosed in glass, big leather armchairs, and a small round table with
curious legs that resembled caryatids, because at the top of each was a
little metal head. At the bottom, little bare feet, also metal, stuck
out of the wood as if out of a coffin. Which didn't seem at all
grotesque to me, too young to make such associations. I proceeded
systematically to gouge out all the heads, one after another, and found
that they were hollow bronze. When I tried to put them back, they
buckled with every movement of the tabletop.

My father's desk, covered with green cloth, stood against the wall by
itself and was locked, for it held money: real money. On rare occasions
the desk would also store more valuable treasure, more valuable from my
point of view then -- a box of Lardelli chocolates brought all the way
from Warsaw, or a box of candied fruit. My father had to fiddle with a
cluster of keys before one of those morsels, rationed out like medicine,
would finally appear before me. At which point I was torn between
opposite desires: I could either consume the delicacy immediately or
prolong the anticipation of its consumption as much as possible. As a
rule I ate everything at once.

Also locked in that desk were two objects of great beauty. One was a
tiny wind-up bird in a box inlaid with mother-of-pearl, which they said
came from the Eastern Fair and had been on exhibit there, a thing not
for sale. My father, seeing how the pearl lid opened when you pressed a
miniature key, which revealed another lid, one with a golden
checkerboard, and how from there jumped a bird smaller than a
fingernail, all iridescent and flapping its wings and poking its beak
and flashing its eyes, and how it strutted in a circle and sang --
seeing this, he set in motion a whole army of stratagems and connections
and finally purchased this jewel for an astronomical sum. The bird was
taken out and turned on only rarely -- so I wouldn't get my hands on it,
which would surely have meant the end of the little thing. Although I
loved and revered it no less than did my father, I could not control
myself. For a while there was another bird that stayed in the desk, one
less fine, the size of a sparrow, a wind-up that had no musical ability
but only pecked the table vigorously when you put it there. I persuaded
my father to let me have it longer, and that was its last hour.

There were little knickknacks, too, in my father's desk. I remember best
the eyeglasses no larger than a matchstick, with gold wire frames and
ruby lenses, which sat in a gold etui. The less valuable knickknacks
were kept in the glass case in the dining room. These were all works of
the miniaturizer's art -- a table with chessboard and chessmen fixed in
place forever, a chicken coop with chickens, a violin (from which I
pulled the strings), and assorted pieces of ivory, furniture, and an egg
that opened to reveal a group of figures packed together. Also silver
fish constructed of tin segments which allowed for movement, and bronze
armchairs, each seat the size of a fingertip, upholstered with the
softest satin. Somehow -- I do not know how -- most of these objects
survived the years of my childhood presence.

My father's study had old, big armchairs, and the narrow but deep
crevices between their cushions and backs slowly gathered a variety of
objects -- coins, a nail file, a spoon, a comb. I labored mightily,
straining my fingers and the chairs' springs, which twanged in pained
protest, to retrieve all these, breathing the smell of old leather and
glue. Yet it was not such objects that spurred me on but, rather, the
vague hope of finding -- hatched -- objects altogether different and
possessing inexplicable qualities. This is why I had to be alone when
with quiet fury I set about disturbing those lazy things dark with age.
The fact that I found nothing out of the ordinary did not cool my ardor.

But here I should acquaint the reader with the basic principles of the
mythology I adhered to then. I believed, not confiding this to anyone,
that inanimate objects were no less fallible than people. They, too,
could be forgetful. And if you had enough patience, you could catch them
by surprise, forcing them to multiply, among other things. Because a
penknife kept in a drawer, for example, could forget where it belonged,
and you might find it someplace altogether different, between books on a
bookshelf, say. The penknife, unable to get back to the drawer in time,
would have no choice in such a situation but to duplicate itself, so
there would be two of them. I believed that inanimate objects were
subject to logic and had to abide by definite rules, and whoever knew
those rules could control matter. In an obscure, almost reflexive way I
held on to this faith for years -- and cannot say I am completely free
of it even now.

The library, because it was locked, fascinated me. It contained my
father's medical books, anatomical atlases, and, thanks to his
absentmindedness, I was able to inform myself in a systematic and
thorough way about the differences between the sexes. But, oddly, I was
far more impressed by the volumes on osteology. The blood-red or
brick-red plates showing men with their skin peeled off like raw steak
disgusted me; the skeletons, on the other hand, were so clean. I don't
know how old I was when I first thumbed through the heavy black quarto
tomes with their yellow drawings of skulls, ribs, pelvises, and shins.
In any case I had no fear of those corpses, nor did the study of them
give me any squeamish pleasure. It was, instead, like going through a
catalog of Erector-set parts, where first we see the individual shafts,
levers, and wheels, and then on following pages constructions that can
be made from them. It is possible that these osteological atlases
appealed to my interest in building things, which did not show itself
until later. I thumbed through those books conscientiously, and remember
some of the illustrations to this day -- the bones of the foot, for
example, tied together by ligaments drawn in sky blue, probably for
contrast.

Since my father was a laryngologist, most of the thick volumes in his
library dealt with diseases of the ears, nose, and throat. These organs
and their afflictions I privately considered of little importance, a
prejudice I did not realize I had until recently. Prominent in the
collection was the monumental dozen-volume German Handbuch of
otolaryngology. Each volume had no fewer than a thousand glossy pages.
There I could look at heads cut open in various ways, innumerable ways,
the whole machinery drawn and colored with the utmost precision. I
especially loved the pictures of brains, whose different coils were
distinguished by every color of the rainbow. Many years later, when in
an anatomy lab I saw a real brain for the first time, I was surprised
(though of course I knew better) that it was so drab a thing.

Since these anatomical sessions were forbidden, I had to plan them
carefully. Such tactical preparation is by no means the privilege only
of adults -- provided a child is sufficiently motivated. I sat like a
rider on the large squeaky leather arm of the armchair, hidden from the
door by the doors of the open bookcase, open so I could quickly put the
book back in its place. I rested the book against the back of the chair
and in that position continued my studying. It is curious, what I
thought at the time. I was drawn by the purity and precision of the
illustrations. Again, I was to experience disappointment when many years
later, as a medical student, I realized that what I had seen in my
father's study were only idealizations, abstractions, of the systems of
nerves and muscles. Nor can I recall ever feeling that there was any
connection between what I saw in the books and my own body. There was
nothing disturbing in those plates -- perhaps because of their
matter-of-factness, the breaking up into parts, and the fanatical
completeness, which showed not only anatomical detail but even the
fingers and hooks used to part the cut skin for better viewing. There
were other books there also, with illustrations indeed frightful, but
too frightful for me to fear them either. These showed wounds of the
face, in war: faces without noses, without jaws, without earlobes or
eyes, and even faces that were without a face, being only a pair of eyes
among scars, with an expression that said nothing to me, for I had
nothing with which to compare it. I might have shuddered a little, but
only as you shudder listening to a fairy tale. In fairy tales, awful
things happen, in fact are expected to happen, and the shudder is
desirable and pleasant. And many things in those books were funny:
artificial limbs, artificial noses attached to eyeglasses, artificial
ears on headbands, little masks that smiled, clever plugs to fill holes
in cheeks, and false teeth and palates. All this seemed to me a
masquerade grown-ups played, a little mystifying, like so many of their
games, but containing nothing bad or shameful. There was only one thing,
not a book, that made me uneasy. It lay on one of the shelves, in front
of the gilded spines of thick tomes: a bone, a temporal bone removed by
surgery of the middle ear, by a mastoidectomy. I knew only that it was a
bone, similar in weight and touch to the bones sometimes found at the
bottom of a bowl of soup. On the shelf, as if set there on purpose, it
alarmed me a little. It had a definite smell, mostly of dust and old
books, but with a whiff of something else, sweetish, rotten. Sometimes I
would take long sniffs of it to figure out what it was, as if smell was
the sense that led me. Then at last I would feel a slight revulsion and
put the bone back, making sure it lay exactly in the same place.

The lower shelves were filled with stacks of French paperbacks, frayed,
torn, and without covers, as well as some magazines -- one was called
Uhu and was in German. The fact that I could read titles doesn't help
establish the time of this memory, since I could read from the age of
four. I would leaf through the crumbling French novels because they had
amusing fin-de-siècle illustrations. The texts must have been spicy,
though this is a present-day conclusion, a reconstruction based on
memories half-effaced by the passage of time.

On some pages there were ladies in elegant dignified poses, but several
pages later the dignity was suddenly replaced by lace underwear, a man
escaping through a window and losing his pants while ladies in long
black stockings and nothing else were running around the room. I see now
that the proximity of these two kinds of books was peculiar, and the
way, too, that I leafed through everything, straddling the armchair as I
went, without concern or hesitation, from skeletons to erotic nonsense.
I accepted, as one accepts the clouds and trees. I was learning about
the world, accustoming myself to it, and found nothing dissonant in it.

On the bottom shelf was a metal tube, wider at one end, and in it was a
scroll of unusually thick, yellowish paper. Attached to the scroll, a
black-and-yellow twisted cord led to a small flat canister that
contained something resembling a tiny bright-red pastry with writing in
high relief. This was my father's medical diploma, on parchment,
beginning with the enormous, lofty words Summis Auspiciis Imperatoris Ac
Regis Francisi Iosephi. The tiny pastry -- into which I gingerly tried
to sink my teeth once or twice, but no more, because it didn't taste
good -- was the grand seal, wax, of the University of Lvov. I knew that
the tube contained a diploma because my father told me so, but I had no
idea what a diploma was. I was also told not to pull it out of the tube,
and that parchment was made from donkey hide, which I didn't believe.
Later I was able to read a few words, though not understanding anything.
It was only in my first year of gymnasium, I believe, that I could make
sense of those lofty words.

This example of the diploma illustrates the process of the repeated
updating of our knowledge of objects and phenomena. I went gradually
from level to level, each time learning the next version of the thing,
and in this there was nothing remarkable. Everyone knows it -- everyone
first learned the version of the stork and then the more realistic
explanation of his own genesis. The point is that all the earlier
versions, even those as patently false as the one with the stork, are
not discarded completely. Something of them remains in us; they mesh
with succeeding versions and somehow continue to exist -- but that is
not all. As far as the facts are concerned -- say, in the case of my
father's diploma -- it is not difficult to determine what the correct
version is, the one that counts. It is otherwise with experience. Each
experience has its weight, its authority, which does not admit of
argument and depends only on itself. And herein lies the problem, for
the sole guardian and guarantor of the authenticity of experience is
memory. True, you can say that there are "doubtful" experiences, on the
order of my fantasizing about the black iron chest. But it is not always
possible to make such a categorical judgment.

To the side in my father's bookcase was a row of tightly packed books
which I left alone, having found that they had no pictures. I remember
the color and weight of some of them, nothing more. I would give a great
deal now to know what my father kept there, what he read, but the
library was swallowed whole by the chaos of war, and so much happened
afterward that I never asked. And thus the child's version -- primitive,
false, really no version at all -- remains the final one for me, and
this applies not only to those books but also to a multitude of things,
some of them dramatic, which were played out over my head. Any attempt
of mine to reconstruct them, using logic and guesswork, would be a risky
enterprise indeed, perhaps a fantasy, moreover a fantasy spun not by a
child. So I think I had better not.

The dining room, as I mentioned before, contained, besides the usual set
of chairs and a table that opened for larger groups, a very important
cupboard, the abode of desserts, with the shelf where Mother kept the
"nips," her specialty. Near the window was a fluffy rug on which I loved
to sprawl while reading books -- now my own books. But because the act
of reading was too passive, too simple, I would rest a chair leg on my
calf or knee or foot and with little movements keep the chair at the
very brink of falling. Sometimes I would have to stop in midsentence to
catch the chair to avoid the noise that would call the household's
attention to me, which I didn't want. But I'm getting ahead of myself,
always a problem in this kind of account.

As far back as I can remember, I was frequently ill. Various quinsies
and flus put me in bed, and generally that was a time of great
privileges. The whole world revolved around me, and my father asked me
in detail how I felt, establishing between us certain passwords and
signs which would describe how I felt with incredible precision, to
infinitesimal degrees on a scale that didn't exist. I was also the
object of complicated procedures, some not exactly pleasant, such as
drinking hot milk with butter. But inhaling vapor was great
entertainment. First a large washbasin full of hot water was brought in,
and Father would add an oily liquid from a bottle with a worn cork. Then
he went to the kitchen, where a cast-iron lid was being heated over the
flames. He brought it in, red hot, with a pair of tongs and put it in
the basin, and my job was to breathe in the aromatic steam. It was a
wonderful spectacle, the furiously boiling water, the hissing cherry-red
iron, blackened flakes of it falling off, and in addition I got to float
things in the basin, whatever was in reach, a toy duck, a wooden pen
box. I hope I did not fake pain I did not feel. There must have been the
temptation to do this, since my father could not refuse me anything when
I was sick. The bird in the mother-of-pearl box sang for me then, and I
was allowed to play with the gold eyeglasses with the ruby lenses, and
when my father came home from the hospital, he brought "packies" filled
with toys. Illness was certainly profitable. Thanks to a sore throat I
got a wooden limousine large enough for me to ride sitting astride its
roof. There were illnesses, of course, like the stone in my bladder; the
pain and fever from that made all gifts and games inadequate
compensation. Yet one way or another I always returned to health.

When I was well, I would spend a lot of time by myself. I explored our
apartment on all fours, since being a beast increased my sense of smell.
So seriously did I take this animal impersonation that I developed thick
calluses on my knees, and had them even in the higher grades of
elementary school.

It is time now to talk about my nasty side. I ruined all my toys.
Possibly my most shameful deed was the destruction of a lovely little
music box of shiny wood, in which under a glass lid little golden wheels
with spokes turned a brass cylinder that made crystalline music. I was
not to enjoy this marvel for long. I got up in the middle of the night,
apparently decided, because I didn't hesitate at all, lifted the glass
lid, and peed into the works. I couldn't explain later to the alarmed
household what had prompted this nihilistic act. A Freudian
psychologist, I am sure, would have labeled me with some appropriate
terminology. In any case, I grieved over the silencing of that music box
no less sincerely than many a rapist-murderer has grieved over his
freshly slain victim.

Unfortunately, this was not an isolated incident. I had a little miller
who, when you wound him up, would carry a sack of flour up a ladder to a
storeroom, descend for another, carry it up, and so on, endlessly,
because the sacks thrown in the storeroom meanwhile traveled back down
to the foot of the ladder. I had a man in a diving suit inside a jar
sealed with rubber, which, when pressed, would send the diver deeper
into the water. I had birds that pecked, carousels that turned, racing
cars, dolls that did somersaults, and I disemboweled them all, without
mercy, pulling wheels and springs out from under the bright paint. For
my magic lantern made by Pathé, with the enameled French rooster, I had
to use a big hammer, and even so the thick lenses resisted its blows for
a long time. A mindless, repulsive demon of destruction lived inside me.
I don't know where it came from or what happened to it later.

When I was a little bigger, but only a little bigger, I no longer dared
grab instruments of murder and strike -- simply, with childhood
innocence -- because, apparently, I had lost that innocence. Now I
looked for various pretexts. For example, that something inside needed
fixing, adjusting, examining. A lame story, since I didn't know how to
fix anything, nor did I even make an effort. And yet I felt I had a
right to do what I did, and when my mother scolded me once for starting
to hammer a nail into the dining-room cupboard in order to set up my toy
train, I was resentful for a long time. Only Wicus, a trim little
sawdust-filled boy doll with reddish blond hair, was exempt from the
sphere of total destruction. I made him clothes and shoes, and he hung
around in the apartment afterward, probably up to the war itself. Once,
in the rush of an irresistible urge, I began to do him in, but
immediately stopped and sewed up the hole in his stomach, or perhaps it
was a hand pulled off; I don't remember. I had long conversations with
him, but we never talked about this.

Having no room of my own, I ranged over all the rooms, and slowly grew
wilder. I stuck half-eaten candies under the table, where after years
they made veritable geological formations of sugar. From my father's
suits pulled out of the closet I built mannequins on sofas and chairs,
stuffing their sleeves with rolled paper and filling out the body with
whatever lay at hand. When chestnuts were in season, I tried to do
something with those beautiful things, which I loved so much I never had
enough of them. Even as they spilled from my pockets, I would put more
in my underpants. But I found out that chestnuts, deprived of their
freedom and kept in a box, quickly lost their wonderful luster and
turned dull, wrinkled, ugly. I tore open enough kaleidoscopes to have
supplied a whole orphanage, and yet I knew that all they contained was a
handful of bits of colored glass.

In the evenings I liked to stand on the balcony and watch the dark
street come alive with light. The lamplighter, out of nowhere, silent,
appeared, stopped for a moment at each street lamp, raising his rod, and
instantly a timid glowworm grew into a blue flame. For a while I wanted
to be a lamplighter.

Of the two powers, the two categories that take possession of us when we
enter the world (from where?), space is by far the less mysterious. It,
too, undergoes transformations, but their nature is simple: all space
does is shrink with the passage of years. That is why the dimensions of
our apartment slowly dwindled, as did the Jesuit Garden, and the stadium
of the Karol Szajnocha II State Gymnasium, where I went for eight years.
True, it was easy for me to overlook these changes, because at the same
time I was growing more active and independent, venturing into Lvov more
and more boldly. The coming together of places familiar to me was hidden
by a series of adventures of ever-increasing range. That is why one
becomes aware of the reduction only later.

Space is, after all, solid, monolithic; it contains no traps or
pitfalls. Time, on the other hand, is a hostile element, truly
treacherous, I would even say against human nature. First, I had great
difficulty, for years, with such concepts as "tomorrow" and "yesterday."
I confess -- and I never told this to anyone before -- that for a very
long time I situated both of them in space. I thought that tomorrow was
above the ceiling, as if on the next floor, and that at night, when
everyone was sleeping, it came down. I knew of course that on the third
floor there was not tomorrow but only a couple who had a grown daughter
and a shiny gold box filled with greenish candy that stuck to your
fingers. I didn't really like that candy, which filled my mouth with the
chill of eucalyptus, but I enjoyed receiving it, because it was kept in
a rolltop desk that roared like a waterfall when it was opened. So I
understood that by going upstairs I would not catch tomorrow red-handed,
and that yesterday was not below us, because the landlord and his family
lived there. Even so, I was somehow convinced that tomorrow was above us
and yesterday below -- a yesterday that did not dissolve into
nonexistence but continued, abandoned, somewhere under my feet.

But these are introductory, and elementary, remarks. I remember the
gate, stairs, doors, hallways, and rooms of the house on Brajerska
Street where I was born, and many people, such as the neighbors
mentioned, but without faces, because those faces changed, and my
memory, ignorant of the inevitability of such change, was helpless, as a
photographic plate is helpless with a moving object. Yes, I can
visualize my father, but I can see his figure and clothes more clearly
than his features, because images from many years are superimposed and I
do not know how I want to see him, the man turned completely gray or the
still vigorous fifty-year-old. And it is the same with everyone I knew
for a long enough time. When the photographs and portraits are lost, our
complete defenselessness against time becomes apparent. You may learn of
its action early in life, but that is theoretical knowledge and not
useful. When I was five, I knew what old and young meant, because there
was old butter and a young radish, and I knew a bit about the days of
the week and even about years (the twenties were light in color and then
grew dark toward 1929), and yet basically I believed in the immutability
of the world. Of people especially. Adults had always been adults, and
when they used diminutives with each other, I was slightly shocked -- it
was inappropriate; diminutives were for children. How absurd that one
old man should say to another "Stasiek."

So time was for me then a motionless, paralyzed, passive expanse. A
great deal took place in it, as in the sea, but time itself remained
stationary. Every hour of school was an Atlantic Ocean one had to cross
with manful determination; from bell to bell whole eternities passed,
fraught with peril, and the summer vacation between June and September
was an eon. I describe this unbelievable duration of hours and days as
if I had only heard it from someone else and not experienced it myself,
because I can now neither picture it nor conceive it. Later,
imperceptibly, everything speeded up, and let no one tell me that
impressions lie because all clocks measure the same rhythm of passing.
My answer is, it is just the opposite: the clocks lie, because physical
time has nothing in common with biological time. Physics aside, how does
the time of electrons and cogs concern us? It always seemed to me there
was some hidden trickery in the comparison, a vile deceit masked by the
computational methods that equated all kinds of change. We come into
this world trusting that things are as we see them, that what our senses
witness is happening, but later it turns out, somehow, that children
grow up and grownups start to die.

 

 

 

CHAPTER

2

 

Norbert Wiener begins his autobiography with the words "I was a child
prodigy." What I would have to say is "I was a monster." Possibly that's
a slight exaggeration, but as a young boy I certainly terrorized those
around me. I would agree to eat only if my father stood on the table and
opened and closed an umbrella, or I might allow myself to be fed only
under the table. I don't actually remember these things; they are
beginnings that lie beyond the boundary of memory. If I was a child
prodigy, it could only have been in the eyes of doting aunts. A
sensitive child, definitely. Which accounts for my very early affinity
for poetry. Even before I was able to read, I recited poems, often
before guests. There was one about a mosquito that fell off an oak, but
I couldn't finish it, because when I reached the place where the fatal
effects of that fall became apparent (the mosquito broke its back), I
would start bawling and would have to be led away, sniffling in despair.
There were few beings then for whom I felt such fervent, tragic sympathy
as for that mosquito. The power of literature over me had revealed
itself in hoc signo.

In my fourth year I learned to write, but had nothing of great
importance to communicate by that means. The first letter I wrote to my
father, from Skole, having gone there with my mother, was a terse
account of how all by myself I defecated in a country outhouse that had
a board with a hole. What I left out of my report was that in addition I
threw into that hole all the keys of our host, who also was a physician.
But the author of the prank may not have been I -- there was a local boy
there with me, my age, and it is unclear who had the keys last. Fishing
them out was not at all easy.

In those days, of all the sights and monuments Lvov had to offer,
Zalewski's Confectionery on Academic Street attracted me most. I must
have had good taste, because since that time I have not seen anywhere
pastry displays done with such flair. These were actually tableaux in
metal frames, changed several times a year, backdrops for mighty statues
and allegorical figures made of marzipan. Some great artists, Leonardos
of confectionery, realized their visions here, and especially before
Christmas and Easter there were marvels cast in almond paste and
chocolate. Sugar Santa Clauses, their sacks overflowing with goodies,
pulled on the reins of sleighs, and hams and fish in aspic sat on
plates, all made of icing with marzipan inside -- and here my
information is not secondhand. Even the lemon slices in the aspic were
the work of confectionery sculpture. I remember pink pigs with chocolate
eyes, and every variety of fruit, mushroom, meat, plant; and there were
forests and fields, too, as if Zalewski could reproduce the whole cosmos
in sugar and chocolate, using shelled almonds for the sun and icing for
the stars. In any case this great master knew how to capture my
yearning, anxious, untrusting soul in a different way each season, to
conquer me with the eloquence of his marzipan carvings, etchings of
white chocolate, Vesuviuses of whipped cream whose volcanic bombs were
heavily candied fruit. The cakes cost twenty-five groszy, an awful lot
of money considering that a large roll cost five and a lemon about ten,
but I suppose you had to pay Zalewski for the panoramas, the sweet,
festive battle scenes that rivaled a Raclawicka exhibit.

On Academic Street there was another confectioner, whose creations
appealed more to the stomach than the eye. With that store I have less
happy associations. My father's older brother, Uncle Fryderyk, once took
me for a pleasure ride in a two-horse droshky, I wearing my best clothes
and white lace collar, but we ended up at the dentist, who pulled out
one of my baby teeth. On the way home, I wailed, my lace spattered with
drool and blood, and my uncle tried to appease my indignation at the
betrayal by buying me pistachio ice cream at that confectionery. My
father, apparently lacking the courage to assist at such terrible
scenes, was absent on this occasion.

In Mikolasch's Arcade there was another candy store, which served
Italian ice cream. It was here, much later, that my cousin Stefan, a
huge hulk of a boy, would challenge me to duels, unfair duels, because
we ate ice cream and the one who lost by eating less had to pay for
both. Stefan had more room. I remember going home from there, along the
glass-covered arcade, walking stiffly, my stomach turned into an iceberg
of vanilla.

At the start of Academic Street, not far from the Hotel George, was
another store, this one not a candy store yet very important, Klaften's
Toy Shop. I know nothing of its windows or interior, because that sacred
place took from me all powers of observation; I approached it in a state
of sweet fainting, with a pounding heart, feeling what an ordeal awaited
my greed that could not make a choice. At Klaften's you could buy
voluptuously heavy flat boxes of lead soldiers, little cannons that shot
peas, wooden fortresses, tops, popguns, but no pistols that used
ammunition -- they were forbidden. Once, at the very beginning, I had a
horse, a gray rocker. I can't see it now, but the rough feel of its mane
and tail, made of real horsehair, remains on the tips of my fingers. I
immediately called it Sir, because it was so large and magnificent, and
I was good to it: the runners fell off by themselves, gnawed by the
tooth of time.

The other images preserved from my pre-gymnasium days are grouped around
events fearsome and violent rather than pleasurable. I know where my
aunt lived on Jagiellonska Street, because I was attacked there once, in
the hallway, by a giant turkey -- what it was doing there I have no
idea. For a long time I was afraid to enter that hallway, and would run
at lightning speed through the darkness between the double wooden gate
and the foot of the terribly squeaky steps. The way to my aunt's
apartment was also scary -- along an annex gallery slanted so badly
toward the courtyard that I thought it would fall at any moment. The
whole floor of the vestibule slanted, too, like the Tower of Pisa.
Behind one door was a drawing room barred to everybody, with a
glistening parquet floor and heavy furniture in linen slipcovers. The
room was never used, and I imagine that the mere fact of its hermetic
existence satisfied my aunt. Young omnivore that I was, I once entered
it, taking advantage of my aunt's momentary inattention or absence, and
like a pirate made immediately for the black credenza, where a pyramid
of big marzipan fruit -- apples, bananas, pears -- beckoned to me from
under a glass cover. I lifted the glass and bit into one of those sweet
treasures. Somehow I didn't break a tooth, but neither did I leave any
mark on the shining surface. The marzipan was as hard as rock; time had
given it armor against my gluttony. This was one of my bitterest
disappointments.

They tell me that I almost drowned in Lake Zelazna. I was sitting on the
shore, and a lady of our acquaintance was playing with me, tugging on a
stick -- and at one point she pulled too hard. I sank to the bottom like
a stone, without even time to be frightened. Everything went green, then
dark, then someone was holding me upside down and shaking water out of
me. The whole experience is shrouded in fog. I think the bathing was
separate for men and women, in which case I must have been with my
mother, with the women.

I was a witness only in two other dreadful episodes. The Human Fly came
to Lvov, and I think it was in the middle of town, on Legions Street,
that he climbed a high building, using only "a little shoelacing hook,"
as our maid said -- and there were indeed such things, hooks to fasten
the buttons and loops on women's shoes. They had a metal handle and a
round hook. The Human Fly fell, there was a crowd, police, and the next
day, on the front page of what was probably the New Age, I saw a
photograph of him lifted from the pavement. His pale face was covered
with lines like the legs of a giant spider. I think he had fractured his
skull. I don't know what happened to him after that.

Another time, the coal in our cellar caught fire or began to smolder. We
had guests, and a card game was in progress when the doorbell rang and
suddenly there was the threatening brass glitter of firemen's helmets in
the hall. The whole building had to be evacuated. We stood in the street
watching while the firemen flooded the cellar with their cloth hoses.
Then we all went to my uncle, who lived nearby. The fire was put out,
but the fear of it stayed with me. For a long time after that I had
nightmares in which the fire appeared as a white, windswept person
banging on the door of the house and looking in the windows. And during
the day, when no one was looking at me, I would get down and touch the
floor to make sure it was not hot from flames quietly consuming the
apartment below.

Of this fear of fire, however, nothing has remained. It is curious that
in a child some experiences activate a mechanism of pathological
susceptibility while others make absolutely no impression.

One of the first books I read was about a boy who took an elevator that
either rebelled or broke, because it went right through the roof of the
building and sailed over the city like a balloon. The author intended to
entertain, no doubt, but it terrified me, and even twenty-five years
later, stepping into an elevator, I would remember this silly story.

Nor do I know where I acquired my fear of insects. My contemporaries
loved collecting beetles, but I couldn't touch them. The same with
moths. Mice, on the other hand, I had no fear of, and even profited from
this. My mother hated them so much that it was I who had to remove the
little corpses from the traps, and when no mice were caught, I would
show my mother a gray rubber mouse from a distance and thus receive my
burial fee all the same.

It is striking that I have little memory of playmates yet had so much
feeling for various objects. I cannot recall the face of a single child
but remember perfectly my hoop, even the screws that held the wood
together, and how I learned to make the rolling hoop return to me. Could
this have been because objects submitted to me completely, whereas
living beings had a will of their own, a will that went too much against
mine? Because everything that surrounded me, whether of metal or wood,
became my plunder, my prey. I waited a long time, years, for the death
of our gramophone, or at least for it to grow old, but finally my
patience ran out and I opened it up. It was not a machine with a big
horn, which I saw only in store windows and illustrations; it was made
of wood with a resonating box, an internal speaker, and was called, I
think, a Pathephone. I loved turning the crank. There were a few "hit"
records, one that had nothing but laughter, some popular songs like
"Let's Step on the Gas and Go Faster," and arias, but the device for
changing the needle, a spring regulator, interested me more than the
music. It was the same with the radio. The first radio appeared in our
house about 1929. It was a long box with an ebonite face, knobs that had
white grooves and pointers, and sockets for earphones. Although there
was a large speaker that resembled a fan, one could barely hear the
local station on it. This monumental piece of equipment was powered by
storage batteries that had to be recharged. I recall that the first
program we picked up from Lvov's radio station was Conrad's "Inn of the
Two Witches" read by a man with a voice from the grave. Uncle Mundek,
the husband of Aunt Hania from Freedom Street, sometimes came to help my
father coax from this Swedish box (the trademark was Ericsson) loud
whistles, howls, and the meowing of electric cats. Together they built
and adjusted an antenna, a wooden cross on which wires were stretched
rectangularly. Only rarely were they able to catch, from behind the
curtain of static, a screech of music like a signal from another planet,
providing pleasure only by virtue of its great rarity. My uncle would
make a note of all remarkable instances of reception, from places such
as Milan or Berlin, where the most powerful station in Europe was:
Königswusterhausen. This apparatus, too, underwent a slow, long decline,
going out of date, and the time came for my pliers and hammer. I took it
apart and was disappointed: no toothed wheels, no springs, nothing, only
some silver-coated tubes, condensers, and a tangle of wires.

My father feared a variety of things -- he never allowed an antenna to
be put on our roof lest it draw lightning, and in our ovens only wood
was burned, because coal gave off fumes that could suffocate you. I may
have inherited his disposition but not the specific forms of it. I liked
electricity and was always comfortable with it, as early as when I
caught pieces of paper with my comb after it was rubbed. As for poison
gases, I tried to produce them, to the extent that it was possible. But
these manias -- electrical, chemical, mechanical -- really developed
only in my gymnasium years. Before the thirties I was occupied with the
trivial, unoriginal things that fill the lives of little boys. First, I
went through various machine metamorphoses -- I was a ship, a steamboat,
an airplane, I worked my pistons, released the steam, went into reverse,
and traces of these routines stayed with me almost until graduation. I
remember that even as an adolescent in a gymnasium uniform and in love,
I was not above suddenly switching gears on the street, or turning the
helm alee and dropping anchor.

Such mimicry is probably a normal stage, although it can annoy an
observer, who would like children to be simply children and not tiny
adults -- I have in mind particularly the many eight-year-old mommies
pushing little carriages. An expert would say that children are merely
preparing, in their play, for the culture they have entered. In the
Middle Ages they no doubt played knights, sieges, and crusades.

Also normal is the tendency to explore one's body and its possibilities.
Which with me led to a variety of things. For a while I liked hanging
myself and collected the necessary rope, though of course I didn't go
all the way. And I would torture myself; for example, tie a string
around my finger to make it "go to sleep," or tie myself to a doorknob,
or hang upside down on a rope ladder (I had one), or press a finger into
my eye socket to see double. But I never stuck peas and beans in my nose
or ears, well aware of the bad consequences of that -- my father was an
otolaryngologist, after all. I don't know where I got the idea, but for
quite a while I considered the foot, particularly a bare foot, to be the
most indecent part of the human body. Once I got into a terrible fight
about this with my cousin Mietek, who was two years older (he perished
in Warsaw, like Stefan). We were sitting on a windowsill in our
apartment, and I had got him to accept my idea, and the issue was who
would be the first to show his foot. Since no one was home, we rolled on
the floor a long time, locked in combat. I'm sure a Freudian would take
pleasure in this confession, but nothing of the foot idea survived, and
I did not become in any way a fetishist.

I dwell on these details because somehow they seem to me more
interesting than my later memories. With the passage of time, a child
becomes more distinctly, more clearly a member of a group -- elementary
school, gymnasium -- and in his behavior conforms to it, or conforms as
best he can. His activity therefore grows more derivative and says less,
I think, about his innate qualities, the inherited demons in their
genotypic suits, than did his first actions, often performed in
solitude. Far more interesting, and more worth study, are the first
preferences, the first aversions, which seem to come from nowhere; not
that which comes later, which is learned and is often mindless
imitation. Small children, as we know, have no fear of even the most
terrible physical deformities of those near to them; they simply do not
notice. It takes a certain amount of time for them to internalize the
norms of society. We certainly do not enter the world with any criteria
for distinguishing ugliness from beauty. But this is only hazy
supposition, for we do not know if it is actually possible to teach a
child a hypothetical everyday aesthetics that is "opposite" the
ordinary.

But to return to objects. Clothing was an exception; it didn't interest
me. Which I conclude from the fact that I remember nothing of what I
wore, with the exception of a pair of lederhosen with green suspenders.
In front they had a wide fly, a flap with horn buttons, an
uncomfortable, dangerous arrangement, because one could simply be unable
to open it in time. I remember wishing I had a regular fly and not a
flap like the kind little children wore.

I've said nothing yet about the two rooms in our apartment that were
important because they were off limits to me: the waiting room and the
examination room. The waiting room was furnished with slipcovered
armchairs apparently made of ebony, because when an arm broke off once,
you could see blue-black wood. There was also an old glass cabinet with
"nips," but not good ones, and trays and silver baskets that were gifts
from grateful patients, and an imitation Japanese dagger that was coming
apart. And there was a Lvov street arab on a wood pedestal, nameless,
since he belonged to no child, a large doll with glaring blue eyes, a
short coat full of patches, trousers, a striped shirt, and a felt banana
in his pocket. I was not allowed to touch this urchin, which was the
reason he survived to the war and even through the first years of it,
succumbing finally to the collective, methodical attacks of moths. There
were always moths on Brajerska Street, and anyone in the house seeing
one was required to give chase, clapping furiously, but I, disgusted by
the thought of one squashed between my fingers, always clapped to the
side.

My father's examination room was forbidden ground, so of course I
explored it scrupulously whenever I had the chance. The wallpaper had a
porcelain-tile pattern, and there was a hard narrow couch, and a cabinet
filled with medicine and a few books, also a small desk, a heating lamp,
a sterilizer, a metal table with instruments, a white chair for the
patient, and an adjustable revolving stool for my father. All very
spartan, with one exception. In the cabinet was a black box that had
small partitions, and carefully placed in these were the things my
father, using the large tubes of his Brüning laryngoscope, had removed
from the windpipes and esophagi of his patients -- quite innocent things
in themselves but awesome when you considered where they had been stuck.
The exhibit included a denture with four teeth and a little hook, an
open safety pin fished from the trachea of a child, various pins, and
beans that had begun to sprout, as if they had intended to settle
permanently in someone's nose. There were also coins with verdigris, and
a large roll of film. When I was older, my father would sometimes tell
me the circumstances surrounding the recovery of these trophies, of how
he had hunted, his pistol-grip Brüning in his hand, and he showed me his
special long hooks, ingenious forceps, probes. Amazing was the story of
the man brought to him choking, fainting, and turning blue. The throat
speculum showed an open, unobstructed larynx, but then my father noticed
an odd glimmer, like glass. It turned out to be a strip of
motion-picture film, which the man, a projectionist, had ingested along
with a cheese blintz. No one knew how the film got into the cheese, but
it lodged in his throat and acted as a valve, closing and choking him
whenever he inhaled. The ordinary objects that my father extracted in
great numbers from patients, such as fishbones, did not go into the
black box. On holidays we could never finish dinner without the violent
sound of the bell downstairs, and Father would immediately get into his
white coat, put the mirror on his forehead like a huge third eye, and
disappear into the examination room.

I envied him his triumphs, whose sporting rather than medical nature
appealed to me, and in great secrecy I would take out the whole Brüning
apparatus, connect the long nickel-plated tubes, insert the tiny
lightbulbs, and bravely attempt to retrieve from the hose of the vacuum
cleaner the foreign bodies I had put there. I would spin on my father's
stool until I was dizzy. I would turn on the large thermal lamp, which
once supposedly set a woman patient's hair on fire because she had a
celluloid clasp or comb in it, but that was before my time. And when I
could think of nothing better to do, I would fill the half-liter syringe
my father used to flush out ear wax and squirt water through the open
window facing the courtyard, now up at the floor above, now down on the
landlord's balcony.

As I said before, I learned to read and write early. For my father and
mother I made beautiful honorary scrolls decorated abundantly with
drawings of flowers. My first reading matter was typical, the usual
assortment of fairy tales and poems, such as that one about the
mosquito. After the war I came across a collection of children's poems
and recognized some that I had read more than thirty years before, and
was surprised at what I had found in them as a six-year-old boy.
Improbable, inexpressible dramas, and emotions that no longer went
together in me now; amazement, terror, but humor, too, lay in wait for
me then in the course of the most innocuous words. Why should a story
about a spot on the floor that a broom could not sweep clean be full of
such gloom, even menace? Why did counting crows without tails become a
magic incantation, the perilous summoning of hidden powers or demons?
What is even stranger, I told no one about my emotions, fears,
forebodings. But probably I could not have expressed or named those
states. And perhaps, too, I thought -- assuming I was able to think at
all about this -- that my reaction to reading was the only one possible
and therefore perfectly normal. In any case I was a far more sensitive
instrument then than I am now; not much stimulus was needed to raise in
my head whole edifices of feeling and experience. The authors of
children's books truly do not know what they do, do not know with what
inflammable material they juggle. They may think they are merely telling
an instructive tale, but in the mind of a child it becomes a mystery or
a tangled tragedy. Trying to amuse, they teach occult truths; rhyming
simply, they lead a seven-year-old mind to catharsis. This beginning, my
first reading, was extraordinary. Later, more typically and quietly, I
immersed myself in books.

I was Mowgli, of course, and Winnetou, and Captain Nemo. The oddest
passages have stuck in my memory for no apparent reason. After the war I
bought a copy of Uminski's Voyage Without Money and searched page by
page for one of its most beautiful lines: "The bullet, having flown with
characteristic thunder." It had to do with hunting a crocodile or
rhinoceros, but unfortunately this was a revised edition, and that
wonderful bullet with its thunder had been taken out, to my great
disappointment. And Valley Without an Exit? Awful things transpired in
me when I read it as a boy. Not to mention Call of the Wild. Such
reading did not permit casual lounging on the window ledge or balancing
a chair with my feet or kneeling at the table with my elbows on the
tabletop. I had to be very close to completely safe adults, and even
then it was sometimes horrible. I didn't like Dickens; he was like a
rainy, hopeless autumn. In Dumas, however, I plunged and was lost. It
began innocently, with The Three Musketeers, and then after a while it
seemed that there was not time enough in a life to read all his books.

Later, at the gymnasium, I read everything I could get my hands on,
Fredro and May, Sienkiewicz and Verne, H. G. Wells and Slowacki and
Pitigrilli. A real stew.

As I read, I usually ate something. I believe I've already made it clear
that I was a glutton. But amorous, too. I should mention here my first
women. It went in a curious zigzag. Mila first, our laundress. I was
probably about five and wanted to marry right away. The poor woman
suffered from varicose veins. There were no washing machines in those
days, and laundering turned the house into a kind of stifling hell, at
least the kitchen and adjoining rooms. An enormous tub was put in the
center, the boilers gurgled like a volcano, then the wooden ringer
appeared and made an awful racket. I stood in the middle of all this,
not bothered by the chaos.

Next I fell in love with my elementary-school teacher. I don't know what
she looked like, but I remember that one day she knocked the classmate
sitting next to me off his chair. In school you usually got nothing more
than a rap of a ruler on your open palm, but this boy was hard, cold,
insubordinate, and arrogant, and my beloved spanked him until a cloud of
dust rose from his pants. He said not a word and didn't cry, which
impressed me enormously.

Gradually my specialty became unrequited love. I fell madly in love with
a girl some four years older than I and therefore practically an adult,
since I was ten. Transfixed, I watched her from afar in the Jesuit
Garden. I was quite fat by that time, my body beginning to assume the
shape of a pear, wider below the middle. In the gymnasium I would be
even more a pear. I had a pudgy face with eyes that bulged, because I
was curious by nature, and my mouth hung open -- apparently I thought
that that was attractive. I didn't have much chance of success then;
however, I had no fulfillment in mind, no idea of what to do with girls
other than chase them in the evening, in the Garden, from bush to bush,
and frighten them with a flashlight. My love for the girl in the Jesuit
Garden therefore had no action, no development, and yet it was unusually
intense. I must even have told my parents about it; otherwise I would
not have been allowed to spend so much time at my observation post. She
probably knew nothing about me; I did not exchange a single word with
her. Yet her profile, her chin, her lips are so distinct in my memory, I
can see them today.

It is curious that these platonic passions did not interfere with
dalliances (if they were dalliances) of a more earthy nature. I could
not have been more than eight when my father, entering the kitchen,
found me pinching a servant's behind. Embarrassed, he said something
like, "Ah, yes" or "Ah, excuse me," and quickly left. It is also curious
that I can recall some of my actions from those years, and even
feelings, but no thoughts. Possibly my thoughts never went beyond the
circle of immediate data, of physical experience. On Slowacki Street,
across from the Central Post Office, was the Cunard Line office, and in
each of its windows was a model of an ocean liner. Those magnificent
ships accompanied me, filled my dreams; they had everything, brass
screws in the steering wheels, rigging, masts, endless portholes in a
row, decks, bridges, miniature lifeboats, ladders, and life preservers.
I thought about them with hopeless hunger, much as Jack the Ripper must
have thought about the women who did not fall into his clutches. His
fantasies were surely as bloodless as mine as I stood at the Cunard Line
windows, for it was only the acting upon them that led to crime. So it
was probably a good thing that none of those two-meter marvels ever came
within arm's reach of me, because sooner or later I would have reached
for a hammer.

 

 

The child I was interests me and at the same time alarms me. True, I
murdered only dolls and gramophones, but you should remember that I was
physically weak and feared the reprisal of adults. My father never hit
me, my mother sometimes slapped, that was all, but there were many
other, less direct, means and methods, from verbal reprimand to
withholding of dessert. If four-year-olds equaled their parents in
strength, the world would be a different place. They are truly a
separate species, and no less complex than adults -- but the complexity
lies in a different place. For wasn't it with despair in my heart that I
demolished my toys? Didn't I regret afterward their loss (independently
of the punishments imposed)? And why, if I was so timid, did I relish
dangerous situations? Something drove me to lean as far as I could out
of the window, even though I knew from the example of the Human Fly what
a fall from the third floor could do. I remember how I frightened my
uncle one winter vacation in the town of Tatarow when I crawled under a
locomotive just as it was about to move, to break off an icicle hanging
from a driving rod. I was full of fear that the train would move and cut
off my legs, but evidently I desperately needed to get hold of that
icicle. Could this have been what psychologists call compulsive
behavior, a kind of obsession? I indeed went through periods of counting
windows and doors, phases of complicated rituals; I avoided the cracks
in the sidewalk when I walked, and with breathing I had awful problems.
I tried to hold my breath as long as possible, or to breathe in a
special way, not only inhaling but also interhaling, particularly before
sleep, and I would put the little pillow and the big pillow under my
head just so, build a tent out of the blanket, and so on.

Sometimes, when I was sick, but also when I was perfectly healthy, I
would have strange sensations called, as I learned thirty years later,
disturbances of the body-image. I lay in bed with my hands on my chest,
and suddenly they would start growing, while under their incredible mass
I became smaller and smaller. This happened several times, and
definitely when I was awake. My hands grew to mountainous size, the
fingers turning into enormous closed arches in their monstrous
elephantiasis. I was frightened, but only a little, it was so strange --
and told no one.

 

 

 

CHAPTER

3

 

I see now that I was a lonely child, but was unaware of it then. I
wanted a little brother or sister, but I'm afraid what I really wanted
was a little slave. I liked to read the advertisements in the paper in
which parents put their children up for adoption. Such advertisements
were common. If we could take in such a child, I thought, that would be
wonderful. The generality of this wish seems to me today a little
suspect. Other children didn't visit me very often. Not that it never
happened, but it was the exception rather than the rule.

On Sundays in summer and fall, we usually took a ride outside town --
always to the same place, Mr. Rucki's garden restaurant located on the
road to my uncle's house, near the tollbooth. Paying the toll was an
interesting, entertaining break in the trip. I sat with the droshky
driver, of course. His name was Kramer or Kremer, but I called him
Fatty, and that stuck. He was thickset, had a red face, and was very
patient with me. It was from him that I learned the basic things about
horses, such as the fact that the horse respects and obeys man because
its large eyes magnify everything, so man appears much larger than the
horse itself. This is the reason horses are skittish -- they think
everything is huge! During the long hours while my father, Uncle Fritz,
and the rest of the company sat under the fruit trees playing cards, I
had to find something to do. Rucki's restaurant had a bowling alley, but
for years I lacked the strength to throw the big wooden ball. Sometimes
I was able not only to get into a theoretical discussion with Fatty but
also to persuade him to unhitch the horse so I could ride it a little.
When he refused, it was always politely. Or he slept in the droshky, his
feet propped on the driver's seat, and I crawled into the raspberry
bushes, where there were lots of cruel thorns. As a last resort, I would
sneak up on the cardplayers. My uncle had a derby that intrigued me
because it was so hard. I tried with all my might to break its crown,
but it resisted, as if a steel plate were hidden under the black felt.

I must have managed to amuse myself, because I don't remember being
bored. I had everything, after all -- toys, books, modeling clay with
which I made elephants, horses (they always came out worst), different
kinds of sausage, and dolls. I would take clay out of the doll's belly
and insert little intestines, livers, lungs, also made of clay, because
by now I knew something about how things inside looked. I liked
multicolored clay best, because then you could take the belly of the
patient and roll it between your hands until you had a lump with all
different layers of color mixed and spread, and from this "dough" you
could make the next victim, and so on without end.

Before my gymnasium days I was not that independent, and apart from my
immediate neighborhood didn't know Lvov well. I knew a little of
Kazimierz Street and the area near Saint Brigid's Prison, a grim
building with thick walls, because it was not far from Bernstein Street,
where Uncle Fritz had a law office. And Grodecka Street, which we took
when we went to the train station, magnificent and vast at the end of
Foch Boulevard.

Uncle Fritz lived on Kosciuszko Street, not that far from Brajerska, and
I could have gone there myself, though I never did. I was afraid of his
apartment at first, because of the bear rug in the middle of the living
room, with its open mouth and teeth. It was a long time before I dared
put my fingers between those jaws. I loved Uncle Fritz, although he
played a cruel joke on me once. He brought me a gift in an enormous
package, and I threw myself on it to tear away the wrapping, but this
took forever, maybe a quarter of an hour, until, covered with sweat and
trembling, I stood surrounded by paper, and in my hand a doll smaller
than a bean. My uncle roared with laughter; I was deeply hurt.

If I agreed to go to Kosciuszko Street at all, it was because of the big
black piano which nobody ever played. I loved the opportunity to assault
the keyboard, making thunderous cacophonies. I had no ear, and thank God
my parents did not attempt to inculcate musical ability in me by lessons
on an instrument. Besides the numerous heavy, long door curtains of
which my uncle's second wife, Aunt Niunia, was so fond, there was fancy
furniture on Kosciuszko Street -- no doubt imitation Louis this or that.
I remember a mirror in a gilt frame (on lion's legs?); a griffin on a
stand, of painted wood and with a little African on its back; a
chandelier of a thousand pieces of rainbow glass; and a copper pot in a
windowless niche -- the most interesting thing of all, since it served
no purpose.

Uncle Fritz generously allowed me to take home volumes of the old
Brockhaus and Meyer encyclopedia, which was piled high in his office. I
couldn't manage more than one at a time, they were so heavy. Nor could I
read them, not knowing German; but they were full of tables,
illustrations, woodcuts. I spent a lot of time over those thick, dusty
tomes. The world depicted in them was, in the 1920s, already fossilized,
an anachronism, but that didn't bother me. The trains of the 1880s, the
iron bridges with garland grill-work, the locomotives with crowned
smokestacks, and the passengers, the bearded gentlemen -- all that
seemed wonderful to me, inexpressibly enchanting. And those ancient
dynamos, and devices with wheels that had carved spokes, and the
electric motors, and all kinds of latest inventions such as horseless
carriages powered by battery (these in the last, supplementary, volume).
What amused me was that the books, containing everything, put everything
side by side: elephants, birds, plants, reconstructions of mammoths,
colorful tables of Prussian medals, portraits of rulers, African
physiognomies, vases, gems. I sank deliciously into the encyclopedia,
turning each successive volume page by page so as not to miss anything.
I don't recall if I had any idea what kind of book this was and what
function it served. That probably didn't matter to me. But even if I
failed to understand that this was the cataloging and description of an
entire world, or, rather, a cross section of one made in the 1880s, I
did at least grasp one principle: Everything was equally good, though of
course not equally interesting. And this was the perfect complement to
the explorations I had carried out in my father's library. More than one
engraving inspired me later, when the passion for inventing things fell
upon me. In addition, the encyclopedia, when it gained the right of
permanent residence in our apartment and was put on the old white shelf
in the room by the kitchen, served as a hiding place. Behind certain
volumes there was room enough for me to conceal tiny flasks of secret
mixtures -- or simply of different alcohols that I took discreetly from
the bottles in the living-room cupboard.

 

 

It is so much easier for me to talk about the objects of my early
childhood than about the people. But, then, only the objects -- if you
can say this -- were honest with me, were completely open, hiding
nothing: those that were at my mercy and I destroyed, as well as those
that I had no power over. Certainly parents and relatives had reasons
not to confide in a child. That's only natural. Even so, their problems
and affairs did reach me sometimes, in a fragmented, incomplete, unclear
way, or else only in long retrospect. I learned more than one thing
after the fact, and could fill out this narrative with explanations and
glosses which would put things in true perspective -- that is, the
perspective of an adult -- and bring order to an account whose limited
point of view must leave many gaps. But this is exactly what I do not
wish to do, to create such a double perspective, for I am not writing a
history either of my family or of its individual members. My goal is a
much more modest one: I am concerned only with the child I was. A child,
after all, does not consider his world incomplete, full of gaps,
requiring commentary from the vantage point of a hazy future. A child
acts instinctively, not by choice, for he is not aware that he
constitutes an exception in the world of adult situations. One who
describes a society that practices magic should not say at every step
that its belief is wrong, should not criticize, speak of madness,
advocate rationality as opposed to superstition, and constantly deny the
validity of charms and the efficacy of spells. If the spells have no
real effect on the material world, they certainly have an effect -- a
major, decisive effect -- on those who believe in them. The same is true
with a child. What counts for him is what he experiences and not the
correct interpretation of facts; and the sifting of those facts is not a
matter of true version versus false but done passively, at the silent
command of memory, which registers what it registers -- without any
possibility of appeal.

 

 

 

CHAPTER

4

 

Writing about one's childhood is a risky activity, especially for
someone like me, who has a terrible memory. Moreover I must keep a tight
rein on my professionalism as a fantast, that is, the ability to group
details into coherent wholes. With several science-fiction books and one
contemporary novel behind me, I have put together biographies of
fictitious persons so many times that the addressing now of my own
person, and my own person of years ago, should be done only with the
utmost self-control. The literary reflex is to build patterns, to order
a sequence of events so that it achieves closure in some way, closure
and meaning. But I believe this reflex is also a general, fundamental
impulse in human nature -- manifesting itself in both the individual and
the collective. And from the earliest times. For what are myths if not
the imposing of order on phenomena that do not possess order in
themselves? And all myths, however they differ from philosophical
systems and scientific theories, share this with them, that they negate
the principle of randomness in the world. Even if chaos itself does not
exist in the material world in a pure form, unadulterated by any kind of
order, we still will not accept whatever order that can be objectively
discerned. Neither a novelist nor a biographer will settle for a
statistical explanation, the law of large numbers, the Brownian motion
of molecules. Where you have statistical order, which describes the
course of events only in a general way, leaving plenty of margin to the
operation of blind chance, an author -- and not always consciously --
will insert order to a degree not found in the real world, an excess of
order that may come from wishful thinking, or from limited vision, or
from obedience to a reigning methodology or aesthetic. The effect is
usually that the represented reality is ennobled. And so we have the
idyll of childhood, its sweet innocence -- or, if the author wishes to
counter that formula, he creates a world of children as little monsters,
which is but another kind of biographical formula. To say "everything,"
disregarding all method, is impossible, because there is always
selection and all that changes are the criteria for selection. Anyway,
if I rely on memory, I am trusting it as the selector, submitting to
that which I am able to recall. I therefore believe that the limit of
one's ability to remember is the barrier of one's honesty, a barrier
that cannot be crossed.

It is unsettling how often I have had the impression, while writing
these pages, that I am not presenting events but, rather, a kind of
literary travesty of them. Indeed, in Time Not Lost I began with my
childhood, but after rewriting and reworking that part of the book many
times, I finally threw it out completely. It contained a great deal of
material taken from early memories, fragments of which were also
scattered among other books of mine. Thus I find myself in the awkward
position of one who cannot simply reach into a bag of facts, however
chaotically they are mixed together, but instead must pull them, as if
by force, out of constructs where they have assumed the appearance of
truth. One might see this as an ironic variant of the sorcerer's
apprentice, or simply of the liar caught in his own lies.

This obviously applies more to accounts of feelings and psychological
reactions than to purely physical experience. But it applies to both.
Saying which, I undermine -- I realize it -- the whole idea of
separating the interpretation of the experience from the experience
itself, as if by separating to purify the latter. But that is
impossible; it is like demanding that the truth and only the truth be
written. The child I was thus becomes a Kantian Ding an sich: I can
track it, guess at it, but I will never know to what degree I have
succeeded. Never know when my reconstruction goes too far and I am
building, from fragments and guesses, a reality that doesn't exist at
all.

It is interesting that people in fields far, far removed from attempts
to return to "the land of childhood" face similar difficulties. For it
turns out that when we desire accuracy and precision beyond a certain
point, the objective facts can no longer be separated from their
interpretation, since interpretation lies at the very foundation of
language -- words, grammar, syntax. Interpretation lies there and not
perfectly faithful photographs of objects or psychological phenomena.
Not a comforting statement, but at least it may absolve. Too much
knowledge often is a burden that interferes with action, because one who
knows how very many "theories of the child" exist in psychology and
anthropology must be aware that no matter how hard he tries to be
simple, candid, authentic, he will drift despite himself toward one of
those theories, carried by his intellectual and personal predilections,
for he sees the child he was through the glasses placed upon his nose by
all the years that followed, and there is no help for this.

So much for the child as unknowable being. As the years pass, he becomes
more knowable, but at the same time, it seems to me, he undergoes
banalization, normalization; that is, he conforms increasingly to the
group in which and with which he grows. The eternal dispute of which in
a human being are inherited factors and which are acquired through
environmental influences now rages only with regard to the first years
of childhood. And here breakthroughs may come, in theoretical knowledge
and in education -- if, for example, it turns out that the learning
process and culturization can begin much earlier. Then we could turn
toddlers of two or three into individuals capable of doing higher
mathematics.

But let us not talk of the future; our subject is the past. For which I
can rely upon nothing but my memory. In vain did I try to fill gaps by
consulting old books and albums. To be sure, images of streets, squares,
and churches seemed familiar, but probably only in the way the nooks and
corners of a house are more familiar to the mice than to its legal
residents. Strangely enough, it was a map of the city that spoke to me
the most, a dry outline, an abstraction of the streets. Apparently the
mechanisms of memory, which continue to defy the deciphering of science,
are multiform and many-layered. The road from home to the gymnasium -- I
could walk it even today with my eyes closed, because constant
repetition over the years fixed it in my mind, turned it into a
"kinesthetic melody," as a psychologist might say. But as a Lvov student
I was no more appreciative of the beauty of my surroundings than the
mouse is of its. Undoubtedly I passed monuments of architecture, the
Armenian Cathedral, the old buildings of Market Square, including the
famous Black House, but I remember nothing of that. At seven-thirty in
the morning I would add water to my coffee to cool it, then I took
Moniuszko Street, Chopin Street, Smolka Square with the stone Smolka in
the middle, Jagiellonska Street, and passed the Marysienka Cinema before
Legions Street. On the left loomed the cinema, but what drew me, as a
lighthouse draws a sailor, was a little building, far less imposing, on
the corner of the Square of the Spirit -- a kiosk selling Mr. Kawuras's
products.

He made halvah, and it came in two different packages, one for ten
groszy and one for twenty. I usually got a weekly allowance of fifty
groszy, and so on Mondays could wallow in halvah, but from Wednesday on
there was gloom. Also I was tormented by a problem of both solid
geometry and algebra: Which was better, one package for twenty groszy or
two for ten each? The fiendish Mr. Kawuras complicated the solution by
giving the packages irregular shapes, and I was never completely sure of
the right answer.

Next on the way was Market Square, with the enormous boxlike Municipal
Building, the tower of City Hall, the Neptune Fountain with stone lions
crouching at the gate, then I went down narrow Ruska to Rampart, where
the two-story gymnasium stood, surrounded by trees.

When I did not have a grosz to my name, I would go instead past the
Viennese Coffee Shop, so that the sight of those rich walls of halvah
behind the glass of the kiosk would not wound my heart. At the coffee
shop was the first clock to tell me how much time I had; the next was
high on the City Hall tower. They told me if I could still look in some
shop window or had to run. And that is really all the eye remembers and
almost all that occupied my soul. I was truly like a mouse, and society
did what it could, through its educational system, to turn me into a
human being. Did I resist? Not much as an individual -- more as a member
of the student body.

On this subject the most outstanding writers of the world have said
things that cannot be surpassed. They have shown school as a complex
game, a battle of opposing interests, where the teacher, representing
authority and power, attempts to pack the maximum information into the
students' heads, while the students, by nature the weaker side, do their
best to avoid that information. In this they are not completely
successful -- but the mindless, desperately stubborn resistance of the
class, a mixture of villainy and inertia, does what it can to pervert,
besmirch, and discredit everything that implements the learning process.
The educational battlefield is not rich in epic scenes, but there are
examination duels, mass executions in the form of tests, and all manner
of feints, attacks, ruses, and escapes, where every desk becomes a
barricade, a piece of chalk can be a missile, and the lavatory is often
the only refuge.

Thus arises, from antlike labor hidden in all the cracks and crevices of
the official culture, a gymnasium subculture -- because the class,
maltreating desks and carving graffiti on bathroom walls and drowning
flies in inkwells and wetting the chalk and tearing the erasers and
drawing mustaches on national heroines and breasts on national heroes,
may seem simply to be answering order with chaos, but in reality it is
building an order, an order that neutralizes, by the smearing on of
nonsense, all the material instruments of instruction. That is why pens
are turned into play swords and notebook pages into paper airplanes.
There is method to this wild, noisy-horde student madness, as the class
seats, entrenched, face the teacher's desk.

I entered the old gymnasium in 1932, and my collar, hook-fastened, had
one silver stripe. Each year a stripe was added, and in the fifth year
the silver was replaced by gold. But in my second year they changed this
system, and I was back to one stripe. Stiff caps with yellow velvet
piping (we were called canaries) replaced the soft-visored caps, and the
uniforms now were navy blue. The trousers had a light-blue stripe (the
lower classes), and the shirts were open at the collar, civilian style.
We were also given badges -- Gymnasium 2 became Gymnasium 560. The
badges started a battle. Each morning before eight, the director and one
of the masters would walk about the building, among students doffing
their caps to them. Now and then the director would call a student over
to see if his badge was sewn in accordance with regulations or only
disreputably pinned. Therefore more than one student carried a sewing
kit in his pocket, so that, when warned by friends, he could duck into a
gateway on Ruska Street and quickly cover the traces of his crime. As
for me, my badge was firmly sewn on by my mother, to my chagrin -- and I
fought this in a roundabout way, finally hitting upon what I could do
with the badge, in keeping with the above-mentioned subculture. But of
that later.

With the old gymnasium went the pewlike benches and desks. They were
replaced in almost all the classes by modern desk-chairs with drawers.
School benches for me are archaic, a relic of a vanished era. I
encountered them only briefly, when they were on their way out, and I
cannot think of them without sadness. But, emotions aside, it seems to
me that those left should be collected and put in museums alongside
relics of Aurignacian and Mousterian cultures. Paleolithic man carved
stone; Gymnasium man carved his desk-bench. It was an excellent medium.
The carpenters who designed it must have been full of wisdom, foreseeing
generation upon generation of students, each new wave attempting to
break those wooden chains. With time the edges grew as smooth as ivory,
gripped desperately by the hands of countless students called upon by
the teacher. Sweat and ink seeped into the thick planks, so that
gradually they assumed an indescribable gray-blue-dun color. Nibs of
pens, penknives, fingernails, and probably teeth, too, left secret
marks, rows of hieroglyphics, layer upon layer, for each generation
deepened the work of the one before, and thus craters came into being,
and hollows where once there had been knots, made incomparably smooth by
Sisyphean labor during endless hours of lecturing. And that is not all.
When discipline grew most stringent, and one had to sit with hands
folded, the eyes, those servants of the soul, over which the pedagogical
body had no power, sought escape by resting on the patterns in the wood.
With a little concentration one could silence the teacher's words. As
Hamlet bounded in a nutshell could count himself a king of infinite
space, so could each student merge with the abstract meanderings on the
desk before him, sink into sweet torpor, and escape. True, you could
carve things also on a polished desk-chair, but it was not the same.
That was done without conviction, without artistry, out of habit only.
The old desk-bench had two shallow holes for inkwells, which were a
special kind, glass containers with a deep funneled opening designed so
the ik would not come out if they were overturned. The ink came out, I
assure you, and if it didn't at first, it was helped. Ballpoint pens did
not exist and fountain pens were looked down on; we wrote with pen
points, which could also be thrown or used to jab one's neighbor.
Thereby demonstrating that there is no implement that cannot be put in
the service of a goal opposite the one intended by its creator. A
culture is passed from generation to generation, so it was known for
ages what benches are for -- but with these new desk-chairs obstupuunt
omnes at first. We were not stymied for long, however, and the chairs
began losing their legs. This is called vandalism, and vandalism it was,
yet not so different really from what monastic scribes in medieval
cloisters did when they scratched valuable writing off a parchment to
substitute their own uninteresting text.

What Heaven is to a Christian, Highcastle was to each of us. We went
there when a class was canceled because the teacher was suddenly
indisposed -- one of those blissful surprises that fate on rare
occasions brings. Highcastle was not a place for truants, too dangerous
for that; in the lanes and between the park benches and trees one might
meet a schoolmaster. The deserters instead took to the ravines of the
Kaiserwald, beyond Sand Mountain, where they sat safely in the bushes
and smoked fancy Silesian cigarettes. But in Highcastle we walked
openly, making plenty of noise, in the sweet aura of legal idleness,
drunk with our sudden freedom. Only two tram stops separated the
gymnasium from this delightful place, but we never took the tram; it was
too expensive. We usually went up Teatynska Street, and a few dozen
steps beyond the place where the rails ended there was a steep drop, and
the whole city lay before us, with Sand Mountain on the right, and on
the left the park greenery, obscuring the Memorial Mound of the Lublin
Union. Far below was the dark tangle of tracks of the Podzamcze train
station, with tiny locomotives, and beyond that an airy expanse, light
blue and hazy to a green horizon.

In Highcastle there stood a broken wall, a ruin, but I hardly remember
it. Thirty years had to pass before I thought about this and learned
that Highcastle had been a magnificent building, given its name because
there was a Lowcastle in the city. But ruins and venerable monuments
were of no interest to me then. What did we do there? Nothing to speak
of. A few times a year my father would take me to the Union Mound or to
Sand Mountain, but never during school hours. It was then, during the
school day, that possibilities suddenly opened. In my eight years at the
gymnasium I must have gone there countless times, but I remember nothing
of the place except the low hedges, behind them the sky-blue panorama of
the city, and the shade of great chestnut trees. Because it was not
really a place, it was a state, so intensely perfect that it could be
compared only with the first day of summer vacation -- a day not yet
touched, not yet begun, when the heart faints with deliciousness because
everything is still ahead, but you also feel the urge to loaf, with time
spread out like an ocean through all of July and August. At Highcastle,
however, we had only one hour, so every minute had to be savored, filled
conscientiously with indolence. We dove in, we wallowed, we let
ourselves drift, as in a warm river under a sky with white clouds. It
was not a Christian heaven full of modest prayer, but a nirvana -- no
temptations or desires, but blessedness that existed independently. Even
our throats, hoarse from howling during recess, were affected by this
gust from another world; we screamed a little, yes, but more out of
habit than conviction.

We also went there, particularly into the hills behind Sand Mountain, on
nature field trips, but that was something altogether different, at
least for me, who never liked plants. Our nature teacher, Mr.
Noskiewicz, was amazed that even with Rostafinski's classification guide
in my hand I could turn grasses and thistles into rhododendrons.
Angiosperms, gymnosperms -- the names themselves disgusted me; I don't
know why. Somehow plants made me nervous. True, they are in a sense
related to us, yet they are satisfied with everything or -- what is
worse -- they are indifferent. With mice, lions, and ants we share a
multitude of troubles, we fear, we desire, we strive; but the vegetable
kingdom's quiet acceptance of fate seems to me a betrayal of the common
cause. Did I hold such eccentric views in my twelfth year? Hardly, and
yet my dislike for my green cousins -- which has nothing to do with
being forced to eat spinach -- goes as far back as I can remember.

Returning to the gymnasium from such an excursion, you noticed how small
the playing field was, an area cut into the slope of the ramparts and
stamped flat by countless feet. It was marked off only with low stone
posts connected by an iron rail -- no obstacle, but one was forbidden to
go beyond that border. We had to stay in the enclosed space, and so used
every centimeter of it.

From the free world would come a cake vendor, and with the cakes he also
brought the sweetness of gambling. Two of us would pay him ten groszy,
five groszy each, then he would rattle his coins in the pocket of his
dirty apron, take out a handful, and say, "Odd or even." The boy who
guessed correctly got the cake and ate it on the spot. I wasn't allowed
to eat them; my father said I could get food poisoning. I didn't disobey
him, although somehow all my classmates remained in perfect health.

For several meters along the wall of the building ran a concrete
rainspout from the hill, and we wore out our shoes climbing up and
sliding down it endlessly, that is, until the bell for class. We also
loosened all the iron rails in the stone posts, and we tore (I almost
said "gnawed") the bark off the trees around the playing field. In other
words, we were a kind of collective Abbot Faria from a Dumas novel. If
you could somehow concentrate the energy of all the schoolchildren in
the world, you could definitely turn the earth upside down and dry up
all the seas. But first you would have to make that absolutely
forbidden.

I have sketched something like outlines here for essays entitled "The
Gymnasium as Subculture" and "The Gymnasium as Elemental Force." But we
were also a society, governing ourselves with a legal system, a
democratically elected chieftain, a treasury and treasurer, which I was
for a time, sergeants at arms in the classrooms, and a hierarchy that
included two special positions: the mama's boy and the class jester. The
mama's boy was determined by class verdict, unofficial but without
appeal. The ideal candidate was fat and clumsy, someone you could
mistreat a little -- not with any cruelty but simply to remind him what
he was. If he accepted his role, he could lead a perfectly reasonable
existence. As a rule a class had only one mama's boy, as if having more
than one would reflect unfavorably on the group itself. In our class,
for many years this position was filled by two, but the exception proved
the rule, because they were twins, the F. brothers, forming one person,
as it were, in two bodies: one mama's boy, except doubled. Our verdict
led to a curious fraternal rivalry, setting one against the other. More
than once, after long whispering in the corner, they would come to
blows, but as mama's boys, of course, swinging wildly, pulling hair, and
blubbering. When the twins were ill, the position fell per procura to
fat Z. He was incredibly touchy, had perfect cheeks for pinching, and,
being both fat and standoffish, was a natural for squashing. Squashing
involved two athletes, who would sit on the bench on either side of the
unsuspecting victim -- you couldn't squash without a bench -- and at a
given signal they would plant their feet and grip the desk and press the
poor soul between them until his ribs made sounds and his eyeballs
popped. But the mama's boy was not persecuted too insistently -- that
was considered poor taste.

Looking more closely at this school society, one may notice a certain
anxiety among some students, who know instinctively that they are
candidates for the position of mama's boy and will surely be pushed into
it if it becomes vacant. These are the ones who persecute the most, as
if to separate themselves with punches and insults from what they dread
to be. Meanwhile worthy representatives of the class take no interest in
its pariahs.

You became a mama's boy by decree and consensus, but you became a class
jester by native ability and the ambition to be one. A class jester
could amuse the class with a single word at the right moment, knew how
to coin a phrase, but most of all knew how to be stupid when called on
by the teacher. A difficult position, for it demanded balance between
the class and the enemy camp. You couldn't be the jester of both,
either. To keep an acrobatic act like that going was no simple art.

In our class Miecio P. was jester for a while, a boy of heavy humor and
a heavier hand. Questioned, he played the idiot in such a way as to make
the questioner look like an idiot. He was merciless particularly to the
young women who assisted the teachers and sometimes conducted classes
themselves. Miecio was vulgar, and I didn't like him. He sat on the last
bench and often pretended to be hard of hearing, so the questions would
have to be repeated, and he lied in a special way, giving detailed but
completely absurd explanations for not having done his homework, while
staring at the teacher with unabashed sincerity. The more obvious the
lie, the more detailed the account. He evoked laughter, but any laughter
at him personally was cut short by a pointed nod at the gang he belonged
to. These were repeat offenders and athletic types the pedagogues had
given up on. Miecio was their spokesman, even their intellectual, but
not their leader, because they didn't appreciate humor and kept their
distance, like visitors from a world outside the gymnasium. To them we
were kids. One of them, for example, W., would let this one or that try
to strangle him, hands around his throat, and resist with nothing but
the boardlike tightening of his neck muscles.

While we in the middle grades began to take an interest in sexual
matters, outdoing one another in verbal pornography and scatology, the
eloquence of which attempted to substitute for experience, this gang did
not join in such discussions. Sex for them was an everyday thing,
routine, practically a profession. With despair we shouted the most
dreadful obscenities, feeling the ground of desired masculinity slipping
out from under our feet.

Curiously, I remember their hands and book bags better than their faces.
The hands were the hands of grown men -- heavy and still, with yellow
nicotine stains, protruding veins, scars, but not scars from some
penknife in a game; their scars had nothing to do with games. The book
bags were leather worn to a muddy black, torn, without handles, the
sides half fallen in, because they didn't hold much besides lunch, and
you could see that for years they had been put to the roughest service
-- used as goals in truant soccer games, as pillows in the Kaiserwald,
even as missiles. Such a veteran book bag deserves to be placed in the
museum alongside the old school bench.

There were many classmates I was on good terms with, but I had no real
friends to whom I could confide my private thoughts. I liked Jozek F.,
who started getting a mustache I think as early as the first year of the
new gymnasium. He was an excellent mathematician -- killed by the
Germans. I was also impressed by Zygmunt E., called Puncia. Oddly, I
remember him not at a desk or in a classroom but on the playing field. A
son of poor parents, he worked his way through the gymnasium by
tutoring. Tuition was expensive -- 110 zlotys a semester, the equivalent
of a suit or five pairs of shoes -- and scholarships were hard to come
by. I remember Puncia -- a dramatic, heroic moment -- making a penalty
kick before the opposing goal. He placed the ball eleven paces from the
goal, while the goalie, crouched and staring, nervously licked his lips.
Then Puncia retreated and stood in silent, almost mournful thought, his
eyes narrowed, as if struggling with his opponent, and his body tensed
slightly. He began moving toward the ball, running slowly at first,
waddling like a duck because his legs were a little crooked, and he also
moved them in a special way to keep the goalie from guessing which leg
he would kick with. We all knew which leg -- it was always the left --
yet surprisingly this game of pretended uncertainty always worked. In
the last few meters he gathered speed, until his legs were a blur; then
came the dull thud of the kick, and the ball went right into the corner
of the goal. In the uproar of our triumph Puncia would turn slowly and
smile. It was the same smile he showed in the classroom, polite, sweet,
mild, and completely uninterested.

For many years I had two neighbors in class. One was Julek C., the son
of a policeman, a sturdy kid with blond hair, a snub nose, and a
tentative expression in his eyes. He and I carried out an important
transaction which took a long time to finalize. He gave me his
single-shot 6mm pistol in exchange for my fake Browning 9mm, with which
I was bored. Of course I wanted to try out the gun right away; every
minute was precious. So the moment I was home, I loaded it with a
"ball." It was hard to fit the thing into the chamber, but I managed. I
opened the window in the room by the kitchen, aimed at the bathroom door
at the end of the hall, and fired. The bang was unexpectedly loud; I
would even say horrendous. Before I could go and see what had happened
to the bullet, my mother came running in and, after her, my father, from
his office, in his white lab coat, the mirror on his forehead. My
still-smoking gun was immediately confiscated, and it ended up in a
double-locked drawer as a highly dangerous object. Much later, I
examined it and realized that I had been lucky, because the firing
chamber was of thin metal and part of it had been expanded by the hot
gases. Fortunately the flexible copper held and it didn't all go into my
eyes. I looked for the bullet a long time, in vain; the bore apparently
had not been rifled. So Julek got the better of the bargain after all.
It may have been a family thing with him, but we talked a lot about
guns. He was even in a hunt once, for wild boar, and was wounded in the
thigh when a hunter aimed at a boar he thought he saw in the bushes.
Julek wore a bandage for a long time, which was a great distinction. But
that happened later, at the lyceum. By then Julek D. also had a gun, a
magnificent Flower repeating rifle, whereas I never went beyond my air
pistol. This stung deeply. Had it been up to me, I would have gone to
school with revolvers hung all over myself. At best I could make
certificates of hunting prowess for myself, but I did this
halfheartedly, feeling that in that particular area fiction could not
compete at all with reality.

Even earlier, my desk neighbor was Jurek G., handsome and amorous. He
was always romantically involved with girls, and in addition --
supposedly -- was having an actual affair with a grown woman, a widow.
He met her in Stryjski Park, they said, and one of my classmates
reportedly observed him there in the throes of passion, but there was no
way I could observe, too, because I was carefully watched. In the
afternoon I was not allowed to leave the house; I was given a guardian
angel, my tutor Mr. Wilk, a student and then a graduate student in law.
He made sure I did my homework. Therefore the classical excuse, "I'm
going to a friend's to study," was ruled out for me: I really did have
to study. Also I was learning French at home, from a certain
Mademoiselle, an ugly person with an enormous red nose that was pitted,
as if under a magnifying glass. But I was able to tame her, working out
a whole system of stratagems to deliver me from the mysteries of that
horrible grammar. Mademoiselle was very inquisitive and would ask me
about my family, ask if someone was getting married or not getting
married; knowing next to nothing about such matters, I lied, saying
whatever entered my head -- and so managed to parler a little after all,
but the secrets of tenses, temps défini, indéfini, and all those awful
subjonctifs remained hidden from me forever.

At that time I was making my own alcoholic beverages -- in case male
guests dropped in unexpectedly, though they never did. Behind the
volumes of the Brockhaus and Meyer encyclopedia in the dirty white
cabinet, I hid tiny bottles filled with leftover drinks mixed according
to my own recipe. I used ingredients from my mother's cupboard, adding
them to the kümmel my father sometimes had with lunch. When I ran out of
family gossip, I would treat my French teacher to one of these
cocktails, and she was not above accepting a little glass or two. On
tiny porcelain saucers from my chemical experiments I also mixed
perfumes taken from my mother's dresser. And I would anoint Mademoiselle
with these. It is amazing that after all this I can read a book in the
language of Molière.

Between school, Mr. Wilk, and the French teacher, I didn't have much
time to myself, and my life would have been dreary indeed if I hadn't
enriched it in hidden ways, but more of that later.

There was some diversion in the school plays, though many, like
Wyspianski's Liberation, were awful bores (I am speaking not of
Wyspianski himself but only of his reception among fourteen-year-olds at
the time). The tickets, numbered, were distributed in class, and
immediately there would be a lively discussion about where the girls'
gymnasium would sit. Through secret channels came valuable information,
and bargaining and trading ensued, since practically everyone wanted to
sit where you could count on a voluptuous neighbor. This didn't concern
me; I was still infantile and green and could do no more than listen
with an open mouth as Jurek G. spoke of his rendezvous and all that
transpired during them. Anyway, at the school plays no real advantage
derived from female proximity, because strategically placed teachers
made sure that not even the slightest contact took place.

From time to time there were dances arranged by the parents' committee,
but I still didn't know how to dance and could only stand by a wall,
that is, by the risers, since the dancing was in the gym. Some of the
younger teachers, too, danced with our guests of the fair sex -- which
to me seemed against nature. As if Attila were to take up ballet.

To describe my position in the class, I must compare it to others.
Although clumsy and quite pudgy, I somehow didn't become a mama's boy.
Perhaps because I kept my distance, was a good student, and had a lot of
things on my mind. I believe it was at the end of gymnasium or the
beginning of lyceum that I encountered Proust, learning of his existence
from Jeremi R. and Janek C. Jeremi was studying English, carried
dictionaries with him, and in general was extraordinarily intelligent.
Because I read absolutely everything that fell into my hands, and saw
that Janek and Jeremi had books with intriguing titles, such as Within a
Budding Grove, I borrowed the first volume -- and got stuck in the first
few pages. Surprised, I stepped back like a hurdler to gather momentum
and charged the obstacle a few times, but each time I fell back as if I
had hit a wall. Maybe it was this that planted the seeds of my
inferiority complex. I tried reading Proust but couldn't -- but I
couldn't even try going out with girls. I had to pretend this was by
choice, pretend even before my friends, including Janek C. How I envied
him! He was the son of a well-known Lvov lawyer and lived not far from
us, off Mickiewicz Avenue, near Smolka Square, in a large apartment.
Entering, the visitor would be greeted by a Roman bust of Janek's
father, a powerful head on a massive neck, a craggy face, wide nostrils.
Janek's mother had mental problems. He never spoke of her. She stayed in
the apartment in a separate room, the door almost always closed. The few
times I saw her there, for a moment, the air was blue with smoke and she
held a cigarette. Janek did not have a tutor. In general, his father
treated him like an adult; Janek didn't have to say where he was going
or what he wanted to do or if he had finished his homework. He would
read Proust, wearing his wire-rimmed glasses. When I came, he closed the
book and took off the glasses, along with a piece of paper kept under
the frame so the wire wouldn't leave a mark. He was an excellent
swimmer, could do one hundred meters freestyle in a minute and sixteen
seconds (whereas I, in the water, splashed and went nowhere); he played
tennis, basketball, and in lyceum dated the beautiful Wanda P., which he
never discussed. He never boasted of his superiorities. But what
impressed me most about him was that, an average student, he did not
take school too seriously, did not fear bad grades, as if he could see
farther, as if he had his own system of values and was practicing it
quietly. We walked each other home, between Brajerska and Mickiewicz.
Janek was a good, obliging person with a somewhat lethargic manner and a
great sense of humor. I believe that he, too, was killed by the Germans.

In gymnasium I did many things not because I liked doing them but
because they were what my peers did (in this, following the adults,
although I didn't know that). Even before lyceum, my more sophisticated
classmates began to play bridge, which to me seemed worse than irregular
Latin verbs. I could never remember what cards had been played, what was
in my hand, what to bid, and how to open. Considered retarded by my
partners, I gave up bridge once and for all. As for chess, I actually
did win once against a boy my age who was an outstanding player -- and
won in a way that stunned him. A feat I was never able to repeat. I
think this was a situation such as Napoleon spoke about -- to the effect
that on the field of battle the most dangerous opponent is either a
strategic genius or a complete cretin, and that sometimes the cretin has
the advantage, since his moves cannot be foreseen.

For a while I played buttons, swiping some valuable specimens from my
mother's dresser, and in class I threw spit-soaked cigarette butts at
the ceiling -- everyone did that. When the spit dried, the butts began
to fall in a mysterious rain during the lecture, which infuriated the
teacher. I studied jujitsu with Janek C., usually in the third-floor
lavatory vestibule, and hurled special darts at the blackboard -- made
of cork with a needle in front and feathers and a microscopic weight in
back. I learned how to spit five, even six meters, but not how to
whistle with fingers, which was one of my great aggravations. If I
failed at things in this education, if things were beyond my grasp, it
was not for lack of trying. I strove to conform -- for example,
pretending to collect stamps, which didn't interest me in the least, and
with my friends who did visit I played soldiers and war, not looking at
my notebooks until I was alone.

But going to the Eastern Fair, for that I didn't have to force myself.
We went in a group, and collected the free-coupon flyers and drank the
free Maggi soup until the managers of the stands lost all patience and
drove us away.

My obesity proved to be an advantage in certain situations, such as when
I played defense in soccer and it was difficult to push me aside in the
scrimmage because I had a lot of mass. And on rare occasions there were
car races in Lvov, which we loved with a passion. They made a loop using
Stryjska, Cadet, and Pelczynska streets; they even poured plaster over
the tram tracks and put sandbags at the sidewalk corners. We felt then
that Lvov was an exceptionally European city, and the proof was those
enormous racing machines and the hellish roar they made.

I confess with some embarrassment that I never played hooky, but
sometimes a class was canceled and we went to Highcastle, Kortumowa
Mountain, or the Kaiserwald. I got to know that area better in the
winter, on skis, and also as a member of the Cadet Corps -- the fallen
trees, ravines, hills. But the best view was from the Memorial Mound of
the Lublin Union.

 

 

 

CHAPTER

5

 

The director of our school was Stanislaw Buzath, a small man with a big,
commanding voice, but he was also a good historian and a decent person.
Geography was taught by Professor Nawrocki, called the Conductor because
he silenced us with a special bell, pushing a button in his office.
Lewicki and Bleiberg took turns teaching physics. I was once given a
good smack by the former while he was lecturing on the properties of
mercury, because I sat in the first row and in my eagerness to impress
him with my knowledge completed all his sentences for him. He hit me so
hard that I saw stars. A terrible disappointment: I had hoped to be
singled out in another way. Miss Maria Lewicka, his namesake but no
relative, taught Polish. I was always first in that class, and wrote
long compositions, hardly ever able to finish them in the allotted
forty-five minutes. She wrote many wonderful comments in red ink in my
notebook -- especially when the topic was open. That was my favorite
kind of composition. Alas, I abused my special position by rarely
studying or preparing for class. From the required reading list I chose
only what I liked, and the Szymonowiczes and Kasprowiczes were ignored.
Hence my gaps in Polish literature, which were not always filled later.
I took advantage of the fact that Lewicka never called on me, and now
present the sad case of a man who has been graduated from college but
does not know the first thing about grammar, for in that subject I was
negligent, spoiled by the confidence placed in me. Once, writing a
homework assignment, I did a shameful thing. On my voyage to the planet
Venus -- that was the theme, which combined the requirements of
composition with my own interests -- I lifted a large chunk of text from
a book by Professor Wyrobek on the wonders of nature: in striking prose,
a description of Venus with its primal jungles and thick clouds. So my
literary career began, in gymnasium, with a simple act of plagiarism. I
think I did try to add something of my own, some nonsense about the
Venusians (the errors of youth, how they take their revenge in later
years!), but saw it was inferior to the expressiveness and vividness of
Professor Wyrobek's vision. Our Polish teacher conducted her classes in
the modern way, encouraging free discussion. Having owned up to some
sins, I wish to balance the picture a little by adding here that I was
not indifferent to everything in Polish class, that it was not just on
"Venusian" topics that I had things to say. Lewicka's method encouraged
independent thinking. On the other hand, it required a little
cooperation and industry from the student, and not every student was up
to that.

Mathematics was taught by Professor Zarycki, one of the more unusual
members of the faculty, a Ukrainian whose daughter was involved in the
assassination attempt on Minister Pieracki. Zarycki was probably in his
fifties, handsome, with a furrowed, swarthy face, even swarthier
eyelids, a sharp nose, deep eyes, and he was bald as a billiard ball,
because he carefully shaved his skull. The class was terribly afraid of
him, and I was as well, because mathematics was my nemesis. Our
mathematician treated us strangely -- he had an imagination. He might
reward a correct answer by telling the student to leave the classroom
and go for a walk around the city. Or he might begin the lesson by
sending some students to different places, on various personal errands.
Which was a great favor -- an unusually safe way to exclude oneself from
the dangers that lay in wait on the chalk-scribbled blackboard. Zarycki
resembled the film actor Boris Karloff in that he never smiled and no
emotion showed on his masklike face. Sometimes he would give a
particularly hard question to the whole class and offer a cigarette to
the one who answered correctly. Once, thanks to an unexpected
inspiration, I received such a trophy and carried it triumphantly home.
I didn't smoke this cigarette, of course; I kept it until the tobacco
started to crumble. Zarycki was frightening because he was enigmatic --
nobody could tell when he was joking and when he was in earnest. When a
new student, answering well and hearing that he could go for a walk in
the town, returned instead to his seat, Zarycki let out such a bellow
that the boy fled as fast as he could. What kind of man was this really?
I have no idea. What did we know about any of our teachers? We were
taught by Professor Ingarden, also mathematics; even then he was a
philosopher of European renown, but in our school nobody knew that.
Ingarden didn't stay long or devote much effort to us, and no wonder,
since our collective resistance to mathematics was more than a match for
the greatest pedagogical talent.

The great, eccentric teacher is dying out as a species, it seems,
because conditions have become unfavorable for him. Nawrocki the
Conductor was replaced temporarily by a newcomer from another gymnasium,
Babyn, who within a single hour destroyed the entire class, this with
one trick question: "How many continents are there?" If you answered
"Five," you got an F. F followed F followed F. Finally he explained that
there were five continents on Earth, yes, but many more in the whole
universe. There was of course no arguing with that, so on my report card
I received an unsatisfactory in geography, though with plenty of
company. Babyn was a terror; everyone feared him, because those who
studied found themselves in the same boat as those who never touched a
book. I know nothing about him; he appeared like a comet of devastation
and not long after, a few months, passed from our small horizon, having
turned hours of geography into sessions of horror. I suspect that he was
not quite right in the head, because the victories he won against us
were such cheap ones.

The lower grades of Latin were taught by Professor Rappaport -- old,
ailing, a yellow face, a gruff but gentle disposition. He hardly ever
left the lectern, so during his reign the illegal transmission of
correct answers flowered greatly. But even then we were beginning to
hear disturbing stories about another Latin teacher, Auerbach, and the
time came, in one of the higher grades, when he manifested himself in
the flesh.

Short of stature and comical in appearance, Auerbach would come to
school in enormous galoshes, which he removed from his feet with
ferocious kicks at the entrance to the classroom. Then, to have better
command of the room, he would hop up on the podium table, let his legs
dangle, and in the dead silence look at us carefully through his thick
glasses. After a few minutes of this hypnotic watching, he would find
the student least prepared for danger, and if the victim made even the
feeblest gesture of soliciting the help of his neighbors, Auerbach would
spring tigerlike and appear suddenly beside the prey, examining his
desk, book, hands. The man was a true detective in spotting sinners.
During quizzes he did not take refuge in the fortress of his desk but
moved silently about the room. His bloodcurdling battle cry, "A-hee!,"
which was a little nasal, and all the special intonations and
expressions he used to skewer a culprit were imitated by us endlessly
and mocked; but that didn't break the terrible spell cast by our little
Latin teacher. My guess is that at the very beginning of his teaching
career he realized that he would have to compensate in some very
definite, dramatic way for the physical inadequacies of his person --
his extreme nearsightedness, his dwarfism making him laughable,
vulnerable. So he worked out a whole system of ambushes, sorties, leaps,
and thundering, and that was his shield. Basically he was an
intelligent, peaceable man. I remember how upset he became when, at the
fourth-year graduation, one of our classmates, U., who had grown too big
for his uniform, saw all the Fs on the certificate handed him by the
gymnasium authorities, pulled a flask from his pocket, threw his head
back, and drank the contents in two gulps, the smell of iodine spreading
all around. . . Everyone stood rooted in horror, Auerbach probably most
of all, his F being the final nail in U.'s coffin. After a few minutes
of confusion it turned out that the liquid was not lethal -- just water
with a few drops of tincture of iodine in it. U., who didn't care
anymore, had chosen this colorful way to conclude his stay at our
school.

In the language of the ancient Romans I was not particularly adept, but
I had a sense of rhythm and could read an unfamiliar text in hexameter
without understanding -- nota bene -- any of it. Perhaps the fluency of
my speech and correctness of my accents softened somewhat the injury
done to the Latin teachers' ears by my less eloquent fellow students.
The teachers liked me. In addition, I never dared use a crib. Many of my
classmates did, of course, in the conviction that homework was not their
first duty. Thus they added to that great storehouse of subterfuges used
for centuries by students in the war against education. The smuggling of
information -- the essential purpose of all such activity -- called for
the creation of many industries. First, the handicrafts, painstaking
artisan work. I have in mind the insertion of a translation, say,
between the lines of Latin text, and marking the caesuras, the long and
short syllables, the dactyls, trochees, this done by placing a piece of
paper over the page and writing the letters and words in pencil, bearing
down so that the crib would be in the form only of colorless
indentations. Holding the book at the exact angle to the light, you
could read -- particularly with young eyes -- the lifesaving
information. If you didn't want to go to so much trouble, you could make
use of the products of an unscrupulous publisher, I think it was
Zuckerkandel, who printed small yellow ponies that were available in all
the gymnasiums of Lvov and no doubt throughout Poland. These were
translations as well as parsings of the required Latin texts, poems, and
plays, printed on cheap paper and in tiny type. Possession of a pony was
a heinous crime; therefore the more cautious of us copied onto small
strips of paper the parts of the Latin translation needed, and hid them
in pockets and up sleeves. But there were plenty who were too lazy and
simply tore the appropriate page from the Zuckerkandel and put it in the
textbook. Others counted on their height, towering over Auerbach and
holding the textbook high so he could not see it. Fools. Our incredible
sleuth could tell from the eye movements that skulduggery was afoot, and
the consequence was a sudden paralyzing cry of "A-hee!" and a leap from
the podium, and the dry teacher's hand seizing the book, and the secret
sin revealed to the class, the page of the pony, which Auerbach would
wave in all directions like a cloth dipped in poison, wave it with
disgust and bitter triumph. And if the page was hidden in time, passed
to a colleague, the little teacher would quickly order the whole row
emptied, and one by one pull from the desks all that they held. Such
searches usually ended sadly.

Of course, various countermeasures were attempted, new methods used. You
could read from a crib held at a certain angle by a student sitting in
the row in front of you, he hiding it from Auerbach with an open book.
But our indefatigable master of detection easily scotched such trickery.
There was visionary talk of using a mirror to throw messages on a wall,
as a film projector did, in a corner behind the teacher's back, in Morse
code. Nothing came of that, because in the end it was easier to learn a
translation by ordinary means than to master the art of a telegraphic
alphabet.

Writing about my teachers, I feel with growing dissatisfaction that I
have fallen into one of the many ruts made by generations of
professional memoirists, where one speaks of the gymnasium as a
dollhouse -- from above, at a distance, with a sad smile, the pedagogues
presented in gentle, forgiving caricature. The tired tricks of a balding
writer! Tricks all the more insidious in that they are unconscious,
turning prose into a sweet pabulum, a candied mud that gums and
paralyzes the mind. To write about the gymnasium from above is worse
than a crime -- it's a mistake. One should treat it as one treats the
Absolute.

Fortified by walls and chalk, the gymnasium existed basically in the
faculty body -- this would be the first approximation. I am quite
serious. Teachers from other schools -- one met them in the theater, for
example -- to us they were as heretics are to the orthodox, they and
their altars and practices. We felt embarrassment, surprise: there was
absolutely nothing to them; how could they be so blind? At a glance I
could reduce any foreign schoolmaster to his elements, from galoshes to
official abstractedness to pince-nez. He was the tedious sum of his
parts, nothing more. But the fact that our Conductor had a big belly
never entered my head -- because he was an Absolute, he and his notebook
and little pencil of power and the way his fingers slowly turned those
always mysterious pages, pages that one minute were as empty as the
world before creation and the next full of silent thunder. Prophets in
the front row would try to read our implacable fate in the microscopic
movements of that pencil. More than once I carried the test books to the
conference room. There must have been a table there, chairs, but I have
no memory of them. As for the director's office, I couldn't begin to
describe it, and that is not solely because of the circumstances that
brought me there (for example, the time L. and I broke the lavatory
sink). It was not fear that blinded me, but the Absolute. The Absolute
was there; I could feel it. Years later, I even looked for it when, as a
man of letters, I was to meet students in the first and second
gymnasiums and waited, with coffee, in the director's office. I found
nothing; it had evaporated like camphor, leaving the desks cold, the
chairs and coat of arms and portraits on the wall -- it was gone, but
gone only for me. Its presence I immediately saw reflected in the faces
of the students when they crossed the threshold. Immediately they fell
into that trance so familiar to me. I recognized the slight numbing,
stiffening, trembling, the dark exultation in the eyes, the failing of
all the senses -- they did not speak to the point and shuffled their
feet. As I once did. Out of fear? Their fear, and mine, at twelve? Too
simple! When the Germans were shelling Lvov in September, I ran through
Jesuit Garden looking for still-hot shrapnel timers -- in terrible fear,
because the bombardment continued -- and the point is not that I was
stupid but that the danger was trivially definite: a shell could kill.
The director, on the other hand, not only didn't kill but often didn't
even raise his voice.

I know that describing some things is like trying to square the circle;
that the believer, while faith lasts, neither wishes nor is able to
speak of his faith, for its state, like the possession of ears or legs,
is not communicable. The atheist debunks the mysticism of his old
memories by faultfinding analysis or the tolerant superiority of one
awakened from a dream. Go ahead, gentlemen, analyze, smile your sad
smiles, weave your comfortable tale of the past. I cannot join you.
Mysticism? Yes, but of a special kind, an Absolute that is omnipresent
yet at the same time wholly material. The tribes of the gymnasium do not
hold with superstition, do not believe in telepathy or mind over matter.
They would master both if the world allowed it. No spiritualist is more
attuned to the minds of others or whispers from the beyond than we were
to a drop of knowledge, eye to eye at the blackboard with the Absolute,
the burning Sahara of ignorance in our heads. As for psychokinesis, we
were forty joined in spirit, and quicker than it takes to read this
sentence, the teacher, the lectern, and his notes would have plunged
through all the floors below if thought strained to the utmost could
indeed move matter.

My style waxes biblical, but perhaps one can speak of such things only
thus. Or should I instead become Homeric? The Ancient Greeks made fun of
their gods, knowing their weaknesses and foibles. Even the Jews of the
Old Testament, when God turned His head, started whispering in the
corners, playing hooky with golden calves, losing faith in their
teacher's podium, the Ark of the Covenant. An Ezekiel could deliver an
algebra lesson in numbered verse, each line containing a soul-shaking
bolt; I won't attempt that. Whatever I do, it will verge on a joke, a
parody, and yet the spiritus that flat ubi vult filled with high-voltage
transcendence the piece of chalk held in stiff fingers that awaited the
Word. Have I exaggerated? No, I did not consider our math teacher a god,
nor the director a Zeus. Nevertheless, after all these years and wars,
many of my old classmates still dream of final exams every bit as
terrible as the Last Judgment, though no Goya has painted their
eschatology. Are we to dismiss the evidence of our senses and stubborn
dreams with such words as "awe of authority"? I know only this: We were
forced to learn and fought it like the plague, but at the same time we
were initiated into ultimate experience, and from minds tuned in unison
the highest and lowest human notes were produced. Yes, there was Old
Testament quaking before the burning bush, and terror before the fire
and brimstone of Fs, and with more than one teacher we argued like Moses
on Sinai when he was called on unexpectedly by Jehovah. Those feelings
took us past all we knew and placed us painfully face to face with the
Unknowable, that divine element, that hideous ecstasy, which I, free of
it for so many years, now try to invoke with the name of the Absolute.

Each of us in the course of a lifetime grows out of a series of faiths,
abandoning their temples, but the things toppled from the pedestals of
yesterday's cult deserve neither our contempt nor our affection. I will
say more: I didn't know this then, but our teachers would have been
nothing without us, in the frame of erasers and black roll books and
carved desks; it was from the interaction between us and them that there
gradually emerged something that sanctified and gave power to their
spectacles, galoshes, watch chains, and little pencils. When the bubble
burst and everything vanished behind the walls of the gymnasium like a
magic circle when it is crossed, what remained was a vague impression, a
thing impossible to verbalize and which memories attempt to show in
vain, for besides the hours of instruction and the pandemonium of
recesses I knew a certain condition born of relationships only half
visible, a condition that may have dwindled to insignificance in the
perspective of time and also may have been a little grotesque -- open to
laughter when the sleeper woke -- but it was my first initiation into
the tragicomedy of existence. There were other initiations, because
later, too, I experienced the rise, flowering, and fall of mighty
principles that eventually turned out to be -- as in all histories,
large and small -- ordinary people. The thunderbolt held by Zeus in the
textbook of ancient history always reminded me of a twist of Carpathian
goat cheese. I beheld it without illusion -- as today I behold the
precisely sharpened little pencil of the Conductor. Olympus, for the one
who has awakened, is only a mountain and requires hiking boots, not
sacrificial animals. In gymnasium directors' offices there is nothing
for me now but desks and chairs; I say this without sorrow but also
without a smile, for that is the way of things.

After which harangue I return to Lvov of the thirties, to its shady
walkways and hilly streets, the green, almost sylvan Academic Street,
Legions Street bracketed by the Grand Theater and with Mariacki Square
in the middle, gorgeous at night with the rooftop lights -- the stag of
Schicht's soap, the Suchard chocolates hopping on their neon ladder.
Around 1935, a talking film came, Al Jolson and his title song "Sonny
Boy," which the street singers immediately took up. The streets and
courtyards then were filled with jugglers, fire-eaters, acrobats,
singers and musicians, and the most authentic organ grinders in the
world, some even with parrots that could tell the future by picking
cards with their beaks. I don't know whether it is from a guilty
conscience because of my murdered music box, but the hobbling, twanging,
awkward, always slightly off-key music of all organ grinders and other
anachronistic mechanisms is something I hold in great respect. There is
in it a sweet, naive solemnity, a nineteenth-century trust in the
perfection of wheels and toothed cylinders, and an honesty of mechanical
matter speaking in its own voice instead of imitating the human. But the
Heraclitean river has claimed all those hand-cranked clunkers and
clangers.

I also loved to watch circus performers from the kitchen steps.
Sometimes whole families put on a show; they traveled with frayed canvas
suitcases that contained torches, weights, a sword for swallowing, a
rolled carpet to do acrobatic tricks on, and other curiosities. While
the paterfamilias ate fire or a sword, the mother played the accordion,
and the children made human pyramids and ran about the courtyard picking
up the coins wrapped in paper, thrown from the windows. Those were hard
times, and poverty put into the street not only the circus but also
trade and manufacturing. There was a multitude of peddlers selling combs
and mirrors, and one often heard the bells of the knife grinders and
their cry, "Pots soldered!" And there were Gypsy women who told
fortunes, and out-and-out beggars who had nothing to sell, only their
misery. All these figures were to me a natural part of the city -- as if
it could not be otherwise.

Of the talking films I really remember only the ones with monsters: King
Kong, the four-story ape who fell in love with a lady, climbed a
skyscraper, grabbed her through a window, removed her clothes, then held
her in his hand like a banana. And the Mummy, the Black Room, the
Werewolf. In The Mummy, Boris Karloff, playing the mummy, put his hand
on the arm of the young Egyptologist; that five-fingered ruin straight
from the grave was terrible, a masterpiece of makeup. Karloff was
incomparable in the role of spastic corpses (Frankenstein and Son of
Frankenstein). The films somehow went in families, because right after
that I saw Son of King Kong. A noble ape, friendly toward humans on a
volcanic island, when the ocean swallows the island, holds the heroes
above water in his hand until a ship comes, but the ape himself, after
his good deed, sinks with bubbles to the bottom.

In the theater I had the unpleasant habit of jabbing my father with an
elbow during the more gripping scenes, and in certain films I would hit
him nonstop. Reprimands didn't help; this was stronger than I was. The
more afraid I got, the more I liked it; the less afraid, the less I
liked it. Why we enjoy being frightened (within reason) is a mystery,
and I have no explanation for it.

Like every Lvov child, I visited the Raclawicka Panorama, a great
attraction. The entrance itself put you in an elevated mood, because you
walked through a dim place and after a flight of stairs came out on a
bridge that was exactly like being suspended in the gondola of a giant
motionless balloon. From this bridge you saw the panorama of a battle as
real as life, and there was a lot of argument about where the authentic
fence (with jugs set on poles) ended and the painting of the fence
began. At that time I had no problem with the naturalistic school of
art. I liked going to the theater early, before the enormous metal
curtain painted by Siemiradzki went up, there were so many entertaining
things depicted on it. Our Grand Theater seemed to me an incredibly
luxurious place, comme il faut, in the best taste, with its red velvet
upholstery, the many floors, the candelabras, the smoking room, and --
last but not least -- the buffet, where my father would buy my mother
and me pieces of thinly sliced ham. I don't recall what outstanding
dramatic works I saw there but remember perfectly that a piece of ham
cost fifty groszy.

I was growing civilized, to the best of my ability, yet deep within I
was on the side of all those forces against which civilization
struggles. Proof of this: my reaction to severe winters and other, more
temporary, disasters. Lvov weather was mild; a winter storm there was
virtually unknown. But in 1930, I believe, with the sky as clear as a
blue iceberg, the temperature fell to twenty-six below; the price of
fuel soared; huddled children ran after every coal wagon, waiting for a
piece to drop off. When my father and I went for a walk -- I wrapped to
a ridiculous degree in thick felts and earmuffs -- we would pass several
large iron baskets in which was burning coal provided by the city, and
around each basket some of the frozen warmed themselves a little. This
all seemed wonderful to me, and I hoped even more for catastrophic
changes when the snowstorm came. I hoped that the snow would bury our
house, that all the trams and automobiles would stop, that I would be
able to step from our third-floor balcony right into a street that was a
canyon of ice. Similarly, when there was a rare electrical outage, I
would help search for candles with reverence, would carry their
tentative, unsteady light through the house, which had become suddenly
blind and mysteriously spacious. And how sad I was when the vulgar light
bulbs came on again, ending the sweet magic of that medieval dark!

 

 

As much as I have spoken about the events that filled my childhood, I
still feel I have not discharged the debt I owe them. The "laying of the
psyche's foundation" is how I would name that first gathering of
experience from commerce with the world, and in time it is revealed to
be unexchangeable with any other. Because of this "foundation" you can
be a materialist and atheist twenty times over and still feel a stirring
in your gut when you hear organ music or the ringing of bells -- while
the voice of the muezzin calling the faithful to prayer may be
attractive and exotic but remains foreign to you. Indeed, this is the
initiation into the concrete shape of your culture, which is more
enduring than any system of faith, because you can know perfectly well
that there are different kinds of cemeteries in the world, but the
"real" cemetery will always be the one with tombstones hidden in wild
thyme and crosses of stone and birch tilted at angles as if pushed by
the wind. But the laying of the psyche's foundation is also the
establishing of the most tender ties, because they are the first, with
the prosaic products of civilization. For what poetry, really, inhered
in the long Haberbusch beer wagons, their kegs secured by hooks, their
heavy draft horses glossy from oats? Or in the old automobiles that,
climbing Cadet or Stryjska Street, groaned and shuddered so, you not
only felt their desperate effort but had to assist them by exerting all
your will? Those wrecks demanded your constant attention, sympathy, I
would even say acts of charity, which today's cars, designed to conceal
proudly from their drivers the extent of their effort, neither ask of us
nor require. Those old vehicles, now antiques, were by their very
undependability true individuals.

I remember my introduction to the automotive art. A year before I
graduated, I was given an instructor of few words who looked as if he
subsisted entirely on black oil. The first lesson was how to crank the
motor, and, since motors kicked like restive horses, he began by showing
me how to hold the handle so a sudden kick wouldn't break my wrist. And
when I finally sat on the leather seat, which stank of gasoline, the man
told me -- and in that moment he resembled Captain Nemo when he
commanded the Nautilus through the terrifying Arabian Tunnel -- to put
the car in first and drive full speed toward the brick wall of the
courtyard. Deliriously faint with fear, I obeyed, and with the mad rush
of a charging soldier we made for the red wall. A meter from it, my
preceptor used his own separate brake. In those days the synchronization
of gears was considered an unhealthy debauchery thought up by foreign
fops; the ignition was done by hand, the horn was a rubber bulb like an
enema syringe, and to change a tire you needed the strength of Hercules.

But the domestic area of life, too, not yet touched by the bacillus of
indolent automation, presented itself to me in the full wealth of its
liturgical schedule. I have already mentioned the cataclysm of Laundry
Day, which was divided into the soapsuds-and-steam phase, the
backbreaking scrubbing-in-tubs phase, and finally the wringing phase,
which shook the whole house with wooden clatter. And the marathons run
in place, on brushes, to turn the floor into a mirror. And the ironing
in a cloud of fumes, when the ironing woman would keep running to the
porch and waving the iron to make the coals burn, and sparks would fly
from the half-moon slits in the sides as if from the belly of a
locomotive. And the periodic visits of the seamstress, who rattled on
the machine from morning till night, while I made off with scraps of
cloth because I wasn't supposed to. And the cooking of the jam and my
persistent request to be promoted to collect -- with a large wooden
spoon -- the froth from the volcanic pool of raspberry. The froth
belonged on a plate, according to my mother, but my clever design was
for it to end up instead in my salivating mouth. The rational purpose of
all this hard labor was unimportant. Its primitive nature indeed
consumed an enormous amount of time and strength -- but because of that
primitive nature my childhood was given an apprenticeship in forces
fundamentally disobedient. When sparks burned black holes in clothing or
the jam in the cupboard turned to sugar or went moldy, I learned about
the stubbornness of an only half-tamed Nature, which bubbled on the
stove and blazed in the oven. And even if nothing catastrophic happened,
the house was changed, and I lived now in proximity to doom, seeing how
careful one had to be with the harnessing of processes trapped in pots
and tubs, unpredictable processes, like sailing on an unknown sea. The
power that lay in yellowing grandmother-recipes was summoned so that the
laundry could be a pretty bluish white, and so that the fruit could keep
its shape while the syrup it swam in took on the color of old wine. But
sometimes experience was not enough. Nothing was sure or automatic; it
was always married to risk. The roses were kept in baskets, and the
whitish tip of each petal was removed with small scissors, and then
there was more pre-jam activity, the Danaidean froth and the
magic-more-than-chemistry of sterilizing the glass, until finally this
mountain of labor produced a row of labeled jars that turned the
cupboard into a glorious museum. So I understand perfectly the mixture
of contempt and fear in the breast of those housekeepers of yore (where
are they today?) when they learned that industry could equal them in the
preparation of compotes and jams. True, one would have to be mad to want
to return to a time of drudgery. And yet the landscape of those labors,
labors eaten by doubt and carried out with heroic determination worthy
of a better cause, has fused with my memories of school, and its passing
also means the loss of a bitter-tasting but valuable quality, because we
dealt then with imperfect objects and it was precisely their
imperfection that made us concerned about them -- and is not such
concern often the source of an attachment similar to love? Therefore, in
that distant time, an out-of-town excursion was not an escape from
modern conveniences, not a playful making-difficult of existence, but,
rather, the exchange of one type of work for another. Meanwhile, the old
folks looked upon the technological novelties with indignation and spoke
of their own youth -- harder and therefore healthier -- which was of
course ignored.

 

 

As one goes through childhood illnesses, I went through various manias
-- manias more or less typical of the age or period. I collected
Anglaces -- flags of different countries in the chocolates of that name.
Then little photographs of faraway cities, in Suchard chocolates,
accumulating enough for the company to give me a stereoscope to view
them. I collected stamps, but only for appearances, as I said before.
Collecting for its own sake somehow never interested me. My father tried
to get me to save groszy, for this purpose buying a clay piggy bank. The
first I broke open, the second I plundered with the aid of a knife.
After that, my father brought home a strongbox from the Savings Bank.
One could put coins in it but not take them out; only the bank, where I
had my own little book, could do that. This, in theory; but after
examining the mechanism, I discovered that by shaking the box upside
down for a very long time I could make it spit out a zloty or two, which
eventually led to its complete emptying. My father gave up trying to
teach me to save. And yet I was in great need of money. Nobody was
giving away wires for induction coils or tinfoil for condensers and
Leyden jars, or glue, or rubber bands for slingshots. And halvah, which
was at the top of the list and which I needed a lot of, was quite
expensive. Also cutouts. There were wonderful things then to cut out and
paste, not only ordinary tanks and planes, but also gas masks that you
could wear until they fell apart from saliva and breathing through the
holes of the paper canister.

And balloons. "Live" balloons, not the kind they have today. The ones I
first got were attached to sticks, like pinwheels, the sticks in turn
embedded in a raw potato to hold them. They were sold by a vendor in
front of the University, but the University then was still called
Parliament, perhaps out of inertia, from the Austrian time, when the
building housed the Galician parliament. The little balloons came in
many colors, and later had hemp strings and were filled with gas. For me
there was something fascinating and at the same time sad about them. You
couldn't let a balloon go; it would take off into the sky. I remember
the wails of children when this happened to them in the Jesuit Garden.
But a balloon wasn't happy in a house, either; it would rise to the
ceiling and stay there, stubborn, stupidly and desperately butting it
with its inflated head. But the next morning was worse, when I would
find the balloon dying. In the course of a single night it grew
wrinkled, feeble, drawn, miserable, not having enough strength now even
to jump to the ceiling. It barely lifted itself above the floor,
pathetically dragging its string here and there behind it. My strange
partiality to balloons remained with me for many years. I bought them
and hid them, afraid people would laugh at me. I pretended to fit them
with gondolas, to make zeppelins out of them, but that was
self-deception. I needed their brief companionship, their one-day
existence, a kind of memento mori demonstrating the transience of all
worldly things. There were also balloons filled with air instead of gas,
on flexible copper wires, but these were dead, stillborn imitations,
pretending to be what they were not, and I had nothing but contempt for
them. Not taking the risk of reality, they were good only for fools. I
would have nothing to do with them.

There was something I collected for its own sake, and persistently, for
a long time: electrical-mechanical junk. To this day I have a special
feeling for broken bells, alarm clocks, old radio coils, telephone
speakers, and in general for objects derailed, worn out, abandoned, and
which are given for the last time a chance to exist, with a pitiful
vestige of respectability, at a flea market behind a theater. I went to
ours often, a little like a philanthropist visiting a slum, or an animal
lover secretly feeding the thinnest dogs or cats. I was a patron for old
spark plugs, and bought dilapidated car magnetos, nuts, utterly useless
commutators, fragments of unknown devices, and carried them home and hid
them in shoe boxes, in drawers, wherever I could, even above the books
on the highest shelf (I now had my own bookcase). Occasionally I would
take them out and dust them off, turn a handle to make a mechanism
happy, then put them carefully back. I don't know why I did this. Had
someone asked me, no doubt I would have answered immediately that this
thing or that might prove useful in some project -- but that was not the
whole truth, and I knew it.

Beyond the Eastern Fair lay what I thought was one of the most beautiful
places in the world -- the Amusement Park. It had carousels, a
small-gauge railway, a haunted house, a fun house, and even better
things. For example, a leather dummy you could punch in the mouth, with
a meter that measured how hard you hit. Or a flea circus in which the
little creatures were forced to pull tiny carts and carriages. Or
mysterious tents -- in one, when my father and I entered, an unusually
broad lady undressed, not for striptease purposes but to show us the
wealth of her tattoos. My father grew uneasy when she revealed the
interesting scenes on her belly, but when she went lower, I got to see
only the edge of a novel landscape, because he forcibly pulled me
outside. At a certain place was a stand separated from the people by a
barrier. Behind the barrier -- a long, low table covered with
chocolates, boxes of candy. The idea was to throw a coin at these
prizes; if the coin landed on a prize, it became the property of the
lucky player. I quickly noticed that the larger boxes of chocolates had
slightly convex lids and in addition were covered with slippery
cellophane, so that the coin always slid to the table. But what are we
given a brain for? At home I made a testing range out of books and
pencil cases on the floor, and soon taught myself how to throw a coin so
that it would land vertically and not bounce or skid. Then I calmly went
to the Amusement Park. I won a big box of chocolates, but was almost
immediately approached by a man with impressive shoulders who hissed
into my ear, "Beat it, you little shit!" I wisely took his advice -- and
at home the chocolates turned out to be inedible, either moldy or
rock-hard with age.

As can be seen from these little anecdotes, the years passed but some of
my interests resisted the flow of time. I still loved Piasecki's halvah,
and Wedel's too (in little slate boxes), moreover I discovered a candy
store near the Grand Theater, the Yugoslavia, which had the best treats
of the East in Lvov: Turkish delight, baklava, exotic nougats, a kvass
made from bread, and many other good things. At that time, note, I
weighed several kilograms more than I do today.

I spoke of the Eastern Fair. I loved to walk there when the place was
empty and no one was around. The great pavilions with dirty windows
looked strange then, and my favorite spot was the big semicircle made by
the longest pavilion, half of which embraced the Baczewski pavilion (the
one covered with bottles of liquor). Standing under Baczewski Tower, one
could awaken the echo that slept in that space; a clap of the hands, if
strong enough, would be repeated four, five, even six times, and the
same for a shout. A remarkably long time passed between these weaker and
weaker returns of the voice, which seemed to come from an increasing
distance and with an increasing effort. On cold, clear autumn days I
would stand and listen to the dying throes of my echo, which held both
mystery and sorrow, and though of course I knew about the principle of
reflected sound waves, that had nothing to do with the special charm of
the place.

It was three years before the war that I encountered for the first time,
suddenly and close up, Hitlerite Germans. A red flag with a swastika
appeared on one of the pavilions, and inside were many interesting
machines and, on special display, tanks halfway between toys and models
-- faithful copies, the armor with lizard spots, the tracks, the
turrets, and all the guns. The Wehrmacht emblem was proudly painted on
them, in miniature, and I would soon see it again in life-size
actuality, on the steel plates of the same Mark IV tanks. But at the
time they were only toys, though I knew a little about the Nazis, and
even then, in those toys that delighted the eye, there was something
portentous, ominous, though the reduction of scale pretended innocence.
The pretty tanks had a slight repugnance about them, as if they were not
only and simply themselves, as if something would be hatching or growing
from them. But I am not entirely sure of this. Later events may have
thrown a kind of pre-storm light backward and put a tinge of evil on
what was purely childlike.

 

 

 

CHAPTER

6

 

It is time now to speak about what so far I have only hinted at: the
activities -- special, intense, and above all personal -- to which I
devoted myself both in school and at home. That I could accomplish so
much (and the amount of that labor will become evident in a moment)
astonishes me today, when there is usually not time enough for anything.
Time evidently is more stretchable when we are young, and with
appropriately focused effort it can be expanded to make additional room,
like the pockets of my school uniform, in which (in keeping with
tradition) I carried more than their prosaic dimensions allowed. Or can
it be that space itself favors children? Surely that is impossible, and
yet my pockets held rolls of string (for sailor's knots and
emergencies), a collection of favorite screws, a penknife, erasers that
disappeared (did I eat them?), a small brass chain from a toilet,
spools, rubber bands, a protractor, a small compass (not so much for
geometrical purposes as to be used against fat Z., who sat in front of
me), a vial filled with crushed match heads (a poison, also an
explosive), a magnifying glass turned cloudy from scratches, an
exhausted wallet, various treasures provided by nature according to the
season (acorns, chestnuts), half a yo-yo (useless but somehow valuable),
a small puzzle with movable squares, called the Fifteen, another puzzle
with three pigs (a game of dexterity, under a round glass), not to
mention the entire contents of my desk, which I took with me from home
to school and from school to home. This -- and I don't know how or when
I got the original idea -- was for making identification papers.

I worked during class, under the pretense of taking notes, behind my
open notebook raised a little with my left hand -- worked calmly, on a
large scale, and solely for myself, showing nothing of it to anyone. I
skip over my period of apprenticeship and proceed to the mastery I
achieved in my second and third years at the gymnasium. First I would
cut small sheets of paper from a notebook -- the paper had to be glossy
-- and these were folded in two to make a booklet, which I bound using a
special method. The number 560 on our school badges was made of tiny
spirals of hair-thin silver thread, and that is what I sewed the spine
with. After accumulating a number of booklets of different sizes, which
was important, I gave them covers made of the finest materials: bristol,
drawing paper, and I encased certain special booklets in high-quality
cardboard cut from the covers of class exercise books. When the recess
bell rang, I hid all this in my bag, and in the next class began the
slow, precise work of filling the empty pages. I used ink, India ink,
colored pencils, and coins pressed as stamps in the appropriate places.

What kind of identity papers were these? All kinds -- conferring
authority over a certain territory, with limitations, and documents of
empowerment, and titles, and licenses and warrants, and on the longer
pages I handprinted various checks and payable-to-bearer certificates
for kilograms of ore, usually platinum and gold, and vouchers for
precious gems. I made passports for emperors and monarchs, assigned to
them dignitaries, chancellors, each of whom could produce papers at a
moment's notice, and I fashioned meticulous coats of arms and produced
special passes with validations and authorizations, and since I had
plenty of time, this legitimizing seemed to have no end. I began
bringing to school old postage stamps, which I modified to make seals,
creating a hierarchy of them, from the little triangulars through the
rectangulars to the highest -- top-secret, perfect circles with mystic
signs in the middle that would make anyone fall to his knees. Developing
a taste for this labor, I issued permits for the collecting of diamonds
as big as human heads, and to the permits I appended riders, and to the
riders, codicils, rising ever higher in the realm of power and
authority, until the only valid documents were in code and protected by
a system of exacting passwords and symbols. Certain papers even had
their own decoding booklets, their meaning was so awesome; without the
booklets they were only numbered pages covered with incomprehensible
calligraphy.

I read a story somewhere at that time, and it made a great impression on
me. It was a tale about an expedition into the heart of Africa. The
explorers, crossing mountains and jungles, encountered an unknown tribe
of savages who knew a terrible word, to be uttered only in extremis, for
whoever heard it turned into a mound of jelly about a meter high. The
mounds were described in detail, also the simple stratagem used by the
savages so they would not turn into jelly themselves: when screaming the
transmuting word, they put their fingers in their ears. I remembered
this dreadful word, and did not have the courage at first to say it out
loud, impressed by the fate of one scientist, an unbeliever, who laughed
at the account given by the only surviving member of the expedition, and
shouted it -- with tragic, gelatinous consequences. The word capable of
changing a man into an aspic was ämälän.

Considering this story from the vantage point of today, I wonder if the
author's intention was not humorous. If so, the humor failed to reach
me. To be sure, I did not believe the story was true; yet it left me
with the uneasy feeling that there were words that could somehow cause
fatal results. I reasoned: If certain sounds could put a person into a
hypnotic trance, why couldn't some special combination of sounds have an
even stronger effect, not through magic but through the influence of
waves acting in the air on the ear. . . and so on.

Ämälän clearly needed to be incorporated into the sphere of
authorization, where I had now become an expert. It inspired many
passwords. Since I was not a bad student, no one looked into my book
bag, books, or notebooks -- a good thing, because dozens of tiny
booklets would have been discovered, some filled with writing, some
blank, and there were experimental samples, too, in which I tried,
unfortunately without success, to increase the eloquence of the
documents with watermarks. My lust for realistic detail was not
satisfied in that case, despite innumerable attempts.

I was building a kingdom of universal permission, universal power, but
such defining words did not appear in the course of my creative effort.
Following my bureaucratic instinct, I rightly mistrusted transcendent
ideas, sticking to the system of centimeters-grams-seconds, that is, I
always specified in respectable units of measurement what the bearer
could do. As for the blank booklets, each had a serial number,
certifying signatures, and notarizing seals placed at the very bottom,
so they wouldn't be invalidated by a paper blemish or an error in
positioning. Naturally all the blank pages also had a perforated line so
they could be torn from the booklet and presented. After much trial and
error I accomplished this with a small toothed wheel taken from an alarm
clock and always kept in my pencil case, which also contained one of my
father's razor blades, for cutting pages. More than once I accidentally
cut into my desk as well, but somehow it wasn't noticed.

It may seem strange that I never showed my friends these invoices for
sacks of rubies and deeds to empires overseas. But my friends might have
laughed, and this was no laughing matter to me. What I probably felt --
without knowing it -- was the fear and shame of an artist asked to
explain his work in no-nonsense terms: What exactly is this and what
purpose does it serve? To have answered that it was only for amusement
would have been a lie, at least partly, because more was involved. What
more? To this day I don't know, but I was right nevertheless. People
nowadays complain about the general decline of art, the lack of ideas,
the shallowness, frivolous experimentation, ephemeral fashion. We feel
this particularly in the presence of the continuing power of works of
the past, the cathedrals of Florence and Siena, the mysteries of ancient
Chinese theater, the African gods cured with smoke. We leave an exhibit
of Paleolithic art or the Sistine Chapel and wonder what happened to the
human spirit, why it lost its capacity to focus, erupt, command like an
elemental force, compelling acceptance as trees do, clouds, the bodies
of animals and men. They tell us that artists have ceased to be a
lightning rod that catches and accumulates energy from above. They tell
us that art has been killed by the possibility of unlimited choice, the
knowledge that conventions are but conventions -- he who knows it is
possible to write or paint in any style and on any subject will produce
nothing great. In his freedom he finds the grave of his talent.

Consider the photograph of astronauts leaving their ship in outer space.
How unsuited is the human body for infinity, how helpless it becomes,
showing its absurdity with every movement, bereft of the saving limits
and justifying resistance of ground, walls, ceiling. It is no accident
that the astronaut assumes the position of a fetus in the womb, bowing
the head, bending the knees, keeping the arms close to the body; it is
no accident that the tether connecting him to the ship resembles an
umbilical cord. We are buoyant, energetic, full of direction and purpose
only in the prison of gravity; it is in gravity's thrall only that our
body finds its sense, and every joint and nerve has use and therefore
beauty. Natural purpose, inevitability, the feeling that we are in the
presence of the only possible solution to a problem -- this is what
every great work of art evokes. The Lord God of Michelangelo, with thick
curly beard, folds of robe, and bare feet with veins showing, did not
come from the free play of the artist's mind. The painter had to work in
obedience to the literature of absolute dictates going back to Genesis.
A Michelangelo of today -- his soul made irresolute by skepticism, that
great stink of knowledge -- at every step encounters paradoxes,
dilemmas, absurdities, of which the Renaissance master never dreamed.
The toenails of the Lord God are short. If He has a body like a man's,
those nails should grow. And since He endures eternally, they should
have grown into snaking horns that go from naked toes to all the
galaxies, filling the sky with sweeping spirals of keratin. Could one,
should one paint such a thing? And if not, we are faced with the problem
of the Divine pedicure. The nails are short either by cutting or miracle
-- surely one who can stop the sun in its path can stop the growth of a
toenail. Both solutions are unacceptable: the first smacks of
barbershop, the second of blasphemy. No, the toenails must be short
without disquisition or analysis.

Here we have an imposed limitation that makes art possible, for art
answers the potentially endless series of questions with an act of
faith. The rigor of liturgy must of course be internalized, the burning
hair shirt put on voluntarily, the barrier embraced by an ardent heart
rather than enforced by the police. There are spiritual barriers and
police barriers, and if the latter do not inspire great works, it is
only because the policeman controls others and is not the functionary of
his own art, a worshiper of its rules and regulations. The command must
come from above, the limit must be given by revelation -- and accepted
without questions about proof or purpose, just as we do not question the
leaves, stars, or sand beneath our feet. Faith takes on a reality that
is completely inflexible, absolute; while the spirit -- only in such
chains, obedient, yet in its obedience attempting to express the world
and itself -- creates in the greatest freedom. This applies to all forms
of art marked by a great seriousness that rules out irony, distance,
humor -- for how can one make light of gravel, a bird's wing, the
motions of the sun and moon? Or take dance -- its freedom is an
illusion, the dancer submitting to the tyranny of the music, which
governs his every movement, and individual expression lies only in the
narrowest margin of interpretation.

True, there can be sublime limits outside religion, but then they have
to be given sacred status; one must believe they are inevitable and not
invented. The knowledge that something could be completely otherwise,
the rejection of inevitability in favor of an ocean of conscious
techniques, styles, devices, shackles the mind and hands with the
freedom of choice. The artist, like the astronaut in weightless space,
turns helplessly, with nothing to grab hold of.

In that early, bureaucratic phase of my creativity, I came close indeed
to the sacred wellspring of art. What the celestial Thrones, Dominions,
and Seraphim were for Michelangelo, documented authorization was for me.
One would be greatly mistaken to think that I was letting my imagination
run wild. I was a willing slave of the liturgy of officialdom, a petty
bureaucrat of Genesis, a chubby schoolboy transformed into a lowly clerk
of the Decalogue brought up to date by the administrative grace of Red
Tape. Today, in the gloomier, self-conscious stage of creativity, I
would no doubt take this theme to the comic absurd, issuing licenses for
galaxies to move and proofs of age for geological epochs. But back then,
as Michelangelo did not worry about toenails, I never asked by what
right the Law issued birth certificates to newborns, for in my innocence
I equated legal documentation with the Absolute -- and thus stood on the
threshold of art. Minding letter and seal and making sure the blank
forms were in order and the signatures correct, I was in preordained
harmony with authorization orthodoxy, to which all doubts and
hesitations and indeterminacy were completely foreign.

My first steps were small, uncertain, but taken in the right direction.
I never overreached my authority, despite the fact that, or perhaps
because, I did not know Whose instrument I was. Therefore I did not fill
in the names on the identity papers of kings and prime ministers; I left
empty places also for their photographs and signatures, and kept those
documents, marked "At the Request of Bearer," in a special compartment
of my book bag that was closed with two buttons, to make sure they did
not fall into the wrong hands. In matters dealing with the treasury I
was especially careful to nip in the bud any possibility of fraud or
embezzlement. I specified the sums, quantities, purchasing power of the
coins at my disposal, and from the uncertain value of generalized gold
switched to bricks, bars, ingots (my vouchers gave a precise description
of the ingot, which I standardized, using my physics textbook; my model
was the platinum-indium bar kept in Sèvres, near Paris, which served as
the measure of one meter), and I even gave the dimensions for nuggets,
as described in the books of Karl May and Jack London, to be paid in
leather bags tied with a lasso cut into suitable pieces. Obtaining the
necessary information from Professor Wyrobek's Marvels of Nature, I
permitted the disbursement of rubies, spinels, chalcedonies,
chrysoprases, malachites, and opals, listing on detachable stubs the
grade of the gem, the cut, the carats, the number ordered, and I also
made booklets of special bonus coupons -- which led to a problem. Was it
proper, for example, to give someone, say, a platinum dish through
official channels? My bureaucratic instinct said no, that words like
"give" or "gift" were inappropriate. "Disburse," "allocate," "deliver"
were all right. Also, with a gold chain, the worst someone could do was
wear it, whereas a dish, even of platinum, someone could actually eat
off it -- a prospect offensive to a clerk's cut-and-dried mind. Oh, it
was not lust for material things that moved me to shower pearls and rain
emeralds (but counted to the drop); payment for services rendered was
simply an inescapable part of the world I had created. And I issued
special passes, also according to a hierarchy -- for the Outer Gate, the
Middle Gate, the First, Second, and Third Doors -- with stubs to be torn
off by guards. The interior halls and passageways were heavily guarded,
and their names were known to the lower echelons; the next, more
interior, were known only by code; and slowly a shape began to emerge
from nothingness, a Building, a Castle unbelievably High, with a Center
of Mystery never named, not even by the most daring -- the place where,
after passing through all the gates, halls, and guard stations, you
could finally receive full authorization!

It is easy to describe now, but how very far I was from the Center then,
inching my way as a conscientious and humble scribe, medieval
calligrapher, patient as an ant over my uppercase and lowercase letters,
not knowing how or when my incunabula would cross the line from booklet
to Book, or how or when the scribbler would become a writer, the copyist
an artist!

Acquiring a certain proficiency, even using red ink to make the Bureau
more versatile, I wisely remained conservative as to content. I was not
prodigal in the dispensing of kingdoms, nor did I allow, in any one
kingdom, too much power to accrue to any one individual. It would have
been easy to have a universal passport that opened every door of the
Castle and every treasury vault. But -- and let it be recorded to my
credit -- I never drew up such a document. I remember a booklet I
prepared for an inspector extraordinary and plenipotentiary. Each page,
colored with a different crayon, added to his powers. I could see him
presenting the first page, no doubt to lower functionaries, an ordinary
page with only two triangular seals. The gatekeepers reluctantly slide
back the bolts. Then, turning slightly, he produces the second page,
green, and now officers, seeing it, stiffen. And then onto the table in
the guardhouse are thrown the third and fourth pages, dazzling white,
with the round Great Seal, blood-red, and they stand at attention,
trembling, and salute as he proceeds to the Main Door, where the
Gatekeeper-General, who a moment before was inaccessibility personified,
in a uniform fairly dripping with gold, now is all asweat with official
zeal, and the sound of the lock opening blends with the tinkling of the
medals on his chest, and the old man is a statue at attention, his
gleaming sword aloft -- honoring not the person who crosses the
threshold but the paper the Emissary casually holds in his hand. How
delicious, the thought of that wonderful dealing out of safe-conducts,
those increasing doses of Perfectly Legal Power! No battle scene out of
Sienkiewicz, no thunder of cannon could ever match the rustle of the
Coupons of Power settling on the gray table within the gray walls of the
Castle! The magic hidden in the Great Seal -- even I could not fathom
it, for in the center lay a Sign Secret Unto Itself, that is, a Code
Without a Key, which meant that the bearer must be an Emissary of the
Unnameable!

Was he, then, an inspector sent by the Creator, an executor of the Lord
God Himself? I do not know. He came out of nowhere and, having done his
duty, would return to nowhere.

Did I actually imagine all this so artistically and precisely? Yes and
no. By giving authorizations, I also accepted their authority; thus
between myself and them arose ties and tensions that in turn pointed the
way for me to follow. I made up no stories, constructed no plots; they
came into being themselves, peopling the empty spaces in particular
documents. The papers were what drove the complex drama of the Bureau;
they were the sun around which moved, like planets, the thrones, guards,
minions. Thus I had to be always present, in every place and at every
moment, to supply in an emergency the proper form, without which the
matter at hand -- its country, its world -- would shrivel, fade, and
die. Bureaucracy didn't merely punctuate the action; it created it.

Consider how modern was this gymnasium discovery of mine. Ignorant of
the rules of writing, I strengthened the setting, the atmosphere, not
describing any person or scene directly. Everything placed in the drama
of the Bureau was placed only by implication, extrapolation: from
particular documents one could make inferences about the lives existing
beyond them, just as one inferred, from a branching shadow, the
existence of a tree, the sun, and the laws of optics. The antinovel of
the second half of the twentieth century focused solely on objects, but
my universal asceticism went further than the antinovel, because I wrote
-- exercising the ultimate self-restraint -- only blank forms! Doing
this, I jettisoned the old-fashioned background of landscape or
cityscape, and the psychology of characterization, and the traditional
twists and complications of plot, and all the verbal formulas of
literature, the tired tricks of clauses, modifiers, adverbs. I used no
structures, new or old, no archetypes, quoted no cogent thought or
pungent saying, sticking to my stamps, drawing pen, and toothed wheel,
with them getting to the heart of the matter every time -- because it
was through such total literary abstinence that I proved that an entire
world could be expressed by silence!

My bureaucratic imagination was such, that these papers could not be
arranged along a single time line, since certain periods (dynastic, for
example) had multiple versions, sometimes parallel, sometimes tangled,
and others were like archipelagoes in many dimensions. During math and
Latin classes, when the rigor of their discipline made it impossible for
me to do any work, I would pretend to listen but in my mind review the
authorizations to be issued that day, slowly savoring the kaleidoscope
they made, set in alternating rows along which I could build an endless
number of variations for any sequence of events.

But didn't I become lost in this vastness? After all, I kept no files,
following only the voice of red tape in my ear. I knew no path through
the paper labyrinth, but the point was to wander with panache. Errors
that occur once are merely clerical, unimportant, a speck on the
photograph of Existence, a tiny blemish on a faithful reproduction. But
a whole edifice of error, appropriately complex, can become a dwelling
for the soul, a seat of autonomous meanings, a structure less and less
dependent on prototypes, a version of things liberated from the dictates
of naturalism -- in short, a New and Opposing Edition of Reality. The
culmination of error is, of course, a philosophical system, that is, a
proposition of values for which it is worth living and dying. This is
the road upward, where misunderstanding becomes revelation, a pompous
lie an epic, violence done to logic poetry, and the obstinate
persistence in error the greatest fidelity of which man is capable.

I believe my paper odyssey in gymnasium met these conditions. I drew up
documents that were so stupid, their stupidity grew into perversion (as
when I gave the conspirators of a palace coup authorization to commit
regicide). Leaving behind all common sense, they acquired a lyrical
sense, for I mixed dynasties and shuffled torture chambers, treasuries,
staffs, and regulations, breaking the shackles of time and space, making
document contradict document, putting paragraphs at loggerheads,
canceling coronations, reversing births and executions; I was so
careless, I committed Crimen Laese Legitimationis, opening the door even
to apocalyptic expectations. True, such confusion was produced only by
the abstracted, inattentive hand that held the seal, but an alert
subject-recipient could have not only straightened out that mess but
also given it a different, diabolical interpretation: saying that these
were not accidental lapses but the seismic effects of secret battles,
that even within the Bureau itself there was not complete agreement,
that antagonistic factions there were locked in cruel struggle, that
certain offices were treacherously trying to undermine others, and that
even the highest of the high did not have full control over the Great
Seal, because the lower levels wrestled with them fiercely, constantly,
and this silent bureaucratic wrestling was in its hopeless
irrevocability like the eternal revolving of worlds in space. And
because I not only made errors but repeated myself often, two very
modern spirits assisted in my creation: Obscurity and Boredom.

But how can I expect -- someone asks -- such interpretive willingness to
be bestowed on a fat schoolboy's scribbling? Isn't the joke a bit
overstretched? My answer: In art, we too timidly pass over in silence
the absolute necessity of an audience's willingness to interpret. We
teach and are taught that a work of art is like a rake lying in the
dark. One who steps on it gets hit in the head, is dazzled with sudden
light, and it is the same with a brilliant work: the viewer is struck
with sudden, unexpected bliss. This noble lie is so deeply rooted that
when, a few years after the time described here, I had to flee the
Gestapo from an apartment that had been "blown," leaving behind, among
my belongings, a notebook of poems in longhand, I felt regret at the
loss sustained by our nation's culture but was also convinced that those
of my pursuers who knew Polish would be aesthetically bowled over.
Later, a little wiser, I blushed at this memory, but only because I
realized how awful my sonnets had been -- still not understanding that
the quality of the poetry was completely irrelevant in that situation.
This world of ours would look very different if Gestapo hearts could be
influenced by verse. Art compels no one; we are transported by it only
if we consent to be transported. Therefore the element of mutual
cheering in this, the praise purchasing praise, the tit-for-tat
endorsement, and therefore the fraud and collective prevarication --
Gombrowicz opened our eyes to that.

But there is more to it, and on a higher level: more to the talent of
reading. Any child can read the virtuous tale of Cinderella, but,
without sophistication and Freud, how will you see it as a ballet of
perversion created by a sadist for masochists? Nowadays to deny that
obscenity lies concealed in fairy tales only shows your naiveté. Next
you will say that the detective in Robbe-Grillet's Erasers was a
bungler, for that is the work's literal text, and that Hamlet's
inconsistent behavior came from Shakespeare's incorporating into the
play too many different elements from previous versions. The modern
scientist points to the sky, where the stars are scattered randomly, and
yet everyone knows that they form the zodiac shapes of gods, animals,
and people. For in general we can ennoble a work or call it shallow,
depending on the backdrop we give it on the stage of our mind as we
read. Nor is it a passive backdrop, but a system of references, where a
broken stick may suggest a stylized branch of ancient Japan, and a
notched stone a sculpture expressing the mood of our fragmented time.
Thus, coming upon an error, one could cry, "Inconsistency!" or,
conversely, "Brilliant dissonance!" or, "The abyss, depicted by the
intentional cracking of the shell of logic!" Of course not everyone can
affix an entirely new referential backdrop to a work of art; there are
experts for that, who themselves are often at a loss -- which gives rise
to debates, feuds, and conferences. And the artists don't help, becoming
less explicit and more cryptic about their work to make it semantically
richer. Admittedly, town hall meetings and councils of elders will not
be very impressed with the creative efforts of a gymnasium student, but
if we know the mechanism of a phenomenon, and the phenomenon is the
same, we can at least ask for equal treatment -- and not merely in our
own interest, for we do suspect that in the depths of dusty libraries
lie many undiscovered Musils and Canettis, many works that will never
awake to eminence if we do not help them by presenting their case.

But at the age of twelve I did not know all this. Scrupulous about
limiting power, even sovereign power, and remaining anonymous in my
antlike toil, I disappeared in the work I created, never went to
extremes, never permitted paper inflation, and thanks to this constant
modesty was able to join sacred and realistic. Sacred, because I took as
my axiom that in the Beginning was Authorization; realistic, because my
activity was suggested by the Spirit of the Time itself. And if I was
ever beckoned by an Almighty License, a Document of Documents heavy with
seals like red wax suns and with garlands of multicolored cords,
conceived in the Summis Auspicis of Chaos, where clauses and files still
swirled in a state free of the Office Ladder (which in another context
became the Ladder to Heaven), I put that temptation from me, that
sacrilege, the greedy desire to get to the Heart all at once, as if I
sensed that that would be futile, the attempt doomed to failure. It was
only through the closest attention to detail -- the invoice for a
hundred sacks of coarse gold sand payable to bearer (but only of the
Fifth Order), the booklet sewn with silver thread for the Executioner,
Category II -- it was only by joining Being and Obligation on my desk,
under cover of a textbook, that I was able to raise bureaucracy, by its
nature a lifeless and sterile thing, to the level of art. On wings of
authorization I soared above the gray vale of tears, and as I flew I
plucked from nonexistence whole worlds with the stroke of a pen and the
touch of a cogged wheel from an alarm clock. Not even thirteen, I wedded
literature and graphics (both necessary for making documents) to create
a new movement. Authorizationism -- that is, sacrobureaucratic art under
the double patronage, metaphysical, allusional, of Saint Peter and the
Policeman in one person, because authorizing documents are made, after
all, to be shown to someone.

Not that I believed my work -- surely it was only a game I played during
history class, geography, and even, oh shame, Polish, and yet. . . I
never showed those papers of mine to anybody, and such was my state of
mind that, had I found on the street an authorization to dig up treasure
on Sand Mountain, I would have been overjoyed -- but not surprised. . .
Because, and this is difficult for me to express, although I knew I was
not producing True Documents, at the same time I felt that,
nevertheless, some flicker of truth lay in them. That this was not all
nonsense, though at the same time it was -- but nonsense only literally.
I was well aware that no one would honor my vouchers for pails of
rubies, that they were not worth a grosz, but if I had not created that
kind of value, perhaps I had created another. What kind? A value that
was intrinsic, like the cathedrals of Orvieto and Siena, which an
atheist attempts to diminish, to dismiss, saying they are very large
buildings with black and white stripes like pajamas. It was much easier,
of course, to laugh at my cathedral, which was not even material, which
existed not as a thing but as a metaphor -- or, as a modern
cyberneticist might put it, as an analog model of multivalent relations,
of polysemy. Feeling that no one would understand what I myself couldn't
put into words, that only my infantilism would be seen, I kept silent
and preserved the secret.

The work of that period has unfortunately been lost, including the most
valuable, the decree in the matter of Physical Education, stamped with a
two-groszy coin (of the rare series of Lesser Seals) and reinforced by a
piece of yellow shoelace during recess. Also lost, the permit to
Imprison Suspects, printed in Red Cipher with passwords using the Secret
Key, First Class (my knowledge of codes derived mainly from The
Adventures of the Good Soldier Schweik). The works were lost, but the
path remained, pointing, promising.

Since I did all this office work only at the gymnasium (at home I did
not have the patience to sit, whereas in class I had to), at home I was
free to read, and read a great deal. I read Buyno-Arctowa's Isle of
Sages, which was a kind of premonition of science fiction. Overworked as
I was, and therefore absentminded, I served as treasurer in the student
government and could never balance the account, so my father had to bail
me out with a zloty or two each month. Not that I was embezzling public
funds -- it was simply that groszy dues would get mixed up in my head
with the sacks of gold and diamonds I was disbursing, and that confusion
led to deficits.

Observing office hours like a professional bureaucrat, at home I would
not even glance at my authorizations. Between the tutor, the
Frenchwoman, and supper, I occupied myself with a completely different
form of creativity: inventions. In school, preoccupied with the Bureau,
I gave no thought to them, while at home, as at the turn of a switch,
all my thoughts moved in another direction. This did not trouble me. I
would have been hard put to say which of the two activities I regarded
as more important. I was like a man with two wives who, sincere and
devoted to each in turn, knows how to divide himself between them, for
everything has been arranged perfectly.

Going home, I knew where to buy wire, glue, paraffin, screws, sandpaper,
and when my allowance wasn't enough, I would either touch my uncle -- my
mother's brother and a physician like my father -- or concoct some
scheme. This uncle -- I called him by his first name, almost as if he
were a schoolmate -- had occasional fits of generosity, which didn't
please my parents. I often got a five-zloty piece from him, with
Pilsudski on it; I didn't put it in my horseshoe change purse but held
it, to be safe, in my fist. I remember walking through the city with the
sweaty coin in my hand and feeling like Harun al-Rashid incognito. My
eye, falling on the store windows, would instantly turn that piece of
silver into a hundred things on display; but, suddenly as hard and
miserly as a millionaire, I did not deign to do them the favor of a
purchase. I generally invested my wealth in inventions, and found out
that all real inventors do this, that inventions can consume a great sum
of money without a trace -- and without results.

As a bureaucrat I was tranquil, because passionate bureaucracy is
impossible; as an inventor I was not tranquil. The sacred flame of
technology blazed hot within me. I made bloody sacrifices to it, from
constantly bleeding, bandaged fingers, and was stubborn in defeat,
brokenhearted yet always reviving with new ideas, new hope. For a long
time I worked on an electric motor that resembled Watt's steam engine,
but instead of a piston and flywheel it had a coil whose magnetic field
sucked in an iron rod. A special circuit breaker sent current into the
winding. I later learned that this device had already been invented and
that such motors existed, or, rather, used to exist, for they were
inefficient and too slow. But that didn't matter. This was the first
time, I think, I showed my extraordinary tenacity, because I built and
rebuilt that prototype maybe fifty times before it finally moved. And
when it moved, an awkward thing of twisted metal scrounged from a
tinsmith who had his shop in our building, amid a confusion of wires,
oil stains, dead batteries, junk, hammers and pliers (the blood of
massacred toys still on them), I sat and watched the creaking, slow,
jerky rotations, the hesitating levers, the little sparks at the circuit
breaker. I watched, dirty, weary, and triumphant. If I boasted later,
demonstrating the motor to the household, I did only what any boy my age
would have done. But the important thing was that moment when it was
accomplished, the creative act realized, and there was nothing more for
me to do: the motor went, limping, until dusk, and I watched. A very
special kind of satisfaction it was, requiring no praise from others,
and not even witnesses. I needed no one, because it had come to pass.
Watt and Stephenson could not have experienced a greater happiness.

Of course, this feat did not suffice; I thirsted for new victories. For
a long time I worked on electrolysis, dropping all sorts of substances
into water, and not in the expectation that gold would someday appear on
the electrodes. I was not interested in gold but in the creation of a
substance that did not exist. I scraped brown, rust-red, and gray
powders from the electrodes and carefully put them in boxes. Concluding
finally that my data were insufficient, I returned to electrical
apparatuses, this time more systematically, using a thick German book
with Gothic print, Elektronisches Experimentierbuch. I had taken two
years of German in gymnasium but couldn't read the language -- that is,
couldn't understand it, not a single sentence. So I had to tackle the
text with a dictionary, a little like Champollion and Egyptian
hieroglyphics. It was slow going but produced results, because I finally
read that book cover to cover and built a Wimshurst machine and a
Ruhmkorff coil -- for some reason I loved powerful electrical
discharges. I was by nature slovenly, extremely impatient, and careless,
which makes it all the more surprising that I was capable of so much
self-discipline and mulish repetition in the face of discouragement.
Twice I went through several months of murderous toil and cut fingers
and bruised knuckles and dirty bandages, wrapping several kilometers of
inductor wire onto small paper bobbins that I'd glued, covering each
layer with paraffin, putting wax paper in between, and it was worse with
the electrostatic machine, because I couldn't get the right material for
its disks. First I tried old gramophone records from a motion-picture
theater, one-sided and with a diameter of maybe sixty centimeters, but
they turned out to be worthless. Finally I obtained some plates from a
very old and broken Wimshurst machine. With a fretsaw I cut these down
to smaller plates, discarding the ebonite at the edges, which was green
with age, and turned them on a lathe, in a foul cloud of black dust that
got into my hair, eyes, teeth, fingernails. At last the machine was
built. It is funny that at the same time I was never good with my hands;
whatever I made in shop at school was crooked, wobbly, not properly
finished, and got a poor grade.

Next I constructed a Tesla transformer, and delighted in the unearthly
glow of the Geissler tubes in a high-voltage field. At that time the
little store in Hausmann's Alley that sold scientific supplies became
the place I besieged. I remember that a Wimshurst machine, small but
much better than mine, cost ninety zlotys, the price of a suit. Years
later, in my first year at medical school, the first money I ever
received in my life -- a stipend for the Medical Institute (this was
1940) -- I blew entirely on Geissler tubes. My Wimshurst machine was
still working. It disappeared only after the outbreak of war in 1941.

I was a theorist, too, having a pile of notebooks in which I recorded my
inventions, with "blueprints." I remember some of them. There was a
device for cutting corn kernels in such a way that the cooked hulls
remained on the cob; an airplane shaped like a parabolic mirror so that,
flying above the clouds, it could collect the sun's rays and convert
them to steam that drove a turbine that drove a propeller; a bicycle
without pedals, which you rode like a horse, the seat acting as a piston
that turned a toothed pivot that turned the wheels. Another kind of
bicycle had a front-wheel drive, where the handlebars were pumped like
bellows and connected by rods to a camshaft, as in a locomotive. And a
car that used cigarette-lighter flints for spark plugs. And an
electromagnetic cannon -- I actually built a small model, only to learn
that someone had thought of that long before me. And an oar in the shape
of an umbrella, which under the influence of the resistance of the water
alternately opened and closed. My greatest invention was the
sun-and-planet gear -- like many of my inventions, unoriginal -- I
didn't even know its name -- but at least the thing was real and is used
even today. And of course there were perpetual-motion machines -- I
thought up a dozen of those. I had notebooks devoted entirely to
automobiles. One idea, for example, was to have a small three-cylinder
engine, like those in planes, set in each wheel. (A variant of that was
actually used, but with electric motors.) I also recall an idea for a
two-piston engine, and even a kind of rocket propelled by rhythmic
bursts in its combustion chamber. I thought about my rocket when I read
-- in 1944, or maybe 1945 -- of the German V-1. Obviously I'm not
claiming to have invented the V-1 before the Germans, but the principle
was similar.

In addition I designed various machines of war: a one-man tank, a flat
steel coffin on tracks with a machine gun and a motorcycle engine; a
tank-missile; tanks that moved on the principle of a screw instead of
treads; planes able to take off vertically. And a great many other
machines, big and small, filled my black notebooks as well as the
notebooks with marbled covers. I could draw well enough, but my
specifications were imaginary and all the numbers and details made up.

Meanwhile my library was growing, abundant now in popular-science books,
various Marvels of Nature and Secrets of the Universe. Other notebooks
were filling up, these with designs not of machines but of animals, for
I had taken over the reins of Evolution, serving as Chief Constructor. I
developed terrible predators based on dinosaurs, creatures with shields
and horns and serrated teeth, and for the longest time I tried to make
an animal that had a wheel instead of legs. I went about it rigorously,
beginning with a drawing of its skeleton, adapting bone and tendon to
elements taken from a locomotive.

Describing at length my engineering efforts, in the lower gymnasium, to
discover Americas already discovered, and telling of the great toil this
involved, I do not forget that it was all, after all, a game. I set
obstacles for myself, I measured my strength against my goals, which
sometimes were set too high, because I also suffered defeats -- for
example, when I tried to imitate Edison and build a phonograph. I used
every kind of needle, diaphragm, rolling pin, wax, paraffin, foil, and
though I screamed myself hoarse into the horn of one phonograph after
another, I never got a machine to respond with even the weakest squeak
of a recorded voice. But, I repeat, it was a game. I knew this at the
age of twelve, and today I agree with that twelve-year-old, though with
a few reservations. That destructive period in my life, when I would
take apart whatever fell into my hands, did not pass into the next,
constructive, period overnight; there was a transition, and that
transition, it seems to me now, is more interesting as a phenomenon than
either: a period of pretend work. In other words, for quite a while --
before my great feats of engineering -- I built radio apparatuses,
receivers and transmitters, that could not function, nor were they meant
to function. Put together from old spools of thread and burned-out tubes
and condensers and thick copper wire, provided with a great number of
impressive knobs and gauges mounted on little boards and set in empty
tea tins -- realistic copies of real radios -- if they did not satisfy
me, did not look serious enough, I would add to their importance by
inserting into that artful tangle a shiny piece of tin here, a specially
twisted spring there, until some instinct said that this was enough, the
pseudoradio had come up to my expectations. It was a game. I was
playing. Yet it is curious, the similarity between those constructions
and the things you find today in art exhibits. Was I ahead of my time in
art as well? Too nattering a thought, especially as I recall a recent
experience I had at a show of abstract sculpture.

The center of the exhibition was occupied by squat pretzel-like
antitorsos and antinudes; and collages (why not simply call them
cutouts?) of various types and materials hung on the walls. I passed
completely empty canvases on easels, canvases poked from behind in a few
places by pegs, so that the sheetlike surfaces were broken into
geometric shapes, and I passed gray-brown-green sackcloth forms in
frames, forms whose material the eye could recognize only very close up
-- shreds of netting stuck under mastic or glue, iron fillings, rubber
shells -- but at the next work I stopped. A quiet thing, as if the
artist had decided to choose the strategy of restraint: it had a
rectangular frame made of metal. About two-fifths up from the bottom
edge -- the proportion of the "golden section" -- was a carelessly
attached bar emphasizing the position, and above that line stretched a
barren field of metal old to the point of senility, with three nearly
equidistant holes at the center. The holes, drilled through, gaped into
space, each surrounded by a dark gray halo. Blinded stars, suns like
eyes put out! I wondered what technique the artist had used to dust
those openings so naturally with a pale ash that slowly blended into
nothingness, and I marveled at the skill with which he had annealed the
metal surface, for it was fused-smooth yet at the same time
bubbled-lumpy in places, as if from flame. I looked for the card with
the work's title and the artist's name, but there was none. Then,
blinking, I realized my mistake. The exhibit was in a large, beautifully
vaulted cellar, the artwork hung on unplastered walls, and here and
there, as is common in cellars, in recesses in the brick were the
registers of furnace ducts. I was standing in front of one of these, a
rusty vent with a twisted damper bar. Instantly the aesthetic light
emanating from that register to my eager eyes dimmed and was
extinguished; the thing, unmasked, humbled, became a banal piece of
metal over a flue, and I moved away hurriedly, embarrassed, to return to
the exhibit and put myself again in the frame of mind appropriate for
meeting the challenge of abstract art.

Thinking about this adventure, I concluded that there was no reason to
be ashamed. If anyone was to blame for that easy misunderstanding, it
was not I. I recall how a certain expert -- a true art lover, though
admittedly somewhat nearsighted -- at another exhibit stepped past a
multitude of lumps and lobes in stone gray and plaster-of-Paris white,
and proceeded quickly to a piece on a base right at the entrance. He was
drawn by its unusual color. It was a small, roundish piece with surfaces
woven rhythmically. He froze in mid-stride, winced, and slowly turned
away, because it was an ordinary challah, the creation of only a baker.
The woman operating the cash register had set it there while she went
out for tea.

What is going on with art, that it allows the possibility of such
amusing substitutions? Can it be that the role of purveyor of its
fashionable products is playable also by a chimney sweep, a baker, a
fantasizing child? The answer is not that simple. In the past an artist
produced things that were necessary socially; they were instruments,
albeit of a special kind, that helped the dead to reach eternity, spells
to be cast, prayers to be liturgically fleshed, the barren woman to
conceive, the hero to receive sacral distinction. The aesthetic
component of those instruments enhanced their function but was never
central, never an independent, nonutilitarian thing. An artist thus had
a definite place in the transcendental edifices of religion and
government. He was the engineer-performer of a theme, not its author,
for authorship was attributed to Revelation, to the Absolute. Hence the
strict limits we have spoken of so much; hence also the tautological
nature of ancient art, which never says anything new but repeats by
heart what is well known: Crucifixion, Annunciation, Assumption, the act
of procreation in priapic symbols, the struggle between Ormazd and
Ahriman. As for his personality, his unique genius, the artist smuggled
that, as it were, deep in the canvas or sculpture or altar, and the
greater the talent, the greater the ingenuity in manifesting itself
despite the need to submit to the liturgical recipe and remain in the
narrow margin of the permitted. Because the artist was able to move the
frozen dogma a little, to set it vibrating, to give it a resonance that
more or less reflected the contemporary real world; he was also able,
conversely, to conceal himself in the work through dissonances, discords
barely perceptible -- whose interpretation today may be altogether
wrong, since what to us is naive or even comical in the figures of early
Gothic saints, for example, may not have been at all naive or comical
for the people living then. I would love to have seen the face of one of
those artists when he was alone with his saint taking shape. The
smuggling of one's personality into a metaphysical dogma fascinates me,
because in many masterpieces I sense the active presence of the creator
-- a kind of unconscious sabotage or microscopic blasphemy, whose drop
of poison paradoxically strengthens the official, holy message. But that
era has passed, the house of metaphysical bondage has fallen under the
nudges of technology, and the artist now finds himself terribly free.
Instead of a decalogue of themes, an infinite world; instead of
revelation, a search; instead of commands, a choice. We have evolution:
the literal nude, the nude rough-hewn, a stone generalization of the
body, a geometrical hint of the body, a fragment, a piece chopped off, a
ruined torso or head, and finally someone in a dry riverbed selects a
rock out of a million around it, because of its particular shape, and
carries it to an art exhibit. And so one goes, nolens volens, from fate
as Omniscient Providence to fate as the theory of statistics -- a blind
boil of forces carving rocks in the current of a river. From a Conscious
Creator to creative randomness. From Necessity to Chance.

It is not only the artist who suffers from too much freedom; the public
is no better off. The game, then, is of creative attempts and thumbs up
or thumbs down. Above the global chessboard of such moves hovers the
sour, weary demon of uncertainty, and he cannot be driven off by all the
exorcisms of the experts. A famous painter exhibits six perfectly black
canvases. A joke, a challenge, or a valid idea? A refrigerator without a
door, on bicycle wheels, and painted with stripes -- is that acceptable?
A chair pierced by three knives -- is that art? But what do such
questions mean when there are shows, when there are viewers and buyers,
and critic-apologists, and in ten or twenty years the thing becomes
petrified in art-history textbooks as a movement past and irretrievable?
Uncertainty remains, however; hence works are not called by their names
but, instead, given interpretational hedges. These are, we hear, quests,
attempts, experiments. The future historian of twentieth-century art
will state, with a smile, that the period produced practically nothing
but proposed a great deal.

The artist, meanwhile, surrounded only by useful objects, exploits them.
Everything serves a purpose -- listening to music, shaving, moving from
one place to another, grinding flour or baking bread. One can roll a
millstone to a gallery, but the small degree of one's personal
contribution to that creative act is sadly apparent. One must do
something with the object, remove its function, so that what is left is
perforce pure expression, the unalloyed aesthetic. That is how "machines
for no purpose" come about. I, too, built them. Not as a trailblazer; as
a child. The contemporary artist thus attempts to become a child at the
heart of civilization, to recapture, in the child, lifesaving limits.
For only a child does not know doubt, does not know of the flood of
conventions -- his game alone is serious. But does the artist find what
he seeks in the child, safety from the bottomless pit of excessive
freedom? He longs to return to the beginning of beginnings, where work
was also play and also a creative act, where a deed was its own reward
and needed no reason or goal outside itself. Yes, this was the state in
which I made my pseudomachines. I built them because I needed them, and
I needed to build them. A perfectly closed circle -- like the ultimate
circle of a faith that says it is All -- but mine was natural because I
was only twelve. I did all that I was able, pursued no real goals, and
the only restrictions on me were imposed by nature and by my age. Unlike
the artist, I did not try to be a child. What else could I have been?

The poor artist, seeking limits in the child, cannot fit himself in the
child. True, it is a quiet, unconditional faith that pulls from a man
the words Credo quia absurdum est. And true, there is nothing more
absurd in our civilization, which is a pyramid of machines that serve
purposes, than a machine that serves none. But the absurdity really lies
in the fact that different paths lead to the same result. It is not good
for a challah or river rock or furnace register to be mistaken for a
work of art. It is not good when the photograph of a cross section of a
mineral, or the slide of a stained tissue specimen, or a virus colony
dusted with silver ions and seen through an electron microscope can be
placed among abstract canvases and be their equal. Not that I dislike
abstract paintings -- not at all; there are excellent ones -- yet even
better work can be found among laboratory slides, or on a blackened
strip of bark in a forest, where some white mold has embroidered its
biological rhythm.

The misfortune of modern art is not that it is an artificial construct.
Quite the contrary. Nature animate and inanimate is full of "abstract
compositions." The microbiologist, geologist, and mathematician know
them; they are present in the pseudomorphs of old dolerite, in the
structures of amoebas, in the veins of leaves, in clouds, in the
formations of eroded cliffs; and the two great creating-destroying
master artists in this field are Entropy and Enthalpy. He who does not
wish to compete with them (understanding, as few do, that in the end he
will lose), and seeks safety in a return to the sweet prehistoric, hides
in the child, in the primitive -- to no avail, because the child and the
Neanderthal acted earlier, and authentically.

But by what authority do I say all this? By none. You are free to
disagree with me, particularly as I have no new prison to propose, no
saving closure. And yes, I admit, alas, that I was a great trailblazer,
and my classmates were, too, even in elementary school, when we stirred
with a stick a puddle that had a drop of spilled gasoline in it,
creating brief but beautiful color studies. We were great if snot-nosed
primitivists, and my pseudopodia are to Calder's mobiles what Bosch is
to the surrealists. And what compositions we made, even before that, out
of a bowl of cream of wheat interspersed with spinach! Or, if you are
interested in conceptual performance art, may I remind you -- this time
with pride -- of the music box I urinated into? The twisted act of
filling a mechanism of clockwork harmony with a bodily fluid of low
regard -- is this not the clash between the Newtonian idea (the
clockwork notion of the heavenly spheres) and the principle of animal
decay? And is not the juxtaposition of Ideal and Excrement truly
avant-garde, the prophetic voice of catastrophic nihilism? At the tender
age of four I discredited the lifeless determinism of music by an
existential act, a blow struck for animal freedom, a slap in the face to
centuries of conformity, a spontaneous creation, perfectly useless hence
disinterested, pure. . .

One can go on and on. For all has turned out to be convention, language,
too, the alphabet, the rules of grammar and syntax, and if the field of
what is permissible widens enough, and if there can be an agreement of
sorts about meanings assigned to objects, then absolutely anything can
be expressed -- with any sign, symbol, thing, picture. You will be able
to place on exhibit severed fingers. Chairs that have, instead of a
back, the rib cage and spine of a human skeleton and legs of human bone
instead of wood. A giant onion, signifying the epistemology of cosmic
matter: the many -- and unending -- layers of the knowledge of it,
peeled off one by one, since there is no longer a monolithic Truth held
by society, and no garbage dump anywhere that with the right lighting
and frame does not make some clever, dark statement about civilization.
Because a darkening cloud has taken the place of Truth, a blurring of
information in which here and there individual works of art flicker with
their own sad light, longing irrationally to be free of their freedom.
But we have long digressed, our subject being not grown-up matters but a
child. Let us return to him.

 

 

 

CHAPTER

7

 

Little remains for me to describe. Meanwhile, a host of objects in the
house, and the streets I walked, which have not been mentioned, clamor
for attention. What is it about the objects and cobblestones surrounding
us in childhood that is so magical, so irreplaceable? Whence comes their
demand that after the destruction of war and with them piled in rubbish
heaps, I testify to their existence? Not many years after the idyllic
time presented here, inanimate things were envied their permanence, for
day by day people were taken from their midst, and suddenly the things
were orphaned, the chairs, canes, and knickknacks abandoned and
monstrously useless. As if objects were superior to the living, hardier
than they, less vulnerable to the catastrophes of time. As if liberated
from their owners, they had gained force and expression -- consider the
baby carriages and washbasins on the barricades, the eyeglasses there
was no one to look through, the piles of letters stepped on. Although in
the landscape of war they gained the power of eerie signs, I never held
that against them. I believed in their innocence.

Untouched by fire and time is my affection for the old faience owl in my
father's library; the lion and tiger, those heavy, beautiful creatures
of blackened bronze; the chess set whose kings and pawns had Tatar
faces, carved for my father by a fellow prisoner of war in a Russian
camp in 1915; the two dog-clocks on my mother's dresser, showing the
hour by the turns of their bulging eyes. I remember, in my parents'
commonplace, very middle-class bedroom, a pane of a casement window that
had a round hole with cracks in the glass running out toward the frame.
I was told that a bullet did that during the battles of 1918.
Deliberative child that I was, I looked for a mark in the ceiling,
following the trajectory, but the surface there was smooth, unbroken.
They had plastered the hole, they told me. But whether I couldn't
believe that or didn't want to, in the quiet, ordinary apartment full of
bourgeois affluence my eyes kept returning to the small, high pane. The
hole apparently was not large enough to merit changing the pane. Did it
disturb me, as Robinson Crusoe was disturbed by a footprint on the shore
of his desert island? No, I did not see it as an omen of the cruelty to
come -- that cruelty would have been beyond my imagining in any case.
The hole simply did not go with the sleepy harmony of the furniture.
That trace was an astounding thing, like a detail taken from an
impossibility that unexpectedly presents itself before you and calmly
insists on its unquestionable, physical existence. Could it be that
someone actually shot at the windows? At our apartment? And that I was
born three years later?

But I must not exaggerate. The hole in the window always surprised me,
perhaps even pained me as a sharp dissonance, but no more than that. It
was no more remarkable than the drops of sap exuded by the frame of the
same window. I loved to collect them on my finger, each drop slowly,
because it took a few days for it to appear through the wood, through
the varnish, a tear that was a little dry on the surface but inside
fragrant, resinous, sticky. As if the wood were not reconciled to its
fate, as if its unseen interior were still in the forest, stubbornly
denying the reality of the plane, the nails, the varnish, and the two
metal pieces that fastened the narrow strip of the blind to the frame.

So what exactly was it that formed the bond between the child walking
those streets -- always the same streets -- and their pavement and
walls? Beauty? I saw no beauty, did not know that the city could be
different, that it could not go in folds of stone, could not be hilly,
that streets like Copernicus and Sextus didn't have to soar upward, or
the trams claw their way to the top and careen down. I did not see the
Gothic architecture of Elizabeth Church or the eastern exoticism of the
Armenian Cathedral. If I raised my head, it was to look at the metal
hens turning on the chimneys.

It is amazing that I am at all able, straining against the current of
time with my memory, to restore innocence to such words as Janow,
Zniesienie, Piaski, Lackiego, to which the years 1941 and 1942 gave such
evil meaning, when the streets from Bernstein's and past the theater,
toward Sloneczna and beyond, one day were empty, silent, their windows
open and curtains moving in the wind. The walls, courtyards, balconies
-- deserted, and in the distance appeared, then disappeared, the wooden
fence of the ghetto. I saw the far, scattered buildings outside the
city, then only rubble overgrown with grass.

In the thirties no one saw this coming. Though there was sometimes
trouble. From the balcony of our apartment, crouching, I watched mounted
police charge a crowd of demonstrators -- it was during the funeral of
Kozak. As rocks clattered on the metal shutters which the merchants used
to try to save their windows, I saw one policeman in a shining helmet
pulled off his horse. But this passed like a sudden storm, and when the
janitors swept the broken glass off the sidewalk, peace returned, and
nuns -- my father's grateful patients -- brought from their garden great
armfuls of grafted lilacs, which we put under running water in the
bathtub, and on the "Merry Lvov" station we listened to the comedians
Toncio and Szczepiec and the funny monologues, with much throat-clearing
from Mr. Stroncio, and I told my parents that I wouldn't go to gymnasium
because you had to wear knickerbockers, which I hated because they
tickled under the knee. We were like ants bustling in an anthill over
which the heel of a boot is raised. Some saw its shadow, or thought they
did, but everyone, the uneasy included, ran about their usual business
until the very last minute, ran with enthusiasm, devotion -- to secure,
to appease, to tame the future. Adults and children, we were all made
equal by the blessing of ignorance, without which one cannot live.

We prepared ourselves. Every day we wore uniforms to school, and once a
week there was a military-training lesson and we had to wear a different
uniform, which was a green linen tunic put on over the head like a
Russian gimnastyorka. Students pinned various badges on their chest,
Scout badges, sharpshooting medals. As for me, after strewing a great
number of cartridges on the firing range by Highcastle, I received a
gold sharpshooter's medal before I graduated -- but didn't have long to
glory in it. The tunic was worn with the front smoothed out under a wide
belt. Some of us had elegant belts with double buckles and lots of
stitching. I got one like that; it even had a felt lining and brass
hooks for an officer's diagonal strap across the chest, which of course
I had no right to. For that tunic you needed to be thin, like L., whose
waist could be spanned with two hands, and a big behind made the folds
in back flare like a tail, turning the uniform into a skirt. This
tormented me.

The commander of our corps was Professor Starzewski, a historian and
reserve officer, but he kept himself above us, that is, at a distance.
On an everyday basis we were seen to by several noncommissioned officers
who came from downtown, often carrying little packages that contained
military secrets -- for example, vials that when you lifted the cork,
you got a whiff (harmless) of poison gas. They let us smell phosgene,
bromobenzyl, cyanide, chloroacetophenone, and various other invisible
poisons with equally ominous names. We were also given gas masks during
these exercises. I remember their unpleasant rubber-canvas smell and
taste. It was hard to breathe in them; you gasped when you ran, but this
was still just a game.

Once, on the playing field, they set off smoke bombs, and the sergeant
threw a tear-gas grenade. The wind shifted, and the cloud enveloped the
janitor, who emerged from it crying like a baby. The noncoms had a lot
of trouble with us. We laughed behind their backs and made up names for
them. We had our own rifles -- in our microscopic gymnasium arsenal --
mostly Lebels of 1889 make, I think. An archaic weapon, long and heavy,
though repeating. The cartridges were fed one at a time into a slot
below the firing chamber, the bolt being opened and closed countless
times. There was a lot of drill and presenting of arms, but only very
rarely did we get even blanks to fire -- and that was outside the city,
of course, somewhere in the Kaiserwald, to which we marched in a column.

The sights of our rifles were uncalibrated, but these weapons clearly
were not meant for battle; we might just as well have drilled with wood
carved in the shape of rifles. But complaining about the quality of our
arms would probably have been considered high treason. When the weather
was bad, we spent the two hours in class cleaning our rifles. It was an
art in itself, a little Danaidean, a little Sisyphean, in the midst of
enormous quantities of oakum and petroleum jelly. We also learned how to
check our work -- with a match whittled to a toothpick, which the
sergeant delicately poked around the screws of the butt and between the
stock and barrel. It was always possible to find some minuscule crevice
that would dirty the tip of the wood, and then you had to start all
over. But it didn't really anger us -- as if we understood that such
were the rules of the game, and that this was what the military was
based on.

In the second year of lyceum we went to the firing range with real
rifles, not Lebels. The mood was front-line. We had been prepared for
this so long, and for the Mausers used in the army, but we were not
allowed to touch them until the very last moment, and the rounds were
distributed to us with great mystery and caution only at the concrete
stands and only one apiece, such miserliness giving the rifle gigantic
significance, making it a weapon whose power nothing could resist, a
rare and accurate instrument such as few other armies in the world
possessed. And the atmosphere intensified: the concrete stands of the
firing range, the powerful kick of the weapon if you did not press the
butt correctly into your shoulder. In comparison with the KB, what was
the paltry .22 we had sometimes fired when we were in gymnasium! Even
Julek D.'s repeater no longer impressed.

Amusing, that the whole purpose of a military rifle was something we --
or at least I, but I think this applied to others, too -- did not really
think about. The targets, true, were not innocent circles but
silhouettes, pale green, that wore helmets and had white blotches for
faces; but this, too, was a conventional target. The point was to score,
not to kill -- there was no talk, somehow, of killing.

Not even when we had bayonet practice. Which I didn't like. Our weapon
there was a long piece of wood in the rough shape of a rifle, and its
jutting end was wrapped with rags, like a hard fist of cloth. The basic
posture was grotesque -- legs wide apart and knees bent. We dueled in
pairs or sometimes with the sergeant, who was a master of the bayonet,
or else we attacked enormous, lumbering dolls that looked a little like
tailor's dummies. The sergeant showed us where to jab and how, and loved
to talk about different kinds of bayonets, the Polish flat bayonet and
the one with a square blade, and how after you shoved it in, you had to
twist it to tangle the entrails. Then he showed us, but only
theoretically, what you could do with an ordinary folding shovel, what a
terrific tool it was; if you hit with it between the neck and collarbone
and were lucky, you could take off a whole arm at the shoulder. But not
to aim for the head, for God's sake; the head would probably have a
helmet, and the shovel would only bounce off. We were also shown how to
parry a bayonet thrust with such a shovel, and we threw grenades, that
is, mock grenades. And then, again, long hours of cleaning our clumsy
Lebels while it rained.

Only once did we go into the city with our rifles, an extraordinary
circumstance. It was after the death of Marshal Pilsudski, in the
evening. Why in the evening, I do not know. We marched in the
present-arms position the whole time, our arms numb from the heavy Lebel
pulled to the belt, and made a great circle through the city, through
Mariacki Square, where not far from the Mickiewicz monument, invisible
in the darkness then, stood a lonely pedestal, not large, with a stone
bust bound with a black sash, under a floodlight. And we marched,
tramping the pavement as hard as we could, to a mournful drumbeat that
seemed to fill the city. The year was 1935.

During the three years of my military training, there was no mention
made, not once, of the existence of tanks. They simply didn't matter. We
studied every kind of gas and the names of the parts of guns, and
regulations, and how sentries are posted, and ground tactics, and many
other things. About a hundred hours a year of such instruction, three
hundred in the upper classes, but it was -- I see this now -- as if they
were preparing us for a war like the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. We did
not belong to the army, were not even a small reserve, only the idea of
one. Multiply us, with our anachronistic, worthless training, thousands,
tens of thousands of times, and you have a sense of the tremendous labor
undertaken by men in uniform -- to no end. The defeat has overshadowed
everything; and yet, looking back, I am still dismayed by that great
waste.

My last summer vacation before graduation I spent at a training camp in
Delatyn. It was like being in the army, on maneuvers. We lived eighteen
men to a tent, near the high, steep bank of the Prut, with everything
military: reveille, drills, field exercises, meals from a cauldron,
tactics, and evening roll call. It was my first time away from home --
no one to care for me but section leaders and noncoms. They let us know
right off that we would be treated as adults, soldiers, and the captain
warned against contact with the local female population because there
was a lot of syphilis among the mountaineers.

I learned many things, among them the mechanism of power. When it was my
turn to be orderly, I went in the morning to the quartermaster-sergeant
to get our tent's allotment of marmalade. The sergeant sliced off a
large portion of the raspberry substance for himself and handed me the
rest. On my way back I understood what I was supposed to do, and in turn
took my own cut.

Toward the end of the vacation there were big maneuvers in the presence
of a Warsaw observer, a major. He seemed to us a towering general. To
avoid the problems connected with carrying the folding shovel, which hit
me in the back when I ran, I took advantage of the fact that only every
other student received a shovel, and began to pretend that I had never
been issued one. I hid mine (on the advice of a kindly section leader)
in my straw mattress. I had to pay for it, but at least I got out of the
drudgery of entrenching. I also solved the problem of my Lebel:
listening to the civilian who sat within me, I cleaned the inside of its
barrel to a silver shine, then plugged the muzzle with a small,
inconspicuous cork so no dirt could get in during all the jumping and
falling. Thus, when I cleaned the rifle, I needed to polish only the
surface, and during inspection, at the right moment, I secretly removed
the cork.

My colleague Miecio R. did not fare as well. In an intermission in the
big maneuvers he was singled out for some reason by the major himself
and ordered first to demonstrate the correct procedure for a gas alert.
When the major shouted, "Gas attack!," Miecio turned pale, and before
the sharp eyes of all the top brass he finally opened his metal
canister, which instead of a mask contained apples and candy. He had hid
his mask in his straw mattress. The consequences of this were to be
dreadful, including a failing grade on his report card, but then the
whole thing somehow was forgotten.

The maneuvers themselves I remember as a great deal of running about and
shooting blanks. For which they woke us at four in the morning. I
observed that at that hour in July the world was incredibly lovely, and
promised myself that in civilian life also I would enjoy the early
morning. But this never happened. We did plenty of crawling and, not
ever knowing where the enemy was, fired in all directions to be safe.
Then our advance guard got lost, and we encountered a mountaineer woman,
who began to follow us, then suddenly she jumped on our section leader's
back and got his rifle. It turned out to be one of the corporals,
fiendishly disguised to demonstrate to us the trickery of war.

We won, I think, though I'm not sure. A few more times they woke us in
the middle of the night for an attack, and if our shoelaces weren't all
tied right, back we had to go under the blankets and start again. One
night we dressed and undressed something like four times at record
speed. But what I remember most is that in the army you were always
cleaning something -- if not a weapon, then boots, if not boots, then
the floor (there was no floor in the tents, so here cleaning revealed
its completely symbolic nature).

This was the first time -- on this vacation -- that I saw poverty close
up. The mountaineers were extremely poor: for five groszy or a hunk of
bread you could get a heaping mess-tin of raspberries or strawberries,
and they thought they were getting a bargain. Delatyn, not like Tatarow
or Jaremcze, was off the beaten path for tourists.

For several days we worked in water, rebuilding a bridge that the
swollen river had swept away. The sun turned me as dark as an African.
An end finally came to our mock warfare, and all the rituals took place
-- tossing noncoms and lieutenants into the air, and those not liked,
those who had given us a hard time, met with fists on their way down
instead of open hands. I remember how we chased one of the lieutenants
through the camp, a pig-faced blond who turned apoplectic red in the
sun. He tried to restrain us with orders, but the bubble of authority
and obedience had broken, and nothing could help him -- up into the air
he went.

The rifle improved my posture, and I even lost weight. On the last day
there was a campfire with singing, fizzy lemonade, and doughnuts, and
the next morning they put us on the train. On the way to Lvov, one of
the instructors, an officer-cadet, sat next to me, told me he really
liked me -- more, admired me. Friendship from an officer, admiration no
less (but for what?) -- it staggered me. When it turned out that he
liked my boots (I had two pair), I was happy to part with them -- except
I didn't know how to make the offer without offending him, given his
high rank. Fortunately, the officer-cadet took care of this for me and,
holding the boots by their back loops, disappeared. The train was just
then pulling in under the enormous vault of the main station, where my
anxious parents were waiting for me.

 

 

 

EPILOGUE

 

Nobody died when I was little. I heard of such things, yes -- as one
hears of meteors. Everyone knows they fall, but what does that have to
do with us? While writing this book, between one rainy Zakopane day and
another, I dreamed of my father. Not indistinct and of indeterminate
age, as I see him when I am awake, but in a specific moment, alive. I
saw his gray eyes behind his glasses, eyes not yet weary, and the
trimmed mustache and small beard, and his hands with short fingernails
-- the always scrubbed hands of a doctor -- and his gold ring grown
thinner with wear. The folds of his vest, the coat pulled a little to
the right by the weight of the laryngologist's mirror -- and, behind
him, the apartment, the wallpaper, the old tall stove with the white
tiles and their network of tiny cracks, and a thousand other details I
was unable to name when I woke. All this is inside me, an inaccessible
host of memories, sequences of minutes, hours, days, weeks, years -- and
nothing can enter there except dream, whose movement I have no control
over. Stryjski Park is in there somewhere, all in snow, and my father
walking on a path between dark trees, his freezing hands in the pockets
of his overcoat, while I, on skis for the first time, can hardly move my
legs, imagining myself a king of infinite space. The clop of hoofs
suddenly dulled on the wooden pavement of Marszalkowska in front of Jan
Casimir University, and the long screech of a tram hitting the windows
of the classroom as it turns around our playing field to begin the
arduous climb to Highcastle. All the banisters I slid down at school;
the checkered knickerbockers of my colleague Loza, the longest in the
class; the green bumper cars at the Eastern Fair; all the chestnuts. The
copper kettle for hot water on the kitchen stove; the acorns on the
bedroom ceiling; the scrap iron at the flea market, through which I
looked for treasures; and even my first bed, white, enclosed on the side
with string netting. The ship that by some miracle sailed into a bottle
through the narrow neck. The first legal cigarette, with a red cloth
filter tip, a "Nile," which I smoked after graduation in June 1939.

And what avalanches descended on that world. How was it they did not
wipe it out completely, erasing every trace? And for whom exactly do the
traces survive? For whom does memory preserve them, reluctant memory,
opening its treasury only at night, in insensible sleep, to the blind
dreamer? In the light of day memory is stubborn, tight-fisted, giving
brief, cryptic answers which have to be laboriously deciphered, the gaps
filled in with guesses; and when suddenly some fragment is pulled from
memory by force or stealth -- a blotch of color, the outline of
someone's lips, a shadow, a sound -- there is no explanation, only the
vague but persistent conviction that it had to do with something
important, fateful, but there is only emptiness, blank as a wall, and we
can do nothing. Our thoughts are like underground tunnels that collapse.
Although tight-fisted and indifferent, memory knows everything and can
but will not help; it is contemptuous, locked in itself, ignoring the
passage of time, independent of time. If it were indeed just a void with
a few fading images flitting here and there -- but no, it is definitely
not that; there is evidence, dreams. And it keeps denying me admittance
where I wish to go, letting me in only elsewhere, and never when I want.
Stupid latched gate. Sovereign machine stupidly preoccupied with its
function, its task: to record, preserve indelibly, permanently. But that
is not true either. It will perish with me, fanatical guardian, miser
tyrant, mocking, disobedient, stiff-necked, so invariable and yet so
uncertain, uncaring and at the same time sensitive, like a lump of coal
that bears the delicate impression of a leaf. How am I to understand
memory? How come to terms with it? Neural nets, synapses, McCulloch
loops? No, there is no explaining it in that wise, absurdly scientific
way -- it's useless, let memory remain as it is. Memory and I are a pair
of horses eyeing each other distrustfully, pulling one wagon. So let us
go, my inseparable, unknown companion, my enemy, my friend.

 
