[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon, Congers, New York, 1952.

[]

Copyright © 1999 by the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1950, 1951, 1952, 1953 by Theodore
Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Foreword copyright ©
1999 by David Crosby. All rights reserved. No portion of this book,
except for brief review, may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the written
permission of the publisher. For information contact North Atlantic
Books.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover art by Richard M. Powers
Cover design by Catherine Campaigne

_Baby Is Three_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native Arts
and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are to
develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Sturgeon, Theodore
     Baby is three / Theodore Sturgeon : edited by Paul Williams.
         p. cm. — (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon : v. 6)
     Contents: The stars are the Styx—Rule of three—Shadow, shadow on
the wall—Special aptitude—Make room for me—The traveling crag—Excalibur
and the atom—The incubi of parallel X—Never underestimate—The sex
opposite—Baby is three.
     eISBN: 978-1-58394-750-0
     1. Science fiction, American.   2. Fantasy fiction, American.   I.
Williams, Paul, 1948–   .   II. Title.   III. Series: Sturgeon,
Theodore.   Short stories : v. 6.

PS3569.T875   A6   1999 vol. 6
813′.54—dc21

99-31975

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the sixth of a series of volumes that will collect all of
his short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel. The
volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized chronologically
by order of composition (insofar as it can be determined). This sixth
volume contains stories written between 1950 and 1952. Two have never
before appeared in a Sturgeon collection. The title story, “Baby Is
Three,” is the original text of one of Sturgeon’s most-loved stories, as
it appeared in a magazine before he significantly reworked its ending
for the purposes of _More Than Human_, the novel he wrote by adding
extensive material about what happened to Homo Gestalt before and after
the events described in “Baby Is Three.”

Preparation of each of these volumes would not be possible without the
hard work and invaluable participation of Noël Sturgeon, Debbie Notkin,
and our publishers, Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. I would also
like to thank, for their significant assistance with this volume, David
Crosby, the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, Emily Weinert, Marion
Sturgeon, Jayne Williams, Ralph Vicinanza, Ron Colone, David Hartwell,
Tair Powers, Eric Weeks, Bill Glass, Dixon Chandler, Gordon Benson, Jr.
and Phil Stephensen-Payne, Paula Morrison, Catherine Campaigne, T. V.
Reed, Cindy Lee Berryhill, The Other Change of Hobbit Bookstore, and all
of you who have expressed your interest and support.

BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON

_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry Medusa_] (1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News …_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (2010)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

Editor’s Note

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword by David Crosby

Shadow, Shadow on the Wall

The Stars Are the Styx

Rule of Three

Make Room for Me

Special Aptitude

The Traveling Crag

Excalibur and the Atom

The Incubi of Parallel X

Never Underestimate

The Sex Opposite

Baby Is Three

Story Notes by Paul Williams

Appendix:
Two Autobiographical Essays



FOREWORD


by David Crosby

I’M AN INVETERATE LOVER of science fiction. I always have been and still
am. I read it constantly. I started as an early teenager—long before the
Byrds, or Crosby, Stills & Nash, even before I became a musician—back in
the mid-1950s. I started with Robert Heinlein’s juvenile novels, _Rocket
Ship Galileo_ then _Red Planet, Farmer in the Sky, Between Planets,
Space Cadet …_ I read them all. They were my escape. I was a little
chubby kid in a high school, not at all popular, and lonely, and this
was a world where I could … I could _really_ dig it. Then it just
progressed, the natural steps you would expect, Clarke and Van Vogt,
Campbell, _Analog …_ and I just went right into it from there.

Then somebody passed Theodore Sturgeon’s _More Than Human_ to me. And
that novel—which of course is built around the title story of this
collection, “Baby Is Three”—was the standout for me. The relationship
described in that story, people transcending the lacks in themselves and
making a whole that’s greater than anybody else could be because of
it … There was a perceived lack in me and I felt sort of like a person
that wasn’t gonna … So there was a strong emotional resonance for me—and
for every other little lonely kid—with those people, because they were
different too. They didn’t fit in either. But when they _linked_, they
were this awesome being …

Paul Williams tells me my friend Phil Lesh of the Grateful Dead has
described “Baby Is Three”/_More Than Human_ as the only model he and his
bandmates had to understand what was happening to them when they began
playing together. He might have been more conscious about that than I
was, but it affected me in the same place. There is a thing that happens
in a band, where these diverse human beings link up, through this
language that they’re speaking together, this music.

They create a thing where the whole is greater than the sum of the
parts. And there springs into existence over them another being. So if
there’s four of them, there’s a fifth being, or if there’s five there’s
a sixth being, that is a composite of them, and that is bigger than all
of them. And if they understand what they’re doing, they submit to this
personality, they give up their individuality for this unity. And they
create this new being that can make the art of the instant, that can
make the magic happen when you’re playing live.

That’s how it feels. And it requires a—if it isn’t telepathic, it’s
certainly _em_pathic—link-up and union. And the relationship described
first by Theodore Sturgeon in “Baby Is Three” really hit all of us that
wanted that kind of “above the family,” taking the idea of a family to a
new place, to a new level.

It really rang _my_ bell. When I was a child my favorite comic book was
one about a whole group of very different orphans who got together and
somebody let them live together on a ranch, and they ran this ranch
together. And when I read _More Than Human_, I—and all the other kids
who were loners and didn’t really fit in—said, “I could fit in _there_.
I would love to be part of that kind of incredible link-up where people
really understand each other and love each other and have a unity of
purpose.” It was a high thing to do. And bands emotionally so closely
resembled that, that it was inevitable that we musicians would love that
story.

Although I loved the story _before_ I became a band member. But once I
became a band member I had this whole resonant blueprint in the back of
my head about what that was. And so I understood what it was and I
submitted to it, and I have always loved being a part of that, more than
being a solo … I like union so much more than autonomy that there must
have been some basic tilt in me towards it. I think “Baby Is Three” was
a large part of me having that tilt. It just rang my bell. Big time.

That _homo gestalt_ experience of creating a fifth entity by forming a
four-person unit is such a startling thing, it’s very hard to explain it
to people who haven’t played music with other people or done some kind
of unity-forming for a purpose. I’m sure a group of Amish farmers
getting together for a barn-raising have some of the same thing. But
with a band, the thing that you’re trying to create is so ethereal, and
so hard to put salt on its tail, that it’s very difficult to explain to
people when it’s there and when it’s not there. Too many people think
that it’s just about turning up and striking a pose. Trying to do the
other thing is intricate, and requires people with enough ego to go on
stage who are also over here to dissociate from the ego and disassemble
it, in order to create this other thing. It’s a rare deal. Anybody, any
really good band, particularly a band that improvises together—the
Grateful Dead for absolute sure, they were built on it, it was their
lifeblood—any band that improvises together and tries to push the
envelope (which of course is where the best shit is), they know this
thing. Anybody from a band like that would read “Baby Is Three” and say,
“Oh yeah! Yeah!!” and recognize it right away.

I met Ted Sturgeon in 1970. He was an unusual guy. He wasn’t all cosmic
and airy-fairy in how he thought about things. He was actually sort of
acerbic and funny and had a great kind of wry wit about stuff. But he
could conceive idealism on a level that most other people couldn’t get
to. He was a great cat. We put him through a really unbearable
experience, Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young did, when we hired him to write
a screenplay for _Wooden Ships_, a proposed CSNY film based on one of
our songs.

It was a nightmare for him, because each guy would get him alone and
tell him how _he_ wanted the script to be. And of course in each guy’s
view, _he_ was the hero. The other guys were sort of posed around the
edges, like a Greek chorus. Mine was populated with young girls—and had
all this sex in it. Stephen’s was populated by this lonely military hero
out there. Neil took one look at the whole film idea and said, “No … No,
man, I don’t think so, man …” It was hysterical. We were all such
complete egotists by that time, and living so much in our own universes,
and everything was so contrary to the vision I just told you about …

It was a complete hopeless tar-baby of a project. And Ted tried to do it
in all good faith. He kept trying to be positive about it. He would
write and write and write and say, “What about this?” And we’d say,
“Well, no, that’s too much of _them_ and not enough of me.” It was a
terrible thing, and I’m mostly responsible for having done it to him. He
had a good sense of humor about it. I’m sure he must have laughed a lot
privately

He was a _delightful_ man, very very very bright, great sense of humor,
witty, had a good skeptical and skewed take on things. I regret that I
didn’t get to hang out with him more. I should have stayed friends with
him and stayed close to him, but at a certain point there the drugs took
over, and friendships got less important …



SHADOW, SHADOW ON THE WALL


IT WAS WELL after bedtime and Bobby was asleep, dreaming of a place with
black butterflies that stayed, and a dog with a wuffly nose and blunt,
friendly rubber teeth. It was a dark place, and comfy with all the edges
blurred and soft, and he could make them all jump if he wanted to.

But then there was a sharp scythe of light that swept everything away
(except in the shaded smoothness of the blank wall beside the door:
someone _always_ lived there) and Mommy Gwen was coming into the room
with a blaze of hallway behind her. She clicked the high-up switch, the
one he couldn’t reach, and room light came cruelly. Mommy Gwen changed
from a flat, black, light-rimmed set of cardboard triangles to a
night-lit, daytime sort of Mommy Gwen.

Her hair was wide and her chin was narrow. Her shoulders were wide and
her waist was narrow. Her hips were wide and her skirt was narrow, and
under it all were her two hard silky sticks of legs. Her arms hung down
from the wide tips of her shoulders, straight and elbowless when she
walked. She never moved her arms when she walked. She never moved them
at all unless she wanted to do something with them.

“You’re awake.” Her voice was hard, wide, flat, pointy too.

“I was asleep,” said Bobby.

“Don’t contradict. Get up.”

Bobby sat up and fisted his eyes. “Is Daddy—”

“Your father is not in the house. He went away. He won’t be back for a
whole day—maybe two. So there’s no use in yelling for him.”

“Wasn’t going to yell for him, Mommy Gwen.”

“Very well, then. Get up.”

Wondering, Bobby got up. His flannel sleeper pulled at his shoulders and
at the soles of his snug-covered feet. He felt tousled.

“Get your toys, Bobby.”

“What toys, Mommy Gwen?”

Her voice snapped like wet clothes on the line in a big wind. “Your
toys—all of them!”

He went to the playbox and lifted the lid. He stopped, turned, stared at
her. Her arms hung straight at her sides, as straight as her two level
eyes under the straight shelf of brow. He bent to the playbox.
Gollywick, Humptydoodle and the blocks came out; the starry-wormy piece
of the old phonograph, the cracked sugar egg with the peephole girl in
it, the cardboard kaleidoscope and the magic set with the seven silvery
rings that made a trick he couldn’t do but Daddy could. He took them all
out and put them on the floor.

“Here,” said Mommy Gwen. She moved one straight-line arm to point to her
feet with one straight-line finger. He picked up the toys and brought
them to her, one at a time, two at a time, until they were all there.
“Neatly, neatly,” she muttered. She bent in the middle like a garage
door and did brisk things with the toys, so that the scattered pile of
them became a square stack. “Get the rest,” she said.

He looked into the playbox and took out the old wood-framed slate and
the mixed-up box of crayons; the English annual story book and an old
candle, and that was all for the playbox. In the closet were some little
boxing-gloves and a tennis racket with broken strings, and an old
ukulele with no strings at all. And that was all for the closet. He
brought them to her, and she stacked them with the others.

“Those things, too,” she said, and at last bent her elbow to point
around. From the dresser came the two squirrels and a monkey that Daddy
had made from pipe cleaners, a small square of plate-glass he had found
on Henry Street; a clockwork top that sounded like a church talking, and
the broken clock Jerry had left on the porch last week. Bobby brought
them all to Mommy Gwen, every one. “Are you going to put me in another
room?”

“No indeed.” Mommy Gwen took up the neat stack of toys. It was tall in
her arms. The top fell off and thunked on the floor, bounced, chased
around in a tilted circle. “Get it,” said Mommy Gwen.

Bobby picked it up and reached it toward her. She stooped until he could
put it on the stack, snug between the tennis racket and the box of
crayons. Mommy Gwen didn’t say thank you, but went away through the
door, leaving Bobby standing, staring after her. He heard her hard feet
go down the hall, heard the bump as she pressed open the guest-room door
with her knee. There was a rattle and click as she set his toys down on
the spare bed, the one without a spread, the one with dusty blue ticking
on the mattress. Then she came back again.

“Why aren’t you in bed?” She clapped her hands. They sounded dry, like
sticks breaking. Startled, he popped back into bed and drew the covers
up to his chin. There used to be someone who had a warm cheek and a soft
word for him when he did that, but that was a long time ago. He lay with
eyes round in the light, looking at Mommy Gwen.

“You’ve been bad,” she said. “You broke a window in the shed and you
tracked mud into my kitchen and you’ve been noisy and rude. So you’ll
stay right here in this room without your toys until I say you can come
out. Do you understand me?”

“Yes,” he said. He said quickly, because he remembered in time, “Yes
ma’am.”

She struck the switch swiftly, without warning, so that the darkness
dazzled him, made him blink. But right away it was the room again, with
the scythe of light and the shaded something hiding in the top corner of
the wall by the door. There was always something shifting about there.

She went away then, thumping the door closed, leaving the darkness and
taking away the light, all but a rug-fuzzed yellow streak under the
door. Bobby looked away from that, and for a moment, for just a moment,
he was inside his shadow-pictures where the rubber-fanged dog and the
fleshy black butterflies stayed. Sometimes they stayed … but mostly they
were gone as soon as he moved. Or maybe they changed into something
else. Anyway, he liked it there, where they all lived, and he wished he
could be with them, in the shadow country.

Just before he fell asleep, he saw them moving and shifting in the blank
wall by the door. He smiled at them and went to sleep.

When he awoke, it was early. He couldn’t smell the coffee from
downstairs yet, even. There was a ruddy-yellow sunswatch on the blank
wall, a crooked square, just waiting for him. He jumped out of bed and
ran to it. He washed his hands in it, squatted down on the floor with
his arms out. “Now!” he said.

He locked his thumbs together and slowly flapped his hands. And there on
the wall was a black butterfly, flapping its wings right along with him.
“Hello, butterfly,” said Bobby.

He made it jump. He made it turn and settle to the bottom of the light
patch, and fold its wings up and up until they were together. Suddenly
he whipped one hand away, peeled back the sleeve of his sleeper, and
presto! There was a long-necked duck. “Quack-ack!” said Bobby, and the
duck obligingly opened its bill, threw up its head to quack. Bobby made
it curl up its bill until it was an eagle. He didn’t know what kind of
noise an eagle made, so he said, “Eagle-eagle-eagle-eagle-eagle,” and
that sounded fine. He laughed.

When he laughed Mommy Gwen slammed the door open and stood there in a
straight-lined white bathrobe and straight flat slippers. “What are you
playing with?”

Bobby held up his empty hands.

“I was just—”

She took two steps into the room. “Get up,” she said. Her lips were
pale. Bobby got up, wondering why she was so angry. “I heard you laugh,”
she said in a hissy kind of a whisper. She looked him up and down,
looked at the door around him. “What were you playing with?”

“A eagle,” said Bobby.

“A what? Tell me the truth!”

Bobby waved his empty hands vaguely and looked away from her. She had
such an angry face.

She stepped, reached, put a hard hand around his wrist. She lifted his
arm so high he went on tiptoes, and with her other hand she felt his
body, this side, that side. “You’re hiding something. What is it? Where
is it? What were you playing with?”

“Nothing. Reely, reely truly nothing,” gasped Bobby as she shook and
patted. She wasn’t spanking. She never spanked. She did other things.

“You’re being punished,” she said in her shrill angry whisper. “Stupid,
stupid, stupid … too stupid to know you’re being punished.” She set him
down with a thump and went to the door. “Don’t let me hear you laugh
again. You’ve been bad, and you’re not being kept in this room to enjoy
yourself. Now you stay here and think about how bad you are breaking
windows. Tracking mud. Lying.”

She went out and closed the door with a steadiness that was like
slamming, but quiet. Bobby looked at the door and wondered for a moment
about that broken window. He’d been terribly sorry; it was just that the
golf ball bounced so hard. Daddy had told him he should be more careful,
and he had watched sorrowfully while Daddy put in a new pane. Then Daddy
had given him a little piece of putty to play with and asked him never
to do it again and he’d promised not to. And the whole time Mommy Gwen
hadn’t said a thing to him about it. She’d just looked at him every once
in a while with her eyes and her mouth straight and thin, and she’d
waited. She’d waited until Daddy went away.

He went back to his sunbeam and forgot all about Mommy Gwen.

After he’d made another butterfly and a dog’s head and an alligator on
the wall, the sunbeam got so thin that he couldn’t make anything more,
except, for a while, little black finger shadows that ran up and down
the strip of light like ants on a matchstick. Soon there was no sunbeam
at all, so he sat on the edge of his bed and watched the vague
flickering of the something that lived in the end wall. It was a
_different_ kind of something. It wasn’t a good something and it wasn’t
bad. It just lived there, and the difference between it and the other
things, the butterflies and dogs and swans and eagles who lived there,
was that the something didn’t need his hands to make it be alive. The
something—stayed. Some day he was going to make a butterfly or a dog or
a horse that would stay after he moved his hands away. Meanwhile, the
only one who stayed, the only one who lived all the time in the shadow
country, was this something that flickered up there where the two walls
met the ceiling. “I’m going right in there and play with you,” Bobby
told it. “You’ll see.”

There was a red wagon with three wheels in the yard, and a gnarly tree
to be climbed. Jerry came and called for a while, but Mommy Gwen sent
him away. _“He’s been bad.”_ So Jerry went away.

Bad bad bad. Funny how the things he did didn’t used to be bad before
Daddy married Mommy Gwen.

Mommy Gwen didn’t want Bobby. That was all right—Bobby didn’t want Mommy
Gwen either. Daddy sometimes said to grownup people that Bobby was much
better off with someone to care for him. Bobby could remember ’way back
when he used to say that with his arm around Mommy Gwen’s shoulders and
his voice ringing. He could remember when Daddy said it quietly from the
other side of the room, with a voice like an angry “I’m sorry.” And now,
Daddy hadn’t said it at all for a long time.

Bobby sat on the edge of his bed and hummed to himself, thinking these
thoughts, and he hummed to himself and didn’t think of anything at all.
He found a ladybug crawling up the dresser and caught it the careful
way, circling it with his thumb and forefinger so that it crawled up on
his hand by itself. Sometimes when you pinched them up they got busted.
He stood on the windowsill and hunted until he found the little hole in
the screen that the ladybug must have used to come in. He let the bug
walk on the screen and guided it to the hole. It flew away, happy.

The room was flooded with warm dull light reflected from the sparkly
black shed roof, and he couldn’t make any shadow country people at all,
so he made them in his head until he felt sleepy. He lay down then and
hummed softly to himself until he fell asleep. And through the long
afternoon the thing in the wall flickered and shifted and lived.

At dusk Mommy Gwen came back. Bobby may have heard her on the stairs;
anyway, when the door opened on the dim room he was sitting up in bed,
thumbing his eyes.

The ceiling blazed. “What have you been doing?”

“Was asleep, I guess. Is it night time?”

“Very nearly. I suppose you’re hungry.” She had a covered dish.

“Mmm.”

“What kind of an answer is that?” she snapped.

“Yes ma’am I’m hungry Mommy Gwen,” he said rapidly.

“That’s a little better. Here.” She thrust the dish at him. He took it,
removed the top plate and put it under the bowl. Oatmeal. He looked at
it, at her.

“Well?”

“Thank you, Mommy Gwen.” He began to eat with the teaspoon he had found
hilt-deep in the grey-brown mess. There was no sugar on it.

“I suppose you expect me to fetch you some sugar,” she said after a
time.

“No’m,” he said truthfully, and then wondered why her face went all
angry and disappointed.

“What have you been doing all day?”

“Nothing. Playin’. Then I was asleep.”

“Little sluggard.” Suddenly she shouted at him, “What’s the matter with
you? Are you too stupid to be afraid? Are you too stupid to ask me to
let you come downstairs? Are you too stupid to cry? Why don’t you cry?”

He stared at her, round-eyed. “You wouldn’t let me come down if I ast
you,” he said wonderingly. “So I didn’t ast.” He scooped up some
oatmeal. “I don’t feel like cryin’, Mommy Gwen, I don’t hurt.”

“You’re bad and you’re being punished and it should hurt,” she said
furiously. She turned off the light with a vicious swipe of her hard
straight hand, and went out, slamming the door.

Bobby sat still in the dark and wished he could go into the shadow
country, the way he always dreamed he could. He’d go there and play with
the butterflies and the fuzz-edged, blunt-toothed dogs and giraffes, and
they’d stay and he’d stay and Mommy Gwen would never be able to get in,
ever. Except that Daddy wouldn’t be able to come with him, or Jerry
either, and that would be a shame.

He scrambled quietly out of bed and stood for a moment looking at the
wall by the door. He could almost for-sure see the flickering thing that
lived there, even in the dark. When there was light on the wall, it
flickered a shade darker than the light. At night it flickered a shade
lighter than the black. It was always there, and Bobby knew it was
alive. He knew it without question, like “my name is Bobby” and “Mommy
Gwen doesn’t want me.”

Quietly, quietly, he tiptoed to the other side of the room where there
was a small table lamp. He took it down and laid it carefully on the
floor. He pulled the plug out and brought it down under the lower rung
of the table so it led straight across the floor to the wall-receptacle,
and plugged it in again. Now he could move the lamp quite far out into
the room, almost to the middle.

The lamp had a round shade that was open at the top. Lying on its side,
the shade pointed its open top at the blank wall by the door. Bobby,
with the sureness of long practice, moved in the darkness to his closet
and got his dark-red flannel bathrobe from a low hook. He folded it once
and draped it over the large lower end of the lamp shade. He pushed the
button.

On the shadow country wall appeared a brilliant disk of light, crossed
by just the hints of the four wires that held the shade in place. There
was a dark spot in the middle where they met.

Bobby looked at it critically. Then, squatting between the lamp and the
wall, he put out his hand.

A duck. “Quackle-ackle,” he whispered.

An eagle. “Eagle—eagle—eagle—eagle,” he said softly.

An alligator. “Bap bap,” the alligator went as it opened and closed its
long snout.

He withdrew his hands and studied the round, cross-scarred light on the
wall. The blurred center shadow and its radiating lines looked a little
like a waterbug, the kind that can run on the surface of a brook. It
soon dissatisfied him; it just sat there without doing anything. He put
his thumb in his mouth and bit it gently until an idea came to him. Then
he scrambled to the bed, underneath which he found his slippers. He put
one on the floor in front of the lamp, and propped the other toe-upward
against it. He regarded the wall gravely for a time, and then lay flat
on his stomach on the floor. Watching the shadow carefully, he put his
elbows together on the carpet, twined his forearms together and merged
the shadow of his hands with the shadow of the slipper.

The result enchanted him. It was something like a spider, something like
a gorilla. It was a brand-new something that no one had ever seen
before. He writhed his fingers and then held them still, and now the
thing’s knobby head had triangular luminous eyes and a jaw that swung,
gaping. It had long arms for reaching and a delicate whorl of tentacles.
He moved the least little bit, and it wagged its great head and blinked
at him. Watching it, he felt suddenly that the flickering thing that
lived in the high corner had crept out and down toward the beast he had
made, closer and closer to it until—whoosh!—it noiselessly merged with
the beast, an act as quick and complete as the marriage of raindrops on
a windowpane.

Bobby crowed with delight. “Stay, stay,” he begged. “Oh, stay there!
I’ll pet you! I’ll give you good things to eat! Please stay, _please!”_

The thing glowered at him. He thought it would stay, but he didn’t
chance moving his hands away just yet.

The door crashed open, the switch clicked, the room filled with an
explosion of light.

_“What are you doing?”_

Bobby lay frozen, his elbows on the carpet in front of him, his forearms
together, his hands twisted oddly. He put his chin on his shoulder so he
could look at her standing there stiff and menacing. “I was—was just—”

She swooped down on him. She snatched him up off the floor and plumped
him down on the bed. She kicked and scattered his slippers. She snatched
up the lamp, pulling the cord out of the wall with the motion. “You were
not to have any toys,” she said in the hissing voice. “That means you
were not to make any toys. For this you’ll stay in here for—what are you
staring at?”

Bobby spread his hands and brought them together ecstatically, holding
tight. His eyes sparkled, and his small white teeth peeped out so that
they could see what he was smiling at. “He stayed, he did,” said Bobby.
“He stayed!”

“I don’t know what you’re talking about and I will not stay here to find
out,” snapped Mommy Gwen. “I think you’re a mental case.” She marched to
the door, striking the high switch.

The room went dark—except for that blank wall by the door.

Mommy Gwen screamed.

Bobby covered his eyes.

Mommy Gwen screamed again, hoarsely this time. It was a sound like a
dog’s bark, but drawn out and out.

There was a long silence. Bobby peeped through his fingers at the dimly
glowing wall. He took his hands down, sat up straight, drew his knees up
to his chest and put his arms around them. “Well!” he said.

Feet pounded up the stairs. “Gwen! Gwen!”

“Hello, Daddy.”

Daddy ran in, turning on the light. “Where’s Mommy Gwen, Bob boy? What
happened? I heard a—”

Bobby pointed at the wall. “She’s in there,” he said.

Daddy couldn’t have understood him, for he turned and ran out the door
calling “Gwen! Gwen!”

Bobby sat still and watched the fading shadow on the wall, quite visible
even in the blaze of the overhead light. The shadow was moving, moving.
It was a point-down triangle thrust into another point-down triangle
which was mounted on a third, and underneath were the two hard sticks of
legs. It had its arms up, its shadow-fists clenched, and it pounded and
pounded silently on the wall.

“Now I’m never going into the shadow country,” said Bobby complacently.
_“She’s_ there.”

So he never did.



THE STARS ARE THE STYX


EVERY FEW YEARS _someone thinks to call me Charon. It never lasts. I
guess I don’t look the part. Charon, you’ll remember, was the somber
ferryman who steered the boat across the River Styx, taking the departed
souls over to the Other Side. He’s usually pictured as a grim, taciturn
character, tall and gaunt_.

_I get called Charon, but that’s not what I look like. I’m not exactly
taciturn, and I don’t go around in a flapping black cloak. I’m too fat.
Maybe too old, too_.

_It’s a shrewd gag, though, calling me Charon. I do pass human souls
Out, and for nearly half of them, the stars are indeed the Styx—they
will never return_.

_I have two things I know Charon had. One is that bitter difference from
the souls I deal with. They have lost only one world; the other is
before them. But I’m rejected by both_.

_The other thing has to do with a little-known fragment of the Charon
legend. And that, I think, is worth a yarn_.

It’s Judson’s yarn, and I wish he was here to tell it himself—which is
foolish; the yarn’s about why he isn’t here. “Here” is Curbstone, by the
way—the stepping-off place to the Other Side. It’s Earth’s other slow
satellite, bumbling along out past the Moon. It was built 7800 years ago
for heavy interplanetary transfer, though of course there’s not much of
that left any more. It’s so easy to synthesize anything nowadays that
there’s just no call for imports. We make what we need from energy, and
there’s plenty of that around. There’s plenty of everything. Even
insecurity, though you have to come to Curbstone for that, and be
someone like Judson to boot.

It’s no secret—now—that insecurity is vital to the Curbstone project. In
a cushioned existence on a stable Earth, volunteers for Curbstone are
rare. But they come in—the adventurous, the dissatisfied, the yearning
ones, to man the tiny ships that will, in due time, give mankind a
segment of space so huge that even mankind’s voracious appetite for
expansion will be glutted for millennia. There is a vision that haunts
all humans today—that of a network of force-beams in the form of a
tremendous sphere, encompassing much of the known universe and a great
deal of the unknown—through which, like thought impulses through the
synaptic paths of a giant brain, matter will be transmitted instantly,
and a man may step from here to the depths of space while his heart
beats once. The vision frightens most and lures a few, and of those few,
some are chosen to go out. Judson was chosen.

I knew he’d come to Curbstone. I’d known it for years, ever since I was
on Earth and met him. He was just a youngster then, thirty or so, and
boiling around under that soft-spoken, shockproof surface of his was
something that had to drive him to Curbstone. It showed when he raised
his eyes. They got hungry. Any kind of hunger is rare on Earth. That’s
what Curbstone’s for. The ultimate social balance—an escape for the
unbalanced.

Don’t wince like that when I say ‘unbalanced.’ Plain talk is plain talk.
You can afford to be mighty plain about social imbalance these days.
It’s rare and it’s slight. Thing is, when a man goes through fifteen
years of primary social—childhood, I’m talking about—with all the subtle
tinkering that involves, and still has an imbalance, it’s a thing that
sticks with him no matter how slight it is. Even then, the very
existence of Curbstone is enough to make most of ’em quite happy to stay
where they are. The handful that do head for Curbstone do it because
they have to. Once here, only about half make the final plunge. The rest
go back—or live here permanently. Whatever they do, Curbstone takes care
of the imbalance.

When you come right down to it, misfits are that way either because they
lack something or because they have something _extra_. On Earth there’s
a place for everything and everything’s in its place. On Curbstone you
find someone who has what you lack, or who has the same extra something
you have—or you leave. You go back feeling that Earth’s a pretty nice
safe place after all, or you go Out, and it doesn’t matter to anyone
else, ever, whether you’re happy or not.

I was waiting in the entry bell when Judson arrived on Curbstone. Judson
had nothing to do with that. Didn’t even know he was on that particular
shuttle. It’s just that, aside from the fact that I happen to be Senior
Release Officer on Curbstone, I like to meet the shuttles. All sorts of
people come here, for all sorts of reasons. They stay here or they don’t
for all sorts of other reasons. I like to look at the faces that come
down that ramp and guess which ones will go which way. I’m pretty good
at it. As soon as I saw Judson’s face I knew that this boy was bound
Out. I recognized that about him even before I realized who it was.

There was a knot of us there to watch the newcomers come in. Most were
there just because it’s worth watching them all, the hesitant ones, the
damn-it-alls, the grim ones. But two Curbstoners I noticed particularly.
Hunters both. One was a lean, slick-haired boy named Wold. It was pretty
obvious what he was hunting. The other was Flower. It was just as
obvious what she had her long, wide-spaced eyes out for, but it was hard
to tell why. Last I had heard, she had been solidly wrapped up in an
Outbounder called Clinton.

I forgot about the wolf and the vixen when I recognized Judson and
bellowed at him. He dropped his kit where he stood and came bounding
over to me. He grabbed both my biceps and squeezed while I thumped his
ribs. “I was waiting up for you, Judson,” I grinned at him.

“Man, I’m glad you’re still here,” he said. He was a sandy-haired
fellow, all Adam’s apple and guarded eyes.

“I’m here for the duration,” I told him. “Didn’t you know?”

“No, I—I mean …”

“Don’t be tactful, Jud,” I said. “I belong here by virtue of the fact
that there’s nowhere else for me to go. Earth isn’t happy about men as
fat and funny-looking as I am in the era of beautiful people. And I
can’t go Out. I have a left axis deviation. I know that sounds
political; actually it’s cardiac.”

“I’m sorry.” He looked at my brassard. “Well, you’re Mr. Big around
here, anyway.”

“I’m just big around _here_,” I said, swatting my belt-line. “There’s
Coordination Office and a half-squad of Guardians who ice this
particular cake. I’m just the final check on Outbounders.”

“Yeah,” he said. “You don’t rate. Much. The whole function of this space
station waits on whether you say yes to a departure.”

“Shecks now,” I said, exaggerating my embarrassment to cover up my
exaggerated embarrassment. “Whatever, I wouldn’t worry too much if I
were you. I could be wrong—we’ll have to run some more tests on you—but
if ever I saw an Outbounder, it’s you.”

“Hi,” said a silken voice. “You already know each other. How nice.”

Flower.

There was something vaguely reptilian about Flower, which didn’t take a
thing from her brand of magnetism. Bit by bit, piece by piece, she was a
so-so looking girl. Her eyes were too long, and so dark they seemed to
be all pupil and the whites too white. Her nose was a bit too large and
her chin a bit too small, but so help me, there never was a more perfect
mouth. Her voice was like a cello bowed up near the bridge. She was
tall, with a fragile-in-the-middle slenderness and spring-steel flanks.
The overall effect was breathtaking. I didn’t like her. She didn’t like
me either. She never spoke to me except on business, and I had
practically no business with her. She’d been here a long time. I hadn’t
figured out why, then. But she wouldn’t go Out and she wouldn’t go back
to Earth—which in itself was all right; we had lots of room.

Let me tell you something about modern women and therefore something
about Flower—something you might not reason out unless you get as old
and objective as I’ve somehow lived to become.

Used to be, according to what I’ve read, that clothes ran a lot to what
I might call indicative concealment. As long as clothes had the
slightest excuse of functionalism, people in general and women in
particular made a large fuss over something called innate modesty—which
never did exist; it had to be learned. But as long as there was weather
around to blame clothes on, the myth was accepted. People exposed what
the world was indifferent to in order to whip up interest in the rest.
“Modesty is not so simple a virtue as honesty,” one of the old books
says. Clothes as weatherproofing got themselves all mixed up with
clothes as ornament; fashions came and went and people followed them.

But for the past three hundred years or so there hasn’t been any
“weather” as such, for anyone, here or on Earth. Clothes for only
aesthetic purposes became more and more the rule, until today it’s up to
the individual to choose what he’s going to wear, if anything. An
earring and a tattoo are quite as acceptable in public as forty meters
of iridescent plastiweb and a two-meter coiffure.

Now, most people today are healthy, well-selected, and good to look at.
Women are still as vain as ever. A woman with a bodily defect, real or
imagined, has one of two choices: She can cover the defect with
something artfully placed to look as if that was just the best place for
it, or she can leave the defect in the open, knowing that no one today
is going to judge her completely in terms of the defect. Folks nowadays
generally wait until they can find out what kind of human being you are.

But a woman who has no particular defect generally changes her clothes
with her mood. It might be a sash only this morning, but a trailing
drape this afternoon. Tomorrow it might be a one-sided blouse and
clinging trousers. You can take it as a very significant thing when such
a woman _always_ covers up. She’s keeping her natural warmth, as it
were, under forced draft.

I didn’t go into all this ancient history to impress you with my
scholastics. I’m using it to illustrate a very important facet of
Flower’s complex character. Because Flower was one of those forced-draft
jobs. Except on the sun-field and in the swimming pools, where no one
ever wears clothes, Flower always affected a tunic of some kind.

The day Judson arrived, she wore a definitive example of what I mean. It
was a single loose black garment with straight shoulders and no sleeves.
On both sides, from a point a hand’s-breath below the armpit, down to
the hipbone, it was slit open. It fastened snugly under her throat with
one magne-clasp, but was also slit from there to the navel. It did not
quite reach to mid-thigh, and the soft material carried a light
biostatic electrical charge, so that it clung to and fell away from her
body as she moved. So help me, she was a walking demand for the revival
of the extinct profession of peeping Tom.

This, then, was what horned in on my first few words with Judson. I
should have known from the way she looked that she was planning
something—something definitely for herself. I should have been doubly
warned by the fact that she took the trouble to speak up just when she
did—just when I told Jud he was a certifiable Outbounder if I ever saw
one.

So then and there I made my big mistake. “Flower,” I said, “this is
Judson.”

She used the second it took me to speak to suck in her lower lip, so
that when she smiled slowly at Jud, the lip swelled visibly as if by
blood pressure. “I _am_ glad,” she all but whispered.

And then she had the craft to turn the smile on me and walk away without
another word.

“… Gah!” said Judson through a tight glottis.

“That,” I told him, “was beautifully phrased. Gah, indeed. Reel your
eyeballs back in, Jud. We’ll drop your duffel off at the Outbound
quarters and—_Judson!”_

Flower had disappeared down the inner ramp. I was aware that Judson had
just started to breathe again.

“What?” he asked me.

I waddled over and picked up his gear. “Come on,” I said, and steered
him by the arm.

Judson had nothing to say until after we found him a room and started
for my sector. “Who is she?”

“A hardy perennial,” I said. “Came up to Curbstone two years ago. She’s
never been certified. She’ll get around to it soon—or never. Are you
going right ahead?”

“Just how do you handle the certification?”

“Give you some stuff to read. Pound some more knowledge into you for
six, seven nights while you sleep. Look over your reflexes, physical and
mental. An examination. If everything’s all right, you’re certified.”

“Then—Out?”

I shrugged. “If you like. You come to Curbstone strictly on your own.
You take your course if and when you like. And after you’ve been
certified, you leave when you want to, with someone or not, and without
telling anyone unless you care to.”

“Man, when you people say ‘voluntary’ you’re not just talking!”

“There’s no other way to handle a thing like this. And you can bet that
we get more people Out this way than we ever would on a compulsory
basis. In the long run, I mean, and this is a long-term project … six
thousand years long.”

He walked silently for a time, and I was pretty sure I knew his
thoughts. For Outbounders there is no return, and the best possible
chance they have of survival is something like fifty-four per cent, a
figure which was arrived at after calculations so complex that it might
as well be called a guess. You don’t force people Out against those
odds. They go by themselves, driven by their own reasoning, or they
don’t go at all.

After a time Judson said, “I always thought Outbounders were assigned a
ship and a departure time. With certified people leaving whenever they
feel like it, what’s to prevent uncertified ones from doing it?”

“That I’m about to show you.”

We passed the Coordination offices and headed out to the launching
racks. They were shut off from Top Central Corridor by a massive gate.
Over the gate floated three words in glowing letters:

SPECIES
GROUP
SELF

Seeing Jud’s eyes on it, I explained, “The three levels of survival.
They’re in all of us. You can judge a man by the way he lines them up.
The ones who have them in that order are the best. It’s a good thought
for Outbounders to take away with them.” I watched his face.
“Particularly since it’s always the third item that brings ’em this
far.”

Jud smiled slowly. “Along with all that bumbling you carry a sting,
don’t you?”

“Mine is a peculiar job,” I grinned back. “Come on in.”

I put my palm on the key-plate. It tingled for a brief moment and then
the shining doors slid back. I rolled through, stopping just inside the
launching court at Judson’s startled yelp.

“Well, come on,” I said.

He stood just inside the doors, straining mightily against nothing at
all. “Wh—wh—?” His arms were spread and his feet slipped as if he were
trying to force his way through a steel wall.

Actually he was working on something a good deal stronger than that.
“That’s the answer to why uncertified people don’t go Out,” I told him.
“The plate outside scanned the whorls and lines of my hand. The door
opened and that Gillis-Menton field you’re muscling passed me through.
It’ll pass anyone who’s certified, too, but no one else. Now stop
pushing or you’ll suddenly fall on your face.”

I stepped to the left bulkhead and palmed the plate there, then beckoned
to Judson. He approached the invisible barrier timidly. It wasn’t there.
He came all the way through, and I took my hand off the scanner.

“That second plate,” I explained, “works for me and certified people
only. There’s no way for an uncertified person to get into the launching
court unless I bring him in personally. It’s as simple as that. When the
certified are good and ready, they go. If they want to go Out with a
banquet and a parade beforehand, they can. If they want to roll out of
bed some night and slip Out quietly, they can. Most of ’em do it
quietly. Come on and have a look at the ships.”

We crossed the court to the row of low doorways along the far wall. I
opened one at random and we stepped into the ship.

“It’s just a room!”

“They all say that,” I chuckled. “I suppose you expected a planettype
space job, only more elaborate.”

“I thought they’d at least _look_ like ships. This is a double room out
of some luxury hotel.”

“It’s that, and then some.” I showed him around—the capacious food
lockers, the automatic air recirculators, and, most comforting of all,
the synthesizer, which meant food, fuel, tools and materials converted
directly from energy to matter.

“Curbstone’s more than a space station, Jud. It’s a factory, for one
thing. When you decide to go on your way, you’ll flip that lever by the
door. (You’ll be catapulted out—you won’t feel it, because of the stasis
generator and artificial gravity.) As soon as you’re gone, another ship
will come up from below into this slot. By the time you’re clear of
Curbstone’s gravitic field and slip into hyperdrive, the new ship’ll be
waiting for passengers.”

“And that will be going on for six thousand years?”

“More or less.”

“That’s a powerful lot of ships.”

“As long as Outbounders keep the quota, it is indeed. Nine hundred
thousand—including forty-six per cent failure.”

“Failure,” said Jud. He looked at me and I held his gaze.

“Yes,” I said. “The forty-six per cent who are not expected to get where
they are going. The ones who materialize inside solid matter. The ones
who go into the space-time nexus and never come out. The ones who reach
their assigned synaptic junction and wait, and wait, and wait until they
die of old age because no one gets to them soon enough. The ones who go
mad and kill themselves or their shipmates.” I spread my hands. “The
forty-six per cent.”

“You can convince a man of danger,” said Judson evenly, “but nobody ever
believed he was really and truly going to die. Death is something that
happens to other people. I won’t be one of the forty-six per cent.”

That was Judson. I wish he was still here.

I let the remark lie there on the thick carpet and went on with my
guided tour. I showed him the casing of the intricate beam-power
apparatus that contained the whole reason for the project, and gave him
a preliminary look at the astrogational and manual maneuvering equipment
and controls. “But don’t bother your pretty little head about it just
now, I added. “It’ll all be crammed into you before you get certified.”

We went back to the court, closing the door of the ship behind us.

“There’s a lot of stuff piled into those ships,” I observed, “but the
one thing that can’t be packed in sardine-size is the hyper-drive. I
suppose you know that.”

“I’ve heard something about it. The initial kick into second-order space
comes from the station here, doesn’t it? But how is the ship returned to
normal space on arrival?”

“That’s technology so refined it sounds like mysticism,” I answered. “I
don’t begin to understand it. I can give you an analogy, though. It
takes a power source, a compression device, and valving to fill a
pneumatic tire. It takes a plain nail to let the air out again. See what
I mean?”

“Vaguely. Anyway, the important thing is that Outbound is strictly one
way. Those ships never come back. Right?”

“So right.”

One of the doors behind us opened, and a girl stepped out of a ship.
“Oh … I didn’t know there was anyone here!” she said, and came toward us
with a long, easy stride. “Am I in the way?”

“You—in the way, Tween?” I answered. “Not a chance.”

I was very fond of Tween. To these jaded old eyes she was one of the
loveliest things that ever happened. Two centuries ago, before variation
limits were as rigidly set as they are now, Eugenics dreamed up her
kind—olive-skinned true-breeds with the silver hair and deep ruby eyes
of an albino. It was an experiment they should never have stopped.
Albinoism wasn’t dominant, but in Tween it had come out strongly. She
wore her hair long—really long; she could tuck the ends of it under her
toes and stand up straight when it was loose. Now it was braided in two
ingenious halves of a coronet that looked like real silver. Around her
throat and streaming behind her as she walked was a single length of
flame-colored material.

“This is Judson, Tween,” I said. “We were friends back on Earth. What
are you up to?”

She laughed, a captivating, self-conscious laugh. “I was sitting in a
ship pretending that it was Outside. We’d looked at each other one day
and suddenly said, ‘Let’s!’ and off we’d gone.” Her face was luminous.
“It was lovely. And that’s just what we’re going to do one of these
days. You’ll see.”

“ ‘We’? Oh—you mean Wold.”

“Wold,” she breathed, and I wished, briefly and sharply, that someone,
somewhere, someday would speak my name like that. And on the heels of
that reaction came the mental picture of Wold as I had seen him an hour
before, slick and smooth, watching the shuttle passengers with his dark
hunting eyes. There was nothing I could say though. My duties have their
limits. If Wold didn’t know a good thing when he saw it, that was his
hard luck.

But looking at that shining face, I knew it would be her hard luck.

“You’re certified?” Judson asked, awed.

“Oh, yes,” she smiled, and I said, “Sure is, Jud. But she had her
troubles, didn’t you, Tween?”

We started for the gate. “I did indeed,” said Tween. (I loved hearing
her talk. There was a comfortable, restful quality to her speech like
silence when an unnoticed, irritating noise disappears.) “I just didn’t
have the logical aptitudes when I first came. Some things just wouldn’t
stick in my head, even in hypnopedia. All the facts in the universe
won’t help if you don’t know how to put them together.” She grinned. “I
used to hate you.”

“Don’t blame you a bit.” I nudged Judson. “I turned down her
certification eight times. She used to come to my office to get the bad
news, and she’d stand there after I’d told her and shuffle her feet and
gulp a little bit. And the first thing she said then was always, ‘Well,
when can I start retraining?’ ”

She flushed, laughing. “You’re telling secrets!”

Judson touched her. “It’s all right. I don’t think less of you for any
of his maunderings … You must have wanted that certificate very much.”

“Yes,” she said. “Very much.”

“Could—could I ask why?”

She looked at him, in him, through him, past him. “All our lives,” she
said quietly, “are safe and sure and small. This—” she waved back
towards the ships—“is the only thing in our experience that’s none of
those things. I could give you fifty reasons for going Out. But I think
they all come down to that one.”

We were silent for a moment, and then I said, “I’ll put that in my
notebook, Tween. You couldn’t be more right. Modern life gives us
infinite variety in everything except the magnitude of the things we do.
And that stays pretty tiny.” And, I thought, big, fat, superannuated
station officials, rejected by one world and unqualified for the next. A
small chore for a small mind.

“The only reason most of us do puny things and think puny thoughts,”
Judson was saying, “is that Earth has too few jobs like his in these
efficient times.”

“Too few men like him for jobs like his,” Tween corrected.

I blinked at them both. It was me they were talking about. I don’t think
I changed expression much, but I felt as warm as the color of Tween’s
eyes.

We passed through the gates, Tween first with never a thought for the
barrier which did not exist for her, then Judson, waiting cautiously for
my go-ahead after the inside scanning plate had examined the whorls and
lines of my hand. I followed, and the great gates closed behind us.

“Want to come up to the office?” I asked Tween when we reached Central
Corridor.

“Thanks, no,” she said. “I’m going to find Wold.” She turned to Judson.
“You’ll be certified quickly,” she told him. “I just know. But, Judson—”

“Say it, whatever it is,” said Jud, sensing her hesitation.

“I was going to say get certified first. Don’t try to decide anything
else before that. You’ll have to take my word for it, but nothing that
ever happened to you is quite like the knowledge that you’re free to go
through those gates any time you feel like it.”

Judson’s face assumed a slightly puzzled, slightly stubborn expression.
It disappeared, and I knew it was a conscious effort for him to do it.
Then he put out his hand and touched her heavy silver hair. “Thanks,” he
said.

She strode off, the carriage of her head telling us that her face was
eager as she went to Wold. At the turn of the corridor she waved and was
gone.

“I’m going to miss that girl,” I said, and turned back to Judson. The
puzzled, stubborn look was back, full force. “What’s the matter?”

“What did she mean by that sisterly advice about getting certified
first? What else would I have to decide about right now?”

I swatted his shoulder. “Don’t let it bother you, Jud. She sees
something in you that you can’t see yourself, yet.”

That didn’t satisfy him at all. “Like what?” When I didn’t answer, he
asked, “You see it, too, don’t you?”

We started up the ramp to my office. “I like you,” I said. “I liked you
the minute I laid eyes on you, years ago, when you were just a sprout.”

“You’ve changed the subject.”

“Hell, I have. Now let me save my wind for the ramp.” This was only
slightly a stall. As the years went by, that ramp seemed to get steeper
and steeper. Twice Coordination had offered to power it for me and I’d
refused haughtily. I could see the time coming when I was going to be
too heavy for my high-horse. All the same, I was glad for the chance to
stall my answer to Judson’s question. The answer lay in my liking him; I
knew that instinctively. But it needed thinking through. We’ve
conditioned ourselves too much to analyze our dislikes and to take our
likes for granted.

The outer door opened as we approached. There was a man waiting in the
appointment foyer, a big fellow with a gray cape and a golden circlet
around his blue-black hair. “Clinton!” I said. “How are you, son?
Waiting for me?”

The inner door opened for me and I went into my office, Clinton behind
me. I fell down in my specially molded chair and waved him to a relaxer.
At the door Judson cleared his throat. “Shall I—uh …”

Clinton looked up swiftly, an annoyed, tense motion. He raked a blazing
blue gaze across Jud, and his expression changed. “Come in, for God’s
sake. Newcomer, hm? Sit down. Listen. You can’t learn enough about this
project. Or these people. Or the kind of flat spin an Outbounder can get
himself into.”

“Clint, this’s Judson,” I said. “Jud, Clint’s about the itchy-footedest
Outbounder of them all. What is on your mind, son?”

Clinton wet his lips. “How’s about me heading Out—_alone?_”

I said, “Your privilege, if you think you’ll enjoy it.”

He smacked a heavy fist into his palm. “Good then.”

“Of course,” I said, looking at the overhead, “the ships are built for
two. I’d personally be a bit troubled about the prospect of
spending—uh—however long it might be, staring at that empty bunk across
the way. Specially,” I added loudly, to interrupt what he was going to
say, “if I had to spend some hours or weeks or maybe a decade with the
knowledge that I was alone because I took off with a mad on.”

“This isn’t what you might call a fit of pique,” snapped Clinton. “It’s
been years building—first because I had a need and recognized it; second
because the need got greater when I started to work toward filling it;
third because I found who and what would satisfy it; fourth because I
was so wrong on point three.”

“You _are_ wrong? Or you’re _afraid_ you’re wrong?”

He looked at me blankly. “I don’t know,” he said, all the snap gone out
of his voice. “Not for sure.”

“Well, then you’ve no real problem. All you do is ask yourself whether
it’s worthwhile to take off alone because of a problem you haven’t
solved. If it is, go ahead.”

He rose and went to the door. “Clinton!” My voice must have crackled; he
stopped without turning, and from the corner of my eye I saw Judson sit
up abruptly. I said, more quietly, “When Judson here suggested that he
go away and leave us alone, why did you tell him to come in? What did
you see in him that made you do it?”

Clinton’s thoughtfully slitted eyes hardly masked their blazing blue as
he turned them on Judson, who squirmed like a schoolboy. Clinton said,
“I think it’s because he looks as if he can be reached. And trusted.
That answer you?”

“It does.” I waved him out cheerfully. Judson said, “You have an awesome
way of operating.”

“On him?”

“On both of us. How do you know what you did by turning his problem back
on himself? He’s likely to go straight to the launching court.”

“He won’t.”

“You’re sure.”

“Of course I’m sure,” I said flatly. “If Clinton hadn’t already decided
_not_ to take off alone—not today, anyhow—he wouldn’t have come to see
me and get argued out of it.”

“What’s really bothering him?”

“I can’t say.” I wouldn’t say. Not to Judson. Not now, at least. Clinton
was ripe to leave, and he was the kind to act when ready. He had found
what he thought was the perfect human being for him to go with. She
wasn’t ready to go. She never in all time and eternity would be ready to
go.

“All right,” said Jud. “What about me? That was very embarrassing.”

I laughed at him. “Sometimes when you don’t know exactly how to phrase
something for yourself, you can shock a stranger into doing it for you.
Why did I like you on sight, years ago, and now, too? Why did Clinton
feel you were trustworthy? Why did Tween feel free to pass you some
advice—and what prompted the advice? Why did—” No. Don’t mention the
most significant one of all. Leave her out of it. “—Well, there’s no
point in itemizing all afternoon. Clinton said it. _You can be reached_.
Practically anyone meeting you knows—feels, anyhow—that you can be
reached … touched … affected. We like feeling that we have an effect on
someone.”

Judson closed his eyes, screwed up his brow. I knew he was digging
around in his memory, thinking of close and casual acquaintances … how
many of them … how much they had meant to him and he to them. He looked
at me. “Should I change?”

“God, no! Only—don’t let it be _too_ true. I think that’s what Tween was
driving at when she said not to jump at any decisions until you’ve
reached the comparative serenity of certification.”

“Serenity … I could use some of that,” he murmured.

“Jud.”

“Mm?”

“Did you ever try to put into one simple statement just why you came to
Curbstone?”

He looked startled. Like most people, he had been living, and living
ardently, without ever wondering particularly what for. And like most
people, he had sooner or later had to answer the jackpot question: “What
am I doing here?”

“I came because—because … no, that wouldn’t be a simple statement.”

“All right. Run it off, anyway. A simple statement will come out of it
if there’s anything really important there. Any basic is simple, Jud.
Every basic is important. Complicated matters may be fascinating,
frightening, funny, intriguing, worrisome, educational, or what have
you; but if they’re complicated, they are, by definition, not
important.”

He leaned forward and put his elbows on his knees. His hands wound
tightly around one another, and his head went down.

“I came here … looking for something. Not because I thought it was here.
There was just nowhere else left to look. Earth is under such strict
discipline … discipline by comfort; discipline by constructive luxury.
Every need is taken care of that you can name, and no one seems to
understand that the needs you _can’t_ name are the important ones. And
all Earth is in a state of arrested development because of Curbstone.
Everything is held in check. The _status quo_ rules because for six
thousand years it must and will. Six thousand years of physical and
social evolution will be sacrificed for the single tremendous step that
Curbstone makes possible. And I couldn’t find a place for myself in the
static part of the plan, so the only place for me to go was to the
active part.”

He was quiet so long after that, I felt I had to nudge him along. “Could
it be that there _is_ a way to make you happy on Earth, and you just
haven’t been able to find it?”

“Oh, no,” he said positively. Then he raised his head and stared at me.
“Wait a minute. You’re very close to the mark there. That—that simple
statement is trying to crawl out.” He frowned. This time I kept my mouth
shut and watched him.

“The something I’m looking for,” he said finally, in the surest tones
he’d used yet, “is something I lack, or something I have that I haven’t
been able to name yet. If there’s anything on Earth or here that can
fill that hollow place, and if I find it, I won’t want to go Out. I
won’t need to go—I _shouldn’t_ go. But if it doesn’t exist for me here,
then Out I go, as part of a big something, rather than as a something
missing a part. Wait!” He chewed his lower lip. His knuckle-joints
crackled as he twisted his hands together. “I’ll rephrase that and
you’ll have your simple statement.”

He took a deep breath and said, “I came to Curbstone to find
out … whether there’s something I haven’t had yet that belongs to me, or
whether I … belong to something that hasn’t had me yet.”

“Fine,” I said. “Very damned fine. You keep looking, Jud. The answer’s
here, somewhere, in some form. I’ve never heard it put better: Do you
owe, or are you owed? There are three possible courses open to you no
matter which way you decide.”

“There are? Three?”

I put up fingers one at a time. “Earth. Here. Out.”

“I—see.”

“And you can take the course of any one of the words you saw floating
over the gate to the launching court.”

He stood up. “I’ve got a lot to think about.”

“You have.”

“But I’ve got me one hell of a blueprint.”

I just grinned at him.

“You through with me?” he asked.

“For now.”

“When do I start work for my certificate?”

“At the moment, you’re just about four-ninths through.”

“You dog!” All this has been—”

“I’m a working man, Jud. I work all the time. Now beat it. You’ll hear
from me.”

“You dog,” he said again. “You old _hound-_dog!” But he left.

I sat back to think. I thought about Judson, of course. And Clinton and
his worrisome solo ideas. The trip can be done solo, but it isn’t a good
idea. The human mind’s communications equipment isn’t a convenience—it’s
a vital necessity. Tween. How beautiful can a girl get? And the way she
lights up when she thinks about going Out. She’s certified now. Guess
she and Wold will be taking off any time now.

Then my mind spun back to Flower. Put those pieces together … something
should fit. Turn it this way, back—Ah! Clinton wants Out. He’s been
waiting and waiting for his girl to get certified. She hasn’t even
tried. He’s not going to wait much longer. Who’s his girl now …?

Flower.

Flower, who turned all that heat on Judson.

Why Judson? There were bigger men, smarter, better-looking ones. What
was special about Judson?

I filed the whole item away in my mind—with a red priority tab on it.

The days went by. A gong chimed and the number-board over my desk
glowed. I didn’t have to look up the numbers to know who it was. Fort
and Mariellen. Nice kids. Slipped Out during a sleep period. I thought
about them, watched the chain of checking lights flicker on, one after
another. Palm-patterns removed from the Gate scanner; they’d never be
used there again. Ship replaced. Quarters cleared and readied. Launching
time reported to Coordination. Marriage recorded. Automatic machinery
calculated, filed, punched cards, activated more automatic machinery
until Fort and Mariellen were only axial alignments on the molecules of
a magnetic tape … names … memories … dead, perhaps; gone, certainly, for
the next six thousand years.

Hold tight, Earth! Wait for them, the fifty-four per cent (I hope, I
ardently hope) who will come back. Their relatives, their Earth-bound
friends will be long dead, and all their children and theirs; so let the
Outbounders come home at least to the same Earth, the same language, the
same traditions. They will be the millennial traditions of a
more-than-Earth, the source of the unthinkable spatial sphere made
fingertip-available to humankind through the efforts of the Outbounders.
Earth is prepaying six thousand years of progress in exchange for the
ability to use stars for stepping-stones, to be able to make Mars in a
minute, Antares and Betelgeuse afternoon stops in a delivery run. Six
thousand years of sacred stasis buys all but a universe, conquers Time,
eliminates the fractionation of humanity into ship-riding,
minute-shackled fragments of diverging evolution among the stars. All
the stars will be in the next room when the Outbounders return.

Six thousand times around Sol, with Sol moving in a moving galaxy, and
that galaxy in flight through a fluxing universe. That all amounts to a
resultant movement of Earth through nine Möllner degrees around the
Universal Curve. For six thousand years Curbstone flings off its tiny
ships, its monstrous power plant kicking them into space-time and the
automatics holding them there until all—or until enough—are positioned.
Some will materialize in the known universe and some in faintly
suspected nebulae; some will appear in the empty nothingnesses beyond
the galactic clusters, and some will burst into normal space inside
molten suns.

But when the time comes, and the little ships are positioned in a great
spherical pattern out around space, and together they become real again,
they will send to each other a blaze of tight-beam energy. Like the
wiring of a great switchboard, like the synapses of a brain, each beam
will find its neighbors, and through them Earth.

And then, within and all through that sphere, humanity will spread,
stepping from rim to rim of the universe in seconds, instantaneously
transmitting men and materials from and to the stars. Here a ship can be
sent piecemeal and assembled, there a space station. Yonder, on some
unheard-of planet of an unknown star, men light years away from Earth
can assemble matter transceivers and hook them up to the great sphere,
and add yet another world to those already visited.

And what of the Outbounders?

Real time, six thousand years.

Ship’s time, from second-order spatial entry to materialization—_zero_.

Fort and Mariellen. Nice kids. Memories now; lights on a board, one
after another, until they’re all accounted for. At Curbstone, the quiet
machinery says, “Next!”

Fort and Mariellen. Clinging together, they press down the launching
lever. Effortlessly in their launching, they whirl away from Curbstone.
In minutes there is a flicker of gray, or perhaps not even that. Strange
stars surround them. They stare at one another. They are
elsewhere … else_when_. Lights glow. This one says the tight-beam has
gone on, pouring out toward the neighbors and, through them, to all the
others. That one cries _“emergency”_ and Fort whips to the manual
controls and does what he can to avoid a dust-cloud, a planet … perhaps
an alien ship.

Fort and Mariellen (or George and Viki, or Bruce, who went Out by
himself, Eleanor and Grace, or Sam and Rod—they were brothers) may
materialize and die in an intolerable matter-displacement explosion so
quickly that there is no time for pain. They may be holed by a meteor
and watch, with glazing freezing eyes, the froth bubbling up from each
other’s bursting lungs. They may survive for minutes or weeks, and then
fall captive to some giant planet or unsuspected sun. They may be hunted
down and killed or captured by beings undreamed of.

And some of them will survive all this and wait for the blessed contact;
the strident heralding of the matter transceiver with which each ship is
equipped—and the abrupt appearance of a man, sixty centuries unborn when
they left Curbstone, instantly transmitted from Earth to their vessel.
Back with him they’ll go, to an unchanged and ecstatic Earth, teeming
with billions of trained, mature humans ready to fill the universe with
human ways—the new humans who have left war and greed behind them, who
have acquired a universe so huge that they need exploit no creature’s
properties, so rich and available is everything they require.

And some will survive, and wait, and die waiting because of some
remotely extrapolated miscalculation. The beams never reach them; their
beams contact nothing. And perhaps a few of these will not die, but will
find refuge on some planet to leave a marker that will shock whatever is
alive and intelligent a million years hence. Perhaps they will leave
more than that. Perhaps there will be a slower, more hazardous planting
of humanity in the gulfs.

But fifty-four per cent, the calculations insist, will establish the
star-conquering sphere and return.

The weeks went by. A chime: Bark and Barbara. Damn it all, no more of
Barbara’s banana cream pie. The filing, the sweeping, the recording, the
lights. Marriage recorded.

When a man and woman go Out together, that is marriage. There is another
way to be married on Curbstone. There is a touch less speed involved in
it than in joined hands pressing down a launching lever. There is not
one whit less solemnity. It means what it means because it is not
stamped with necessity. Children derive their names from their mothers,
wed or not, and there is no distinction. Men and women, as responsible
adults, do as they please within limits which are extremely wide.
_Except.…_

By arduous trial and tragic error, humanity has evolved modern marriage.
With social pressure removed from the pursuit of a mate, with the end of
the ribald persecution of spinsterhood, a marriage ceases to be a rubber
stamp upon what people are sure to do, with or without ceremonies. Where
men and women are free to seek their own company, as and when they
choose, without social penalties, they will not be trapped into
hypocrisies with marriage vows. Under such conditions a marriage is
entered gravely and with sincerity, and it constitutes a public
statement of choice and—with the full implementation of a mature
society—of inviolability. The lovely, ancient words “forsaking all
others” spell out the nature of modern marriage, with the universally
respected adjunct that fidelity is not a command or a restriction, but a
chosen path. Divorce is swift and simple, and—almost unheard of. Married
people live this way, single people live that way; the lines are drawn
and deeply respected. People marry because they intend to live within
the limits of marriage. The fact that a marriage exists is complete
proof that it is working.

I had a word about marriage with Tween. Ran into her in the Gate
corridor. I think she’d been in one of the ships again. If she was pale,
her olive skin hid it. If her eyes were bloodshot, the lustrous ruby of
her eyes covered it up. Maybe I saw her dragging her feet as she walked,
or some such. I took her chin in my hand and tilted her head back. “Any
dragons I can kill?”

She gave me a brilliant smile, which lived only on her lips. “I’m
wonderful,” she said bravely.

“You are,” I agreed. “Which doesn’t necessarily have anything to do with
the way you feel. I won’t pry, child; but tell me—if you ever ate too
many green apples, or stubbed your toe on a cactus, do you know a nice
safe something you could hang on to while you cried it out?”

“I do,” she said breathlessly, making the smile just as hard as she
could. “Oh, I do.” She patted my cheek. “You’re … listen. Would you tell
me something if I asked you?”

“About certificates? No, Tween. Not about anyone else’s certificate.
But—all he has to do is complete his final hypnopediae, and he just
hasn’t showed up.”

She hated to hear it, but I’d made her laugh, too, a little. “Do you
read minds, the way they all say?”

“I do not. And if I could, I wouldn’t. And if I couldn’t help reading
’em, I’d sure never act as if I could. In other words, no. It’s just
that I’ve been alive long enough to know what pushes people around. So’s
I don’t care much about a person, I can judge pretty well what’s
bothering him.

“ ’Course,” I added, “if I do give a damn, I can tell even better.
Tween, you’ll be getting married pretty soon, right?”

Perhaps I shouldn’t have said that. She gasped, and for a moment she
just stopped making that smile. Then, “Oh, yes,” she said brightly.
“Well, not exactly. What I mean is, when we go Out, you see, so we might
as well not, and I imagine as soon as Wold gets his certificate,
we’ll … we kind of feel going Out is the best … I seem to have gotten
something in my eye. I’m s-sor.…”

I let her go. But when I saw Wold next—it was down in the Euphoria
Sector—I went up to him very cheerfully. There are ways I feel sometimes
that make me real jovial.

I laid my hand on his shoulder. His back bowed a bit and it seemed to me
I felt vertebrae grinding together. “Wold, old boy,” I said heartily.
“Good to see you. You haven’t been around much recently. Mad?”

He pulled away from me. “A little,” he said sullenly. His hair was too
shiny and he had perfect teeth that always reminded me of a keyboard
instrument.

“Well, drop around,” I said. “I like to see young folks get ahead. You,”
I added with a certain amount of emphasis, “have gone pretty damn far.”

“So have you,” he said with even more emphasis.

“Well, then.” I slapped him on the back. His eyeballs stayed in, which
surprised me. “You can top me. You can go farther than I ever can. See
you soon, old fellow.”

I walked off, feeling the cold brown points of his gaze.

And as it happened, not ten minutes later I saw that _kakumba_ dance. I
don’t see much dancing usually, but there was an animal roar from the
dance-chamber that stopped me, and I ducked in to see what had the
public so charmed.

The dance had gone through most of its figures, with the caller already
worked up into a froth and only three couples left. As I shouldered my
way to a vantage point, one of the three couples was bounced, leaving
the two best. One was a tall blonde with periwigged hair and subvoltaic
bracelets that passed and repassed a clatter of pastel arcs; she was
dancing with one of the armor-monkeys from the Curbstone Hull Division,
and they were good.

The other couple featured a slender, fluid dark girl in an open tunic of
deep brown. She moved so beautifully that I caught my breath, and
watched so avidly that it was seconds before I realized it was Flower.
The reaction to that made me lose more seconds in realizing that her
partner was Judson. Good as the other couple were, they were better. I’d
tested Jud’s reflexes, and they were phenomenal, but I’d had no idea he
could respond like this to anything.

The caller threw the solo light to the first couple. There was a wild
burst of music and the arc-wielding blonde and her arc-wielding boy
friend cut loose in an intricate frenzy of disjointed limbs and
half-beat stamping. So much happened between those two people so fast
that I thought they’d never get separated when the music stopped. But
they untangled right with the closing bars, and a roar went up from the
people watching them. And then the same blare of music was thrown at Jud
and Flower.

Judson simply stood back and folded his arms, walking out a simple
figure to indicate that, honest, he was dancing, too. But he gave it all
to Flower.

Now I’ll tell you what she did in a single sentence: she knelt before
him and slowly stood up with her arms over her head. But words will
never describe the process completely. It took her about twelve minutes
to get all the way up. At the fourth minute the crowd began to realize
that her body was trembling. It wasn’t a wriggle or a shimmy, or
anything as crude as that. It was a steady, apparently uncontrollable
shiver. At about the eighth minute the audience began to realize it was
controlled, and just how completely controlled it was. It was hypnotic,
incredible. At the final crescendo she was on her tiptoes with her arms
stretched high, and when the music stopped she made no flourish; she
simply relaxed and stood still, smiling at Jud. Even from where I stood
I could see the moisture on Jud’s face.

A big man standing beside me grunted, a tight, painful sound. I turned
to him; it was Clinton. Tension crawled through his jaw-muscles like a
rat under a rug. I put my hand on his arm. It was rocky. “Clint.”

“Wh—oh. Hi.”

“Thirsty?”

“No,” he said. He turned back to the dance floor, searched it with his
eyes, found Flower.

“Yes, you are, son.” I said. “Come on.”

“Why don’t you go and—” He got hold of himself. “You’re right. I am
thirsty.”

We went to the almost deserted Card Room and dispensed ourselves some
methyl-caffeine. I didn’t say anything until we’d found a table. He sat
stiffly looking at his drink without seeing it. Then he said, “Thanks.”

“For what?”

“I was about to be real uncivilized in there.”

I just waited.

He said truculently, “Well, damn it, she’s free to do what she wants,
isn’t she? She likes to dance—good. Why shouldn’t she? Damn it, what is
there to get excited about?”

“Who’s excited?”

“It’s that Judson. What’s he have to be crawling around her all the time
for? She hasn’t done a damn thing about getting her certificate since he
got here.” He drank his liquor down at a gulp. It had no apparent
effect, which meant something.

“What had she done before he got here?” I asked quietly. When he didn’t
answer I said, “Jud’s Outbound, Clint. I wouldn’t worry. I can guarantee
Flower won’t be with him when he goes, and that will be real soon. Hold
on and wait.”

“Wait?” His lip curled. “I’ve been ready to go for weeks. I used to
think of … of Flower and me working together, helping each other. I used
to make plans for a celebration the day we got certified. I used to look
at the stars and think about the net we’d help throw around them, pull
’em down, pack ’em in a basket. Flower and me, back on Earth after six
thousand years, watching humanity come into its own, knowing we’d done
something to help. I’ve been waiting, and you say wait some more.”

“This,” I said, “is what you call an unstable situation. It can’t stay
the way it is and it won’t. Wait, I tell you: wait. There’s got to be a
blow-off.”

There was.

In my office the chime sounded. Moira and Bill. Certificates denied to
Hester, Elizabeth, Jenks, Mella. Hester back to Earth. Hallowell and
Letitia, marriage recorded. Certificates granted to Aaron, Musette,
n’Guchi, Mancinelli, Judson.

Judson took the news quietly, glowing. I hadn’t seen much of him
recently. Flower took up a lot of his time, and training the rest. After
he was certified and I’d gone with him to test the hand-scanner by the
gate and give him his final briefing, he cut out on the double, I guess
to give Flower the great news. I remember wondering how he’d like her
reaction.

When I got back to my office Tween was there. She rose from the foyer
couch as I wheezed in off the ramp. I took one look at her and said,
“Come inside.” She followed me through the inner door. I waved my hand
over the infra-red plate and it closed. Then I put out my arms.

She bleated like a new-born lamb and flew to me. Her tears were
scalding, and I don’t think human muscles are built for the wrenching
those agonized sobs gave her. People should cry more. They ought to
learn how to do it easily, like laughing or sweating. Crying piles up.
In people like Tween, who do nothing if they can’t smile and make a
habit-pattern of it, it really piles up. With a reservoir like that, and
no developed outlet, things get torn when the pressure builds too high.

I just held her tight so she wouldn’t explode. The only thing I said to
her was “sh-h-h” once when she tried to talk while she wept. One thing
at a time.

It took a while, but when she was finished she was finished. She didn’t
taper off. She was weak from all that punishment, but calm. She talked.

“He isn’t a real thing at all,” she said bleakly. “He’s something I made
up out of starshine, out of wanting so much to be a part of something as
big as this project. I never felt I had anything big about me except
that. I wanted to join it with something bigger than I was, and,
together, we’d build something so big it would be worthy of Curbstone.

“I thought it was Wold. I _made_ it be Wold. Oh, none of this is his
fault. I could have seen what he was, and I just wouldn’t. What I did
with him, what I felt for him, was just as crazy as if I’d convinced
myself he had wings and then hated him because he wouldn’t fly. He isn’t
anything but a h-hero. He struts to the newcomers and the rejected ones
pretending he’s a man who will one day give himself to humanity and the
stars. He … probably believes that about himself. But he won’t complete
his training, and he … now I know, now I can see it—he tried everything
he could think of to stop me from being certified. I was no use to him
with a certificate. He couldn’t treat me as his pretty slightly stupid
little girl, once I was certified. And he couldn’t get his own
certificate because if he did he’d have to go Out, one of these days,
and that’s something he can’t face.

“He—_wants_ me to leave him. If I will, if it’s my decision, he can wear
my memory like a black band on his arm, and delude himself for the rest
of his life that his succession of women is just a search for something
to replace me. Then he’ll always have an excuse; he’ll never, never have
to risk his neck. He’ll be the shattered hero, and women as stupid as I
will try to heal the wounds he’s arranged for me to give him.”

“You don’t hate him?” I asked her quietly.

“No. Oh, no, _no!_ I told you, it wasn’t his fault. I—loved _something_.
A man lived in my heart, lived there for years. He had no name and no
face. I gave him Wold’s name and Wold’s face and just wouldn’t believe
it wasn’t Wold. I did it. Wold didn’t. I don’t hate him. I don’t like
him. I just don’t … _anything!_”

I patted her shoulder. “Good. You’re cured. If you hated him, he’d still
be important. What are you going to do?”

“What shall I do?”

“I’d never tell you what to do about a thing like this, Tween. You know
that. You’ve got to figure out your own answers. I can advise you to use
those new-opened eyes of yours carefully, though. And don’t think that
that man who lives in your heart doesn’t exist anywhere else. He does.
Right here on this station, maybe. You just haven’t been able to see him
before.”

“Who?”

“God, girl, don’t ask me that! Ask Tween next time you see her; no one
will ever know for sure but Tween.”

“You’re so wise.…”

“Nah. I’m old enough to have made more mistakes than most people, that’s
all, and I have a good memory.”

She rose shakily. I put out a hand and helped her. “You’re played out,
Tween. Look—don’t go back yet. Hide out for a few days and get some rest
and do some thinking. There’s a suite on this level. No one will bother
you, and you’ll find everything there you need, including silence and
privacy.”

“That would be good,” she said softly. “Thank you.”

“All right … listen. Mind if I send someone in to talk to you?”

“Talk? Who?”

“Let me play it as it comes.”

The ruby eyes sent a warm wave to me, and she smiled. I thought, I wish
I was as confident of myself as she is of me. “It’s 412,” I said, “the
third door to your left. Stay there as long as you want to. Come back
when you feel like it.”

She came close to me and tried to say something. I thought for a second
she was going to kiss me on the mouth. She didn’t; she kissed my hand.
“I’ll swat your bottom!” I roared, flustered. “Git, now, dammit!” She
laughed … she always had a bit of laughter tucked away in her, no matter
what, bless her cotton head.…

As soon as she was gone, I turned to the annunciator and sent out a call
for Judson. _Hell_, I thought, _you can try, can’t you?_ Waiting, I
thought about Judson’s hungry upward look, and that hole in his
head … that quality of reachableness, and what happened when he was
reached by the wrong thing. Lord, responsive people certainly make the
worst damn fools of all!

He was there in minutes, looking flushed, excited, happy, and worried
all at once. “Was on my way here when your call went out,” he said.

“Sit down, Jud. I have a small project in mind. Maybe you could help.”

He sat. I looked for just the right words to use. I couldn’t say
anything about Flower. She had her hooks into him; if I said anything
about her, he’d defend her. And one of the oldest phenomena in human
relations is that we come to be very fond of the thing we find ourselves
defending, even if we didn’t like it before. I thought again of the
hunger that lived in Jud, and what Tween might see of it with her newly
opened eyes.

“Jud—”

“I’m married,” he blurted.

I sat very still. I don’t think my face did anything at all.

“It was the right thing for me to do,” he said, almost angrily. “Don’t
you see? You know what my problem is—it was you who found it for me. I
was looking for something that should belong to me … or something to
belong to.”

“Flower,” I said.

“Of course. Who else? Listen, that girl’s got trouble, too. What do you
suppose blocks her from taking her certificate? She doesn’t think she’s
_worthy_ of it.”

My, I said. Fortunately, I said it to myself.

Jud said, “No matter what happens, I’ve done the right thing. If I can
help her get her certificate, we’ll go Out together, and that’s what
we’re here for. If I can’t help her do that, but find that she fills
that place in me that’s been so empty for so long, well and good—that’s
what _I’m_ here for. We can go back to Earth and be happy.”

“You’re quite sure of all this.”

“Sure I’m sure! Do you think I’d have gone ahead with the marriage if I
weren’t sure?”

Sure you would, I thought. I said, “Congratulations, then. You know I
wish you the best.”

He stood up uncertainly, started to say something, and apparently
couldn’t find it. He went to the door, turned back. “Will you come for
dinner tonight?” I hesitated. He said, “Please. I’d appreciate it.”

I cocked an eyebrow. “Answer me straight, Jud. Is dinner your idea or
Flower’s?”

He laughed embarrassedly. “Damn it, you always see too much. Mine … sort
of … I mean, it isn’t that she dislikes you, but … well, hell, I want
the two of you to be friends, and I think you’d understand her, and me
too, a lot better if you made the effort.”

I could think of things I’d much rather do than have dinner with Flower.
A short swim in boiling oil, for example. I looked up at his anxious
face. Oh, hell. “I’d love to,” I said. “Around eight?”

“Fine! Gee,” he said, like a school kid. “Gee, thanks.” He shuffled, not
knowing whether to go right away or not. “Hey,” he said suddenly. “You
sent out a call for me. What’s this project you wanted me for?”

“Nothing, Jud,” I said tiredly. “I’ve … changed my mind. See you later,
son.”

The dinner was something special. Steaks. Jud had broiled them himself.
I got the idea that he’d selected them, too, and set the table. It was
Flower, though, who got me something to sit on. She looked me over,
slowly and without concealing it, went to the table, pulled the light
formed-aluminum chair away, and dragged over a massive relaxer. She then
smiled straight at me. A little unnecessary, I thought; I’m bulky, but
those aluminum chairs have always held up under me so far.

I won’t give it to you round by round. The meal passed with Flower
either in a sullen silence or manufacturing small brittle whips of
conversation. When she was quiet, Jud tried to goad her into talking.
When she talked, he tried to turn the conversation away from me. The
occasion, I think, was a complete success—for Flower. For Jud it must
have been hell. For me—well, it was interesting.

Item: Flower poked and prodded at her steak, and when she got a lull in
the labored talk Jud and I were squeezing out, she began to cut
meticulously around the edges of the steak. “If there is anything I
can’t stand the sight or the smell of,” she said clearly, “it’s fat.”

Item: She said, “Oh, Lord” this and “Lord sakes” that in a drawl that
made it come out “Lard” every time.

Item: I sneezed once. She whipped a tissue over to me swiftly and
politely enough, and then said “Render unto sneezers …” which stood as a
cute quip until she nudged her husband and said, _“Render!”_ at which
point things got real hushed.

Item: When she had finished, she leaned back and sighed. “If I ate like
that all the time, I’d be a big as—” She looked straight at me and
stopped. Jud, flushing miserably, tried to kick her under the table; I
know, because it was me he kicked. Flower finished, “—as big as a
lifeboat.” But she kept looking at me, easily and insultingly.

Item—You get the idea. All I can say for myself is that I got through it
all. I wouldn’t give her the satisfaction of driving me out until I’d
had all she could give me. I wouldn’t be overtly angry, because if I
did, she’d present me to Jud ever after as the man who hated her. If Jud
ever had wit enough, this evening could be remembered as the time she
was insufferably insulting, and that was all I wanted.

It was over at last, and I made my excuses as late as I possibly could
without staying overnight. As I left, she took Jud’s arm and held it
tight until I was out of sight, thereby removing the one chance he had
to come along a little way and apologize to me.

He didn’t get close enough to speak to me for four days, and when he
did, I had the impression that he had lied to be there, that Flower
thought he was somewhere else. He said rapidly, “About the other night,
you mustn’t think that—”

And I cut him off as gently and firmly as I could: “I understand it
perfectly, Jud. Think a minute and you’ll know that.”

“Look, Flower was just out of sorts. I’ll work on her. Next time you
come there’ll be a real difference. You’ll see.”

“I’m sure I will, Jud. But drop it, will you? There’s no harm done.” And
I thought, next time I come will be six months after the Outbounders get
back. That gives me sixty centuries or so to get case-hardened.

About a week after Jud’s wedding, I was in the Upper Central corridor
where it ramps into the Gate passageway. Now whether it was some sixth
sense, or whether I actually did smell something, I don’t know. I got a
powerful, sourceless impression of methyl-caffeine in the air, and at
the same time I looked down the passage and saw the Gate just closing.

I got down there altogether too fast to do my leaky valves any good. I
palmed the doors open and sprinted across the court. When anything my
size and shape gets to sprinting, it’s harder to stop it than let it
keep going. One of the ship ports was open and I was heading for it. It
started to swing closed. I lost all thought of trying to slow down and
put what little energy I could find into pumping my old legs faster.

With a horrible slow-motion feeling of disaster, I felt one toe tip my
other heel, and my center of gravity began to move forward faster than I
was traveling. I was in mid-air for an age—long enough to chew and
swallow a tongue—and then I hit on my stomach, rocked forward on my
receding chest and two of my chins, and slid. I had my hands out in
front of me. My left hit the bulkhead and buckled. My right shot through
what was left of the opening of the door, which crunched shut on my
forearm. Then my forehead hit the sill and I blacked out.

When the lights dimmed on again, I was spread out on a ship’s bunk,
apparently alone. My left arm hurt more than I could bear, and my right
arm hurt worse, and both of them together couldn’t match what was going
on in my head.

A man appeared from the service cubicle when I let out a groan. He had a
bowl of warm water and the ship’s B first-aid kit in his hands. He
crossed quickly to me, and began to stanch the blood from between some
of my chins. It wasn’t until then that my blurring sight made out who he
was.

“Clinton, you hub-forted son of a bastich!” I roared at him. “Leave the
chin alone and get some plexicaine into these arms!”

He had the gall to laugh at me. “One thing at a time, old man. You are
bleeding. Let’s try to be a patient, not an impatient.”

“Impatient, out-patient,” I yelped, “get that plex into me! I am just
not the strong, silent type!”

“Okay, okay.” He got the needle out of the kit, squirted it upward, and
plunged it deftly into my arms. A good boy. He hit the biceps on one,
the forearm on the other, and got just the right ganglia. The pain
vanished. That left my head, but he fed me an analgesic and that
cataclysmic ache began to recede.

“I’m afraid the left is broken,” he said. “As for the right—well, if I
hadn’t seen that hand come crawling in over the sill like a pet puppy,
and reversed the door control, I’d have cut your fingernails clear up to
the elbow. What in time did you think you were doing?”

“I can’t remember; maybe I’ve got a concussion. For some reason or other
it seemed I had to look inside the ship. Can you splint this arm?”

“Let’s call the medic.”

“You can do just as well.”

He went for the C kit and got a traction splint out. He whipped the
prepared cushioning around the swelling arm, clamped the ends of the
splint at the wrist and elbow, and played an infra-red lamp on it. In a
few seconds the splint began to lengthen. When the broken forearm was a
few millimeters longer than the other, he shut off the heat and the
thermoplastic splint automatically set and snugged into the cushioning.
Clinton threw off the clamps. “That’s good enough for now. All right,
are you ready to tell me what made you get in my way?”

“No.”

“Stop trying to look like an innocent babe! Your stubble gives you away.
You knew I was going to solo, didn’t you?”

“No one said anything to me.”

“No one ever has to,” he said in irritation, and then chuckled. “Man, I
wish I could stay mad at you. All right—what next?”

“You’re not going to take off?”

“With you in here? Don’t be foolish. The station’d lose too much and I
wouldn’t be gaining a thing. Damn you! I’d worked up the most glamorous
drunk on methyl-caffeine, and you had to get me all anxious and drive
away the fumes … Well, go ahead. I’ll play it your way. What do we do?”

“Stop trying to make a Machiavelli out of me,” I growled. “Give me a
hand back to my quarters and I’ll let you go do whatever you want.”

“It’s never that simple with you,” he half-grinned. “Okay. Let’s go.”

When I got to my feet—with more of his help than I like to admit—my
heart began to pound. He must have felt it, because he said nothing
while we stood there and waited for it to behave itself. Clinton was a
good lad.

We negotiated the court and the Gate all right, but slowly. When we got
to the foot of my ramp, I shook my head. “Not that,” I wheezed.
“Couldn’t make it. Down this way.”

We went down the lateral corridor to 412. The door slid back for me.

“Hi!” I called. “Company.”

“What? Who is it?” came the crystal voice. Tween appeared. “Oh—oh! I
didn’t want to see anyone just—why, what’s happened?”

My eyelids flickered. I moaned. Clinton said, “I think we better get him
spread out. He’s not doing so well.”

Tween ran to us and took my arm gently above the splint. They got me to
a couch and I collapsed on it.

“Damn him,” said Clinton good-humoredly. “He seems to be working full
time to keep me from going Out.”

There was such a long silence that I opened one eye to look at them.
Tween was staring at him as if she had never seen him before—as,
actually, she hadn’t, with her eyes so full of Wold.

“Do you really want to go Out?” she asked softly.

“More than …” He looked at her hair, her lovely face. “I don’t think
I’ve seen you around much. You’re—Tween, aren’t you?”

She nodded and they stopped talking. I snapped my eyes shut because they
were sure to look at me just for something to do.

“Is he all right?” she asked.

“I think he’s—yes, he’s asleep. Don’t wonder. He’s been through a lot.”

“Let’s go in the other room where we can talk together without
disturbing him.”

They closed the door. I could barely hear them. It went on for a long
time, with occasional silences. Finally I heard what I’d been listening
for: “If it hadn’t been for him, I’d be gone now. I was just about to
solo.”

“No! Oh, I’m glad … I’m glad you didn’t.”

One of those silences. Then, “So am I, Tween. Tween …” in a whisper of
astonishment.

I got up off the couch and silently let myself out. I went back to my
quarters, even managing to climb the ramp. I felt real fine.

I heard an ugly rumor.

I’d seen a lot and I’d done a lot, and I regarded myself as pretty
shockproof, but this one jolted me to the core. I took refuge in the old
ointment, “It can’t be, it just can’t be,” but in my heart I knew it
could.

I got hold of Judson. He was hollow-eyed and much quieter than usual. I
asked him what he was going these days, though I knew.

“Boning up on the fine points of astrogation,” he told me. “I’ve never
hit anything so fascinating. It’s one thing to have the stuff shoveled
into your head when you’re asleep, and something else again to
experience it all, note by note, like music.”

“But you’re spending an awful lot of time in the archives, son.”

“It takes a lot of time.”

“Can’t you study at home?”

I think he only just then realized what I was driving at. “Look,” he
said quietly, “I have my troubles. I have things wrong with me. But I’m
not blind. I’m not stupid. You wouldn’t tell me to my face that I
couldn’t handle problems that are strictly my own, would you?”

“I would if I were sure,” I said. “Damn it, I’m not. And I’m not going
to pry for details.”

“I’m glad of that,” he said soberly. “Now we don’t have to talk about it
at all, do we?”

In spite of myself, I laughed aloud.

“What’s funny?”

“I am, Jud, boy. I been—handled.”

He saw the point, and smiled a little with me. “Hell, I know what you’ve
been hinting at. But you’re not close enough to the situation to know
all the angles. I am. When the time comes, I’ll take care of it. Until
then, it’s no one’s problem but my own.”

He picked up his star-chart reels and I knew that one single word more
would be one too many. I squeezed his arm and let him go.

Five people, I thought: Wold, Judson, Tween, Clinton, Flower. Take away
two and that leaves three. Three’s a crowd—in this case, a very
explosive kind of crowd.

Nothing, _nothing_ justifies infidelity in a modern marriage. But the
ugly rumors kept trickling in.

“I want my certificate,” Wold said.

I looked up at him and a bushel of conjecture flipped through my mind.
So you want your certificate? Why? And why just now, of all times? What
can a man do with a certificate that he can’t do without one—aside from
going Out? Because, damn you, you’ll never go Out. Not of your own
accord, you won’t.

All this, but none of it slipped out. I said, “All right. That’s what
I’m here for, Wold.” And we got to work.

He worked hard, and smoothly and easily, the way he talked, the way he
moved. I am constantly astonished at how small accomplished people can
make themselves at times.

He was certified easy as breathing. And can you believe it, I worked
with him, saw how hard he was working, helped him through, and never
realized what it was he was after?

After going through the routines of certification for him, I wasn’t
happy. There was something wrong somewhere … something missing. This was
a puzzle that ought to fall together easily, and it wouldn’t. I
wish—Lord, how I wish I could have thought a little faster.

I let a day go by after Wold was certified. I couldn’t sleep, and I
couldn’t eat, and I couldn’t analyze what it was that was bothering me.
So I began to cruise, to see if I could find out.

I went to the archives. “Where’s Judson?”

The girl told me he hadn’t been there for forty-eight hours.

I looked in the Recreation Sector, in the libraries, in the stereo and
observation rooms. Some kind of rock-bottom good sense kept me from
sending out a general call for him. But it began to be obvious that he
just wasn’t around. Of course, there were hundreds of rooms and
corridors in Curbstone that were unused—they wouldn’t be used until the
interplanetary project was completed and the matter transmitters started
working. But Jud wasn’t the kind to hide from anything.

I squared my shoulders and realized that I was doing a lot of
speculation to delay looking in the obvious place. I think, more than
anything else, I was afraid that he would _not_ be there.…

I passed my hand over the door announcer. In a moment she answered; she
had apparently come in from the sun-field and hadn’t bothered to see who
it was. She was warm brown from head to toe, all spring-steel and
velvet. Her long eyes were sleepy and her mouth was pouty. But when she
recognized me, she stood squarely in the doorway.

I think that in the back of every human mind is a machine that works out
all the answers and never makes mistakes. I think mine had had enough
data to figure out what was happening, what was going to happen, for a
long while now. Only I hadn’t been able to read the answer until now.
Seeing Flower, in that split second, opened more than one door for me …

_“You_ want something?” she asked. The emphasis was hard and very
insulting.

I went in. It was completely up to her whether she moved aside or was
walked down. She moved aside. The door swung shut.

“Where’s Jud?”

“I don’t know.”

I looked into those long secret eyes and raised my hand. I think I was
going to hit her. Instead I put my hand on her chest and shoved. She
fell, unhurt but terrified, across a relaxer. “What do you th—”

“You won’t see him again,” I said, and my voice bounced harshly off the
acoust-absorbing walls. “He’s gone. _They’re_ gone.”

“They?” Her face went pasty under the deep tan.

“You ought to be killed,” I said. “But I think it’s better if you live
with it. You couldn’t hold either of them, or anyone else.”

I went out.

My head was buzzing and my knitting arm throbbed. I moved with utter
certainty; never once did it occur to me to ask myself: “Why did I say
that?” All the ugly pieces made sense.

I found Wold in the Recreation Sector. He was tanked. I decided against
speaking to him, went straight to the launching court and tried the row
of ship ports. There was no one there, no one in any of them. My eye
must have photographed something in the third ship, because I felt
compelled to go back there and look again.

I stared hard at the deep-flocked floor. The soft pile of it looked
right and yet not-right. I went to the control panel and untracked an
emergency torch, turned it to needle-focus and put it, lit, on the
floor. A horizontal beam will tell you things no other light knows
about.

I turned the light on the door and slowly swung the sharp streak across
the carpet. The monotone, amorphous surface took on streaks and ridges,
shadows and shadings. A curved scuff inside. Two parallel ones, long,
where something had been dragged. A blurred sector where something heavy
had lain long enough to press the springy fibers down for a while, over
by the left-hand bunk.

I looked at the bunk. It was unruffled, which meant nothing; the
resilient surface was meant to leave no impressions. But at the edge was
a single rubbed spot, as if something had spilled there and been wiped
hard.

I went to the service cubicle. Everything seemed in order, except one of
the cabinet doors, which wouldn’t quite close. I looked inside.

It was a food locker. The food was there all right, each container
socketed in place in the prepared shelves. But on, between, and among
them were micro-reels for the book projector.

I frowned and looked further. Reels were packed into the disposal lock,
the towel dispenser, the spare-parts chest for the air exchanger.

Something was where the book-reels belonged, and the reels had been
hidden by someone who could not leave them in sight or carry them off.

And where did the reels belong?

I went back to the central chamber and the left-hand bunk. I touched the
stud that should have rolled the bunk outward, opening the top, so that
the storage space under it could be reached. The bunk didn’t move.

I examined the stud. It was coated over with quick-setting leak-sealer.
The stuff was tough but resilient. I got a steel rod and a hammer from
the tool-rack and, placing the rod against the stud, hit it once. The
leak-sealer cracked off. The bed rolled forward and opened.

It was useless to move him or touch him, or, for that matter, to say
anything. Judson was dead, his head twisted almost all the way around.
His face was bluish and his eyes stared. He was pushed, jammed, wedged
into the small space.

I hit the stud again and the bunk rolled back. Moving without any
volition that I could analyze, feeling nothing but a great angry
numbness, I cleaned up. I put the rod and the hammer away and fluffed up
the piling of the carpeting by the bunk. Then I went and stood in the
service cubicle and began to wait.

Wait. Not just stay—wait. I knew he’d be back, just as I suddenly and
belatedly understood what it was that every factor in five people had
made inevitable. I was coldly hating myself for not having known it
sooner.

The great, the admirable, the adventurous in modern civilizaton were
Outbounders. To one who wanted and needed personal power, there would be
an ultimate goal, greater even than being an Outbounder. And that would
be to stand between an Outbounder and his destiny.

For months Flower had blocked Clinton. When she saw she must ultimately
lose him to the stars, she went hunting. She saw Judson—reachable,
restless Jud—and she heard my assurance that he would soon go Out. Then
and there Judson was doomed.

Wold needed admiration the way Flower needed power. To be an Outbounder
and wait for poor struggling Tween suited him perfectly. Tween’s
certification gave him no alternative but to get rid of her; he couldn’t
bring himself to go Out.

Once I had taken care of Tween for him, there remained one person on the
entire project who could keep him from going Out—and she was married to
Jud. Having married, Jud would stay married. Wold did what he could to
smash that marriage. When Jud still hung on, wanting to help Flower,
wanting to show me that he had made the right choice, there remained one
alternative for Wold. Evidence of that lay cramped and staring under the
bunk.

But Wold wasn’t finished. He wouldn’t be finished while Jud’s body
remained on Curbstone. In Wold’s emotional state, he would have to go
somewhere and drink to figure out the next step. There was no way of
sending a ship Out without riding it. So—I waited.

He came back all right. I was cramped, then, and one foot was asleep. I
curled and uncurled the toes frantically when I saw the door begin to
move, and tried to flatten my big bulk back down out of sight.

He was breathing hard. He put his lips together and blew like a winded
horse, wiped his lips on his forearm. He seemed to have difficulty in
focusing his eyes. I wondered how much liquor he had poured into that
empty place where most men keep their courage.

He took a fine coil of single-strand plastic cord out of his belt-pouch.
Fumbling for the end, he found it and dropped the coil. With the
exaggerated care of a drunk, he threw a bowline and drew the loop tight,
pulled the bight through the loop so he had a running noose. He made
this fast to a triangular bracket over the control panel, let it along
the edge of the chart-rack and down to the launching control lever. He
bent two half-hitches in the cord, slipped it over the end of the lever
and drew it tight. The cord now bound the lever in the
up—“off”—position.

From the bulkhead he unfastened the clamps which held the heavy-duty
fire extinguisher and lifted it down. It weighed half as much as he did.
He set it on the floor in front of the control panel, brought the
dangling end of the cord through the U-shaped clamp gudgeons on the
extinguisher, took a loose half-hitch around the bight, and, lifting the
extinguisher between his free arm and his body, pulled the knot tight.
Another half-hitch secured it.

Now the heavy extinguisher dangled in mid-air under the control panel.
The cord which supported it ran up to the handle of the launching lever
and from there, bending over the edge of the chart-rack, to the bracket.

Panting, Wold took out a cigarette and shook it alight. He drew on it
hungrily, and then put it on the chart-rack, resting it against the
plastic cord.

When the cigarette burned down to the cord, the thermoplastic would melt
through with great enthusiasm. The cord would break, the extinguisher
would fall, dragging the lever down. And Out would go all the evidence,
to be hidden forever, as far as Wold was concerned, and six thousand
years from anyone else.

Wold stepped back to survey his work just as I stepped forward out of
the service cubicle. I brought up my broken arm and swung it with all my
weight—and that is really weight—against the side of his head. The cast,
though not heavy, was hard, and it must have hit him like a crowbar.

He went down like an elevator, hitched to his knees, and for a second
seemed about to topple. His head sagged. He shook it, slowly looked up
and saw me.

“I could use one of those needle-guns,” I said. “Or I could kick you
cold and let Coordination handle you. There are regulations for things
like you. But I’d rather do it this way. Get up.”

“I never …”

“Get up!” I bellowed, and kicked at him.

He threw his arms around my leg and rolled. As I started down, I pulled
the leg in close and whipped it out again. We both hit with a crash on
opposite sides of the room. The bunk broke my fall; he was not so lucky.
He rose groggily, sliding his back up the door. I lumbered across,
deliberately crashed into him and heard ribs crack as the wind gushed
out of his lungs.

I stood back a little as he began to sag. I hit him savagely in the
face, and his face came back and hit my hand again as his head bounced
off the door. I let him fall, then knelt beside him.

There are things you can do to a human body if you know enough
physiology—pressures on this and that nerve center which paralyze and
cramp and immobilize whole motor-trunk systems. I did these things, and
got up, finally, leaving him twisted, sweating in agony. I wheezed over
to the control bank and looked critically at the smoldering cigarette.
Less than a minute.

“I know you can hear me,” I whispered with what breath I could find.
“I’d … like you to know … that you’ll be a hero. Your name will … be on
the Great Roll of the … Outbounders. You always … wanted that without
any … effort on your part … now you’ve got it.”

I went out. I stopped and leaned back against the wall beside the door.
In a few seconds it swung silently shut. I forced back the waves of gray
that wanted to engulf me, turned and peered into the port. It showed
only blackness.

_Jud … Jud, boy … you always wanted it, too. You almost got cheated out
of it. You’ll be all right now, son.…_

I tottered across the court and out the gate. There was someone standing
there. She flew to me, pounded my chest with small hard hands. “Did he
go? Did he really go?”

I brushed her off as if she had been a midge, and closed one eye so I
could get a single image. It was Flower, without her come-on tunic. Her
hair was disarrayed and her eyes were bloodshot.

_“They_ left,” I croaked. “I told you they would. Jud and Wold … you
couldn’t stop them.”

“Together? They left _together?”_

“That’s what Wold got certified for.” I looked bluntly up and down her
supple body. “Like everybody else who goes Out together, they had
_some_thing in common.”

I pushed past her and went back to my office. Lights were blazing over
the desk. Judson and Wold. Ship replaced. Quarters cleared. Palm-key
removed and filed. I sat and looked blindly until they were all lit and
the board blanked out.

I thought, this pump of mine won’t last much longer under this kind of
treatment.

I thought, I keep convincing myself that I handle things impartially and
fairly, without getting involved.

I felt bad. Bad.

I thought, this is a job without authority, without any real power. I
certify ’em, send ’em along, check ’em out. A clerk’s job. And because
of that I have to be God. I have to make up my own justice, and execute
it myself. Wold was no threat to me or Curbstone, yet it was in me to
give oblivion to him and purgatory to Flower.

I felt frightened and disgusted and puny.

Someone came in, and I looked up blindly. For a moment I could make out
nothing but a silver-haloed figure and a muted, wordless murmuring. I
forced my eyes to focus, and I had to close them again, as if I had
looked into the sun.

Her hair was unbound beneath a diamond ring that circled her brows. The
silver silk cascaded about her, brushing the floor behind her, mantling
her warm-toned shoulders, capturing small threads of light and weaving
them in and about the gleaming light that was her hair. Her deep
pigeon’s-blood eyes shone and her lips trembled.

“Tween.…”

The soft murmuring became words, laughter that wept with happiness,
small shaking syllables of rapture. “He’s waiting. He wanted to say
good-by to you, too … but he asked me to do it for him. He said you’d
like that better.”

I could only nod.

She came close to the desk. “I love him. I love him more than I thought
anyone could. Somehow, loving him that much, I can … love you, too.”

She bent over the desk and kissed my mouth. Her lips were cool.
She—blurred then. Or maybe it was my eyes. When I could see again, she
was gone.

The chime, and the lights, one after another.

Marriage recorded.…

Suddenly I relaxed and I knew I could live with the viciousness of what
I had done to Wold and to Flower. It had been my will that Judson go
Out, and that Tween be happy, and I had been crossed, and I had taken
vengeance. And that was small, and decidedly human—not godlike at all.

So, I thought, every day I find something out about people. And, today,
I’m people. I felt the pudgy lips that Tween had kissed. I’m old and I’m
fat, I thought, and by the Lord, I’m people.

_When they call me Charon, they forget what it must be like to be denied
both worlds instead of only one_.

_And they forget the other thing—the little-known fragment of the Charon
legend. To the Etruscans, he was more than a ferryman_.

_He was an executioner_.



RULE OF THREE


THEY WERE A decontamination squad—three energy-entities (each triple)—on
a routine check of a known matter-entity culture. What they traveled in
was undoubtedly a ship, since it moved through space, except that it was
not a physical structure of metal. It slowed down like a light wave that
had suddenly grown tired.

“There it is,” said RilRylRul.

The two other triads merged their light-perceptions and observed it.
“Out at the edge,” said KadKedKud, in satisfaction. “It should not be
too difficult to handle out there. When infection spreads near the heart
of a Galaxy, it can be troublesome.”

MakMykMok cautioned, “Don’t underestimate the job until it’s surveyed.”

“It’s a very small sun,” said Ril. “Which one of the planets is it? The
fourth?”

“No, the greenish-blue one, the third.”

“Very well.”

In due time the ship—a bubble of binding energy and collapsed, rarefied
gas molecules—entered the atmosphere. It reshaped itself gradually into
a round-nosed, tapered transparency and dropped sharply, heading due
west over the planet’s equator.

“Busy little things, aren’t they?”

As the world turned under them, they watched. They saw the ships, the
cities. In the microscopic, intangible fluxes of force which were nerve
and sinew and psyche to their triple structure, they stored their
observations. They recorded the temperature of steel converters and
ships’ power plants, calculated the strength of materials of buildings
and bridges by their flexure in a simply computed wind velocity, judged
and compared the flow-shapes of air and ground vehicles.

“We could return right now,” said Kad. “Any race which has progressed
this far in such a brief time must be a healthy one. Otherwise, how
could—”

“Look!” Ril flashed.

They watched, appalled. “They are _killing_ one another!”

“It must be a ritual,” said Kad, “or perhaps a hunt. But we’d better
investigate closer.”

They dropped down, swiftly overtook a low-flying open-cockpit biplane
with a black cross on the fuselage, and settled on the cowling behind
the pilot’s head. Mak interpenetrated the ship’s wall and, treading and
passing the air molecules which fled past, reached the pilot’s leather
helmet at the nape of the neck. Contact was made and broken almost in
the same moment of time, and Mak hurtled back in horror to the skin of
their ship.

“_Get clear!”_ he ordered.

In three microseconds the invisible ship was in the upper atmosphere,
with Mak still clinging to the outer skin.

“What was it?”

“Pa’ak, the most vicious, most contagious energy-virus known. That
creature is crawling with them! Never have I _seen_ such an infestation!
Examine me. Irradiate me. Be careful, now—be sure.”

It was strong medicine, but effective. Mak weakly permeated through the
ship’s wall and came inside. “Disgusting. Utterly demoralizing. How can
the creature live in that condition?”

“Worse than Murktur III?”

“Infinitely worse. On Murktur I never saw a concentration higher than
14, and that was enough to reduce the natives to permanent bickering.
These bipeds can apparently stand a concentration of over 120 on the
same scale. Incredible.”

“Perhaps that individual is quarantined.”

“I doubt it. It was flying its own machine; it can apparently land at
will anywhere. But we will check further. Mak, you were quite right,”
said Ril. “Don’t underestimate the job indeed. Why, with an infestation
like that, and a drive like that … what couldn’t they accomplish if they
were clean?”

They swooped close to the land, barely touched the hair of a child on a
hilltop, and soared again, shaken and frightened.

“From what we’ve seen, that one was no more than 15% of maximum size.
How do you read the Pa’ak concentration?”

“Over 70. This place is a pesthole. These creatures must be stopped—and
soon. You know how soon such a technology reaches for the stars.”

“Shall we send for reinforcements?”

“Before investigating? Certainly not. And after all, there are three of
us.”

“We shall have to protect ourselves,” Ril pointed out.

“You mean—dissociate? Divide our triple selves?”

“You know that’s the only way we can remain undetected by the Pa’ak. Of
course, once we know exactly how they have developed here, and have
analyzed the psychic components of the natives, we can re-synthesize.”

“I hate the thought of dividing myself. So weak, so impotent …”

“So safe. Don’t forget that. Once we’ve encased ourselves in the minds
of these creatures and analyzed them, we’ll have to join ourselves again
to fight the Pa’ak.”

“Yes, indeed. And we’ll be together again soon. Take care,” added Mak,
the cautious one. “The Pa’ak are mindless, but exceedingly dangerous.”

“Hungry,” Kad supplemented.

“Especially for our kind. Shall we begin?”

The ship disappeared, bursting like a bubble. The three dropped, sharing
a wordless thought that was like a handclasp. Then each of them
separated into three, and the nine particles drifted down through the
atmosphere.

_The news is apples for the unemployed … disarmament … the Model A
Ford_.

A young girl lay on her stomach under a tree, reading. She yawned
widely, choked a little, swallowed, and went back to her book.

Two friends shook hands. Later, one absentmindedly palmed the back of
his neck. Something was rubbed into his skin. The other young man
scratched his wrist as he walked away.

Something was in the drinking water, though neither the nurse, as she
filled the glass, nor the little girl, as she drank, knew of it.

Some dust settled on a toothbrush.

A small boy sank his teeth into his bread-and-jam. The rich, red
preserve drooled to the table. The boy put his finger in it, thrust the
finger into his mouth.

Another youngster ran through the dewy morning grass in his bare feet.

Somewhere, two dust motes were waiting their turn.

And a number of years went by.

_The news is Korea and Tibet … protein synthesis … Aureomycin … leaf and
grain hormone poisons … the McCarran Act_.

There was a character at the party named Irving, and Jonathan Prince,
Consulting Psychologist, didn’t like him. This Irving played guitar and
sang folk songs in a resonant baritone, which was fine; but after that
he would put a lampshade on his head and be the “March of the Wooden
Soldiers” or some such, and that was as funny, after the fourth viewing,
as a rubber crutch. So Jonathan let his eyes wander.

When his gaze came to the dark girl sitting by the door, his breath
hissed in suddenly.

Priscilla was sitting next to him. She said “Ouch,” and he realized he
had squeezed her hand painfully.

“What’s the matter, Jon?”

“I just—nothing, Pris.” He knew it was tactless, because he knew the
sharpness of Priscilla’s tilted eyes, but he couldn’t help it; he stared
back at the dark girl.

The girl’s hair was blue-black and gleamed like metal, yet he knew how
soft it would be. Her eyes were brown, wide apart, deep. He knew how
they would crinkle on the outside ends when she smiled. He knew, as a
matter of fact, that she had a small brown mole on the inside of her
left thigh.

Irving was still singing. Of course it had to be “Black Is the Color of
My True Love’s Hair.” Priscilla pressed Jon’s hand, gently. He leaned
toward her.

She whispered, “Who’s the charmer? Someone you know?”

He hesitated. Then he nodded and said, without smiling, “My ex-wife.”

Priscilla let his hand go.

Jonathan waited until Irving finished his song and, in the applause,
rose.“ ’Scuse …” he muttered. Priscilla didn’t seem to be listening.

He crossed the room and stood in front of the dark girl until she looked
up at him. He saw the little crinkle by her eyes before he saw the
smile.

“Edie.”

“Jon! How _are_ you?” Then she said, in unison with him, “Can’t
complain.” And she laughed at him.

He flushed, but it was not anger. He sat on the ottoman by her feet.
“How’ve you been, Edie? You haven’t changed.”

“I haven’t,” she nodded seriously. There was an echo in his mind.
_“We’ll always be friends, Jon. Nothing can change that.”_ Was that what
she meant? She said, “Still trying to find out how the human mind
works?”

“Yes, on the occasions when I find one that does. Are you in town for
long?”

“I’ve come back. They closed the Great Falls office. Jon …”

“Yes?”

“Who’s the redhead?”

“Priscilla. Priscilla Berg. My assistant.”

“She’s lovely, Jon. Really lovely. Is she … are you …”

At last he could smile. “You can ask, Edie,” he said gently. “Here, I’ll
ask you first. Are you married?”

“No.”

“I didn’t think so. I don’t know why, but I didn’t think so. Neither am
I.”

He looked down at his hands because he knew she was smiling, and somehow
he didn’t want to look into her eyes and smile too. “I’ll get us a
drink.”

She waited until he was on his feet and a pace away before she said what
she used to say: “Come back quickly.”

Someone jostled him at the bar.

“What’s up, Doc?” said Irving, and nickered. “Hey, that assistant of
yours, she drinks scotch, doesn’t she?”

“Rye on the rocks,” he said absently, and then realized that the scotch
suggestion was Irving’s shot in the dark, and that he’d given the idiot
an opening gambit with Priscilla. He was mildly annoyed as he ordered
two Irish-and-waters and went back to Edie.

Communication was dim and labored.

“We’re trapped …”

“Don’t give up. Ked is very close to me now.”

“Yes, you and Ked can achieve proximity. But these creatures won’t
combine emotionally in threes!”

“They can—they must!”

“Do not force them. Remain encysted and work carefully. Did you know the
Pa’ak got Mak?”

_“No!_ How horrible! What about Myk and Mok, then?”

“They will be guardians, watchers, communicators. What else can they
do?”

“Nothing … nothing. How terrible to be one-third dead! What happened to
Mak?”

“The creature Mak occupied killed itself, walked in front of a speeding
vehicle as Mak tried to synthesize. Mak could not get clear in time from
the dead thing.”

“We must hurry or these beasts will leap off into space before we join
our strength again.”

The club wouldn’t be open for hours yet, but Derek knew which of the
long row of herculite doors would be unlocked. He shouldered it open and
sidled in, being careful not to let it swing shut on his bass viol.

Someone was playing the piano out back. Piano … hadn’t Janie been
knocking herself out looking for a piano man before he went away? He
mumbled, “Hope she—” and then Jane was on, over, and all around him.

“Derek, you tall, short underdone yuk, you!” she crooned. She hugged
him, and put a scarlet print of her full mouth on his cheek. “Why didn’t
you wire? God, man, I missed you. Here, put down that Steinway and
smooch me once. Am I glad to see your ugly head … Look at the man,” she
demanded of the empty club as he leaned the big bass against the wall
and stroked its rounded flank with the tips of his fingers. “Hey, this
is me over here.”

“How are you, Janie?” He delivered a hug. “What’s been giving around
here?”

“Me,” she said. “Giving, but out. Ma-an … a hassle. For ten days I had a
sore throat clear from neck to tonsil, carrying that piano man. Damn it,
I got a way I sing, and a piano’s got to walk around me when I do it.
Chopsticks this square makes_—eggs—ack—ly—on—the—beat,”_ she stressed
flatly. “And then a bass player I had, a doghouse complete with dog, and
tone-deaf to boot. I booted him. I worked the last three nights without
a bass, and am I glad you’re back!”

“Me too.” He touched her hair. “We’ll get you a piano player and
everything’ll riff like Miff.”

“A piano I _got,”_ she said, and her voice was awed. “Little cat I heard
in a joint after hours. Gives his left hand a push and forgets about it.
Right hand is _crazy_. Real sad little character, Derek. Gets the
by-himself blues and plays boogie about it. Worse he feels, the better
he plays. Sing with him? Man! All his chords are vocal cords for little
Janie. He’s back there now. Listen at him!”

Derek listened. The piano back there was talking to itself about
something rich and beautiful and lost. “That just one man?” he asked
after a moment.

“Come on back and meet him,” she said. “Oh, Derek, he’s a sweetheart.”

“Sweetheart?”

She thumped his chest and chuckled. “Wait till you see him. You don’t
need to lie awake nights over him. Come on.”

He was a man with a hawk face and peaceful eyes. He huddled on the bench
watching what his hands did on the keyboard as if he hadn’t seen them
before but didn’t much care. His hands were extraordinarily eloquent. He
didn’t look up.

Derek said, “I’m going to go get my fiddle.”

He did, and picked up the beat so quietly that the pianist didn’t hear
him for three bars. Then he looked up and smiled shyly at Derek and went
on playing. It was very, very good. They volleyed an intro back and
forth for a while and then, before Derek fully realized what they were
playing, Janie was singing “Thunder and Roses”:

_“When you gave me your heart_

_You gave me the world …”_

And, after, there was a chord with a tremendous emphasis on an added
sixth, and then it was augmented—a hungry, hungry leading tone, which
led, with a shocked sort of satisfaction, into silence.

Derek put by his bass, carefully, so it wouldn’t make any sound.

Jane said, in a mouselike voice, “I can breathe now?”

The pianist got up. He was not tall. He said, “You’re Derek Jax. Thanks
for letting me play along with you. I always wanted to.”

“Thanks, he says.” Derek gestured. “You play a whole mess of piano.
What’s your name?”

“Henry. Henry Faulkner.”

“I never heard of you.”

“He was head of the Orchestration Department at the Institute for twelve
years,” said Jane.

“Hey? That’s all right,” said Derek. “Symphony stuff. What’d you leave
for?”

“Squares,” said Henry. To Derek, it was a complete explanation. “I’d
like to work here.”

Jane closed her eyes and clasped her hands. “Yummy.”

Derek said, from a granite face, “No.”

Jane stood frozen. Henry came out from behind the piano. He walked—he
all but trotted up to Derek. “No? Oh, please! A—joke?”

“No joke. Just no.”

Jane breathed, “Derek, what are you on? Goofballs?”

Derek threw up his hands. “No. It’s a good word. Ain’t ‘no’ better than
a whole lot of yak? No, that’s all.”

“Derek—”

“Mr. Jax,” said Derek.

“Mr. Jax, please think it over,” Henry said. “I’ve been wanting to work
with you ever since you recorded ‘Slide Down.’ ” You know how long ago
that was. I don’t just want to play piano someplace. I want to play
here—with you. I don’t care about the pay. Just let me back up that
bass.”

“He never talked like that to me,” said Jane with a small smile. “You’ve
made yourself a conquest, puddin’head. Now—”

“I don’t want to hear that kind of talk,” exploded Derek. “I don’t want
to hear any kind of talk. I said no!”

Jane came to him. She squeezed Henry’s forearm and gave him a long look.
“Walk around some,” she said kindly. “Come back and see me later.”

Derek stood looking at the piano. Jane watched Henry go. He walked
slowly, holding himself in, his head forward. At the other side of the
dance floor he turned and opened his mouth to speak, but Jane waved him
on. He went out.

Jane whirled on Derek. “Now what the God—”

Derek interrupted her, rasping, “If you got any more to say about this,
you can look for a new bass man too.”

Pallas McCormick was fifty-three years old and knew what she was about.
She strode briskly down Eleventh Street, a swift, narrow figure with
pointed shoulders and sharp wattles at the turn of her thin jaw. It was
late and the tea room would be closed before long.

Verna was there before her, her bright white hair and bright blue eyes
standing out like beacons in the softly lit room.

“Good evening, Pallas.” Verna’s voice was soft and pillowy, like her
pudgy face and figure.

“Evening,” said Pallas. Without preliminaries she demanded, “How are
yours?”

Verna sighed. “Not so well. Two are willing, one isn’t. The little
fool.”

“They’re all fools,” said Pallas. “Two billion stupid fools. Never heard
of such a place.”

“They want to do everything by twos,” said Verna. “They’re all afraid
they’ll lose something if they don’t pair off, pair off. They’ve been
schooled and pushed and ordered and taught that that’s the way it must
be, so—” she sighed again—“that’s the way it is.”

“We haven’t much more time. I wish we hadn’t lost—” There followed a dim
attempt to project “Mak,” a mental designation for which there was no
audible equivalent.

“Oh, dear, _stop_ saying that! You’re always saying that. Our first
third is gone, all eaten up, and that’s the way it is.”

“We’re two,” said Pallas caustically, “and we don’t want to be. Are you
all right?”

“Thoroughly encysted, thank you. Pa’ak can’t get to me. I’m so well
encased I can barely get through to control this—” she lifted her arms
and dropped them heavily on the table—“this bag of bones. And I can’t
telepath. I wish I could communicate with you and the others directly,
instead of through this primitive creature and its endless idioms. I’ve
even got to use that clumsy terrestrial name of yours—there’s no
vocalization for our real ones.” Again there was an effort to identify
the speaker as “Myk” and the other as “Mok,” which failed.

“_I_ wish I could get through to the others. Goodness! A weak signal
once in a while—a mere ‘come close’ or ‘go away’—and in between,
nothing, for weeks on end.”

“Oh, but they’ve got to stay closed up so tight! You know how the Pa’ak
infection works—increasing the neurotic potential so that the virus can
feed on the released nervous energy. There are two groups of three
people who must come together by their own free emotional merging, or
Ril’s three parts and Kad’s three parts can never become one again. To
allow them that emotional freedom is to allow the Pa’ak virus which
infests them to remain active, since they tend to be attracted to one
another for neurotic reasons. At least we don’t have _that_ much
trouble. There was so little neurosis or anything else left in these
minds when we took them over that they were poor feeding grounds for
Pa’ak. And that’s the—”

“Verna, can you spare me that everlasting—”

”—the way it is,” finished Verna inexorably. “I’m sorry, Pallas, truly.
There’s a horrid little pushbutton in this mind that plays that phrase
off every once in a while no matter what I do. I’m rebuilding the mind
as fast as I can; I’ll get to it soon. I hope.”

“Verna …” said Pallas with an air of revelation. “We can speed this
thing up. I’m sure we can. Look. These fools won’t group in threes. And
Ril and Kad can’t complete themselves unless their three hosts are
emotionally ready for it. Now then.” She leaned forward over her teacup.
“There’s no important difference between _two_ groups of _three_ and
_three_ groups of _two.”_

“You really think … why, Pallas, that’s a _marvelous_ idea. You’re so
clever, dear! Now the first thing we’ll have to—”

They both froze in an attitude of listening.

“My word,” said Verna. “That’s a bad one.”

“I’ll go,” said Pallas. “That’s one of the creatures I’m guarding. Ril
is in it.”

“Shall I come too?”

“You stay here. I’ll take a taxi and keep in touch with you. When I’m
far enough away I’ll triangulate. Keep watch for that signal again.
Goodness! What an urgent one!”

She trotted out. Verna looked across at Pallas’s untouched teacup. “She
left me with the check.” A sigh. “Well, that’s the way it is.”

_The news is the artificial satellite program and flying
discs … three-stage rockets and guilt by association_.

Dr. Jonathan Prince was saying, “The world’s never been in such a state.
Industrialization is something you can graph, and you find a geometric
increase. You can graph the incidence of psychoneuroses the same way and
find almost the same curve, but it’s a much larger one. I tell you,
Edie, it’s as if something were cultivating our little traumas and
anxieties like plowed fields to increase their yield, and then feeding
off them.”

“But so much is being done, Jon!” his ex-wife protested.

Jon waved his empty glass. “There are 39,000 psychotherapists to how
many millions of people who need their help? There’s a crying need for
some kind of simple, standardized therapy, and people refuse to behave
either simply or according to standards. Somewhere, somehow, there’s a
new direction in therapy. So-called orthodox procedures as they now
exist don’t show enough promise. They take too long. If by some miracle
of state support and streamlined education you could create therapists
for everyone who needed them, you’d have what amounted to a nation or a
world of full-time therapists. Someone’s got to bake bread and drive
buses, you know.”

“What about these new therapies I’ve been reading about?” Edie wanted to
know.

“Oh, they’re a healthy sign to a certain extent; they indicate we know
how sick we are. The most encouraging thing about them is their
diversity. There are tools and schools and phoneys and fads. There’s
psychoanalysis, where the patient talks about his troubles to the
therapist, and narcosynthesis, where the patient’s troubles talk to the
therapist, and hypnotherapy, where the therapist talks to the patient’s
troubles.

“There’s insulin to jolt a man out of his traumas and electric shock to
subconsciously frighten him out of them, and CO2 to choke the traumas to
death. And there’s the pre-frontal lobotomy, the transorbital leukotomy,
and the topectomy to cut the cables between a patient’s expression of
his aberrations and its power supply, with the bland idea that the
generator will go away if you can’t see it any more. And there’s
Reichianism which, roughly speaking, identifies Aunt Susan, who slapped
you, with an aching kneecap which, when cured, cures you of Aunt Susan
too.

“And there’s—but why go on? The point is that the mushrooming schools of
therapy show that we know we’re sick; that we’re anxious—but not yet
anxious enough, _en masse—_to do something about it, and that we’re
willing to attack the problem on all salients and sectors.”

“What kind of work have you been doing recently?” Edie asked.

“Electro-encephalographics, mostly. The size and shape of brainwave
graphs will show a great deal once we get enough of them. And—did you
know there’s a measurable change in volume of the fingertips that
follows brainwave incidence very closely in disturbed cases? Fascinating
stuff. But sometimes I feel it’s the merest dull nudging at the real
problems involved. Sometimes I feel like a hard-working contour
cartographer trying to record the height and grade of ocean waves. Every
time you duplicate an observation to check it, there’s a valley where
there was a mountain a second ago.

“And sometimes I feel that if we could just turn and look in the right
direction, we’d see what’s doing it to us, plain as day. Here we sit
with our psychological bottle of arnica and our therapeutic cold
compresses, trying to cure up an attack of lumps on the headbone. And if
we could only turn and look in the right place, there would be an
invisible maniac with a stick, beating us over the head, whom we’d never
detected before.”

“You sound depressed.”

“Oh, I’m not, really,” he said. He stood up and stretched. “But I almost
wish I’d get away from that recurrent thought of looking in a new
direction; of correlating neurosis with a virus disorder. Find the virus
and cure the disease. It’s panacea; wishful thinking. I’m probably
getting lazy.”

“Not you, Jon.” His ex-wife smiled at him. “Perhaps you have the answer,
subconsciously, but what you’ve learned won’t let it come out.”

“Very astute. What made you say that?”

“It’s a thing you used to say all the time.”

He laughed and helped her up. “Edie, do you have to get up early
tomorrow?”

“I’m unemployed. Didn’t I tell you?”

“I didn’t ask,” he said ruefully. “My God, I talk a lot. Would you like
to see my new lab?”

“I’d love to! Oh, I’d love it. Will it be—all right?”

“All right? Of course it—oh. I see what you mean. Priscilla. Where is
she, anyway?”

“She went out. I thought you noticed. With that man who plays the
guitar. Irving.” She nodded toward the discarded instrument.

“I hadn’t noticed,” he said. Over his features slipped the poker
expression of the consulting psychologist. “Who did you come with?”

“The same one. Irving. Jon, I hope Priscilla can take care of herself.”

“Let’s go,” he said.

Faintly, and with exasperation, Ril’s thought came stumblingly through
to Ryl and Rul:

“How can a thinking being be so stupid? Have you ever heard a more
accurate description of the Pa’ak virus than that? ‘Cultivating our
little traumas and anxieties like plowed fields to increase their yield,
and then feeding off them.’ And ‘a new direction.’ Why haven’t these
people at least extrapolated the idea of energy life? They know that
matter and energy are the same. An energy virus is such a logical thing
for them to think of!”

And Rul’s response: “They can no more isolate their experiments from
their neuroses than they can isolate their measuring instruments from
gravity. Have patience. When we are able to unite again, we will have
the strength to inform them.”

Ril sent: “Patience? How much more time do you think we have before they
start to spread the virus through this whole sector of the cosmos? They
are improving rockets, aren’t they? We should have sent for
reinforcements. But then—how could we know we’d be trapped like this in
separate entities which refuse to merge?”

“We couldn’t,” Ryl answered. “We still have so much to learn about these
creatures. Sending for reinforcements would solve nothing.”

“And we have so little time,” Rul mourned. “Once they leave Earth, the
Pa’ak pestilence will no longer be isolated.”

Ril responded: “Unless they are cured of the disease before they leave.”

“Or prevented from leaving,” Ryl pointed out. “An atomic war would lower
the level of culture. If there is no choice, we could force them to
fight—we have the power—and thus reduce their technology to the point
where space flight would be impossible.”

It was a frightening idea. They broke contact in trembling silence. They
had a drink, and then coffee, and now Irving was leading her homeward.
She hadn’t wanted to go through the park, but it was late and he assured
her that it was much shorter this way. “There are plenty of places
through here where you can cut corners.” It was easier not to argue.
Irving commanded a flood of language at low pitch and high intensity
that she could do without just now. She was tired and bored and
extremely angry.

It was bad enough that Jon had deserted her for that bit of flotsam from
his past. It was worse that she should have walked right past him with
her hat on without his even looking up. What was worst of all was that
she had let herself be so angry. She had no claims on Jonathan Prince.
They were more than friends, certainly, but not any more than that.

“Who’s the girl you came to the party with, Irving?” she asked.

“Oh, her. Someone trying to get a job at the plant. She’s a real bright
girl. Electronics engineer—can you imagine?”

“And—”

He glanced down at her. “And what? I found out she was a cold fish,
that’s all.”

Oh, she thought. So you ditched her because you thought she was a cold
fish, and scooped me up. And what does that make me? Aloud she said,
“These paths wind around the park so. Are you sure it’s going to take us
out on the downtown side?”

“I know everything about these woods.” He peered. “This way.”

They turned off the blacktop walk and took a graveled path away to the
right. The path was brilliantly lit by a street-lamp at the crossing of
the walks, and the light followed the path in a straight band through
the undergrowth. It seemed so safe … and then Irving turned off to still
another path. She turned with him, unthinking, and blinked her eyes
against a sudden, oppressive darkness.

It was a small cul de sac, completely surrounded by heavy undergrowth.
As her eyes became accustomed to the dim light that filtered through the
trees, she saw benches and two picnic tables. A wonderful, secluded,
restful little spot, she thought—for a picnic.

“How do you like this?” whispered Irving hoarsely. He sounded as if he
had been running.

“I don’t,” she said immediately. “It’s late, Irving. This isn’t getting
either of us anywhere.”

“Oh, I don’t know,” he said. He put his arms around her. She leaned away
from him with her head averted, swung her handbag back and up at his
face. He caught her wrist deftly and turned it behind her.

“Don’t,” she gasped. “Don’t …”

“You’ve made your little protest like a real lady, honey, so it’s on the
record. Now save us some time and trouble. Let’s get to it.”

She kicked him. He gasped but stood solidly. There was a sharp click
behind her. “Hear that?” he said. “That’s my switch-blade. Push a button
and zip!—seven inches of nice sharp steel. Now don’t you move or make a
sound, sweetheart, and this’ll be fun for both of us.”

Locking her against him with his left arm, he reached slowly up under
the hem of her short jacket. She felt the knife against her back. It
slipped coldly between her skin and the back of her low-cut dress.
“Don’t you move,” he said again. The knife turned, sawed a little and
the back strap of her brassiere parted. The knife was removed; she heard
it click again. He dropped it in his jacket pocket.

“Now,” he breathed, “doesn’t that feel better, lamb-pie?”

She filled her lungs to scream, and instantly his hard hand was clamped
over her mouth. It was a big hand, and the thumb was artfully placed so
that she couldn’t get her mouth open wide enough to use her teeth on it.

“Let’s not wrestle,” he said, his voice really gentle, pleading. “It
just doesn’t make sense. I’d as soon kill you as not—you know that.”

She stood trembling violently, her eyes rolled up almost out of sight.
Her mouth sagged open when he kissed it. Then he screamed.

His arms whipped away from her and she fell. She lay looking dully up at
him. He stood straight in the dim light, stretched, his face up and
twisted with pain. He had both hands, apparently, on one of his back
pockets. He whirled around and her eyes followed him.

There was someone else standing there … someone in black. Someone who
looked like a high-school teacher Priscilla had once had. Gray hair,
thin, wattled face.

Moving without haste but with great purpose, the spinsterish apparition
stooped, raised her skirts daintily and kicked Irving accurately in the
groin. He emitted a croaking sound and dropped to a crouch, and began a
small series of agonizing grunts. The old lady stepped forward as if she
were dancing a minuet, put out one sensible shoe and shoved. Irving went
down on his knees and elbows, his head hanging.

“Get out,” said the old lady crisply. _“Now.”_ She clapped her hands
once. The sound stiffened Irving. With a long, breathy groan he
staggered to his feet, turned stupidly to get his bearings and hobbled
rapidly away.

“Come on, dear.” The woman got her hands under Priscilla’s armpits and
helped her up. She half-carried the girl over to one of the picnic
tables and seated her on the bench. With an arm around Priscilla’s
shoulders, she held her upright while she put a large black handbag on
the table. Out of it she rummaged a voluminous handkerchief which she
thrust into Priscilla’s hands. “Now, you sit there and cry a while.”

Priscilla said, still trembling,” I can’t,” and burst into tears.

When it was over she blew her nose weakly. “I don’t … know what to say
to you. I—he would have killed me.”

“No, he wouldn’t. Now while I’m alive and carry a hatpin.”

“Who are you?”

“A friend. If you’ll believe that, child, that’s good enough for me and
it’ll have to be good enough for you.”

“I believe that,” said Priscilla. She drew a long, shuddering breath.
“How can I ever thank you?”

“By paying attention to what I tell you. But you must tell me some
things first. How did you ever get yourself mixed up with such an
animal? You surely have better sense than that.”

“Please don’t scold … I was silly, that’s all.”

“You were in a tizzy, you mean. You were, weren’t you?”

“Well,” sniffed Priscilla, “yes. You see, I work with this doctor, and
he and I—it isn’t anything formal, you understand, but we work so well
together and laugh at the same things, and it’s … nice. And then he—”

“Go on.”

“He was married once. Years ago. And he saw her tonight. And he didn’t
look at me any more. I guess I’m foolish, but I got all upset.”

“Why?”

“I told you. He just wanted to talk to her. He forgot I was alive.”

“That isn’t why. You were upset because you were afraid he’d get
together with her again.”

“I—I suppose so.”

“Do you want to marry him?”

“Why, I—I don’t … No, I wouldn’t. It isn’t that.”

The old lady nodded. “You think if he married her again—or anyone
else—that it would make a big difference in the work you do together, in
the way he treats you?”

“I … don’t suppose there would be any difference, no,” Priscilla said
thoughtfully. “I’d never thought it through.”

“And,” continued the old lady relentlessly, “have you thought through
any other possible course of action he could have taken tonight? He was
married to her for some time. He apparently hasn’t seen her for years.
It must have been a small shock to him to find her there. Now, what else
might he have done? ‘Goodness gracious, there’s my old used-up wife.
Priscilla, let’s dance.’ Is that what you expected?”

At last she giggled. “You’re wonderful. And you’re right, you are so
absolutely right. I have been sil—Oh!”

“What is it?”

“You called me Priscilla. How did you know my name? Who are you?”

“A friend. Come along, girl; you can’t sit here all night.” She drew the
startled girl to her feet. “Here, let me look at you. Your lipstick’s
smeared. Over here. That’s better. Can you button that jacket? I think
perhaps you should. Not that it should matter if your bust _does_ show,
the way you brazen things dress nowadays. There now, come along.”

She hurried Priscilla through the park, and when they reached the
street, turned north. Priscilla tugged at the black sleeve.
“Please—wait. I live _that_ way.” She pointed.

“I know, I know. But you’re not going home just yet. Come along, child!”

“Where are you—we—going?”

“You’ll see. Now listen to me. Do you trust me?”

“Oh, my goodness, yes!”

“Very well. When we get where we’re going, you’ll go inside alone. Don’t
worry now, it’s perfectly safe. Once you’re inside you’ll do something
very stupid indeed.”

“I will?”

“You will. You’ll turn around and try to leave. Now, then, I want you to
understand that you must _not_ leave. I shall be standing outside to see
that you don’t.”

“But I—But why? What am I supposed … where …”

“Hush, child! You do as you’re told and you’ll be all right.”

Priscilla walked along in silence for a time. Then she said, “All
right.” The old lady turned to look into the softest-smiling, most
trusting face she had ever seen. She put her arm around Priscilla’s
shoulders and squeezed.

“You’ll do,” she said.

Henry Faulkner sat in a booth, far from the belly-thumping juke box and
the knot of people chattering away at the head end of the bar. Henry’s
elbows were on the table and his thumbs, fitted carefully into the bony
arches over his eyelids, supported the weight of his head. The cafe went
round and round like a Czerny etude, but with a horizontal axis. The
walls moved upward in front of him and down behind him, and he felt very
ill. Once he had forced down three beers, and that was his established
capacity; it had bloated him horribly and he’d had a backache in the
morning. Tonight he’d had four double ryes.

“There he shtood,” he said to one of the blonde girls who sat opposite,
“nex’ to the conductor, watching the orch’stra, an’ sometimes he’d beat
time wiz arms. When the last movement ended, th’ audience rozhe up as
one man an’ roared. An’ there he shtood, nex’ to the conductor—”

“You said that before,” said the girls. They spoke in unison, and the
pair of them had only one voice, like the doubled leading tone in a
major chord.

“There he shtood,” Henry went on, “shtill beating time after the music
stopped. An’ the conductor, wi’ _eyes_ in his tears—wi’ _tears_ in his
eyes—turned him around so he could _shee_ the applause.”

“What was the matter with him?” asked the girls.

“He was deaf.”

“Who was?”

“Beethoven.” Henry wept.

“My God. Is that what you’re tying one on about?”

“You said to tell you the sad story,” said Henry. “You didn’t say tell
you _my_ sad story.”

“Okay, okay. You got money, ain’t you?”

Henry lifted his head and reared back to get perspective. It was then
that the girl merged and became one; he realized that there had been one
all along, in spite of what he had seen. That explained why they both
had the same voice. He was extravagantly pleased. “Sure I got money.”

“Well, come on up to my place. I’m tired uh sittin’ around here.”

“Very gracious,” he intoned. “I shall now tell you the sad story of my
laysted wife.”

“What type wife?”

“I beg your pardon? I’ve never been married.”

The girl looked perplexed. “Start over again.”

_“Da capo,”_ he said, with his finger beside his nose. “Very well. I
repeat. I shall now tell you the story of my wasted life.”

“Oh,” said the girl.

“I have had the ultimate in rejections,” said Henry solemnly. “I fell in
love, deeply, deeply, deeply, dee—”

“Who with?” said the girl tiredly. “Get to the point and let’s get out
of here.”

“With a string bass. A bull, as it were, fiddle.” He nodded solemnly.

“Ah, fer Pete’s sake,” she said scornfully. She stood up. “Look, mister,
I can’t waste the whole night. Are you comin’ or ain’t you?”

Henry scowled up at her. He hadn’t asked for her company. She’d just
appeared there in the booth. She had niggled and nagged until he was
about to tell her all the things he had come here to forget. And now she
wanted to walk out. Suddenly he was furious. He, who had never raised
his hand or his voice in his whole life, was suddenly so angry that he
was, for a moment, blind. He growled like the open D on a bass clarinet
and leaped at her. His clawed hand swept past her fluffy collar and got
caught, tore the collar a little, high on the shoulder.

She squealed in routine fear. The bartender hopped up sitting on the bar
and swung his thick legs over.

“What the hell’s going on back there?” he demanded, pushing himself onto
the floor.

The blonde said, shrilly and indignantly, exactly what she thought Henry
was trying to do.

“Right there in the booth?” said a bourbon up the row.

“That I got to see,” replied a beer.

They started back, followed by the rest of the customers.

The bartender reached into the booth and lifted Henry bodily out of it.
Henry, sick and in a state of extreme panic, wriggled free and ran—two
steps. The side of his head met the bridge of the bourbon’s nose. Henry
was aware of a dull crunch. There were exploding lights and he went
down, rolled, got to his feet again.

The girl was screaming in a scratchy monotone somewhere around high E
flat. The bourbon was sitting on the floor with blood spouting from his
nose.

_“Get ’im!”_ somebody barked.

Powerful hands caught Henry’s thin biceps. A heavy man stood in front of
him, gigantic yellow mallets of fists raised.

“Hold him tight,” said the heavy man. “I’m gonna let him have it.”

And then a sort of puffball with bright blue eyes was between Henry and
the heavy man. In a soft, severe voice it said, “Leave him alone,
you—you bullies! You let that man go, this very minute!”

Henry shook his head. He regretted the movement, but among the other
things it made him experience was clearing sight. He looked at the
puffball, which became a sweet-faced lady in her fifties. She had
gentleness about her mouth and sheer determination in her crackling blue
eyes.

“You better stay out of this, Granny,” said the bartender, not unkindly.
“This character’s got it comin’ to him.”

“You let him go this instant!” said the lady, and stamped a small foot.
“And that’s the way it is.”

“Al,” said the heavy man to the bartender, “just lead this lady off to
one side while I paste this bastard.”

“Don’t you put a hand on me.”

“Watch your language, Sylvan,” said the bartender to the heavy man. He
put a hand on the lady’s shoulder. “Come over here a sec—_uh!”_

The final syllable was his staccato response to the old lady’s elbow in
the pit of his stomach. That, however, was not the end of
her—literally—chain reaction. She swung her crocus reticule around in a
full-armed arc and brought it down on the heavy man’s head. He sank to
the floor without a whimper. In the same movement she put her other hand
swiftly but firmly against Henry’s jaw and pushed it violently. His head
tipped back and smashed into the face of the man who stood behind him
holding his arms. The man staggered backward, tripped, and fell,
bouncing his skull off an unpadded bar stool.

“Come along, Henry,” said the old lady cheerfully. She took him by the
wrist as if he were a small boy whose face needed washing, and marched
him out of the cafe.

On the street he gasped, “They’ll chase us.…”

“Naturally,” said the lady. She put two fingers into her mouth and blew
a piercing blast. A block and a half away, a parked taxicab slid away
from the curb and came toward them. There was shouting from the cafe.
The taxicab pulled up beside them. The lady whipped the door open and
pushed Henry in. As four angry men shouldered out on the sidewalk, she
reached deep into her reticule and snatched a dark object from it. She
stood poised for a moment, and in the neon-shot half-light Henry saw
what was in her hand—an old-fashioned, top-of-stove flat iron. He
understood then why the heavy man had drowsed off so readily.

The lady hefted the iron and let it fly. It grazed the temple of one of
the men and flew straight through a plate glass window. The man who was
hit went to his knees, his hands holding his head. The other three fell
all over each other trying to get back out of range. The lady skipped
into the cab and said calmly, “Young man, take us away from here.”

“Yes, _ma’am!”_ said the driver in an awed tone, and let in his clutch.

They jounced along in silence for a moment, and then she leaned forward.
“Driver, pull up by one of these warehouses. Henry’s going to be sick.”

“I’m all right,” said Henry weakly. The cab stopped. The lady opened the
door. “Come along!”

“No, really, I—”

The lady snapped her fingers.

“Oh, all right,” said Henry sheepishly. In the black shadows by the
warehouse he protested faintly, “But I don’t _want_ to be sick!”

“I know what’s best,” she said solicitously. She took his hand, spread
it, and presented him with his long middle finger, point first, as if it
were a clinical thermometer. “Down your throat,” she ordered.

“No!” he said loudly.

“Are you going to do as you’re told?”

He looked at her. “Yes.”

“I’ll hold your head,” she said. “Go on.”

She held his head.

Afterward, in the cab, he asked her timidly if she would take him home
now.

“No,” she said. “You play the piano, don’t you, Henry?”

He nodded.

“Well, you’re going to play for me.” She reached forcefully into her
reticule again, and his protest died on his trembling lips. “Here,” she
said, and handed him an old-fashioned mint.

Priscilla mounted the stairs. She had a “walking-underwater” feeling, as
if she were immersed in her own reluctance. She had trod these stairs
many times at night—usually downward after a perplexing, intriguing
series of experiments. She did not know why she should be returning to
the laboratory now, except that she had been ordered to do so. She
freely admitted that if it were not for the thin, straight figure in
black who waited downstairs, she would certainly be in bed by now. But
there was an air of command, of complete certainty, about the old lady
who had saved her that was utterly compelling.

She walked quietly down the carpeted hall. The outer door of the lab
office was ajar. There was no light in the office, but a dim radiance
filtered in from the lab itself, through the frosted panel of the inner
door. She crossed to it and went in.

Someone gasped.

Someone said, “Priscilla!”

Priscilla said, “Excuse _me!”_ and spun around. She shot through the
office and out into the hall, her cheeks burning, her eyes stinging.
“He—he—” she sobbed, but could not complete the thought, would not
review the picture she had seen.

At the lower landing she raced to the street door, valiantly holding
back the tears and the sobs that would accompany them. Her hand went out
to the big brass doorknob, touched it—

As the cool metal greeted her hand she stopped.

Outside that door, standing on the walk by the iron railings, radiating
strength and rectitude, would be the old lady. She would watch Priscilla
come out of the building. She would probably nod her head in
knowledgeable disappointment. She would doubtless say, “I told you you
would want to leave, and that it would be foolish.”

“But they were—” said Priscilla in audible protest.

Then came the thought of trustfulness: “Listen to me. Do you trust me?”

Priscilla took her hand away from the knob. She thought she heard the
murmur of low voices upstairs.

She remembered the talk about Jon and his meeting with Edie at the
party. She remembered herself saying, “I—just didn’t think it through.”

She turned and faced the stairs. “I can’t, I can’t possibly go back. Not
now. Even if … even if it didn’t make any difference to me,
they’d … they’d hate me. It would be a terrible thing to do, to go
back.”

She turned until the big brass knob nudged her hip. Its touch projected
a vivid picture into her mind—the old lady, straight and waiting in the
lamplight.

She sighed and started slowly up the stairs again.

When she got to the office this time the light was on. She pushed the
door open. Jon was leaning against the desk, watching it open. Edie, his
ex-wife, stood by the laboratory door, her wide-spaced eyes soft and
bright. For a moment no one moved. Then Edie went to Jon and stood
beside him, and together they watched Priscilla with questions on their
faces, and something like gentle sympathy. Or was it empathy?

Priscilla came in slowly. She went up to Edie and stopped. She said,
“You’re just what he needed.”

The wide dark eyes filled with tears. Edie put her arms out and
Priscilla was in them without quite knowing which of them had moved.
When she could, Edie said, “You are so lovely, Priscilla. You’re so very
lovely.” And Priscilla knew she was not talking about her red hair or
her face.

Jon put a hand on each of their shoulders. “I don’t understand what’s
happening here,” he said, “but I have the feeling that it’s good.
Priscilla, why did you come back?”

She looked at him and said nothing.

“What made you come back?”

She shook her head.

“You know,” he smiled, “but you’re just not talking. You’ve never done a
wiser thing than to come back. If you hadn’t, Edie and I would have been
driven apart just as surely as if you’d used a wedge. Am I right, Edie?

Edie nodded. “You’ve made us very happy.”

Priscilla felt embarrassed. “You are giving me an awful lot of credit,”
she said in a choked voice. “I didn’t really do anything. I wish I had
the—the bigness or wisdom you think I have.” She raised her eyes to
them. “I’ll try to live up to it, though. I will …”

The phone rang.

“Now who could that—” Jon reached for it.

Priscilla took it out of his hand. “I’ll take it.”

Edie and Jon looked at each other. Priscilla said into the phone,
“Yes … yes, it’s me. How in the world did you … Tonight? But it’s so
late! Will you be there? Then so will I. Oh, you’re wonderful … yes,
right away.”

She hung up.

Jon said, “Who was it?”

Priscilla laughed. “A friend.”

Jon touched her jaw. “All right, Miss Mysterious. What’s it all about?”

“Will you do something if I ask you? You, too, Edie?”

“Oh, yes.”

Priscilla laughed again. “We do have something to celebrate, don’t we?”
When they nodded, she laughed again. Well, come on!”

It was easier to carry the chopsticks piano-player with Derek to help,
Jane concluded. She watched the rapt faces in the club. The house
counted good, and it was going great, but she couldn’t help thinking
what it would be like if Derek hadn’t been so pigheaded about little
Henry. She finished her chorus and the piano took it up metronomically,
nudged on the upbeats of the authoritative beat of Derek’s bass. She
looked at him. He was playing steadily, almost absently. His face was
sullen. When he got absent-minded he wasn’t colossal any more; only
terrific.

The piano moved through an obvious C-sharp seventh chord to change key
to F-sharp, her key for the windup. She drifted into the bridge section
with a long glissando, and disgust moved into her face and Derek’s in
perfect synchronization as they realized that the pianist was blindly
going into another 32 bars from the beginning.

Derek doubled his beat and slapped the strings hard, and the sudden
flurry of sound snapped the pianist out of it. Blushing, he recovered
the fluff. Jane rolled her eyes up in despair and finished the number.
To scattered applause she turned to the piano and said, “Tinkle some.
Derek and I are going to take ten. And while you’re tinkling,” she added
viciously, _“practice_, huh?”

She smiled at the audience, crossed the stand and touched Derek’s elbow.
“I’m going behind that potted palm and flip my lid. Come catch it.”

He put his bass out of harm’s way and followed her into the office. She
let him pass her and slump down on the desk. She banged the door.

“You—”

He looked at her sullenly. “I know what you’re going to say. I threw out
the best ten fingers in the business. I told you I don’t want to talk
about it. You don’t believe that, do you?”

“I believe it,” she said. Her eyes glittered. “Derek Jax, I love you.”

“Cut it out.”

“I’m not kidding. I’m not changing the subject, either. I love you this
much. I’m going to call your hand, kid. I love you so much that I’m
going to make you talk about what’s with this business of Henry, or I’m
going to see you walk out of here with, and into, your doghouse.”

“That don’t make a hell of a lot of sense, Janie,” he said
uncomfortably.

“No, huh? Listen, the guy I love talks to me. I understand him enough so
he can talk to me. If he won’t talk to me, it’s because he thinks I
won’t understand. I think you see what I mean. I love the guy I think
you are. If you won’t talk about it, you’re just not that guy. Maybe
that doesn’t mean anything to you.”

“Could be,” he growled. He rose and stretched. “Well, I guess I’ll be
going. Nice working with you, Janie.”

“So long,” she said. She went and opened the door.

“By God,” he said, “you really mean it.”

She nodded.

He licked his lips, then bit them. He sat down. “Shut the door, Janie.”

She shut the door and put her head against it. He flashed her a look.
“What’s the matter?”

She said hoarsely, “I got something in my eye. Wait.” Presently she
swung around and faced him. Her smile was brilliant, her face composed.
The vein in the side of her neck was thick and throbbing.

“Jane …” he said with difficulty, “that Henry—did he ever make a pass at
you?”

“Why, you egghead. No! To him I’m something that makes music, like a
saxophone. It’s you he’s interested in. Hell, did you see his face when
you came in with your bass this afternoon? He’d rather play to that bass
than go over the falls in a barrel with me. If that’s all that was on
your mind, forget it.”

“You make it tough for me,” he said heavily. “I’ll play it through for
you a note at a time. Got a stick?”

She rummaged in the desk drawer and found him a cigarette. He lit it and
dragged until he coughed. She had never seen him like this. She said
nothing.

He seemed to appreciate that. He glanced at her and half his mouth
flashed part of a smile. Then he said, “Did I ever tell you about
Danny?”

“No.”

“Kids together. Kids get close. He lived down the pike. I got caught in
a root one time, swimming in a rock quarry. Danny seemed to know the
instant I got tangled. He couldn’t swim worth a damn, but in he came.
Got me out, too.”

He dragged on his cigarette, still hungry, hot and harsh. The words came
out, smoking. “There was a lot of stuff … we played ball, we run away
from home, we broke into an ol’ house and pried loose a toilet and threw
it out a fourth-floor window onto a concrete walk. We done a lot.

“We jived a lot. He had natural rhythm. We used to bang away on his ol’
lady’s piano. I played trumpet for a while, but what I wanted to do was
play string bass. I wanted that real bad.

“We grew up and he moved away. Some lousy job trying to learn
cabinet-making. Saw him a couple times. Half-starved, but real happy. I
was playing bass by then, some. Had to borrow a fiddle. Wanted my own
instrument _so_ bad, never had the money. So one day he called me up
long distance. Come over. I didn’t have no trainfare, so I hitchhiked.
Met him at a barrelhouse joint in town. He was real excited, dragged me
out to his place. A shack—practically a shanty. When we got in sight of
it he started to run. It was on fire.”

Derek closed his eyes and went on talking. “We got to it and it was
pretty far gone. I got there first. One wall was gone. Inside everything
was burning. Danny, he—he screamed like a stung kid. He tried to jump
inside. I hung on to him. Was much bigger’n him. Then I saw it—a string
bass. A full-size string bass, burning up. I sat on Danny and watched it
burn. I knew why he’d moved out of town. I knew why he took up
cabinet-making. I knew why he was so hungry an’—an’ so happy. Made the
box with his own two hands. We watched it burn and he tried to fight me
because I would not let him save it. He cried. Well—_we_ cried. Just two
kids.”

Jane said a single, unprintable word with a bookful of feeling behind
it.

“We got over it. We roomed together after that. We done everything
together. Crowd we ran with used to kid us about it, and that just made
it better. I guess we were about nineteen then.”

He squeezed out a long breath and looked up at her with stretched, blind
eyes. “We had something, see? Something clean and big that never
happened before, and wasn’t nothing wrong with it.

“Then I come home one night and he’s at the back window staring into the
yard. Said he was moving out. Said we weren’t doing each other any good.
He was in bad shape. Somebody’d been talking to him, some lousy crumb
with a sewer mouth and sewer ideas. I didn’t know what it was all about.
We were still just kids, see?

“Anyway, I couldn’t talk him out of it. He left. He was half-crazy, all
eaten up. Like the time we watched the bull-fiddle burn up. He wouldn’t
say what was the trouble. So after he went I milled around the joint
trying to make sense out of it and I couldn’t. Then I—”

Derek’s voice seemed to desert him. He coughed hard and got it back.
“—Then I went and looked out the window. Somebody’d wrote our names on
the fence. Drew a heart around ’em.

“I never gave a damn what anyone thought, see? But Danny, he did. I
guess you can’t know how someone else feels, but you can get a pretty
fair idea. First I was just mad, and then I pretended I was Danny
looking at a thing like that, and I got an idea how bad it was. I ran
out lookin’ for him.

“Saw him after a time. Up by the highway, staggering a bit like he was
half-soused. He wasn’t, though. I ran after him. He was waiting for the
light to change. There was a lot of traffic. Tried to get to him.
Couldn’t begin to. He sort of pitched off the curb right under oh my God
I can still see it the big dual wheel it run right over his head …” he
finished in a rapid monotone.

Jane put her hand on his shoulder. Derek said, “I didn’t know then and I
don’t know now and I never will know if he was so tore up and sick he
just fell, or if he done it on purpose. All I know is I’ve lived ever
since with the idea I killed him just by being around him so much. Don’t
try to talk me out of it. I know it don’t make sense. I know all the
right answers. But knowing don’t help.

“That’s the whole story.”

Jane waited a long time and then said gently, “No, Derek.”

He started as if he had suddenly found himself in an utterly strange
place. Gradually his sense of presence returned to him and he wiped his
face.

“Yeah,” he said. “Your boy Henry. Danny—he played piano, Janie. I
started with him. Danny played piano like nothing that ever lived except
this Henry. Everything I ever drug out of a string bass was put in there
first by the way he played piano. He used to sit and play like that and
every once in a while grin at me. Shy.

“So I walk in here on a guy playing that kind of piano and he grins shy
like that when he plays, and besides, here’s that _real close_ stuff
around him like a fog. That Henry’s a genius, Janie. And he’s a—he’s the
type of guy they ought to use for a mold to make _people_ out of. And he
just wants to be near my fiddle. And me. And you want me to keep him
around here until he knocks hisself off.

“Janie,” he said, with agony in his voice, _“I’m not goin’ through that
again!”_

Jane squeezed his shoulder. She looked back over the afternoon and
evening and words flitted through her mind: “You won’t have to lose any
sleep over him …” “Looks like you’ve made a conquest …” “Did he ever
make a pass at you?” Aloud she told him, “I’ve sure said all the right
things … take a swing at me, pudd’nhead.”

Derek pulled her hand close against his cheek, and pressed it there so
hard it hurt her. She let him do it as long as he wanted. “I love you,
Janie,” he whispered. “I shoulda told you all that about Danny a long
time ago.”

“How could you tell till you tried?” she asked huskily. “Let’s go on out
there before ol’ Kitten on the Keys drives all the customers away.”

“I can’t go in there,” said Henry Faulkner in genuine panic.

“You can and you will,” said the old lady firmly.

“Listen, there’s a man in there who’ll throw me out on sight.”

“Have I been wrong yet? This is your night to do as you’re told, young
man, and that’s the way it is.”

In spite of himself he grinned. They went in through the herculite
doors. Janie was just finishing a number. The piano fluffed the last
chorus badly. Henry and the old lady stood in the back of the club until
Derek and Jane walked off the floor.

“Now,” she said briskly, “go on up there and play for me. Play anything
you want to.”

“But they have a piano player!”

“He’s in a pet. Just go up there.”

“Wh-what’ll I say to him?”

“Don’t say anything, silly! Just stand there. He’ll go away.”

He hesitated, and the lady gave him a small shove. He shambled around
the dance floor and diffidently approached the piano.

The pianist was playing a dingdong version of _Stardust_. He saw Henry
coming. “You again.”

Henry said nothing.

“I suppose you want to take my job again.”

Henry still said nothing. The man went on playing. Presently, “You can
have it. How anyone can work with a couple sourpusses like that …“ He
got off the stool in mid-chorus, leaving _Stardust’s_ garden gate
musically ajar. Henry’s right hand shot out and, catching the chord as
if it had been syncopated instead of shut off, began molding it like a
handful of soft clay. He sat down still playing.

Edie said, “I can’t help feeling a little peculiar. This is wonderful,
so wonderful—but there are still two of us and one of you.”

“Three of us,” corrected Priscilla.

“In some ways that’s so,” said Jon. He swallowed the rest of his drink
and beckoned the waiter. “Pris is the best statistician and
psychological steno I’ve ever run across. And you’re a genius with the
machines. Why, between us we will do research that’ll make history.”

“Of course we will. But—isn’t three a crowd?”

Priscilla said, without malice, “From anyone but you I’d consider that a
hint. Don’t worry about me. I have the most wonderful feeling that the
miracles aren’t finished.”

“Pris, are you ever going to tell us about the miracles?”

“I don’t know, Jon. Perhaps.” Her eyes searched the club. Suddenly they
fixed on a distant corner table. “There she is!”

“Who?” Jon twisted around. “Well, I’ll be damned!”

“What is it?” asked Edie.

“Excuse me,” said Jon, and rose. “Someone I’ve got to see.” He stalked
over to the corner table and glowered down at its occupants. “May I ask
you what you’re doing here?”

“Why, Dr. Prince!” said Pallas. “Imagine meeting you here!”

“What are you two doing here at this time of night?”

“We can go where we like,” said Verna, smoothing her snowy hair, “and
that’s the way it is.”

“There’s no law against a lady having a spot at bedtime,” amended Verna.

“You two never cease to amaze me,” Jon said, chuckling in spite of
himself. “Just be careful. I’d hate to see my prize exhibits get hurt.”

They smiled up at him. “We’ll be all right. We’ll talk to you again
later, won’t we, Verna?”

“Oh, yes,” said Verna. “Definitely. That’s the way it is.”

Still chuckling, Jon went back to his table. “There sits the damnedest
pair of human beings I’ve encountered yet,” he said as he sat down.
“Three years ago they were senile psychotics, the two of them. As far as
I can determine, they had no special therapy—they were in the County
Home, and as mindless as a human being can get and stay alive. First
thing you know they actually started feeding themselves—”

“Pallas and Verna!” said Priscilla. “You’ve mentioned—holy Pete! Are you
sure?”

“Of course I’m sure. I’m on the Board out there. You know the case
history. They have to report to me every sixty days.”

“Well—I—will—be—damned,” Priscilla intoned, awed.

“What is it, Pris? I didn’t think you’d ever seen them. They’ve never
been to the lab.… Say, how did you recognize them just now?”

“Could … could you bring them over?”

“Oh, come now. This celebration is only for—”

“I’ve heard enough to be curious about them,” said Edie. “Do invite
them, Jon.”

He shrugged and returned to the other table. In a moment he was back
with the two spinsters. He drew out chairs for them in courtly fashion,
and called a waiter. Pallas ordered a double rye, no chaser. Verna
smiled like a kitten and ordered scotch on the rocks. “For our colds,”
she explained.

“How long have you had colds?” he demanded professionally.

“Oh, dear, we don’t get colds,” explained Verna sweetly. “That’s because
we drink our liquor straight.”

Dr. Jonathan Prince felt it within him to lay down the law at this
point. A patient was a patient. But there was something in the air that
prevented it. He found himself laughing again. He thought he saw Pallas
wink at Priscilla and shake her head slightly, but he wasn’t sure. He
introduced the girls. Without the slightest hesitation he introduced
Edie as “my wife.” She colored and looked pleased.

“Listen to that music,” breathed Priscilla.

“Thought you’d notice it,” said Pallas, and smiled at Verna.

They all listened. It was a modal, moody, rhythmic invention, built
around a circle of chords in the bass which beat, and beat, and beat on
a single sonorous tone. The treble progressed evenly, regularly, tripped
up on itself and ran giggling around and through the steady structure of
the bass modulations, then sobered and marched again, but always full of
suppressed mirth.

Priscilla was craning her neck. “I can’t see him!”

Verna said, “Why don’t you go up there, dear? I’m sure he would not
mind.”

“Oh … really not?” She caught Pallas’s eye. Pallas gave her one firm
nod. Priscilla said, “Do you mind?” She slipped out of her chair and
went up past the dance floor.

“Look at her,” breathed Edie. “She’s got that—that ‘miracle’ expression
again.… Oh, Jon, she’s _so_ lovely.”

Jon said, looking at the spinsters, “What are you two hugging each other
about?”

Henry looked up from the keyboard and smiled shyly.

“Hello,” Priscilla said.

“Hello.” He looked at her face, her hair, her body, her eyes. His
shyness was there, and no boldness was present; he looked at her the way
she listened to his music. It was personal and not aggressive. He moved
over on the bench. “Sit down.”

Without hesitation she did. She looked at him, too—the hawk profile, the
gentle gray-green eyes. “You play beautifully.”

“Listen.”

He played with his eyes on her face. His hands leaped joyfully like baby
goats. Then they felt awe and hummed something. Henry stopped playing by
ear. He began to sight-read.

Note followed note followed note for the line of her nose, and doubled
and curved and turned back for her nostrils. The theme became higher and
fuller and rounded and there was her forehead, and then there were
colorful waves up and back for her hair. Here was a phrase for an
earlobe, and one for the turn of the cheek, and now there were
mysteries, two of them, long and subdued and agleam and end-tilted, and
they were her eyes.…

Derek came out of the office and stopped so abruptly that Jane ran into
him. Before she could utter the first startled syllable, her breath was
taken away in a great gasp.

Derek turned and gestured at the music. “You—”

She looked up at him, the furious eyes, the terrified trembling at the
corners of his mouth. “No, Derek, so help me God, I didn’t ask him to
come back. I wouldn’t do that, Derek. I _wouldn’t.”_

“You wouldn’t,” he agreed gently. “I know it, hon. I’m sorry. But out he
goes.” He strode out to the stand. Jane trotted behind him, and when
they turned the corner she caught his arm so violently that her long
fingernails sank into his flesh. _“Wait!”_

There was a girl on the bench with Henry, and as he played he stared at
her face. His eyes moved over it, his own face moved closer. His hands
made music like the almost visible current which flowed between them.
Their lips touched.

There was a tinkling explosion of sound from the piano that built up in
fullness and sonority until Jane and Derek all but blinked their eyes,
as if it were a blaze of light. And then Henry’s left hand picked up a
theme, a thudding, joyous melody that brought the few late-owls in the
club right to their feet. He no longer looked at the girl. His eyes were
closed, and his hands spoke of himself and what he felt—a great honest
hunger and new riches, a shy and willing experience with a hitherto
undreamed-of spectrum of sensation.

Jane and Derek looked at each other with shining eyes. Jane said,
deliberately, “Son, you got a rival,” and Derek laughed in sheer
relieved delight.

“I’m going to get my fiddle,” he said.

When Derek started to play, four people left their table and came up to
the piano as if cables drew them. Hand in hand, Jon and Edie stopped
close by Priscilla and stood there rapt as she, Pallas and Verna stood
at the other end of the bench, their eyes glowing.

And out of the music, out of the bodies that fell into synchronization
with the masterful pulse of the great viol, came a union, a blending of
forces from each of six people. Each of the six had a part that was
different from all of the others, but the shape of them was a major
chord, infinitely complete and completely satisfying.

“Ril!”

“Oh, make it formal, KadKedKud!”

“RilRylRul, then …”

“If only Mak were here.”

“Myk is with us, and Muk. Poor partial things, and how hard they have
worked, guarding and guiding with those pitifully inadequate bodies as
instruments. Come, Ril; we must decide. Now that we can operate fully,
we can investigate these creatures.”

Just as they had investigated, compared, computed and stored away
observations on industrial techniques, strength of materials, stress and
temperature and power and design, so now they took instant and total
inventory of their hosts.

RilRylRul found classicism and inventiveness, tolerance and empathy in
Henry. In Derek were loyalty and rugged strength and a powerful
interpretive quality. In Jane was the full-blown beauty of sensualism
and directive thought, and a unique stylization of the products of
artistic creation.

KadKedKud separated and analyzed a splendid systematization in
Priscilla, a superior grasp of applied theory in Edie, and in Jon that
rarest of qualities, the associative mind—the mind that can bridge the
specialties.

“A great race,” said Ril, “but a sick one, badly infected with the Pa’ak
pestilence.”

“The wisest thing to do,” reflected Kad, “would be to stimulate the
virus to such an extent that humanity will impose its own quarantine—by
reducing itself to savagery through atomic warfare. There is such a
great chance of that, no matter what we do, that it would seem expedient
to hasten the process. The object would be to force atomic warfare
before space travel can begin. That at least would keep the virus out of
the Galaxy, which is what we came here to effect.”

“It’s a temptation,” conceded Ril. “And yet—what a tremendous species
this human race could be! Let us stay, Kad. Let us see what we can do
with them. Let us move on to other human groups, now that we know the
techniques of entry and merging. With just the right pressure on exactly
the right points, who knows? Perhaps we can cause them to discover how
to cure themselves?

“It will be a close race,” worried Kad. “We can do a great deal, but can
we do it soon enough? We face three possibilities: Mankind may destroy
itself through its own sick ingenuity; it may reach the stars to spread
its infection; or it may find its true place as a healthy species in a
healthy Cosmos. I would not predict which is more likely.”

“Neither would I,” Ril returned. “So if the forces are that closely
balanced, I have hope for the one we join. Are you with me?”

“Agreed. Myk—Muk … will you join us?”

Faintly, faintly came the weak response of the two paltry parts of a
once powerful triad: “Back in our sector we would be considered dead.
Here we have a life, and work. Of course we will help.”

So they considered, and, at length, decided.

And their meeting and consideration and decision took four microseconds.

The six people looked at one another, entranced, dazed.

“It’s—gone,” said Jon. He wondered, then, what he meant by that.

Henry’s fingers slid off the keys, and the big bass was silent.
Priscilla opened her tilted eyes wide and looked about her. Edie pressed
close to Jonathan, bright-faced, composed. Jane stood with her head
high, her nostrils arched.

They felt as if they were suddenly living on a new plane of existence,
where colors were more vivid and the hues between them more
recognizable. There was a new richness to the air, and a new strength in
their bodies; but most of all it was if a curtain had been lifted from
their minds for the first time in their lives. They had all reached a
high unity, a supreme harmony in the music a second before, but this was
something completely different, infinitely more complete. “Cured” was
the word that came to Jonathan. He knew instinctively that what he now
felt was a new norm, and that it was humanity’s birthright.

“My goodness gracious!”

Verna and Pallas stood close together, like two frightened birds,
darting glances about them and twittering.

“I can’t think what I’m doing here,” said Pallas blankly, yet aware.
“I’ve had one of my spells …”

“We both have,” Verna agreed. “And that’s the way it is.”

Jonathan looked at them, and knew them instantly as incomplete.

He raised his eyes to the rest of the people in the club, still stirring
with the final rustle of applause from the magnificent burst of music
they had heard, and he recognized them as sick. His mind worked with a
new directiveness and brilliance to the causes of their sickness.

He turned to Edie. “We have work to do …”

She pressed his hand, and Priscilla looked up and smiled.

Derek and Jane looked into each other’s eyes, into depths neither had
dreamed of before. There would be music from that, they knew.

Henry said, with all his known gentleness and none of the frightened
diffidence, “Hey, you with the red hair. I love you. What’s your name?”
And Priscilla laughed with a sound like wings and buried her face in his
shoulder.

On earth there was a new kind of partnership of three. And …

_The news is new aggression threatens unleashing of atomic weapons.…
President calls for universal disarmament.… First flight to the Moon
possible now with sufficient funds.… Jonathan Prince announces virus
cause of neurosis, promises possible cure of all mental diseases.…_

Watch your local newspapers for latest developments.



MAKE ROOM FOR ME


“W_E SHALL NEVER SEE him again … there will be no more arguments, no
more pleasant thinking with Eudiche,” mourned Torth to the other Titan_.

_“Come now. Don’t be so pessimistic,” said Larit, stroking the machine.
“The idea of dissociation has horrified you, that’s all. There is every
chance that his components will fuse.”_

_“So involved, so very involved,” Torth fretted. “Is there really no way
to send the complete psyche?”_

_“Apparently not. The crystals are of a limited capacity, you know. If
we grow them larger, they cannot retain a psychic particle. If we sent
all three encased particles together, their interaction would break down
the crystals chemically. They must be sent separately.”_

_“But—horrible! How can one third of a psyche live alone?”_

_“Biologically, you know perfectly well. Psychologically, you need only
look about you. You will find a single psyche only in each of our
gracious hosts—”_

_“—gracious indeed,” muttered Torth, “and gracious they will remain, or
die.”_

_“—and each of the natives on the planet to which we sent Eudiche has
but one psyche_.

_“How then can he occupy three of them?”_

_“Torth, you insist on asking questions requiring a higher technological
comprehension than yours to understand,” replied the other in annoyance.
“There are closer ties than physical proximity. Eudiche will avail
himself of them. Let that suffice.” More kindly, he added, “Eudiche will
be all right. Wait; just wait.”_*

The statue of Ben Franklin, by the very weight of its greyness, sobered
the green sparkle of the campus. At the foot of the benevolent image the
trio stood—Vaughn, tiny, with long braids of flaxen hair; Dran, slender
and aquiline, and—apart from the others, as usual—Manuel, with heavy
shoulders and deep horizontal creases over his thick brows.

Dran smiled at some chattering coeds who passed, then slanted his narrow
face toward the semi-circle of stone buildings. “After three years,” he
said, “I’ve gotten over being delighted by my own uniqueness—the three
miserable years it took me to convince myself that distinction and
difference are not synonymous. And now that I’m _of_ this place—no
longer on the outside looking in, or on the inside looking on, I—”

“Who’s so exceptional?” growled Manuel, moving closer. “Aside from the
runt here, who never will get the knack of being a human being.”

“Are you a specimen of humanity?” asked the girl stormily. “Manuel, I
don’t expect compliments from you, but I wish you’d try courtesy. Now
listen. I have something to tell you. I—”

“Wait a minute,” said Dran, “I have something more important, whatever
you have on your mind. I’ve got the answer—for me, anyway—to this whole
question of being the same as everyone else and being different at the
same time. I—”

“You said it all last night,” said Vaughn wearily. “Only you were so
full of sherry that you didn’t know what you were saying. I quote:
‘Vaughn, not only your charming person but your poetry would be a lot
more popular if you wouldn’t hide behind this closed door of
non-aggression and restraint.’ Well, I’ve been thinking about that, and
I—”

“Manuel,” Dran interrupted, “you’ve got muscles. Throttle her, will you?
Just a little. Just until I can put a predicate on this subject.”

“I’d love to get started on that job,” grinned Manuel, licking his lips.
“Imagine how those wall eyes would pop.”

“Keep your hands off me, animal,” Vaughn hissed. “Dran, I’m trying to—”

“I will not be stopped,” said Dran. With a gesture completely
characteristic, he knocked back a strand of his red-gold hair,
scattering ashes from his cigarette through it. “Be quiet and listen.
You two have held still for a lot of my mouthings and gnashings of teeth
about my being a white monkey—the one all the brown monkeys will tear to
pieces just because he’s different. Well, I have the solution.”

“Get to the point,” Manuel grunted. “It could be that I got a speech to
make, too.”

“Not until I’ve told you—” Vaughn began.

“Shut up, both of you,” said Dran. “Especially you, Vaughn. All right.
What are we here for?”

“To get a degree.”

“We are not. At least, I’m not,” said Dran. “The more I think of it, the
less I think school teaches you anything. Oh, sure, there are some
encyclopaedics that you sponge up, but that’s secondary. A school’s real
function is to teach you how to learn. Period.”

“All right—then what about the degree?”

“That’s just to convince other people that you have learned how to
learn. Or to convince yourself, if you’re not sure. What I’m driving at,
is that _I’m_ sure. I know all I need to know about how to learn. I’m
leaving.”

There was a stunned silence. Vaughn looked slowly from one to the other.
Dran’s eyebrows went up. “I didn’t expect such a dramatic effect. Vaughn
…? Say something!”

“Y—you’ve been reading my script!” she murmured. Her eyes were huge.

“What do you mean?”

“Why—I’ve been thinking .. For more than a year I’ve known what I wanted
to do. And this—” she waved a hand at the grey buildings—“this hasn’t
been it. This … interferes. And I wanted to tell you about that, and
that you mustn’t think it means that I’ve finished learning. I want to
learn a world of things—but not here.”

Manuel released a short bark of laughter. “You mean you made a great big
decision—all by yourself?”

“I’ll make a decision about you one of these days, now that I’ve learned
the technique,” she spat. “Dran … what are you going to do? Where are
you going?”

“I have something lined up. Advertising—direct mail. It isn’t too tough.
I’ll stay with that for a couple of years. See how the other half lives.
The half with money, that is. When I’m ready, I’ll drop it and write a
novel. It’ll be highly successful.”

“Real cocky,” said Manuel.

“Well, damn it, it will be. With me. _I’ll_ like it. So far as I’m
concerned it will be successful. And what about you, Vaughn?”

“I have a little money. Not much. But I’ll manage. I’ll write poems.”
She smiled. “They’ll be successful, too.”

“Good thing you guys don’t have to depend on what anyone else thinks,”
Manuel grunted. “Me, I do it the way the man wants it done or else.”

“But you please yourself doing it,” Dran said.

“Huh? I—never thought of it like that. I guess you’re right. Well.” He
looked from Vaughn to Dran and back. They suddenly spoke, almost in
unison. “Manuel! What are you going to—” and—“Manuel! What will you do
now?”

“Me? I’ll make out. You two don’t think I _need_ you?”

Vaughn’s eyes grew bright. Dran put an understanding hand on her
shoulder. He said, “Who writes this plot? What a switch! Manuel, of all
people, clinging to these walls with the rest of the ivy, while Vaughn
and I try our wings.”

“Sometimes you characters give me a pain in the back of my lap,” said
Manuel abruptly. “I hang around with you and listen to simple-minded
gobbledegook in yard-long language, if it’s you talking, Dran, and
pink-and-purple sissification from the brat here. Why I do it I’ll never
know. And it goes that way up to the last gasp. So you’re going to
leave. Dran has to make a speech, real logical. Vaughn has to blow out a
sigh and get misty-eyed.” He spat.

“How would you handle it?” Dran asked, amused. Vaughn stared at Manuel
whitely.

“Me? You really want to know?”

“This I want to hear,” said Vaughn between her teeth.

“I’d wait a while—a long while—until neither of you was talking. Then
I’d say, ‘I joined the Marines yesterday.’ And you’d both look at me a
little sad. There’s supposed to be something wrong with coming right out
and saying something. Let’s see. Suppose I do it the way Vaughn would
want me to.” He tugged at an imaginary braid and thrust out his lower
lip in a lampoon of Vaughn’s full mouth. He sighed gustily. “I have
felt …” He paused to flutter his eyelashes. “I have felt the call to
arms,” he said in a histrionic whisper. He gazed off into the middle
distance. “I have heard the sound of trumpets. The drums stir in my
blood.” He pounded his temples with his fists. “I can’t stand it—I
can’t! Glory beckons. I will away to foreign strands.”

Vaughn turned on her heel, though she made no effort to walk away. Dran
roared with laughter.

“And suppose I’m you,” said Manuel, his face taut with a suppressed
grin. He leaned easily against the base of the statue and crossed his
legs. He flung his head back. “Zeno of Miletus,” he intoned, “in
reflecting on the cromislon of the fortiseetus, was wont to refer to a
razor as ‘a check for a short beard.’ While shaving this morning I
correlated ‘lather’ with ‘leather’ and, seeing some of it on my neck, I
recalled the old French proverb, ‘Jeanne D’Arc,’ which means: The light
is out in the bathroom. The integration was complete. If the light was
out I could no longer shave. Therefore I can not go on like this. Also
there was this matter of the neck. I shall join the Marines. Q. E. D.,
which means thus spake Zarathusiasm.”

Dran chuckled. Vaughn made a furious effort, failed, and burst out
laughing. When it subsided, Manuel said soberly, “I did.”

“You did what?”

“I joined the Marines yesterday.”

Dran paled. Manuel looked at him in open astonishment. He had never seen
Dran without an instant response before. And Vaughn clutched at his
arms. “You didn’t! You couldn’t! Manuel … Manuel … the uniform … the
pain … you’ll be _killed!”_

“Yup. But slowly. In agony. And as I lie there in the growing dark, a
sweet thought will sustain me. I’ll never again see another line of your
lousy poetry. For Christ’s sake!” he bellowed suddenly. “Get off that
tragic kick, stupid! I’ll be all right.”

“What did you go and do a thing like that for?” Dran asked slowly.

“What are you and the reptile leaving for?” Manuel returned. “The same
thing. This place has taught me all it can—for me. I’m going where I’ll
know who’s my boss, and I’ll know who takes orders from me. What I’ll
wear, where I’ll live—someone else can decide that. Meantime I’ll work
in communications, which I’d be doing anyway, but someone else will buy
the equipment and materials.”

“You’ll be caged. You’ll never be free,” said Vaughn.

“Free for what? To starve? Free to argue with salesmen and landlords?
Nuts. I’ll go and work with things I can measure, work with my hands,
while you two are ex-prassing your tortured souls. What would you like
to see me do instead? Take up writing sonnets that nobody’ll ever read?
Suppose I do that, and _you_ go join the Marines.”

Dran touched Vaughn’s arm. “He’s right, Vaughn. What he’s doing would be
wrong for you, or for me, but it’s right for him.”

“I don’t … I don’t know what to do,” she mourned.

“I do,” said Manuel. “Let’s go eat.”

_“We are parasites,” said the Titan, “which is the initial measure of
our intelligence.”_

_Torth said, “Our intelligence doesn’t make it possible for us to
survive on Titan.”_

_“It’s an impasse. The very act of settling the three components of our
psyche into the brains of the natives gives us a home—and shortens the
life of the native.”_

_“Wouldn’t that be true of the bipeds on the third planet?”_

_“To a degree,” admitted the other. “But they are long-lived—and there
are three billion of them.”_

_“And how would we affect them?”_

_“Just as we affect the natives here.”_

_Torth made the emanation which signified amusement. “That should make
them very unhappy.”_

_“You speak of a matter of no importance,” said the other irritably.
“And it is not true. They will be as incapable of expressing unhappiness
as anything else.” He applied himself again to the machine, with which
he was tracking the three crystalline casings which carried Eudiche on
his Earthward journey_.

After dinner they went to a concert. They sat in their favorite
seats—the loges—and waited, each wrapped in his own thoughts. Dran
stared at the dusty carved figures under the ceiling. Manuel sketched
busily—a power-operated shock absorber, this time. Between them Vaughn
sat, withdrawn and dreamy, turning night-thoughts into free verse.

They straightened as the conductor appeared and crossed the platform,
amid applause which sounded like dead leaves under his feet. When he
raised his baton, Vaughn glanced swiftly at the faces of the other two,
and then they pressed forward in unison.

It was Bach—the _Passacaglia and Fugue in C Minor_. The music stepped
and spiralled solemnly around them, enclosing them in a splendid
privacy. They were separate from the rest of the audience, drawn to each
other. Manuel and Dran moved slightly toward Vaughn, until their
shoulders touched. Their eyes fixed unmoving on the orchestra.

At the last balanced, benevolent crescendo they rose together and left,
ahead of the crowd. None of them cared to talk, strangely. They walked
swiftly through the dark streets to a brightly lit little restaurant
several blocks from the Academy.

In a high-walled booth, they smiled to each other as if acknowledging a
rich secret. Then Vaughn’s eyes dropped; she pulled at her fingers and
sighed.

“No effusions from you, please,” said Dran—possibly more coldly than he
intended. “We all felt it, whatever it was. Don’t mess it up.”

Vaughn’s gaze was up again, shocked. Manuel said, with an astonishing
gentleness, with difficulty, “I was—somewhere else, but you were with
me. And we all seemed to be—to be walking, or climbing …” He shook his
massive head. “Nuts. I must be thirsty or something. What do you want,
runt? Dran?”

Vaughn didn’t answer. She was staring at Dran, her violet eyes dark with
hurt.

“Speak up, chicken. I didn’t mean to crush you. I just didn’t feel like
listening to an iambic extravagance. Something happened to all of us.”

“Thanks f-for crediting me with so little sensitivity that you think I
didn’t feel it. That you think I’d spoil it!”

“Not too little sensitivity. Too much—_and_ out of control. I’m sorry,”
Dran relented. “Let’s order.” He turned to Manuel, and froze in surprise
at the look in the other’s face. It was a look of struggling, as if
unwelcome forces were waking within him, disturbing the rough, familiar
patterns of his thinking.

Joe passed, flashy, noisy, wide open for hurt. The trio had often
discussed Joe. Superficially, he was pushing into their group because of
Vaughn, who appeared to make him quite breathless. Dran had once said,
however, that it went deeper than that. Joe could not abide a liaison
that he couldn’t understand. Joe called, “Hi! As I live and bleed, it’s
the internal triangle. Nice to see you, Vaughn. When am I going to do it
on purpose instead of by accident?”

“Is this drip necessary?” Manuel muttered.

“I’ll see you soon, Joe,” Vaughn said, smiling at him. “We have a class
together tomorrow. I’ll talk to you about it then.” Her nod was a warm
touch, and a dismissal. Joe appeared about to speak, thought better of
it, waved and went away.

“That impossible idiot,” growled Dran. “A more quintessential jerk I
have yet to meet.”

“Oh, Dran! He’s not bad! Just undeveloped. Of course, he isn’t one of
_us_, but he’s fun all the same. He reads good poetry, and he’s quite
a—”

Manuel brought his hand down with a crash. _“That’s_ what I was after.
‘One of us.’ What do you mean, ‘one of us?’ Who joins this union? I’m
not ‘one of us.’ You two have more in common than you have with me.”

Vaughn touched his hand. “Manuel,” she said softly. “Oh, Manuel! Why,
everyone links us together. I—I know I do. So much so that until now I
didn’t think it required questioning. It’s something you accept as
natural.”

Dran’s eyes brightened. “Wait, Vaughn. Let’s not call it natural. Let’s
examine it. See what we get. I’ve been chewing on it since the business
with the music tonight anyway.”

Manuel shrugged. “Okay. What do the runt and I share after all? You and
I can agree on politics, and we have one or two mechanical interests.
But you, Vaughn—you …” He wet his lips. “Hell!” he exploded.
“You’re—useless!”

“I can ignore that,” said Vaughn, very obviously ignoring nothing,
“because you are only trying to hurt me.”

“Hold on,” said Dran easily. “I think this is worth an effort to avoid
that kind of emotional smokescreen. You particularly, Manny. You sound
resentful, and I don’t know that you have anything to resent.”

“She makes me mad, that’s all. Look—there are a lot of useful things in
the world—lock washers .. cotter pins. But this—this dame! You couldn’t
use her for a paperweight. She’s a worm trying to be a snake. You can’t
approach her logically. I can get to you that way, Dran, though I’ll
admit the going gets a little swampy sometimes.”

“Perhaps this thing we have,” said Vaughn softly, “is more than emotion,
or intellect, or any of those things.”

“Here we go again,” snorted Manuel.

“A mystic entity or something?” Dran chuckled. “I doubt it. But there is
something between us—all of us. It isn’t limited to any two. We all
belong. I’m not sure of what it’s for, or even if I like it. But I’m not
prepared to deny it. You aren’t either, Manny.”

“Manuel,” said Vaughn urgently. She reached across and touched him, as
if she wanted to press her eager words into him. “Manuel—haven’t you
ever felt it even a little? Didn’t you, tonight? Didn’t you? In your own
terms.… Manuel, just this once, I’d like to know honestly, without any
sneers.”

Manuel glowered at her, hesitated, then said, “What if I have?”
truculently. In a gentler tone, he added, “Oh, I have, all right. Once
or twice. It—like I said, damn it, it makes me mad. I don’t like getting
pushed around by something I don’t understand. It’ll probably stop when
I get away from here, and good riddance to it.”

Vaughn touched her knuckles to her teeth. She whispered, “To me, it’s
something to treasure.”

Dran grinned at her. “If you like it it’s got to be fragile, hm? Vaughn,
it isn’t. And I think Manny’s in for a surprise if he thinks distance is
going to make any difference.”

“I have hopes,” Manuel said sullenly.

Dran spread his hands on the table and looked at them. “Vaughn stands in
awe of this—this thing we have, and to Manuel it’s like a dose of crabs.
Excuse me, chicken. Far as I’m concerned, it’s something that will bear
watching. I can’t analyze it now. If it gets weaker I will be able to
analyze it even less. If it gets stronger it will show its nature no
matter what I do. So I’m going to relax and enjoy it. I can say this
much …” He paused, frowning, searching for words. “There is a lowest
common denominator for us. We’re all way off balance. And our imbalances
are utterly different in kind, and negligibly different in degree.”

Vaughn stared dully. Manuel said, “Huh?”

Dran said, more carefully, “Vaughn’s all pastels and poetry. Manuel’s
all tools and technology. I’m—”

“All crap and complication,” said Manuel.

“Manuel!”

Dran laughed. “He’s probably right, Vaughn. Anyway, we’re all lopsided
to the same degree, which is a lot, and that’s the only real similarity
between us. If we three were one person, it’d be a somebody, that’s for
sure.”

“It’d be an insect,” Manuel scowled. “Six legs.” He looked at Vaughn.
“With your head. No one’d know the difference.”

“You’re ichor-noclastic,” said Dran. Vaughn groaned. Manuel said, “That
was one of those puns. The only part I got was the ‘corn’. Where the
hell’s the waiter?”

_“Why Eudiche?” Torth fretted. “Why couldn’t they send someone else?”_

_“Eudiche is expendable,” said the other parasite shortly_.

_“Why? His balance is so perfect …”_

_“Answer restricted. Go away. One-third of his psyche has found a host
and is settling in. The observations are exceedingly difficult, because
of the subtlety of Eudiche’s operations. And you are most
exasperating.”_

For the third time in a week, Vaughn was lunching with Joe—a remarkable
thing, considering that in the two years since her departure from the
University she had seen less and less of old acquaintances. But after
all—Joe was easy to be with because she didn’t have to pretend. She
could be as moody as she chose. He would patiently listen to her long
and misty reflections, and let her recite poetry without protest. The
meetings did not hurt her, and Joe seemed to enjoy them so.…

But Joe had something to offer this time, rather than something to take.
As the waitress took their dessert order and left, he gently placed a
little plush box beside her coffee cup. “Won’t you consider it at all?”
he asked diffidently.

Her hand was on the box, reflexively, before she realized what it was.
Then she looked at him. Thoughts, feelings, swirled about each other
within her, like petals, paper, dust and moths in a small sudden
whirlwind. Her eyes fixed on his shy, anxious face, and she realized
that she had seldom looked directly at him .. and that he was good to
look at. She looked at the box and back at him, and then closed her
violet eyes. Joe as a suitor, as a potential lover, was an utterly new
idea to her. Joe as a bright-faced, carefully considerate _thing_ was
not Joe with hands, Joe with a body, Joe with habit patterns and a
career and toothpaste and beneficiaries for life insurance. She felt
flattered and bewildered and uncertain, and—warm.

And then something happened. It was as if an indefinable presence had
raised its head and was listening. This alien attentiveness added a
facet to the consideration of Joe. It made the acceptance or rejection
of Joe a more significant thing than it had been. The warmth was still
there, but it was gradually overlaid by a—a knowledge that created a
special caution, a particular inviolability.

She smiled softly then, and her hand lifted away from the box.

“There’s nothing final about an engagement,” Joe said. “It would be up
to you. Every minute. You could give me back the ring any time. I’d
never ask you why. I’d understand, or try to.”

“Joe.” She put out her hand, almost touched him, then drew it back.
“I … you’re so _very_ sweet, and this is a splendid compliment. But I
can’t do it. I—If I succeeded in persuading myself into it, I’d only
regret it, and punish you.”

“Umm,” mused Joe. His eyes were narrowed, shrewd and hurt. “Tied up,
huh? Still carrying the same old torch”

“The same—” Vaughn’s eyes were wide.

“That Dran Hamilton character,” said Joe tiredly, almost vindictively.
He reached for the ring box. “Part two of the unholy trio—”

_“Stop it!_”

It was the first time he had seen her gentle violet eyes blazing. It was
probably the first time they ever had. Then she picked up her gloves and
said quietly, “I’d like to go now, Joe, if you don’t mind.”

“But—but Vaughn—what did I—I didn’t mean any—”

“I know, I know,” she said wearily. “Why, I haven’t even thought about
them for a long time. For too long. Perhaps I should have. I—_know_ I
should have. Joe, I have to go. I’ve got to get out of here. It’s too
small. Too many people, too many cheap little lights. I need some sun.”

Almost frightened, he paid the check and followed her out. She was
walking as if she were alone. He hesitated, then ran to catch up with
her.

“It’s a thing that you couldn’t understand,” she said dully when he drew
alongside. She did not look up; for all he knew she may have been
talking before he reached her. She went on, “There were three of us, and
that’s not supposed to be right. Twos, and twos, and twos, all through
literature and the movies and the soap operas. This is something
different. Or maybe it isn’t different. Maybe it’s wrong, maybe I’m too
stupid to understand.… Joe, I’m sorry. Truly I am. I’ve been very
selfish and unkind.” There was that in her voice which stopped him. He
stood on the pavement watching her move away. He shook his head, took
one step, shook his head again, and then turned and plunged blindly back
the way he had come.

_“You’re getting old,” said Torth maliciously_.

_“Go away,” said the other. “With two particles assimilated and the
third about to be, matters have reached a critical point.”_

_“There is nothing you could do about it no matter what happened,” said
Torth_.

_“Will you go away? What did you come for, anyway?”_

_“I was having an extrapolative session with another triad,” Torth
explained. “Subject: is the Eudiche experiment a hoax? Conclusion: it
could be. Corollary: it might as well be, for all it has benefited our
race. I came for your comments on that. You are an unpleasant and
preoccupied entity, but for all that you are an authority.”_

_The old one answered with angry evenness: “Answers: The Eudiche
experiment is no hoax. It will benefit the race. As soon as Eudiche has
perfected his fusion technique, we shall emigrate. Our crystalline
casings are dust-motes to the bipeds of the third planet; our psychic
existence will be all but unnoticeable to them until we synthesize. When
we do, they will live for us, which is right and just. They will cease
thinking their own thoughts, they will discontinue their single-minded
activities. They will become fat and healthy and gracious as hosts.”_

_“But observations indicate that they feed themselves largely by tilling
the soil, that they combat the rigors of their climate by manufacturing
artificial skins and complex dwelling shelters. If we should stop all
that activity, they will die off, and we—”_

_“You always were a worrier, Torth,” interrupted the other. “Know, then,
that there are many of them and few of us. Each of us will occupy three
of them, and those three will work together to keep themselves fed and
us contented. The groups of three will be hidden in the mass of bipeds,
having little or no physical contact with one another and remaining
largely undetected. They will slaughter as they become hungry; after
all, they are also flesh-eaters, and the reservoir of unoccupied bipeds
will be large indeed. If, after we get there, the bipeds never plant
another seed nor build another dwelling, their own species will still
supply an inexhaustible supply of food purely by existing to be
slaughtered as needed. They breed fast and live long.”_

_Torth saluted the other. “We are indeed entering upon an era of plenty.
Your report is most encouraging. Our present hosts are small, few, and
too easy to kill. I assume that the bipeds have somewhat the same
minuscule intelligence?_

_“The bipeds of the third planet,” said the other didactically, “have
mental powers several hundred times as powerful as do those we have
dominated here. We can still take them over, of course, but it will be
troublesome. Look at the length of time it is taking Eudiche. However,
the reward is great. Once we have disrupted their group efforts by
scattering our triads among them, I can predict an eternity of
intriguing huntings and killings in order for our hosts to feed
themselves. Between times, life will be a bountiful feast of their vital
energies_.

_“Now, leave me, Torth. As soon as the final part of Eudiche’s triad is
settled in, we can expect the synthesis, by which he will come into full
operation as an entity again. And that I want to observe. He has chosen
well, and his three seeds are sprouting on fertile soil indeed.”_

_“You have been uncharacteristically polite and helpful,” conceded
Torth. He left_.

Dranley Hamilton drank the highball with the cold realization that it
was one too many, and went on talking cleverly about his book. It was
easy to do, because for him it was so easy to define what these fawning
critics, publishers, club-women and hangers-on wanted him to say. He was
a little disgusted with his book, himself, and with these people, and he
was enjoying his disgust immensely, purely because he was aware of it
and of his groundless sense of superiority.

Then there was a sudden, powerful agreement within him, compounded of
noise, heat, stupidity and that last highball, which made him turn
abruptly, to let a press-agent’s schooled wisecrack spend itself on his
shoulder blades as he elbowed his way through the room to the terrace
doors. Outside, he stood with his arms on the parapet, looking out over
the city and thinking, “Now, that didn’t do me any good. I’m acting like
something from the Village. Art for art’s sake. What’s the matter with
me anyway?”

There was a light step behind him. “Hello, Dranley Hamilton.”

“Oh—it’s you.” He took in the russet hair, the blend of blendings which
she used for a complexion. He had not noticed her before. “Do you know I
have hung around this literary cackle-factory for the past two hours
only because you were here and I wanted to get you alone?”

“Well!” said the girl. Then, with the same word in a totally different
language, she added, “Well?”

He leaned back against the parapet and studied her tilted eyes. “No,” he
said finally. “No. I guess I was thinking of somebody else. Or maybe
even something else.”

Her real defenses went up in place of the party set. “Excuse _me!”_ she
said coldly.

“Oh, think nothing of it,” he responded. He slapped her shoulder as if
it were the withers of a friendly horse, and went back to the reception.
_That was lousy_, he thought. _What’s the matter with me?_

“Dran,” It was Mike Pontif, from his publisher’s publicity department.
“You got that statement up about your next novel?”

“Next novel?” Dran looked at him thoughtfully. “There’s not going to be
a next novel. Not until I catch up on .. something I should be doing
instead.” At the publicity man’s bewildered expression, he added, “Going
to bone up on biology.”

“Oh,” said the man, and winked. “Always kidding.”

Dran was not kidding.

Manuel crumpled up the letter and hurled it into the corner of the
communications shack. He shouldered through the door and went out on the
beach, his boots thudding almost painfully down on the rough white coral
sand. He drove his feet into the gritting stuff, stamping so that the
heavy muscles of his thighs felt it. He scooped up the stripped backbone
of a palm frond and cut at the wet sand by the water’s edge as he
walked, feeling the alternate pull of shoulders and chest.

He needed something. It wasn’t women or liquor or people or solitude. It
wasn’t building or fighting or laughter. He didn’t even need it badly.
What he did want badly was to find out what this gentle, steady,
omnipresent need was. He was sick of trying this and that to see if it
would stop this infernal tugging.

He stopped and stared out to sea. The thick furrows across his forehead
deepened as he thought about the sea, and the way people wrote about it.
It was always alive, or mysterious, or restless, or something. Why were
people always hanging mysterious qualities on what should be
commonplace? He was impatient with all that icky business.

“It’s just wet salt and distance,” he muttered. Then he spat, furious
with himself, thinking how breathless the runt would be if she heard him
say such a hunk of foolishness. He turned and strode back to the shack,
feeling the sun too hot on the back of his neck, knowing he should have
worn his helmet. He kicked open the screen door, blinked a moment
against the indoor dimness, and went to the corner. He picked up the
letter and smoothed it out.

_“From some remembered world_

_We broke adrift_

_Like lonely stars_

_Divided at their birth_.

_For some remembered dream_

_We wait, and search_

_With riven hearts_

_A vast and alien earth …”_

With the poem in his hand, Manuel glared around at useful things—the
transmitter, the scrambler, the power supply. He looked at worthwhile
things—the etched aluminum bracelets, the carved teak, the
square-knotted belt he had made. And he looked at those other things, so
meticulously machined, so costly in time and effort, so puzzling in
function, that he had also made without knowing why. He shook the paper
as if he wanted to hurt it. Why did she write such stuff? And why send
it to him? What good was it?

He carried it to the desk, ripped out his personal file, and put it
away. He filed it with Dran Hamilton’s letters. He had no file for the
runt’s stuff.

When she concluded that she loved Dran, Vaughn wrote and said so,
abruptly and with thoroughness. His answering telegram made her laugh
and cry. It read:

NONSENSE, CHICKEN! ROMANTIC LOVE WRONG DIAGNOSIS. I JUDGE IT A
CONVENTIONAL POETIC IMPULSE BETTER CONFINED TO PAPER. A CASE OF VERSE
COME VERSE SERVED. TAKE A COLD SHOWER AND GO WRITE YOURSELF A SONNET.
BESIDES, WHAT ABOUT MANUEL? HE ARRIVES, INCIDENTALLY, NEW YEAR’S EVE AND
INTENDS MEETING ME AT YOUR HOUSE. OKAY?

Dran arrived first, looking expensive and careless and, to Vaughn,
completely enchanting. He bounded up the front steps, swung her off her
feet and three times around before he kissed her, the way he used to do
when they were children. For a long while they could say nothing but
commonplaces, though their eyes had other things to suggest.

Dran leaned back in a kitchen chair as if it were a chaise longue and
fitted a cigarette to a long ivory holder. “The holder?” he chattered.
“Pure affectation. It does me good. Sometimes it makes me laugh at
myself, which is healthy, and sometimes it makes me feel fastidious,
which is harmless. You look wonderful with your hair down. Never pin it
up or cut it again. Manuel’s just turned down a commission. He ought to
arrive about six, which gives us plenty of time to whirl the wordage. I
liked your latest poems. I think I can help you get a collection
published. The stuff’s still too thin in the wrong places, though. So
are you.”

Vaughn turned down the gas under the percolator and set out cups. “You
do look the successful young author. Oh, Dran, I’m _so_ glad to see
you!”

He took her hand, smiled up into her radiant face. “I’m glad too,
chicken. You had me worried there for a while, with that love business.”

Vaughn’s eyes stopped seeing him for a moment. “I was—silly, I suppose,”
she whispered.

“Could be,” he said cheerfully. “I’ll tell you, hon—I like women.
Without question there’s a woman somewhere on earth that will make me go
pitty-pat, quit drinking, write nothing but happy endings, and eat
what’s given to me instead of what I want. Maybe I’ve already met her
and don’t realize it. But one thing I’m sure of is that you’re not that
woman.”

“What makes you so sure?”

“The same thing that makes you sure of it. You had a momentary lapse, it
seems, but—come now; do you love me?”

“I wish Manuel would get here.”

“Isn’t that irrelevant?

“No.”

Then the coffee boiled over and the thread was lost.

They talked about Dran’s book until Manuel arrived. The book was a
strange one—one of those which captivates or infuriates, with no
reader-reactions between the extremes. There were probably far more
people who were annoyed by it than not, “which,” said Dran, “is one of
the few things the book has in common with its author.”

“That remark,” laughed Vaughn, “is the first you have made which sounded
the way your picture in the _Literary Review_ looked. It was awful. The
decadent dilettante—the bored and viceful youth.”

“It sells books,” he said. “It’s the only male answer to the busty
book-jacket, or breast seller. I call it my frontispiece pose; separate
but uplifted.”

“And doubly false,” snapped Vaughn. When he had quieted, she said, “but
the book, Dran. There was one thing in there really worth
mentioning—between us. The thing the critics liked the least.”

“Oh—the dancer? Yes—they all said she was always present, never seen.
Too little character for such a big influence.”

“That’s what I meant,” said Vaughn. “I know and you know—and Manuel?
We’ll ask him—that the dancer wasn’t a person at all, but an omnipresent
idea, a pressure. Right?”

“Something like that cosmic search theme that keeps pushing you around
in your work,” he agreed. “I wonder what Manuel’s counterpart is. It
would have to be something he’d turn on a lathe.”

Vaughn smiled. And then there was a heavy tread on the porch, the front
door flew open, and the room was full of Manuel. “Hi, Dran. Where’s the
runt? Come out from under the furniture, you little—oh. There you are.
Holy cow,” he bellowed. “Holy sufferin’ sepoys! You’ve shrunk!”

Dran threw up his hands. “Sepoys. Foreign background. Authentic touch.”

Vaughn came forward and put out a demure hand. “I haven’t shrunk,
Manuel. It’s you. You’re thicker and wider than ever.”

He took her hand, squeezed it, apologized when she yelped, rubbed his
knuckles into her scalp until she yelped again, and threw himself onto
the divan. “Lord, it’s cold. Let’s get going. Do something about this
New Year’s Eve and welcome home and stuff.”

“Can’t we just stay here and talk awhile?” asked Vaughn in rumpled
petulance.

“What’s the matter, runt?” Manuel asked in sudden concern, for Vaughn’s
eyes were filling.

Dran grinned. “I come in here, ice-cold and intellectual, and kiss the
lass soundly. You come flying through the door, Lochinvar, shake hands
with her and then proceed to roll her around like a puppy. Like the song
says—try a little tenderness.”

“You be quiet!” Vaughn almost shouted.

“Oh, so that’s what you want.” He strode across to Vaughn, brushed aside
her protecting arms, and kissed her carefully in the exact center of the
forehead. “Consider yourself smootched,” he growled, “and we’ll have no
more of this lollygagging. Vaughn, you’re acting like an abandoned
woman.”

Vaughn laced her anger with laughter as she said, “Abandoned is right.
Now wait while I get my coat.”

“I brought something back with me,” Manuel said.

They were at a corner table at Enrique’s, immersed in the privacy of
noise, lights, and people. “What is it?” asked Vaughn. “Something
special in costume jewelry?”

“Always want gilding, don’t you, lily? Yes, I have the usual cargo. But
that’s not what I mean.”

“Quell your greed,” said Dran. “What is it, Manny?”

“It’s a …” He swizzled his drink. “It’s a machine. I don’t know what it
is.”

“You don’t—but what does it do? What’s it made of?”

“Wire and a casting and a machined tube and ceramics, and I built it
myself and I don’t know what it does.”

“I hate guessing games,” said Dran petulantly.

Vaughn touched his arm, “Leave him alone, Dran. Can’t you see he’s
bothered about it?” She turned quickly to the Marine, stroked the
ribbons on his chest. “Talk about something else if you want to. What
are these for?” she asked solicitously.

Manuel looked down at the ribbons, then thumbed the catch and removed
them. He dropped them into Vaughn’s hand. “For you,” he said, his eyes
glinting. “As a reward for talking like a hot damned civilian. I won’t
need ’em any more. My hitch is up; I’m out.”

“Why, Manuel?”

“It’s … I get—spells, sort of.” He said it as if he were confessing to
leprosy or even body odor. “Trances, like. Nobody knows about it. I
wanted to get out from under before the brass wised up.”

Vaughn, whose terror of “the ills our flesh is heir to” amounted to a
neurosis, gasped and said, “Oh! What is it? Are you sick? What do you
think it is? Don’t you think you ought to have an examination right
away? Where does it hurt? Maybe it’s a—”

Dran put an arm around her shoulders and his other hand firmly over her
mouth. “Go on, Manny.”

“Thanks, Dran. QRM, we call that kind of background noise in the Signal
Corps. Shut up, short-change. About those spells … everything seems to
sort of—recede, like. And then I work. I don’t know what I’m doing, but
my hands do. That’s how I built this thing.”

“What sort of a thing is it?”

Manuel scratched his glossy head. “Not a gun, exactly, but something
like it. Sort of a solenoid, with a winding like nothing you ever
dreamed of, and a condenser set-up to trigger it.”

“A gun? What about projectiles?”

“I made some of those too. Hollow cylinders with a mechanical bursting
arrangement.”

“Filled with what?”

“Filled with nothing. I don’t know what they’re supposed to hold.
Something composed of small particles, or a powder, or something. It
wouldn’t be an explosive, because there’s this mechanical arrangement to
scatter the stuff.”

“Fuse?”

“Time,” Manuel answered. “You can let her go now. I think she’s
stopped.”

Dran said, “Manny, I’ve got the charge for your projectiles.” He raised
his hand a fraction of an inch. Vaughn said, “Let me _go!_ Dran, let me
go! Manuel, maybe you ate too much of that foreign—”

Dran’s hand cut her off again.

Manuel said, “Like holding your hand over a faucet with a busted washer,
isn’t it?”

“More like getting a short circuit in a Klaxon. Vaughn, stop wriggling!
Go on, Manny. I might as well tell you, something like it has happened
to me. But I’ll wait until you’ve finished. What about the fuse timing?”

“Acid vial. Double acting. There’s an impact shield that pops up when a
shell is fired, and a rod to be eaten through which starts a
watch-movement. That goes for eight days. As for the acid—it’d have to
be something really special to chew through that rod. Even good old Aqua
Regia would take months to get through it.”

“What acid are you using?”

Manuel shook his head. “That’s one of the things I don’t know,” he said
unhappily. “That acid, and the charge, and most of all what the whole
damned thing is for—those things I don’t know.”

“I think I’ve got your acid too,” said Dran, shifting his hand a little
because Vaughn showed signs of coming up for air. “But where are your
specifications? What’s the idea of making a rod so thick you can’t find
an acid to eat through it?”

Manuel threw up his hands. “_I_ don’t know, Dran. I know when it’s
right, that’s all. I know before I rig my lathe or milling machine what
I’m after.” His face darkened, and his soft voice took on a tone of
fury. “I’m sick and tired of getting pushed around. I’m tired of feeling
things I can’t put a name to. For the first time in my life I can’t whip
something or get away from it.”

“Well, what are you going to do?”

“What _can_ I do? Get out of the service, hole up somewhere, finish this
work.”

“How do you know it won’t go on for the rest of your life?”

“I don’t know. But I know this. I know what I’ve done is done right, and
that when it’s finished, that’ll be the end of it,” said Manuel
positively. “Hey—you better turn her loose. The purple face goes great
with the hair, but it’s beginning to turn black.”

Dran released Vaughn, and just then the bells began to ring.

“_Old one—”_

_The other turned on Torth. “Get out. Get out and leave me alone. Get
out!”_

_Torth got_.

The bells.…

“Not now,” smiled Vaughn. “Not now. I’ll give you rascals the punishment
you deserve next year sometime.” She reached out her arms, and they came
close to her. She kissed Manuel, then Dran, and said, “Happy New Year,
darlings.”

The bells were ringing, and the city spoke with a mighty voice, part
hum, part roar, part whistle, part scream, all a unison of joy and hope.
_“Should auld acHappy-Nooooo Yearzhz-z-zh-h-h …”_ said the city, and
Manuel pulled Vaughn closer (and Dran with her, because Dran was so
close to her) and Manuel said, “This is it. This is right, the three of
us. I quit. Whether I like it or not don’t matter. I got it and I’m
stuck with it. I …”

_EUDICHE!_

No one said that. No one shouted it out, but for a split second there
was a gasping silence in the club, in the floors above and the floors
below, as three abstracts coalesced and a great subetheric emanation
took place. It was more joyous than all the joy in the city, and a
greater voice than that of all the other voices; and it left in a great
wave and went rocketing out to the stars. And then someone started to
sing again, and the old song shook the buildings

_“… and never brought to mind …”_

“_It’s done!” said the old one_.

_Torth replied caustically. “I appreciate the news. You realize that not
one of us on Titan could have missed that signal.”_

_“Eudiche has succeeded,” exulted the old one. “A new era for our
race … on his next transmission we will start the emigration_.

_“And you had doubts of Eudiche.”_

_“I did—I did. I admit it. But it is of no moment now—he has overcome
his defection.”_

_“What is it, this defection?”_

_“Stop your ceaseless questions and leave me to my joy!_

_“Tell me that, decrepit one, and I shall go.”_

_“Very well, Eudiche was imbalanced. He suffered from an over-broadening
of the extrapolative faculty. We call it empathy. It need not concern
you. It is an alien concept and a strange disease indeed.”_

Eudiche left, still in three parts, but now one. He stopped at the
railroad station for a heavy foot-locker, and at a hotel for a large
suitcase. And in the long ride in a taxi, Eudiche thought things out—not
piecemeal, not single-mindedly in each single field, but with the
magnificent interaction of a multiple mind.

“Is it certain that everything will fit together?” asked the mechanical
factor.

“It certainly should. The motivation was the same, the drive was almost
identical, and the ability in each case was of a high order,” said the
intellectual.

The aesthetic was quiet, performing its function of matching and
balancing.

The mechanical segment had a complimentary thought for the intellectual.
“That spore chest is a mechanical miracle for this planet. Wasn’t it
grueling, without a full mechanical aptitude to help?”

“The bipeds have wide resources. Once the design is clear, they can make
almost anything. The spores themselves have started lines of research on
molds, by the way, that will have far- reaching effects.”

“And good ones,” murmured the aesthetic. “Good ones.”

Far away from the city Eudiche paid the driver and the intellectual told
him to come back in the morning. And then Eudiche struck off through the
icy fields, across a frozen brook, and up a starlit slope, carrying with
him the spore case, the projector, and the projectiles.

It was cold and clear, and the stars competed with one another—and
helped one another, too, the aesthetic pointed out: “… for every star
which can’t outshine the others seems to get behind and help another one
be bright.”

Eudiche worked swiftly and carefully and set up the projector. The
spores were loaded into the projectiles, and the projectiles were primed
with the acid and set into the gun.

The aesthetic stood apart with the stars, while the mechanical and the
intellectual of Eudiche checked the orbital computations and trained the
projector. It was exacting work, but there was not a single wasted
motion.

The triggering was left to charge for a while, and Eudiche rested. The
aesthetic put a hand to the projector—that seeking hand, always, with
her, a gesture of earnestness.

“Back to Titan, and may the race multiply and grow great,” she intoned.
“Search the spaces between the stars and find Titan’s path; burst and
scatter your blessings at his feet.”

The condensers drank and drank until they had their fill and a little
over—

_Phup!_ It was like the popping of a cork. Far up, seemingly among the
stars, there was a faint golden streak, gone instantly.

“Reload,” said the intellectual

Two worked; the third, by her presence, guided and balanced and added
proportion to each thought, each directive effort. Eudiche waited,
presently, for the projector to charge again. “Earth …” crooned the
aesthetic. “Rich, wide, wonderful Earth, rich with true riches, rich in
its demonstrations of waste … wealthy Earth, which can afford to
squander thousands upon thousands of square miles in bleak hills on
which nothing grows … wealthy Earth with its sea-sunk acres, its
wandering rivers which curiously seek everything of interest, back and
forth, back and backwards and seaward again, seeking in the flatlands.
And for all its waste it produces magnificently, and magnificently its
products are used. Humans are its products, and through the eyes of
humans are seen worlds beyond worlds … in the dreams of the dullest
human are images unimaginable to other species. Through their eyes pour
shapes and colors and a hungry hope that has no precedent in the
cosmos.”

“Empathy,” defined the intellectual: “The ability to see through
another’s eyes, to feel with his finger-tips.

“To know fire as the feathers of a Phoenix know it. To know, as a bedded
stone, the coolth of brook-water …”

_Phup!_

“Reload,” said the intellectual

In its time the second projectile followed, and then a third and a
fourth.

“_This is the machine,” old Torth said to the youngster. “It was
monopolized, long ago, by a caustic old triad who has since died. And
may I join him soon, for it troubles me to be so old.”_

_“And what was the machine for?”_

_“One Eudiche was analyzed into his three components and sent to that
star there_.

_“It’s a planet.”_

_“Youth knows too much, too young,” grumbled Torth_.

_“And why was Eudiche sent?”_

_“To test the sending; to synthesize himself there; and to prepare for
mass emigration of our kind to the planet.”_

_“He failed?”_

_“He failed. He took over three inhabitants successfully enough, but
that was all. He had empathy, you know.”_

_The youngster shuddered. “No loss.”_

_“No loss,” repeated Torth. “And then the reason for invasion was
removed, and no one bothered to use the machine again, and no one
will.”_

_“That was when the molds came?”_

_“Yes, the molds. Just as we came out of space so long ago, as
crystalline spores, so these molds arrived on Titan. At that time, you_
_know, we possessed all Titans and reproduced faster than they did. We
had to expand.”_

_“It is not so now,” said the youngster with confidence_.

_“No,” said Torth. “Happily, no. The products of the molds—and the molds
grow profusely here—worked miracles with the metabolism of our hosts.
They reproduce faster and they live longer.”_

_“And will they never overpopulate Titan?”_

_“Not in our time, not in any predictable time. Titan can support
billions of the little creatures, and there are only a few thousand
today. The rate of increase is not that great. Just great enough to give
us, who are parasites, sufficient hosts.”_

_“And—what happened to Eudiche?”_

“He died,” said Vaughn. Her voice was shocked, distraught in the cold
dawn.

“He had to die,” said Dran sorrowfully. “His synthesis was complete in
us three. His consistency was as complete. His recognition of the right
to live gave him no alternative. He saved his own race on its own terms,
and saved—spared, rather—spared us on human terms. He found what we
were, and he loved it. Had he stayed here, he and his progeny and his
kind would have destroyed the thing he loved. So he died.”

The grey light warmed as they started down the hill, and then the dawn
came crashing up in one great crescendo of color, obliterating its pink
prelude and establishing the theme for the sun’s gaudy entrance. Drunk
with its light, three people crossed the frozen brook and came to the
edge of the road.

At last Manuel spoke. “What have we got here?”

Dran looked at the satchels, at Vaughn, at Manuel. “What have you got?”

Manuel kicked his foot locker. “I’ve got the beginnings of a space
drive. You’ve got a whole new direction in biological chemistry. Runt—Oh
my god, will you look at that face. I know—poems.”

“Poems,” she whispered, and smiled. The dawn had not been like that
smile.

The taxi came. They loaded their cases in and sat very close together in
the back.

“No one of us will ever be greater than any other,” Dran said after a
time. “We three have a life, not lives. I don’t know anything yet about
the details of our living, except that they will violate nothing.”

Vaughn looked into Manuel’s face, and into Dran’s. Then she chuckled,
“Which means I’ll probably marry Joe.”

They were very close. Dran again broke the silence. “My next book will
be my best. It will have this dedication:

_“What Vaughn inspires, I design, and Manuel builds_.”

And so it came about.

Poor Joe.

* The author apologizes for this poor translation of the Titan personal
pronoun, which, in the original, is singular and plural, masculine and
feminine, and has no counterpart in our tongue.



SPECIAL APTITUDE


AS WE APPROACH the year 2300, the most popular parlor game seems to be
picking the Man of the Century. Some favor Bael benGerson because he
rewrote the World Constitution, and some hark back to Ikihara and his
work on radiation sickness. More often than not, you’ll hear Captain
Riley Riggs nominated, and that comes pretty close to the mark.

But it misses—it misses. I’m just an old space-hound, but I know what
I’m talking about. I was communications officer with Riggs, remember,
and even if it was all of sixty years ago I remember it as if it was
last month. The Third Venus Expedition, it was, and the trip that
changed the face of the Earth. That was the space voyage that brought
back the Venus crystals, and made you and you into the soft and happy
butterflies you are today. Things were different in the old days. We
knew what it was to put in a solid five-hour workday, and we had no
personal robots the way everyone has now—we had to put our clothes on by
ourselves in the morning. Well, it was a tougher breed then, I guess.

Anyway, my bid for the Man of the Century was on that ship, the old
_Starlure—_but it wasn’t Riggs.

They were a grand crew. You couldn’t want a better skipper than Riggs
nor a better mate than Blackie Farrel. There was Zipperlein, the
engineer, a big quiet man with little eyes, and his tube techs, Greaves
and Purci—a wilder pair of fire-eaters never hit black space. And there
was Lorna Bernhard, the best navigator before or since. She was my girl,
too, and she was gorgeous. There were two other women aboard—a ray
analyst by the name of Betty Ordway and Honey Lundquist, the damage
control officer. But they were strictly from blueprints and homely to
boot.

And for comic relief we had this character Slopes. He was shipped
because of some special training in the Venus crystals. I don’t know why
they bothered to put him aboard. Any development work on the crystals
would have to be done on Earth when—_if—_we got back. I guess they
figured there was room for him, and maybe he’d be needed to locate the
crystals or something. Meanwhile, he was useless. We all thought he was
and we told him about it often enough to keep him reminded.

Not that he was a nuisance to anybody. It was just that he was funny. A
natural comic. I don’t mean the kind who slips an anti-gravity plaque
under the tablecloth and switches it on when somebody sets down the
soup, and I don’t mean the life-of-the-party who sticks a brace of
fluorescent tubes under his collar and pretends he’s a Martian. This
Slopes was just automatically funny to have around. He wasn’t quite big
enough, see, and though he wasn’t homely, he also wasn’t good-looking
enough to do himself any good. His voice wasn’t quite deep enough or
loud enough to be completely heard.… I guess the best way to say it is
to call him an Almost; a thoroughgoing Almost. And the difference
between Almost and Altogether—at least in Slopes—was very funny to ship
out with, and he had it in every department.

None of us knew him before he came aboard, which he did two hours before
blast-off in civilian clothes. That was his first mistake, though why I
should call it a mistake … after all, he was a civilian technician. Even
so, all the rest of us were from one or another of the Services, and we
just naturally had something on him from the start. Purci, the Number
Two Tube Man, was lounging in the alleyway when Slopes stepped off the
cargo-lift with his gear, and he sized the man up right now. Purci was
tall, loose-jointed, relaxed, deadpan. He took Slopes aft (down, that
is, since the _Starlure_ stood upright on her tail-vanes when she was
aground) and showed him where to stow his gear. The locker Purci gave
him happened to be the garbage port, which scavenged out automatically
when we hit the ionosphere. There was no real harm in that—there was
plenty of gear in the slop-chest which almost fit him, and at least he
looked halfway “regulation.” But he sure was funny. The look on his face
when he went to that garbage port six hours out was indescribable. I
have to laugh now thinking about it. And for the rest of the trip all he
had to do was ask where anything was, and someone’d say, “Look in the
garbage!” and the whole crew would lay back and roar.

Probably the most fun we had was at “turnover,” when we stopped
accelerating and went into free fall. For Slopes’s benefit the
artificial gravity was left off, and all hands but Zipperlein, who was
at the drive controls, gathered in the wardroom to watch. Word had
passed to everyone but Slopes as to just when the gravity would cut out,
and believe me, it was a tough job to keep from busting out laughing and
spoiling the whole deal. We all sprawled around hard by a stanchion or a
bolted-down table so we’d have something solid to grab when the time
came. Slopes came in and sat by himself near the chow-chutes, innocent
as a babe. Greaves sat with one hand cupping his wrist watch and his
eyes on the sweep second hand. About three seconds short of turnover, he
barked, “Slopes! Come over here, huh?”

Slopes blinked at him. “Me?” He uncrossed his legs and got to his feet,
timidly. He had taken about two steps when the drive cut off.

I guess nobody ever gets really used to turnover. Your stomach gives a
delicate little heave and the semicircular canals in your inner ear
rebel violently. You tense yourself, all over, to the cramping point,
and get no end confused because, though you know you’re falling, you
don’t know which way—and anyhow, your reflexes expect a swift and sudden
impact (because you’re falling) and there just isn’t any impact, so your
reflexes feel foolish. Your hair drifts out every which way, and through
and through, completely separated from your intense panic, is the
_damnedest_ feeling of exhilaration and well-being. They call it
Welsbach’s Euphoria. Psychological stuff. Anxiety relief with the
gravityless state.

But I was talking about Slopes.

When Zipperlein cut the drive, Slopes just went adrift. His advancing
foot touched and lightly scraped the floor instead of making a good
solid pace. He flung his arms backward, I guess because he thought he
was falling that way, and as his shoulders checked the arm motion, they
were carried down while his feet went up. He did a slow-motion
half-somersault and would have gone all the way around if his feet
hadn’t touched the overhead and stopped his rotation. He hung in midair
with his head down and his feet up, with nothing to hang on to, and with
the powerful feeling that, though the blood ought to be rushing to his
face, it wasn’t. All of a sudden, everything around him acted like _up_,
and there wasn’t any _down_ left anywhere. He grabbed wildly toward the
bulkhead, the overhead, the door—things he knew he couldn’t reach. After
that he subsided, trembling, and by that time the rest of us had
recovered from the weird impact of turnover—after all, we’d all felt it
before—and we could enjoy the fun.

“I said, ‘Come here’!” Greaves snapped.

Slopes sort of flailed at the air and jigged with his feet. It made no
never mind—he just stayed where he was, head down and helpless. We
roared. He flapped his lips a couple of times, and then said, real
strained, _“Mmmph. Mmmph.”_ I thought I’d die.

“Don’t be so standoffish,” said the Lundquist chick, the damage control
officer. “Come on down and give us a kiss.”

Slopes whispered, “Please … please.”

Betty Ordway said, “Make him say ‘pretty please.’ ” We laughed.

“Reckon maybe he don’t like us,” I piped up. “Come on down and join the
crowd, Slopesy.”

Somebody said, “Hold out some garbage,” and everybody laughed again.

Zipperlein came in, hand over hand. “Looky there,” he said in his big,
fat, flatulent voice. “Man can fly.”

“Got his head in the clouds,” said the skipper. Everybody laughed
again—not because it was funny—because it was the skipper.

“Please,” said Slopes, “get me down. Somebody get me down.”

Greaves said, “I like a shipmate that can stand on his own two feet.
Slopes, I asked you real polite-like to come on over and be sociable.”

Zipperlein laughed. “Oh—you want him?” He went from the door to the
scuttlebutt, from the wardroom table to a lighting fixture, one hairy
hand after another, until he could reach Slopes’s foot. “Greaves wants
you,” he said, and shoved.

Slopes spun end over end. He began to wail, “Ow-_oo!_ Ow-_oo!”_ as he
turned. Spinning, he went from one end of the wardroom to the other
toward Greaves. Greaves was ready for him, his hands firm to a
banister-bar, his feet doubled up. When Slopes reached him, he planted
his feet in Slopes’s back and booted him, spinning no longer, upship
toward the Captain. Riggs gave him a shoulder and shunted him over to
me. I butted him back to Greaves. Greaves reached but missed him, and he
hit the bulkhead with a crunch. Weight is one thing—you can get rid of
that. Mass is something else again. Slopes’s hundred and fifty-odd
pounds were all with him, at high velocity, when he hit the wall. He
hovered near it, whimpering.

“Zip,” said the Captain, “Turn on the grav plates. This could go on all
day.”

“Aye,” said the engineer, and swarmed out.

I’d been hanging on to Lorna, partly because I knew she’d have hold of
something solid, and partly because I just liked to hang on to her.
“Ace,” she said to me, “whose idea was this?”

“Guess.”

“Ace,” she told me, “you know what? You’re a skunk.”

“Ah, climb off,” I grinned. “You should see what they did to me when I
was a cadet.”

She turned to look at me, and there was an expression I’d seen in her
eyes only twice before. Both times she and I had been strangers. She
said, “I guess you learn something new every day. Even about people you
know pretty well.”

“Yep,” I said, “and it’s a blessing. You can look at the stars just so
long on these trips, and then you can watch just so many visitape
recordings. After that you need something to relieve the monotony. I
think we all owe Slopes a rousing vote of thanks. He’s a very funny
man.”

She said something then but I didn’t get it. Everyone was laughing too
hard. Zipperlein had cut in the artificial gravity and Slopes had
thumped to the floor, where he writhed, hugging it to him as if he loved
it, which of course he did. Everyone does coming out of free fall.

Oh, we had a time that evening. I’ll never forget it.

There was a lot of chit-chat aboard about our mission. Now that we have
Venus crystals by the hundreds of millions, it’s not easy to tell you
just how valuable they were sixty years ago. The Second Venus Expedition
had picked up two of them, and both were destroyed in the tests that
determined their characteristics. The first was shattered
purposely—nobody knew at that time that it was different from any other
crystal—so it could be chemically analyzed, a solution prepared, and new
crystals grown. But Venus crystals just don’t grow. The second crystal
was subjected to some high-frequency resonance tests. Someone got a
little too experimental with the frequencies and the crystal blew up.
Data on the explosion showed that what we had just had in our hands, but
didn’t have any more, was the key to broadcast power—power so plentiful
that everyone could have it practically for free. The power we already
had, since the technique for fissioning copper atoms had been developed.
But broadcasting it was something else again, unless a tight beam could
be aimed from power plant to receiver and kept that way, even if the
receiver was on an automobile or a ‘copter and dodging. The Venus
crystal could do that job—vibrating to power frequencies and sending
back radiations that would guide in the power beam. Get enough of those
crystals and we could do away with millions of miles of transmission
wire, and convert it to enough fuel to power Earth for a couple of
centuries. Don’t forget, mankind has been laying a network of copper
over the world for going on four hundred years, and there’s lots of it.

So for a fuel-hungry Earth, these crystals were top priority. And the
only thing that stood in our way—aside from getting to Venus—was the
Gabblers.

The First Venus Expedition discovered the Gabblers, and left them
respectfully alone. The Second Expedition discovered that the Gabblers
had a stock of the precious crystals—and got chased the hell out after
picking up two. It was our job to bring back a whole slew of the
crystals, Gabblers or no Gabblers. Although our orders ran to a
bucketful of fine detail, the essence of them was: “Treat with the
Gabblers and get crystals. If the Gabblers won’t play—get the crystals
anyway.”

“I hope we can get them peacefully,” Lorna would say. “Humans have
destroyed and killed enough.”

And I’d tell her, “It don’t matter one way or the other, kid. Gabblers
aren’t _people.”_

“They’re civilized, aren’t they? Almost?”

“They’re savages,” I’d snort. “And monsters as well. Keep your
sympathies for nice smooth hungry human beings like me.”

Then she’d slap my hands away and go back to her computers.

Once Slopes asked me about the Gabblers. “Are they really humans?”

“Humanoids,” I told him shortly. He made me a little uncomfortable to
talk to, somehow. I mostly enjoyed his comedy. “They walk on two legs,
and they have hands with an opposed thumb, and they wear ornaments.
That’s all they use the crystals for. But they breathe ammonia instead
of oxygen and have Lord knows what kind of metabolism. Why, Slopesy?
Figuring on rootin’ in their garbage?”

“I was just asking,” he replied gently. He put on his timid almost-smile
and went aft. I remember laughing at the thought of him up against a
couple of Gabblers—the most terrifying object in history since some
ancient tale-teller dreamed up the Gryphon. All but two of the crew of
the _Starbound_, the Expedition Two ship, had thrown down their packs
and run for their lives at the very sight of a Gabbler. The other two
had faced them out until the Gabblers started to scream. The
psychologists had a lot to say about that noise. It was too much for any
normal human being. One of the two men broke and ran, and no shame
attaches to him for that. The other was cut off from the ship, and stood
paralyzed with fear while the Gabblers screamed and trumpeted and
pounded the earth with their scaly fists until it shook. He fired one
shot in the air—he had sense enough not to risk wounding one of the
enraged creatures—to frighten them off. Perhaps it did. All he remembers
is a redoubled bedlam—such a gush of furious animal noise that he passed
out cold on the spot. When he came to they’d gone. The two crystals were
lying near him; he picked them up and ran blindly for the ship. It took
eight months of the world’s most advanced psychotherapy to straighten
him out, and they say he’s not quite normal yet, though he’s lived to be
an old man. What fantastic psychic emanations the Gabblers used as
weapons was not known, but the idea of Slopes up against them really
tickled me.

The watches passed quickly enough with him aboard to keep us amused.
I’ll never forget the night Greaves slipped a spoonful of head-mastic,
the damnedest adhesive that has ever been developed, into one of his
sandwiches. Slopes bit into it and right then his upper teeth were
welded to his lower teeth. He ran around in circles, whimpering, with
half a sandwich sticking out of his face, flapping his hands uselessly.
It was a riot. The stuff was quite harmless—it’s chemically inert, and
it yields readily to a little low-grade beta radiation, which breaks
down the molecular cohesion. But we didn’t radiate him until we were
good and ready. I wish you could have seen the fun.

We forgot about Slopes when we broke atmosphere on Venus, though I
rigged the infrared view-screens for Lorna—they’re a little cleaner than
radar in ammonia fog—and she took us in as neat as you please. We
located the spot where the _Starbound_ had landed by feeding a photo-map
of the scene into the automatic pilot and matching it to the view
screen.

Lorna threw the nose up and flipped the controls to the gyros.
Tail-first we drifted down, sitting on a diminishing pillar of fire,
while Lorna’s eyes were glued to the echo-gauge which indicated the
solidity of the footing under the ship. Once let one of these
space-hoppers fall on its side and you could call yourself marooned. We
didn’t have antigravity drive in those days. It was real primitive
stuff. All the dash and daring’s gone from you young ‘uns.

There’s not much to tell about Venus. It was as unappetizing and useless
then as it is now—except that somewhere out there were the crystals we
had come for. Through the ports we could see nothing but fog. Through
the radar and infrared screens we saw rolling country, crags, pale blue
vegetation, and an occasional treelike growth far larger than such
things ought to be.

We had to sit tight for twelve hours or so while the ground under us
cooled and the chemical mish-mash of fixed and unfixed nitrogen, nitric
acid, ammonium nitrate, ozone, and water stirred up by our landing
worked itself out. Most of us slept. I don’t think Slopes did, though.
He traveled from the infrared to the radar apparatus, fore, aft, left,
above, and below screens. He even haunted the blank, fog-frosted
portholes, peering into the swirl of heat and chemical reaction,
straining his eyes and his heartbeat for little glimpses of that
meaningless Venusian landscape. And it was Slopes who roused us.

“Gabblers!” he jittered. “Come look! Captain Riggs! Captain Riggs!”

He was as excited as a ten-year-old, and I’ve got to admit it was
catching. We crowded around the screens.

Out among the rocks and pale blue bushes two hundred meters from the
ship were moving things which, in spite of our careful indoctrination,
made us gasp and turn away. They were bigger than men—I hadn’t figured
on that, for some reason. They were much bigger. As for the rest … I
have a vision of yellow fangs, angry red eyes, and gray-green scales
that is vivid enough—I’d as soon not talk much about it.

“Let’s have some sound,” said the skipper. I went into the
communications shack and cranked up an amplifier. I switched in an
exterior microphone and plugged the output into the intercom. The ship
filled with background noises of an alien planet—a hollow wind-sound,
startling because the fog seemed so still; birdlike squeaks and screams,
distant and different; and over it all, the repulsive chatter and
back-chatter of the Gabblers—the sound that had given them their name.
It was an insane sound, hoarse and seemingly uncontrolled. It ranged
harshly up and down the scale, and it differed rather horribly from the
yammering of apes in that it seemed to carry consistent intelligence.

“Tubes!” barked the Captain. “Break out the suit stores and walkie gear.
Sparks, stand by your shack. I want separate recordings of each suit
transmitter. Navigator, tend the screens. Four volunteers here by the
exit port. Jump.”

Now, I don’t want to run down the courage of the Space Service. It might
be nice to say that everyone aboard clicked his heels and said, “At your
command, sire!” On the other hand, when I was telling you about the
_Starbound_ men who broke and ran when they saw the Gabblers, I think I
made it clear that under the circumstances they carried no shame with
them. Riggs asked for four volunteers; he got two: Purci, who, without
dramatics, genuinely did not give a damn, and Honey Lundquist, who I
suppose wanted to be noteworthy for something besides being as homely as
a blue mud fence. Me, I was glad I’d been assigned to my communications
equipment and had no decision to make. As for the rest who didn’t
volunteer, I don’t blame them. Not even Slopes, though I still thought
it was a fine idea for him to face up a couple of hungry Gabblers, just
for the comedy of contrast.

Riggs made no comment. He just stripped and got into space harness, the
other two following. The rest of us helped them pull on the skin-tight
rig and clamp down the globular transparent helmets. They tested their
air and their communications, and then went to the inside gate of the
airlock. I opened it for them.

“We’re going to make contact,” said Riggs stonily. His voice came from
the intercom speakers rather than directly from him. It was eerie.
“We’ll try to make it peaceful first. So no side arms. I’m taking a
pencil gun, just in case. You two stay close together and behind me.
We’ll stay hard by the ship, and under no circumstances let ourselves
get cut off. Check communications.”

“Check!” yelped Purci.

“Check!” whispered Honey Lundquist.

The skipper marched into the lock with the other two close behind him. I
rumbled the gate shut behind them, and opened the outer lock with the
remote control. All hands left aboard dived for the view-screens.

The Gabblers, twenty or thirty of them, stuck close to the bush.
Although we could not see the skipper and his volunteers yet, it was
immediately evident that they had been seen. The Gabblers came out with
a rush, and a more terrifying spectacle these old eyes have not seen. In
the intercom, I heard Purci say, “Ugh!” and Honey say, “Eeek!” The
Captain said, “Steady,” in an unsteady voice. Behind me, there was a
faint _thunk_ as Betty Ordway passed out. I let her lie and went back to
my screen.

As if by common agreement, the bulk of Gabblers halted at the crest of
the gentle slope between us and the brush, and three of them came
forward together, one ahead and two behind. The rest set up such a
roaring that the giant trees visibly quivered. It was just about then
that the skipper moved far enough out to be visible, with Honey and
Purci close behind him. They stopped, and the three advancing Gabblers
stopped, and, incredibly, the crowd at the top of the hill doubled its
noise. I couldn’t help it—I turned down the gain control on the outside
mike. I couldn’t stand it. Lorna thanked me. Slopes wiped his face,
working the handkerchief around his eyes so he wouldn’t miss anything.

There was a moment’s tension—I don’t mean silence; the gabbling kept up
at that astounding volume, but nothing moved. When movement started, it
was awfully fast.

The Captain raised both arms in what he obviously felt was a gesture of
peace. Judging by what happened the Gabblers took it as a deadly insult.
They went straight up in the air, all three of them, and hit the ground
running. They traveled in great bounds, yowling and roaring as they
came, and behind them the mass of their followers started down the
slope. Over the racket I heard Honey Lundquist scream. The three
spacesuited figures looked very tiny down there at the approach of that
wave of bellowing giants. I saw one of the three go down in a faint.
Riggs yelled a futile, “Halt or I fire!” and aimed the pencil gun. One
volunteer scooped up the limp form of the other, draped it across the
shoulders of the space suit, and began lumbering toward the ship. Riggs
aimed, fired, turned, and ran without waiting to see what his shot had
accomplished.

It was Slopes who leaped to the lock control and pressed his nose to the
vision port to make sure all three were safely inside, and then slammed
the outer door. He switched on the air-replacement pump that would get
rid of the ammonia gas in the lock, and dived back to the screens.

There was a cluster of Gabblers around the one Riggs had shot. The noise
was fiendish. I went to the shack and turned down the volume again, but
you could actually hear that racket through your feet on the deck
plates.

The inner-lock gate slid open, and a very pale-faced skipper stepped
out. Behind him were his volunteers—Honey Lundquist looking winded, and
Purci draped over her shoulders. “He fainted,” she said unnecessarily
and dumped him in our arms.

We rolled him into a corner and kept our eyes on the screens. “Anyway, I
got one of them,” breathed Riggs.

“No, you didn’t, Captain,” said Slopes. Sure enough, the prostrate
Gabbler was sitting up, weaving his massive tusked head from side to
side and shrieking.

“Are they bullet-proof?” Greaves mouthed.

“No,” Slopes said devastatingly. “The skipper shot him smack on that
crystal he had around his neck.”

Captain Riggs groaned. “And that’s about as close we’ll get to those
crystals this trip,” he predicted morosely. “They never told me it was
going to be like this. Why in time didn’t they send a battle cruiser?”

“To kill off these creatures and loot their bodies for their ornaments?”
asked Lorna scornfully. “We’ve come a long way in the last thousand
years, haven’t we?”

“Now that’s not the way to look at it,” I began, but Riggs cut in,
“You’re right, you’re right, Lorna. Unless we get them to cooperate,
we’ll spend years in finding out how they make the crystals. Or where
they mine them. And we haven’t got years. We’ve got about four more
days.”

See, sixty years ago a ship could fuel for just so much blasting. A trip
was timed for the closest transit of the planets. To leave Venus and
chase after Earth as the planets drew apart again in space was out of
the question. Now, of course, with power to throw away, it happens every
day.

We got Purci out of his suit and revived him. We were all ready to swear
that he’d had some secret weapon used on him. He didn’t scare easily. It
was probably just his particular response to that particular level of
noise—a completely individual thing. But at the moment we were ready to
believe anything of the Gabblers.

The ship began to tremble.

“They’re attacking us!” yelped Greaves.

But they weren’t. There were more than ever of them. The entire slope
was covered with bulky, scaly, horribly manlike monsters. They were all
gabbling away insanely, and in great numbers they’d squat down and pound
on the ground with their mallet-like fists.

“Working theirselves up into a frenzy,” Zipperlein diagnosed. “Skipper,
let’s blast off. We’re what you might call underequipped for this sort
of stuff.”

Riggs thought. “We’ll stick it out for a while,” he said finally. “I’d
like to feel I’d done everything I could—even if it’s just sitting here
until we have to leave.”

I had my doubts, and from the looks of them, so had the others. But no
one said anything. The ship trembled. We went and had chow.

About thirteen hours before blast-off time I was staring glumly into a
screen at the swarm of Gabblers when I sensed someone beside me. It was
Slopes. He’d been left pretty much alone in the past three days. I guess
everyone was too depressed and nervous to want fun.

“Look at ’em,” I growled, waving at the screen. “I don’t know whether
it’s the same ones or whether they’ve been working in relays to keep the
hassle going all this time. You’d have to be a Venusian to tell one from
another. I can’t tell ’em apart.”

He looked at me as if I’d just told him where the crown jewels were hid,
and walked off without a word. He began pulling off his clothes. None of
us paid any attention. If we thought anything at all, I guess we figured
he was going to take a shower. Before any of us knew what was happening,
he’d skinned into a space suit and was clamping on the helmet.

“Hey! Slopes! Where do you think you’re going?”

He said something but I couldn’t hear. I reached back and flipped on the
intercom, which would pick up his suit radio. He repeated his remark,
which was simply, “Out.” He stepped into the airlock and slid the door
shut.

Riggs came pounding out of the control room. “Where’s that crazy fool
go—” He went for the airlock, but the red light over it blazed,
indicating that the chamber was now open to the outside, and Slopes was
gone.

“Get on his beam,” Riggs snapped, and grabbed a mike from my bench.
“Slopes!” he roared.

I punched buttons. Slopes’s voice came in, far more calm and clear than
I had ever heard it before.

“Yes, Captain.”

“Get back in here!”

“I’m going to try for those crystals.”

“You’re trying for some suicide. Get back here. That’s an order!”

“Sorry, Captain,” said Slopes laconically. Riggs and I stared at each
other, amazed. Slopes said, before the Captain could splutter out
another word, “I have an idea about these Gabblers, and I’m the only one
qualified to carry it out.”

“You’ll get killed!” Riggs bellowed.

“I will if I’m wrong,” said Slopes’s quiet voice. “Now, if it’s all the
same to you, I’ll switch off. I have to think.”

Riggs was filling his lungs when he saw Slopes’s radio-response
indicator wink out on the board. The breath came out in a single obscene
syllable.

All hands went to the screens, in which Slopes was just visible walking
away from the ship. “Qualified!” I snorted. “What the hell is _he_
qualified for?”

“Humanity,” said Lorna. I didn’t know what she meant by that. Her face
was white and strained as she watched the screen.

The Gabblers went into a flurry of activity when they saw him. They
crowded forward, practically stepping on one another to get at him.
Three or four of the fastest raced out to him, screaming and clashing
their tusks. As if to gloat over his helplessness, they circled him,
leaping and yammering, occasionally dropping to drum powerfully on the
ground with their fists. Then suddenly one of them picked him up, held
him high over its head, and raced up the slope with him. The mob parted
and closed again behind the creature, and the whole scaly crowd followed
as Slopes was borne up out of sight in the blue underbrush.

“Of all the ways in the world to commit suicide,” breathed Purci. Honey
Lundquist began to sob.

“It isn’t suicide,” said Lorna. “It’s murder. And you murdered him.”

“Who?” I demanded. “Me?”

“Yes, you,” she flared, “you and all the rest of you. That poor little
tyke never hurt anyone. You did the rottenest thing that can be done to
a human being—you persecuted him for what he was, and not for anything
he’d done. And now he proves himself man enough—human enough—to give his
life for the mission we’ve all failed on.”

“If he went out there to get killed,” said Betty Ordway with icy logic,
“it’s suicide, not murder. And if his going out there had anything to do
with getting the crystals, I don’t see it.”

“I didn’t see you giving him a tumble,” said Honey smugly.

Lorna didn’t try to fight back. “I didn’t really know what he was until
just now,” she said ashamedly, and went to her quarters.

“We ought to go out after him,” said Greaves. Everyone just let that
remark lie there. Riggs said, “We blast off in eleven-point-three hours,
whatever,” and went into the chart room. The rest of us stood around
trying not to look at one another, feeling, _Maybe we were a little hard
on the guy_, and _damn it, we never did him any harm, did we?_

It hit all of us at the same second, I think, that after three days of
incessant babbling and ground-thumping, it was deadly quiet outside.
Everybody started to talk and shut up after two syllables. And I think
we all began to understand then what Lorna had been driving at.

It was Purci who said it for us, softly, “He didn’t want to come back
into this ship. He didn’t want to go back to Earth. He didn’t belong
anywhere, because no one ever bothered to take him in. And I guess he
just naturally got tired of that.”

I don’t think fifty words were spoken—outside the line of duty—in the
next ten hours.

It couldn’t have been more than ninety minutes before blast-off when we
heard the Gabblers coming back. Heads came up one by one.

“They want another bite to eat,” someone said. Someone else—one of the
girls—swore abruptly.

I threw power into the screens. The underbrush was alive with Gabblers,
swarming toward the ship. “Skipper!” I called “blast off, huh? And singe
the scales off’n them.”

“You could keep your big stupid fat mouth shut,” said Lorna. It was
barely a whisper, but I’ll swear you could hear it all over the ship.
_“They’re bringing back Slopes!”_

She was right. She was so right. With his legs wrapped around the neck
of a capering Gabbler, his face slightly blue because of a dwindling
oxygen supply in his suit, and a wide grin, Slopes rode up to the ship,
followed and surrounded by hundreds of the scaly horrors. The Gabbler he
rode knelt, and Slopes climbed stiffly off. He waved his hand, and a
full fifty of the creatures dropped to their haunches and began pounding
the dirt with their fists. Slopes walked wearily toward the ship, and
four Gabblers followed him, each carrying a bulky bundle on its head.

“Port open?” someone managed to say. I checked it. It was.

There were heavy thumps in the port, and a nerve-rackingly close blast
of Gabbler chatter. Then the red light went out and we heard the whine
of the air-transfer pump.

At last the door slid open. We fell all over each other to get his
helmet and suit off. “I’m hungry,” he said. “And I’m awful tired. And I
swear I’ll be deaf for life.”

We rubbed him down and wrapped him up and fed him hot soup. He fell
asleep before he was half finished. About then it was blast-off time. We
secured him in his bunk and lashed his four big bundles down and, after
a couple of short puffs to warn the Gabblers back, we reached for the
stars.

In the four bundles were eight hundred and ninety-two perfect Venus
crystals. And on the return trip we tried so hard to make up to Slopes
for what he’d been through all his life that we actually began to be
jealous of each other. And Slopes—he was no longer an Almost. He was
very definitely an Altogether, with a ring to his voice, with a spring
to his step.

He worked like a slave on those crystals. “They’ve _got_ to be
synthesized,” was all he’d say at first. “Humanity and the Gabblers must
be kept apart.” So—we helped him. And bit by bit the story came out. The
nearer he got to analyzing the complex lattice of those crystals, the
more he’d say. So before we reached Luna we found out what he’d done.

“Those Gabblers,” he said. “You had them figured wrong. That’s the damn
thing about a human being—anything he doesn’t understand, he fears.
That’s natural enough—but why does he have to assume that every emotion
he causes in a strange animal means the animal is going to attack?

“Just suppose you’re a small animal—say a chipmunk. You’re hiding under
a table eating cake crumbs and minding your own business. There’s a
half-dozen humans in the room and one of them is droning on about a
traveling farmer and a salesman’s daughter. He reaches the punch line
and everybody laughs. But what about Mr. Chipmunk? All he knows is that
there’s a great, explosive roar of animal sound. He all but turns
himself inside out with fright.

“That’s exactly what happened with human beings and the Gabblers. Only
the humans were the chipmunks, for a change.”

Someone exploded, “You mean those lizard-apes was _laughing_ at us?”

“Listen to him,” said the New Slopes. “How indignant can you get? Yes, I
mean exactly that. Human beings are the funniest things the Gabblers
have ever seen in their lives. When I went out to them they carried me
off to their village, called in neighbors for miles around, and had
themselves a ball. I couldn’t do anything wrong. Wave my arm—they
roared. Sit on the ground—they doubled up. Run and jump—they lay down
and died.”

Suddenly he shoved aside his work and spoke from down deep inside
himself. “That hurts, somehow, doesn’t it? Humans shouldn’t be
laughable. They’ve got to be the kings of creation, all full of dignity
and power. It’s inexcusable for a human being to be funny unless he
tries to be. Well, let me tell you something—the Gabblers gave me
something that no human being ever was able to give me—a sense of
_belonging_ to humanity. Because what you people went through when the
Gabblers first rushed up to you, laughing, is what I’ve been going
through all my life. And it’s never going to happen again. Not to me;
for thanks to the Gabblers I know that all you superior joes are just as
funny as I am.

“The Gabblers are gentle, grateful people. They enjoyed the show and
they showered gifts on me. When I indicated that I liked crystals, they
went out and got more crystals than I could carry.

“And I’m just as grateful, and that’s why these crystals are going to be
manufactured so cheaply on earth that there will never be another Venus
Expedition for them. Don’t you see? If mankind ever makes close contact
with a race that laughs at them on sight—mankind will exterminate that
race.”

On second thought, maybe they shouldn’t nominate Slopes as Man of the
Century. Maybe he wouldn’t like for the Gabblers to get that much
publicity. And besides, he’s a stinker. He married my girl.



THE TRAVELING CRAG


“I KNOW AGENTS who can get work out of their clients,” said the
telephone acidly.

“Yes, Nick, but—”

“Matter of fact, I know agents who would be willing to drop everything
and go out to that one-shot genius’s home town and—”

“I did!”

“I know you did! And what came of it?”

“I got a new story. It came in this morning.”

“You just don’t know how to handle a real writer. All you have to do
is—you what?”

“I got a new story. I have it right here.”

A pause. “A new Sig Weiss story? No kidding?”

“No kidding.”

The telephone paused a moment again, as if to lick its lips. “I was
saying to Joe just yesterday that if there’s an agent in town who can
pry work out of a primadonna like Weiss, it’s good old Crisley Post.
Yes, sir. Joe thinks a lot of you, Cris. Says you can take a joke better
than—how long is the story?”

“Nine thousand.”

“Nine thousand. I’ve got just the spot for it. By the way, did I tell
you I can pay an extra cent a word now? For Weiss, maybe a cent and a
half.”

“You hadn’t told me. Last time we talked rates you were overstocked. You
wouldn’t pay more than—”

“Aw, now, Cris, I was just—”

“Goodbye, Nick.”

“Wait! When will you send—”

“Goodbye, Nick.”

It was quiet in the office of Crisley Post, Articles, Fiction,
Photographs. Then Naome snickered.

“What’s funny?”

“Nothing’s funny. You’re wonderful. I’ve been waiting four years to hear
you tell an editor off. Particularly that one. Are you going to give him
the story?”

“I am not.”

“Good! Who gets it? The slicks? What are you going to do: sell it to the
highest bidder?”

“Naome, have you read it?”

“No. I gave it to you as soon as it came in. I knew you’d want to—”

“Read it.”

“Wh—now?”

“Right now.”

She took the manuscript and carried it to her desk by the window. “Corny
title,” she said.

“Corny title,” he agreed.

He sat glumly, watching her. She was too small to be so perfectly
proportioned, and her hair was as soft as it looked, which was
astonishing. She habitually kept him at arm’s length, but her arms were
short. She was loyal, arbitrary, and underpaid, and she ran the
business, though neither of them would admit it aloud. He thought about
Sig Weiss.

Every agent has a Sig Weiss—as a rosy dream. You sit there day after day
paddling through oceans of slush, hoping one day to run across a
manuscript that means something—sincerity, integrity, high word
rates—things like that. You try to understand what editors want in spite
of what they say they want, and then you try to tell it to writers who
never listen unless they’re talking. You lend them money and
psychoanalyze them and agree with them when they lie to themselves. When
they write stories that don’t make it, it’s your fault. When they write
stories that do make it, they did it by themselves. And when they hit
the big time, they get themselves another agent. In the meantime, nobody
likes you.

“Real stiff opening,” said Naome.

“Real stiff,” Cris nodded.

And then it happens. In comes a manuscript with a humble little covering
note that says, “This is my first story, so it’s probably full of
mistakes that I don’t know anything about. If you think it has anything
in it, I’ll be glad to fix it up any way you say.” And you start reading
it, and the story grabs you by the throat, shakes your bones, puts a
heartbeat into your lymph ducts and finally slams you down gasping, weak
and oh so happy.

So you send it out and it sells on sight, and the editor calls up to say
thanks in an awed voice, and tells an anthologist, who buys reprint
rights even before the yarn is published, and rumors get around, and you
sell radio rights and TV rights and Portuguese translation rights. And
the author writes you another note that claims volubly that if it
weren’t for you he’d never have been able to do it.

That’s the agent’s dream, and that was Cris Post’s boy Sig Weiss and
_The Traveling Crag_. But, like all dream plots, this one contained a
sleeper. A rude awakening.

Offers came in and Cris made promises, and waited. He wrote letters. He
sent telegrams. He got on the long distance phone (to a neighbor’s
house, Weiss had no phone).

No more stories.

So he went to see Weiss. He lost six days on the project. It was Naome’s
idea. “He’s in trouble,” she announced, as if she knew for sure. “Anyone
who can write like that is sensitive. He’s humble and he’s generous and
he’s probably real shy and real good-looking. Someone’s victimized him,
that’s what. Someone’s taken advantage of him. Cris, go on out there and
find out what’s the matter.”

“All the way out to Turnville? My God, woman, do you know where that is?
Besides, who’s going to run things around here?” As if he didn’t know.

“I’ll try, Cris. But you’ve got to see what’s the matter with Sig Weiss.
He’s the—the greatest thing that ever happened around here.”

“I’m jealous,” he said, because he was jealous.

“Don’t be silly,” she said, because he wasn’t being silly.

So out he went. He missed connections and spent one night in a depot and
had his portable typewriter stolen and found he’d forgotten to pack the
brown shoes that went with the brown suit. He brushed his teeth once
with shaving cream and took the wrong creaking rural bus and had to
creak in to an impossibly authentic small town and creak out again on
another bus. Turnville was a general store with gasoline pumps outside
and an abandoned milk shed across the road, and Cris wasn’t happy when
he got there. He went into the general store to ask questions.

The proprietor was a triumph of type-casting. “Whut c’n I dew f’r you,
young feller? Shay—yer f’m the city, ain’t cha? Heh!”

Cris fumbled vaguely with his lapels, wondering if someone had pinned a
sign on him. “I’m looking for someone called Sig Weiss. Know him?”

“Sure dew. Meanest bastard ever lived. Wouldn’t have nought to dew with
him, I was you.”

“You’re not,” said Cris, annoyed. “Where does he live?”

“What you want with him?”

“I’m conducting a nation-wide survey of mean bastards,” Cris said.
“Where does he live?”

“You’re on the way to the right place, then. Heh! You show me a man’s
friends, I’ll tell you what he is.”

“What about his friends?” Cris asked, startled.

“He ain’t got any friends.”

Cris closed his eyes and breathed deeply. “Where does he live?”

“Up the road a piece. Two mile, a bit over. That way.”

“Thanks.”

“He’ll shoot you,” said the proprietor complacently, “but don’t let it
worry you none. He loads his shells with rock salt.”

Cris walked the two miles and a bit, every uphill inch. He was tired,
and his shoes were designed only to carry a high shine and make small
smudges on desk tops. It was hot until he reached the top of the
mountain, and then the cool wind from the other side make him feel as if
he were carrying sacks of crushed ice in his armpits. There was a
galvanized tin mailbox on a post by the road with S. WEISS and advanced
erosion showing on its ancient sides. In the cutbank near it were some
shallow footholds. Cris sighed and started up.

There was a faint path writhing its way through heavy growth. Through
the trees he could see a canted shingle roof. He had gone about forty
feet when there was a thunderous explosion and shredded greenery settled
about his head and shoulders. Sinking his teeth into his tongue, he
turned and dove head first into a tree-bole, and the lights went out.

A fabulous headache was fully conscious before Cris was. He saw it
clearly before it moved around behind his eyes. He was lying where he
had fallen. A rangy youth with long narrow eyes was squatting ten feet
away. He held a ready shotgun under his arm and on his wrist, while he
deftly went through Cris’s wallet.

“Hey,” said Cris.

The man closed the wallet and threw it on the ground by Cris’s throbbing
head. “So you’re Crisley Post,” said the man, in a disgusted tone of
voice.

Cris sat up and groaned. “You’re—you’re not Sig Weiss?”

“I’m not?” asked the man pugnaciously.

“Okay, okay,” said Cris tiredly. He picked up his wallet and put it away
and, with the aid of the tree trunk, got to his feet. Weiss made no move
to help him, but watchfully rose with him. Cris asked, “Why the
artillery?”

“I got a permit,” said Weiss. “This is my land. Why not? Don’t go
blaming me because you ran into a tree. What do you want?”

“I just wanted to talk to you. I came a long way to do it. If I’d known
you’d welcome me like this, I wouldn’t’ve come.”

“I didn’t ask you to come.”

“I’m not going to talk sense if I get sore,” said Cris quietly. “Can’t
we go inside? My head hurts.”

Weiss seemed to ponder this for a moment. Then he turned on his heel,
grunted, “Come,” and strode toward the house. Cris followed painfully.

A gray cat slid across the path and crouched in the long grass. Weiss
appeared to ignore it, but as he stepped by, his right leg lashed out
sidewise and lifted the yowling animal into the air. It struck a tree
trunk and fell, to lie dazed. Cris let out an indignant shout and went
to it. The cat cowered away from him, gained its feet and fled into the
woods, terrified.

“Your cat?” asked Weiss coldly.

“No, but damn if—”

“If it isn’t your cat, why worry?” Weiss walked steadily on toward the
house.

Cris stood a moment, shock and fury roiling in and about his headache,
and then followed. Standing there or going away would accomplish
nothing.

The house was old, small, and solid. It was built of fieldstone, and the
ceilings were low and heavy beamed. Overlooking the mountainside was an
enormous window, bringing in a breathtaking view of row after row of
distant hills. The furniture was rustic and built to be used. There was
a fireplace with a crane, also more than ornamental. There were no
drapes, no couch covers or flamboyant upholstery. There was comfort, but
austerity was the keynote.

“May I sit down?” Cris asked caustically.

“Go ahead,” said Weiss. “You can breathe, too, if you want to.”

Cris sat in a large split-twig chair that was infinitely more
comfortable than it looked. “What’s the matter with you, Weiss?”

“Nothing the matter with me.”

“What makes you like this? Why the chip on your shoulder? Why this
shoot-first-ask-questions-afterward attitude? What’s it get you?”

“Gets me a life of my own. Nobody bothers me but once. They don’t come
back. You won’t.”

“That’s for sure,” said Cris fervently, “but I wish I knew what’s eating
you. No normal human being acts like you do.”

“That’s enough,” said Weiss very gently, and Cris knew how seriously he
meant it. “What I do and why is none of your business. What do you want
here, anyhow?”

“I came to find out why you’re not writing. That’s my business. You’re
my client, remember?”

“You’re my agent,” he said. “I like the sound of it better that way.”

Cris made an Olympian effort and ignored the remark. _“The Traveling
Crag_ churned up quite a stir. You made yourself a nice piece of change.
Write more, you’ll make more. Don’t you like money?”

“Who doesn’t? You got no complaints out of me.”

“Fine. Then what about some more copy?”

“You’ll get it when I’m good and ready.”

“Which is how soon?”

“How do I know?” Weiss barked. “When I feel like it, whenever that is.”

Cris talked, then, at some length. He told Weiss some of the ins and
outs of publishing. He explained how phenomenal it was that a pulp sale
should have created such a turmoil, and pointed out what could be
expected in the slicks and Hollywood. “I don’t know how you’ve done it,
but you’ve found a short line to the heavy sugar. But the only way
you’ll ever touch it is to write more.”

“All right, all right,” Weiss said at last. “You’ve sold me. You’ll get
your story. Is that what you wanted?”

“Not quite.” Cris rose. He felt better, and he could allow himself to be
angry now that the business was taken care of. “I still want to know how
a guy like you could have written _The Traveling Crag_ in a place like
this.”

“Why not?”

Cris looked out at the rolling blue distance. “That story had more sheer
humanity in it than anything I’ve ever read. It was sensitive and—damn
it—it was a _kind_ story. I can usually visualize who writes the stuff I
read; I spend all my time with writing and writers. That story wasn’t
written in a place like this. And it wasn’t written by a man like you.”

“Where was it written?” asked Weiss in his very quiet voice. “And who
wrote it?”

“Aw, put your dukes down,” said Cris tiredly, and with such contempt
that he apparently astonished Weiss. “If you’re going to jump salty over
every little thing that happens, what are you going to do when something
big comes along and you’ve already shot your bolt?”

Weiss did not answer, and Cris went on: “I’m not saying you didn’t write
it. All I’m saying is that it reads like something dreamed up in some
quiet place that smelled like flowers and good clean sweat … Some place
where everything was right and nothing was sick or off balance. And
whoever wrote it suited that kind of a place. It was probably you, but
you sure have changed since.”

“You know a hell of a lot, don’t you?” The soft growl was not completely
insulting, and Cris felt that in some obscure way he had scored. Then
Weiss said, “Now get the hell out.”

“Real glad to,” said Cris. At the door, he said, “Thanks for the drink.”

When he reached the cutbank he looked back. Weiss was standing by the
corner of the house, staring after him.

Cris trudged back to the crossroads called Turnville and stopped in at
the general store. “Shay,” said the proprietor. “Looks like a tree
reached down and whopped ye. Heh!”

“Heh!” said Cris. “One did. I called it a son of a beech.”

The proprietor slapped his knee and wheezed. “Shay, thet’s a good ‘un.
Come out back, young feller, while I put some snake oil on your head.
Like some cold beer?”

Cris blessed him noisily. The snake oil turned out to be a benzocaine
ointment that took the pain out instantly, and the beer was a
transfusion. He looked at the old man with new respect.

“Had a bad time up on the hill?” asked the oldster.

“No worse’n sharing an undershirt with a black widow spider,” said Cris.
“What’s the matter with that character?”

“Nobuddy rightly knows,” said the proprietor. “Came up here about eight
years ago. Always been thet way. Some say the war did it to him, but I
knew him before he went overseas and he was the same. He jest don’t like
people, is all. Old Tom Sackett, drives the RFD wagon, he says Weiss was
weaned off a gallbladder to a bottle of vinegar. Heh!”

“Heh!” said Cris. “How’s he live?”

“Gits a check every month. Some trust company. I cash ’em. Not much, but
enough. He don’t dew nahthin. Hunts a bit, roams these hills a hull lot.
Reads. Heh! He’s no trouble, though. Stays on his own reservation. Just
don’t want folks barrelin’ in on him. Here comes yer bus.”

“My God!” said Naome.

“You’re addressing me?” he asked.

She ignored him. “Listen to this:

_Jets blasting, Bat Durston came screeching down through the atmosphere
of Bbllzznaj, a tiny planet seven billion light years from Sol. He cut
out his super-hyper-drive for the landing … and at that point a tall,
lean spaceman stepped out of the tail assembly, proton gun-blaster in a
space-tanned hand_.

‘Get back from those controls, Bat Durston,’ the tall stranger lipped
thinly. ‘You don’t know it, but this is your last space trip.’ ”

She looked up at him dazedly. “That’s Sig Weiss?”

“That’s Sig Weiss.”

“The same Sig Weiss?”

“The very same. Leaf through that thing, Naome. Nine bloody thousand
words of it, and it’s all like that. Go on—read it.”

“No,” she said. It was not a refusal, but an exclamation. “Are you going
to send it out?”

“Yes. To Sig Weiss. I’m going to tell him to roll it and stuff it up his
shotgun. Honey, we have a one-shot on our hands.”

“That is—it’s impossible!” she blazed. “Cris, you can’t give him up just
like that. Maybe the next one … maybe you can … maybe you’re right at
that,” she finished, glancing back at the manuscript.

He said tiredly, “Let’s go eat.”

“No. You have a lunch.”

“I have?”

“With a Miss Tillie Moroney. You’re quite safe. She’s the Average
American Miss. I mean it. She was picked out as such by pollsters last
year. She’s five-five, has had 2.3 years of college, is 24 years old,
brown hair, blue eyes, and so on.”

“How much does she weigh?”

“34B,” said Naome, with instant understanding, “and presents a united
front like a Victorian.”

He laughed. “And what have I to do with Miss Tillie Moroney?”

“She’s got money. I told you about her—that personals ad in the
_Saturday Review—_remember? ‘Does basic character ever change? $1000 for
authentic case of devil into saint.’ ”

“Oh my gosh yes. You had this bright idea of calling her in after I told
you about getting the Weiss treatment in Turnville.” He waved at the
manuscript. “Doesn’t that change your plans any? You might make a case
out of _The Traveling Crag_ versus the cat-kicking of Mr. Weiss, if you
use that old man’s testimony that he’s been kicking cats and people for
some years. But from my experience,” he touched his forehead, which was
almost healed, “I’d say it was saint into devil.”

“Her ad didn’t mention temporary or permanent changes,” Naome pointed
out. “There may be a buck in it. You can handle her.”

“Thanks just the same, but let me see what she looks like before I do
any such thing. Personally, I think she’s a crank. A mystic maybe. Do
you know here?”

“Spoke to her on the phone. Saw her picture last year. The Average
American Miss is permitted to be a screwball. That’s what makes this
country great.”

“You and your Machiavellian syndrome. Can’t I get out of it?”

“You cannot. What are you making such a fuss about? You’ve wined and
dined uglier chicks than this.”

“I know it. Do you think I’d have a chance to see her if I acted eager?”

“I despise you,” said Naome. “Straighten your tie and go comb your hair.
Oh, Cris, I know it sounds wacky. But what doesn’t, in this business?
What’ll you lose? The price of a lunch!”

“I might lose my honor.”

“Authors’ agents have no honor.”

“As my friend in the general store is wont to remark: Heh! What protects
you, little one?”

“My honor,” replied Naome.

The brown hair was neat and so was the tailored brown suit that matched
it so well. The blue eyes were extremely dark. The rest well befit her
Average Miss title, except for her voice, which had the pitch of a husky
one while being clear as tropical shoals. Her general air was one of
poised shyness. Cris pulled out a restaurant chair for her, which was a
tribute; he felt impelled to do that about one time in seven.

“You think I’m a crank,” she said when they were settled with a drink.

“Do I?”

“You do,” she said positively. He did, too.

“Well,” he said, “your ad did make it a little difficult to suspend
judgment.”

She smiled with him. She had good teeth. “I can’t blame you, or the
eight hundred-odd other people who answered. Why is it a thousand
dollars is so much more appealing than such an incredible thought as a
change from basic character?”

“I guess because most people would rather see the change from a thousand
dollars.”

He was pleased to find she had the rare quality of being able to talk
coherently while she laughed. She said, “You are right. One of them
wanted to marry me so I could change his character. He assured me that
he was a regular devil. But—tell me about this case of yours.”

He did, in detail: Sig Weiss’s incredible short story, its wide impact,
its deep call on everything that is fine and generous in everyone who
read it. And then he described the man who had written it.

“In this business, you run into all kinds of flukes,” he said. “A
superficial, tone-deaf, materialistic character will sit down and write
something that positively sings. You read the story, you know the guy,
and you say he couldn’t have written it. But you know he did. I’ve seen
that time after time, and all it proves is that there are more facets to
a man than you see at first—not that there’s any real change in him. But
Weiss—I’ll admit that in his case the theory has got to be stretched to
explain it. I’ll swear a man like him simply could not contain the
emotions and convictions that made _The Traveling Crag_ what it is.”

“I’ve read it,” she said. He hadn’t noticed her lower lip was so full.
Perhaps it hadn’t been, a moment ago. “It was a beautiful thing.”

“Now, tell me about this ad of yours. Have you found such a basic
change—devil into saint? Or do you just hope to?”

“I don’t know of any such case,” she admitted. “But I know it can
happen.”

“How?”

She paused. She seemed to be listening. Then she said, “I can’t tell
you. I … know something that can have that effect, that’s all. I’m
trying to find out where it is.”

“I don’t understand that. You don’t think Sig Weiss was under such an
influence, do you?”

“I’d like to ask him. I’d like to know if the effect was at all
lasting.”

“Not so you’d notice it,” he said glumly. “He gave me that bouncing
around after he wrote _The Traveling Crag_, not before. Not only that …”
He told her about the latest story.

“Do you suppose he wrote that under the same circumstances as _The
Traveling Crag?”_

“I don’t see why not. He’s a man of pretty regular habits. He
probably—wait a minute! Just before I left, I said something to
him … something about …” He drummed on his temples. “… Something about
the _Crag_ reading as if it had been written in a different place, by a
different person. And he didn’t get sore. He looked at me as if I were a
swami. Seems I hit the nail right on the thumb.”

The listening expression crossed her smooth face again. She looked up,
startled. “Has he got any …” She closed her eyes, straining for
something. “Has he a radio? I mean—a shortwave set—a
transmitter—diathermy—a fever cabinet—any … uh … RF generator of any
kind?”

“What in time made you ask that?”

She opened her eyes and smiled shyly at him. “It just came to me.”

“Saving your presence, Miss Moroney, but there are moments when you give
me the creeps,” he blurted. “I’m sorry. I guess I shouldn’t have said
that, but—”

“It’s all right,” she said warmly.

“You hear voices?” he asked.

She smiled. “What about the RF generator?”

“I don’t know.” He thought hard. “He has electricity. I imagine he has a
receiver. About the rest, I really can’t say. He didn’t take me on a
grand tour. Will you tell me what made you ask that?”

“No.”

He opened his mouth to protest, but when he saw her expression he closed
it again. She asked, “What are you going to do about Weiss?”

“Drop him. What else?”

“Oh, please don’t!” she cried. She put a hand on his sleeve. “Please!”

“What else to you expect me to do?” he asked in some annoyance. “A
writer who sends in a piece of junk like that as a followup to something
like the _Crag_ is more than foolish. He’s stupid. I can’t use a client
like that. I’m busy. I got troubles.

“Also, he gave you a bad time.”

“That hasn’t anyth—well, you’re right. If he behaved like a human being,
maybe I would take a lot of trouble and analyze his trash and guide and
urge and wipe his nose for him. But a guy like that—nah!”

“He has another story like the _Crag_ in him.”

“You think he has?”

“I know he has.”

“You’re very positive. Your … voices tell you that?”

She nodded, with a small secret smile.

“I have the feeling you’re playing with me. You know this Weiss?”

“Oh, no! And I’m not playing with you. Truly. You’ve got to believe me!”
She looked genuinely distressed.

“I don’t see why I should. This begins to look real haywire, Tillie
Moroney. I think maybe we’d better get down to basics here.” She
immediately looked so worried that he recognized an advantage. Not
knowing exactly what she wanted of him, he knew she wanted something,
and now he was prepared to use that to the hilt. “Tell me about it.
What’s your interest in Weiss? What’s this personalityalteration
gimmick? What are you after and what gave you your lead? And what do you
expect me to do about it? That last question reads, ‘What’s in it for
me?’ ”

“Y-you’re not always very nice, are you?”

He said, more gently, “That last wasn’t thrown in to be mean. It was an
appeal to your good sense to appeal to my sincerity. You can always
judge sincerity—your own or anyone else’s—by finding out what’s in it
for the interested party. Altruism and real sincerity are mutually
exclusive. Now, talk. I mean, talk, please.”

Again that extraordinary harking expression. Then she drew a deep
breath. “I’ve had an awful time,” she said. “Awful. You can’t know. I’ve
answered letters and phone calls. I’ve met cranks and wolves and
religious fanatics who have neat little dialectical capsules all packed
and ready to make saints out of devils. They all yap about
proof—sometimes it’s themselves and sometimes it’s someone they know—and
the proof always turns out to be a reformed drunk or a man who turned to
Krishna and no longer beats his wife, not since Tuesday …” She stopped
for breath and half-smiled at him and, angrily, he felt a warm surge of
liking for her. She went on, “And this is the first hint I’ve had that
what I’m looking for really exists.”

She leaned forward suddenly. “I need you. You already have a solid
contact with Sig Weiss and the way he works. If I had to seek him out
myself, I—well, I just wouldn’t know how to start. And this is urgent,
can’t you understand—urgent!”

He looked deep into the dark blue eyes and said, “I understand fine.”

She said, “If I tell you a … story, will you promise not to ask me any
questions about it?”

He fiddled about with his fork for a moment and then said, “I once heard
tell of a one-legged man who was pestered by all the kids in the
neighborhood about how he lost his leg. They followed him and yelled at
him and tagged along after him and made no end of a nuisance of
themselves. So one day he stopped and gathered them all around him and
asked if they really wanted to know how he lost his leg, and they all
chorused YES! And he wanted to know if he told them, would they stop
asking him, and they all promised faithfully that they would stop. ‘All
right,’ he said. ‘It was bit off.’ And he turned and stumped away. As to
the promise you want—no.”

She laughed ruefully. “All right. I’ll tell you the story anyway. But
you’ve got to understand that it isn’t the whole story, and that I’m not
at liberty to tell the whole story. So please don’t pry too hard.”

He smiled. He had, he noticed in her eyes, a pretty nice smile. “I’ll be
good.”

“All right. You have a lot of clients who write science fiction, don’t
you?”

“Not a lot. Just the best,” he said modestly.

She smiled again. Two curved dimples put her smile in parenthesis. He
liked that. She said, “Let’s say this is a science fiction plot. How to
begin …”

“Once upon a time …” he prompted.

She laughed like a child. “Once upon a time,” she nodded, “there was a
very advanced humanoid race in another galaxy. They had had wars—lots of
them. They learned how to control them, but every once in a while things
would get out of hand and another, and worse, war would happen. They
developed weapon after weapon—things which make the H-bomb like a
campfire in comparison. They had planet-smashers. They could explode a
sun. They could do things we can only dimly understand. They could put a
local warp in time itself, or unify the polarity in the gravitomagnetic
field of an entire solar system.”

“Does this gobbledegook come easy to you?” he asked.

“It does just now,” she answered shyly. “Anyway, they developed the
ultimate weapon—one which made all the others obsolete. It was
enormously difficult to make, and only a few were manufactured. The
secret of making it died out, and the available stocks were used at one
time or another. The time to use them is coming again—and I don’t mean
on Earth. The little fuses we have are flea-hops. This is important
business.

“Now, a cargo ship was traveling between galaxies on hyper-spatial
drive. In a crazy, billion-to-one odds accident, it emerged into normal
space smack in the middle of a planetoid. It wasn’t a big one; the ship
wasn’t atomized, just wrecked. It was carrying one of these
super-weapons. It took thousands of years to trace it, but it has been
traced. The chances are strong that it came down on a planet. It’s
wanted.

“It gives out no detectable radiation. But in its shielded state, it has
a peculiar effect on living tissues which come near it.”

“Devils into saints?”

“The effect is … peculiar. Now …” She held up fingers. “If the nature of
this object were known, and if it fell into the wrong hands, the effect
here on Earth could be dreadful. There are megalomaniacs on Earth so
unbalanced that they would threaten even their own destruction unless
their demands were met. Point two: If the weapon were used on Earth, not
only would Earth as we know it cease to exist, but the weapon would be
unavailable to those who need it importantly.”

Cris sat staring at her, waiting for more. There was no more. Finally he
licked his lips and said, “You’re telling me that Sig Weiss has stumbled
across this thing.”

“I’m telling you a science fiction plot.”

“Where did you get your … information?”

“It’s a science fiction story.”

He grinned suddenly, widely. “I’ll be good,” he said again. “What do you
want me to do.”

Her eyes became very bright. “You aren’t like most agents,” she said.

“When I was in a British Colony, the English used to say to me, every
once in a while, ‘You aren’t like most Americans.’ I always found it
slightly insulting. All right; what do you want me to do?”

She patted his hand. “See if you can make Weiss write another _Traveling
Crag_. If he can, then find out exactly how and where he wrote it. And
let me know.”

They rose. He helped her with her light coat. He said, “Know something?”
When she smiled up at him he said, “You don’t strike me as Miss
Average.”

“Oh, but I was,” she answered softly. “I was.”

TELEGRAM

SIG WEISS

TURNVILLE

JULY 15

PLEASE UNDERSTAND THAT WHAT FOLLOWS HAS NOTHING WHATEVER TO DO WITH YOUR
GROSS LACK OF HOSPITALITY. I REALIZE THAT YOUR WAY OF LIFE ON YOUR OWN
PROPERTY IS JUSTIFIED IN TERMS OF ME, AN INTRUDER. I AM FORGETTING THE
EPISODE. I ASSUME YOU ALREADY HAVE. NOW TO BUSINESS: YOUR LAST
MANUSCRIPT IS THE MOST UTTERLY INSULTING DOCUMENT I HAVE SEEN IN
FOURTEEN PROFESSIONAL YEARS. TO INSULT ONE’S AGENT IS STANDARD OPERATING
PROCEDURE: TO INSULT ONESELF IS INEXCUSABLE AND BROTHER YOU’VE DONE IT.
SIT DOWN AND READ THE STORY THROUGH, IF YOU CAN, AND THEN REREAD THE
TRAVELING CRAG. YOU WILL NOT NEED MY CRITICISM. MY ONLY SUGGESTION TO
YOU IS TO DUPLICATE EXACTLY THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH YOU WROTE YOUR
FIRST STORY. UNLESS AND UNTIL YOU DO THIS WE NEED HAVE NO FURTHER
CORRESPONDENCE. I ACCEPT YOUR SINCERE THANKS FOR NOT SUBMITTING YOUR
SECOND STORY ANYWHERE.

CRISLEY POST

Naome whistled. “Really—a straight telegram? What about a night letter?”

Cris smiled at the place where the wall met the ceiling. “Straight
rate.”

“Yes, master.” She wielded a busy pencil. “That’s costing us $13.75,
sir,” she said at length, “plus tax. Grand total, $17.46. Cris, you have
a hole in your head!”

“If you know of a better ‘ole, go to it,” he quoted dreamily. She glared
at him, reached for the phone and continued to glare as she put the
telegram on the wire.

In the next two weeks Cris had lunch three times with Tillie Moroney,
and dinner once. Naome asked for a raise. She got it, and was therefore
frightened.

Cris returned from the third of these lunches (which was the day after
the dinner) whistling. He found Naome in tears.

“Hey … what’s happening here? You don’t do that kind of thing,
remember?”

He leaned over her desk. She buried her face in her arms and boohooed
lustily. He knelt beside her and put an arm around her shoulders.
“There,” he said, patting the nape of her neck. “Take a deep breath and
tell me about it.”

She took a long, quavering breath, tried to speak, and burst into tears
again. “F-f-fi-fi …”

“What?”

“F—” She swallowed with difficulty, then said, _“Fire of Heaven!”_ and
wailed.

“What?” he yelled. “I thought you said _‘Fire of Heaven.’_”

She blew her nose and nodded. “I did,” she whispered. “H-here.” She
dumped a pile of manuscript in front of him and buried her face in her
arms again. “L-leave me alone.”

In complete bewilderment, he gathered up the typewritten sheets and took
them to his desk.

There was a covering letter.

_Dear Mr. Post: There will never be a way for me to express my thanks to
you, nor my apologies for the way I treated you when you visited me. I
am willing to do anything in my power to make amends_.

_Knowing what I do of you, I think you would be most pleased by another
story written the way I did the Crag. Here it is. I hope it measures up.
If it doesn’t, I earnestly welcome any suggestions you may have to fix
it up_.

_I am looking forward very much indeed to meeting you again under better
circumstances. My house is yours when you can find time to come out, and
I do hope it will be soon. Sincerely, S.W_.

With feelings of awe well mixed with astonishment, Cris turned to the
manuscript. _Fire of Heaven_, by Sig Weiss, it was headed. He began to
read. For a moment, he was conscious of Naome’s difficult and
diminishing sniffs, and then he became completely immersed in the story.

Twenty minutes later, his eyes, blurred and smarting, encountered “The
End.” He propped his forehead on one palm and rummaged clumsily for his
handkerchief. Having thoroughly mopped and blown, he looked across at
Naome. Her eyes were red-rimmed and still wet. “Yes?” she said.

“Oh my God yes,” he answered.

They stared at each other for a breathless moment. Then she said in a
soprano near-whisper: _“Fire of …”_ and began to cry again.

“Cut it out,” he said hoarsely.

When he could, he got up and opened the window. Naome came and stood
beside him. “You don’t read that,” he said after a time. “It … happens
to you.”

She said, “What a tragedy. What a beautiful, beautiful tragedy.”

“He said in his letter,” Cris managed, “that if I had any suggestions to
fix it up …”

“Fix it up,” she said in shaken scorn. “There hasn’t been anything like
him since—”

“There hasn’t been anything like him period.” Cris snapped his fingers.
“Get on your phone. Call the airlines. Two tickets to the nearest
feederfield to Turnville. Call the Drive-Ur-Self service. Have a car
waiting at the field. I’m not asking any woman to climb that mountain on
foot. Send this telegram to Weiss: Taking up your very kind offer
immediately. Bringing a friend. Will wire arrival time. Profound thanks
for the privilege of reading _Fire of Heaven_. From a case-hardened
ten-percenter those words come hard and are well earned. Post.”

“Two tickets,” said Naome breathlessly. “Oh! Who’s going to handle the
office?”

He thumped her shoulder. “You can do it, kid. You’re wonderful.
Indispensable. I love you. Get me Tillie Moroney’s number, will you?”

She stood frozen, her lips parted, her nostrils slightly distended. He
looked at her, looked again. He was aware that she had stopped
breathing. “Naome!”

She came to life slowly and turned, not to him, but on him. “You’re
taking that—that Moron-y creature—”

“Moroney. What’s the matter with you?”

“Oh Cris, how could you?”

“What have I done? What’s wrong? Listen, this is business. I’m not
romancing the girl! Why—”

She curled her lip. “Business! Then it’s the first business that’s gone
on around here that I haven’t known about.”

“Oh, it isn’t office business, Naome. Honestly.”

“Then there’s only one thing it could be!”

Cris threw up his hands. “Trust me this once. Say! Why should it eat you
so much, even if it was monkey-business, which it isn’t?”

“I can’t bear to see you throw yourself away!”

“You—I didn’t know you felt—”

“Shut up!” she roared. “Don’t flatter yourself. It’s just that
she’s … average. And so are you. And when you add an average to an
average, you’ve produced NOTHING!”

He sat down at his desk with a thump and reached for the phone, very
purposefully. But his mind was in such a tangle at the moment, that he
didn’t know what to do with the phone once it was in his hands, until
Naome stormed over and furiously dropped a paper in front of him. It had
Tillie’s number on it. He grinned at her stupidly and sheepishly and
dialed. By this time, Naome was speaking to the airlines office, but he
knew perfectly well that she could talk and listen at the same time.

“Hello?” said the phone.

“Ull-ull,” he said, watching Naome’s back stiffen. He spun around in his
swivel chair so he could talk facing the wall.

“Hello?” said the phone again.

“Tillie, Weiss found it he wrote another story it’s a dream he invited
me down and I’m going and you’re coming with me,” he blurted.

“I beg your—Cris, is anything the matter? You sound so strange.”

“Never mind that,” he said. He repeated the news more coherently,
acutely conscious of Naome’s attention to every syllable. Tillie uttered
a cry of joy and promised to be right over. He asked her to hang on and
forced himself to get the plane departure from Naome. Pleading packing
and business odds and ends, he asked her to meet him at the airport. She
agreed, for which he was very thankful. The idea of her walking into the
office just now was more than he could take.

Naome had done her phoning and was in a flurry of effort involving her
files, which had always been a mystery to Cris. She kept bringing things
over to him. “Sign these.” “You promised to drop Rogers a note about
this.” “What do you want done about Borilla’s scripts?” Until he was
snowed under. “Hold it! These things can wait!”

“No they can’t,” she said icily. “I wouldn’t want them on my conscience.
You see, this is my last day here.”

“Your—Naome! You can’t quit. You can’t!”

“I can and I am and I do. Check this list.”

“Naome, I—”

“I won’t listen. My mind’s made up.”

“All right then. I’ll manage. But it’s a shame about _Fire of Heaven_.
Such a beautiful job. And here it must sit until I get back. I did want
you to market it.”

“You’d trust me to market that story?” Her eyes were huge.

“No one else. There isn’t anyone who knows the market better, or who
would make a better deal. I trust you with it absolutely. After you’ve
done that one last big thing for me—go, then, if you’ll be happier
somewhere else.”

“Crisley Post, I hate you and despise you. You’re a fiend and a spider.
Th-thank you. I’ll never forget you for this. I’ll type up four
originals and sneak them around. Movies, of course. What a TV script!
And radio … let’s see; two, no—three British outfits can bid against
each other … you’re doing this on purpose to keep me from leaving!”

“Sure,” he said jovially. “I’m real cute. I wrote the story myself just
because I couldn’t get anyone to replace you.”

At last she laughed. “There’s one thing I’m damn sure you didn’t do. An
editor is a writer who can’t write, and an agent is a writer who can’t
write as well as an editor.”

He laughed with her. He bled too, but it was worth it, to see her
laughing again.

The plane trip was pleasant. It lasted a long time. The ship sat down
every 45 minutes or so all the way across the country. Cris figured it
was the best Naome could do on short notice. But it gave them lots of
time to talk. And talking to Tillie was a pleasure. She was intelligent
and articulate, and had read just as many of his favorite books as he
had of hers. He told her enough about _Fire of Heaven_ to intrigue her a
lot and make her cry a little, without spoiling the plot for her. They
found music to disagree about, and shared a view of a wonderful lake
down through the clouds, and all in all it was a good trip.
Occasionally, Cris glanced at her—most often when she was asleep—with a
touch of surmise, like a little curl of smoke, thinking of Naome’s
suspicions about him and Tillie. He wasn’t romancing Tillie. He wasn’t.
Was he?

They landed at last, and again he blessed Naome; the Drive-Ur-Self car
was at the airfield. They got a road map from a field attendant and
drove off through the darkest morning hours. Again Cris found himself
glancing at the relaxed girl beside him, half asleep in the cold glow of
the dash lights. A phrase occurred to him: “undivided front like a
Victorian”—Naome’s remark. He flushed. It was true. An affectation of
Tillie’s, probably; but everything she wore was highnecked and full-cut.

The sky had turned from grey to pale pink when they pulled up at the
Turnville store. Cris honked, and in due course the screen door slammed
and the old proprietor ambled down the wooden steps and came to peer
into his face.

“Heh! If ’tain’t that city feller. How’re ya, son? Didn’t know you folks
ever got up and about this early.”

“We’re up late, dad. Got some gas for us?”

“Reckon there’s a drop left.”

Cris got out and went back with the old man to unlock the gas tank.
“Seen Weiss recently?” he asked.

“Same as usual. Put through some big orders. Seen him do that before.
Usually means he’s holing up for five, six months. Though why he bought
so much liquor an’ drape material and that, I can’t figure.”

“How’d he behave?”

“Same as ever. Friendly as a wet wildcat with fleas.”

Cris thanked him and paid him and they turned up the rocky hill road. As
they reached the crest, they gasped together at the sun-flooded valley
that lay before them. “Memories are the only thing you ever have that
you always keep,” said Tillie softly, “and this is one for both of us.
I’m … glad you’re in it for me, Cris.”

“I love you, too,” he said in the current idiom, and found himself,
hot-faced, looking into a face as suffused as his. They recoiled from
each other and started to chatter about the weather—stopped and roared
together with laughter. He took her hand and helped her up the cutbank.
They paused at the top. “Listen,” he said in a low voice. “That old
character in the store has seen Weiss recently. And he says there’s no
change. I think we’d better be just a little bit careful.”

He looked at her and again caught that listening expression. “No,” she
said at length, “it’s all right. The store’s outside the … the influence
he’s under. He’s bound to revert when it’s gone. But he’ll be all right
now. You’ll see.”

“Will you tell me how you know these things?” he demanded, almost angry.

“Of course,” she smiled. Then the smile vanished. “But not now.”

“That’s more than I’ve gotten so far,” he grumbled. “Well, let’s get to
it.”

Hand in hand, they went up the path. The house seemed the same, and
yet … there was a difference, an intensification. The leaves were
greener, the early sun warmer.

There were three grey kittens on the porch.

“Ahoy the house!” Cris called self-consciously.

The door opened, and Weiss stood there, peering. He looked for a moment
exactly as he had when he watched Cris stride off on the earlier visit.
Then he moved out into the sun. He scooped up one of the kittens and
came swiftly to meet them. “Mr. Post! I got your wire. How good of you
to come.”

He was dressed in a soft sport shirt and grey slacks—a startling
difference from his grizzled boots-and-khaki appearance before. The
kitten snuggled into the crook of his elbow, made a wild grab at his
pocket-button, caught its tail instead. He put it down, and it fawned
and purred and rubbed against his shoe.

Weiss straightened up and smiled at Tillie. “Hello.”

“Tillie, this is Sig Weiss. Miss Moroney.”

“Tillie,” she said, and gave him her hand.

“Welcome home,” Weiss said. He turned to Cris. “This is your home, for
as long as you want it, whenever you can come.”

Cris stood slack-jawed. “I ought to be more tactful,” he said at length,
“but I just can’t believe it. I should have more sense than to mention
my last visit, but this—this—”

Weiss put a hand on his shoulder. “I’m glad you mentioned it. I’ve been
thinking about it, too. Hell—if you’d forgotten all about it, how could
you appreciate all this? Come on in. I have some surprises for you.”

Tillie held Cris back a moment. “It’s here,” she whispered. “Here in the
house!”

The weapon—here? Somehow he had visualized it as huge—a great horned
mine or a tremendous torpedo shape. He glanced around apprehensively.
The ultimate weapon—invented after the planet-smasher, the
sun-burster—what incredible thing could it be?

Weiss stood by the door. Tillie stepped through, then Cris.

The straight drapes, the solid sheet of plate glass that replaced the
huge sashed window; the heavy skins that softened the wide-planked
floor, the gleaming andirons and the copper pots on the fieldstone wall;
the record-player and racks of albums—all the other soothing, comforting
finishes of the once-bleak room—all these Cris noticed later. His big
surprise was not quite a hundred pounds, not quite five feet tall—

“Cris …”

“Naome’s here,” he said inanely, and sat down to goggle at her.

Weiss laughed richly. “Why do you suppose you and Tillie got that
pogo-plane cross country, stopping at every ball-park and cornfield?
Naome got a non-stop flight to within fifty miles of here, and air-taxi
to the bottom of the mountain, and came up by cab.”

“I had to,” said Naome. “I had to see what you were getting into. You’re
so—impetuous.” She came smiling to Tillie. “I am glad to see you.”

“Why, you idiot!” said Cris to Naome. “What could you have done if
he—if—”

“I’m prettier than you are, darling,” laughed Naome.

“She came pussyfooting up to the house like a kid playing Indian,” said
Weiss. “I circled through the woods and pussyfooted right along with
her. When she was peeping into the side window, I reached out and put a
hand on her shoulder.”

“You might have scared her into a conniption!”

“Not here,” said Weiss gravely.

Surprisingly, Tillie nodded. “You can’t be afraid here, Cris. You’re
saying all those things about what might have happened, but they’re not
frightening to think about now, are they?”

“No,” Cris said thoughtfully. “No.” He gazed around him. “This is—crazy.
Everybody should be this crazy.”

“It would help,” said Weiss. “How do you like the place now, Cris?”

“It’s—it’s grand,” said Cris. Naome laughed. She said, “Listen to the
vocabulary kid there. ‘Grand.’ You meant ‘Peachy,’ didn’t you?”

“Cris didn’t laugh with the others. “Fear,” he said. “You can’t
eliminate fear. Fear is a survival emotion. If you didn’t know fear,
you’d fall out of windows, cut yourself on rocks, get hunted and killed
by mountain lions.”

“If I open the window,” Weiss asked, “would you be afraid to jump out?
Come over here and look.”

Cris stepped to the great window. He had not known that the house was
built so close to the edge. Crag on crag, fold after billow, the land
fell down and away to the distant throat of the valley. Cris stepped
back respectfully. “Open it if you like,” he said, and swallowed, “and
somebody else can jump. Not me, kiddies.”

Sig Weiss smiled. “Q.E.D. Survival fear is still with us. What we’ve
lost here is fear of anything that is not so. When you came here, you
saw a very frightened man. Most of my fears were “might-be” fears. I was
afraid people might attack me, so I attacked first. I was afraid of
seeming different from people, so I stayed where my imagined difference
would not show. I was afraid of being the same as people, so I tried to
be different.”

“What does it?” Cris asked.

“What makes us all what we are now? Something I found. I won’t tell you
what it is or where it is. I call it an amulet, a true magic amulet,
knowing that it’s no more or less magic than flame springing to the end
of a wooden stick.” He took a kitchen match from his pocket and ran his
thumbnail across it. It flared up, and he flipped it into the fireplace.
“I won’t tell you where or what it is because, although I’ve lost my
fear, I haven’t lost my stubbornness. I’ve lived miserably, a partial,
hunted, hunting existence, and now I’m alive. And I mean to stay this
way.”

“Where did you find it?” Tillie asked. “Mind telling us that?”

“Not at all. A half mile down the mountain there was a tremendous
rockfall a couple of years ago. No one owns that land; no one noticed. I
climbed down there once looking for hawks’ eggs. I found a place …

“How can I tell you what that place was like, or what it was like to
find it? It was a brush-grown, rocky hillside near the gaping scar of
the slide, where the crust of years had sloughed away. Maybe the
mountain moved its shoulder in its sleep. There were flowers—ordinary
wildflowers—but perfect, vivid, vital. They lived long and hardily, and
they were beautiful. The bushes had an extraordinary green and a fine
healthy gloss, and it was a place where the birds came close to me as I
sat and watched them. It was the birds who taught me that fear never
walked in that place.

“How can I tell you—what can I say about the meaning of that place to
me? I’d been a psychic cripple all my life, hobbling through the rough
country of my own ideas, spending myself in battle against ghosts I had
invented to justify my fears, for fear was there first. And when I found
that place, my inner self threw away its crutches. More than that—it
could fly!

“How can I tell you what it meant to me to leave that place? To walk
away from it was to buckle on the braces, pick up the crutches again, to
feel my new wings molt and fall away.

“I went there more and more. Once I took my typewriter and worked there,
and that was _The Traveling Crag_. Cris never knew how offended I was,
how invaded, to find that he had divined the existence of that place
through the story. That was why I turned out that other abortion, out of
stubbornness—a desire to prove to Cris and to myself that my writing
came from me and not from the magic of that place. I know better now. I
don’t know what another writer would do here. Better than anything he
could conceivably do anywhere else. But it wouldn’t be the _Crag_ or
_Fire_, because they could only have been mine.”

Cris asked, “Would you let another writer work here?”

“I’d love it! Do you mean to ask if I want to monopolize this place, and
the wonders it works? Of course not. One or another fear or combinations
of fear are at the base of any monopoly, whether it’s in industry, or in
politics, or in the area of religious thought. And there’s no fear
here.”

“There should be some sort of a—a shrine here,” murmured Naome.

“There is. There will be, as long as I can keep the amulet. I found it,
you see. It was lying right out in the sun. I took it and brought it
here. The birds wouldn’t forgive me for a while, but I’ve made them
happy here since. And here it is and here it will stay, and there’s your
shrine.”

Fear walked in then. It closed gently on Cris’s heart, and he turned to
look at Tillie. Her eyes were closed. She was listening.

A hell of an agent I turned out to be, he thought. How much I was
willing to do for Weiss, how much for all the world through his work! By
himself he found himself, the greatest of human achievements. And I have
done the one thing that will take that away from him and from us all,
leaving only the dwindling memory of this life without fear—and two
great short stories.

He looked at Tillie again. His gaze caught hers, and she rose. Her
features were rigidly controlled, but through his mounting fear Cris
could recognize the thing she was fighting. She surely understood what
was about to happen to Weiss and to the world if she succeeded. Her
understanding versus her … orders, was it?

Cris had sat in that incredible aura, listening to the joyous expression
of Sig Weiss’s delivery from fear, and he had thought of killing. Now,
he realized that part of her already thought as he did, and
perhaps … perhaps …

“Sig, can we look around outside?” Cris had stepped over to Tillie
almost before he knew he wanted to.

“You own the place,” said Weiss cheerfully. “Naome and I’ll stir up some
food. You’ve had a nice leisurely trip. I wonder if you realize that
Naome spent fourteen hours on a typewriter before she took that long
hop? _Fire of Heaven’s_ well launched now, thanks to her. Anyway, she
deserves food.”

“And a golden crown, which I shall include in the next pay envelope.
Thank you, Naome. You’re out of your mind.”

“Thank you,” she twinkled.

Cris led Tillie out, and they walked rapidly away from the house. “Not
too far,” she cautioned. “Let’s stay where we can think. We’re in a
magic circle, you know, and outside we’ll be afraid of each other, and
of ourselves and of all our ghosts.”

He asked her, “What are you going to do?”

“I shouldn’t have got you into this. I should have come by myself.”

“I’d have stopped you then. Don’t you see? Sig would have told me. Even
with whatever help you have, you couldn’t have succeeded in getting the
weapon on the first try. He’s too alert, too alive, far too jealous of
what the ‘amulet’ has given him. He’d have told me, and I’d have stopped
you, to save him and his work. You made me an ally, and that prevented
me.”

“Cris, Cris, I didn’t think that out!”

“I know you didn’t. It was done for you. Who is it, Tillie? Who?”

“A ship,” she whispered. “A space ship.”

“You’ve seen it?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Where is it?”

“Here.”

“Here, in Turnville?”

She nodded.

“And it—they—communicate with you?”

“Yes.”

He asked her again. “What are you going to do?”

“If I tell you I’ll get the weapon, you’ll kill me to save Weiss, and
his work, and his birds, and his shrine, and all they mean to the world.
Won’t you, Cris?”

“I will certainly try.”

“And if I refuse to get it for them—”

“Would they kill you?”

“They could.”

“If they did, could they then get the weapon?”

“I don’t know. I don’t think so. They’ve never forced me, Cris, never.
They’ve always appealed to my reason. I think if they could control me
or anyone else, they’d have done it. They’d have to find another human
ally, and start the persuading process all over again. By which time
Weiss and everyone else would be warned, and it would be much more
difficult for them.”

“Nothing’s difficult for them,” he said suddenly. “They can smash
planets.”

“Cris, we don’t think as well as they do, but we don’t think the way
they do, either. And from what I can get, I’m sure that they’re
good—that they will do anything they can to spare this planet and the
life on it. That seems to be one of the big reasons for their wanting to
get that weapon away from here.”

“And what of their other aims, then? Can we take all this away from
humanity in favor of some cosmic civilization that we don’t know and
have never seen, which regards us as a dust-fleck in a minor galaxy?
Let’s face it, Tillie: they’ll get it sooner or later. They’re strong
enough. But let’s keep it while we can. A minute, a day of this aura is
a minute or a day in which a human being can know what it’s like to live
without fear. Look at what it’s done for Weiss; think what it can do for
others. What are you going to do?”

“I—Kiss me, Cris.”

His lips had just touched hers when there was a small giggle behind
them. Cris whirled.

“Bless you, my children.”

“Naome!”

“I didn’t mean to bust anything up. I mean that.” She skipped up to
them. “You can go right back to it after I’ve finished interrupting. But
I’ve just got to tell you. You know the fright Sig tried to throw into
me when I got here last night? I’m getting even. I found his amulet. I
really did. It was stuck to the underside of a shelf in the linen
closet. You’d have to be my size to see it. I swiped it.”

Tillie’s breath hissed in. “Where is it? What did you do with it?”

“Oh, don’t worry, it’s safe enough. I hid it good, this time. Now we’ll
make him wonder where it is.”

“Where is it?” asked Cris.

“Promise not to tell him?”

“Of course.”

“Well, it’s smack in the innards of one of his pet new possessions. You
haven’t been in the west room—the ell he calls a library—have you?”

They shook their heads.

“Well, he’s got himself a great big radio. I lifted the lid, see, and
down inside among the tubes and condensers and all that macaroni are
some wire hoops, sort of. This amulet, it’s a tiny thing—maybe four
inches long and as wide as my two thumbs. It’s sort of—blurry around the
edges. Anyway, I stuck it inside one set of those hoops. Cris—you’re
green! What’s the matter?”

“Tillie—the coil—the RF coil! If he turns that set on—”

“Oh, dear God …” Tillie breathed.

“What’s the matter with you two? I didn’t do anything wrong, did I?”

They raced into the house, through the living room. “In here!” bellowed
Cris. They pounded to the west room, getting into each other’s way as
they went in.

Sig Weiss was there, smiling. “Just in time. I want to show you the best
damn transceiver in—”

“Don’t! Don’t touch it—”

“Oh, a little hamming won’t hurt,” said Sig.

He threw the switch.

There was a loud click and a shower of dust.

And silence.

Naome came all the way in, went like a sleepwalker to the radio and
opened the lid. There was a hole in the grey crinkle-finished steel,
roughly rectangular. Weiss looked at it curiously, touched it, looked
up. There was a similar hole in the ceiling. He bent over the chassis.
“Now how do you like that! A coil torn all to hell. Something came down
through the roof—see?—and smashed right through my new transmitter.”

“It didn’t go down,” said Cris hoarsely. “It went up.”

Naome began to cry.

“What the hell’s the matter with you people?” Sig demanded.

Cris suddenly clutched Tillie’s arm. “The ship! The space ship! They
wouldn’t let it go off while they’re here!”

“They did,” said Tillie in a flat voice.

“Will somebody please tell me what gives here?” asked Sig plaintively.

Through a thick silence, Tillie said, “I’ll tell it.” She sank down on
her knees, slowly sat on the rug. “Cris knows most of this,” she said.
Don’t stop to wonder if it’s all true. It is.” She told about the races,
the wars, the weapons of greater and greater destructiveness and,
finally, the ultimate weapon, and its strange effect on living tissue.
“Eight months ago, the ship contacted me. There was a connection made
with my nerve-endings. I don’t understand it. It wasn’t telepathy; they
were artificial neural currents. They talked to me. They’ve been talking
ever since.”

“My amulet!” Sig suddenly cried. “Sit down,” said Tillie flatly. He sat.

Cris said, “I thought you required some physical contact for them to
communicate with you. But I’ve been with you while you were
communicating, and you had no contact.”

“I hadn’t?” She began to unbutton her blouse at the throat. She stopped
with the fourth button, and gently drew out a metal object shaped
somewhat like a bulbous spearhead with a blunt point. It glittered
strangely with a color not quite that of gold and not quite of polished
brass. It seemed to be glazed with a thin layer of clear crystal.

“Oh-h-h,” breathed Naome, in a revelatory tone.

Tillie smiled suddenly at her. “You minx. You always wondered why I
never wore a V-neck. Come here, all of you. Down on the rug.”

Mystified, they gathered around. “Put your hands on it.” They did so,
and stared at each other and at their hands, waiting like old maids over
a Ouija board. “It hurts a tiny bit at first as the probes go in, but it
passes quickly. Be very still.”

A strange, not unpleasant prickling sensation came and went. There was a
slight shock, another; more prickling.

_Testing. Testing. Naome Cris Sig Tillie …_

“Everybody get that?” asked Tillie calmly.

Naome squeaked. “It’s like someone talking inside my sinuses!”

“It said our names,” said Sig tautly. Cris nodded, fascinated.

The silent voice spoke: _Sig, your amulet is gone and you have lost
nothing_.

_Tillie, you have been faithful to your own_.

_Naome, you have been used, and you have done no wrong_.

_Cris, we have observed that it takes superhuman understanding to guide
and direct work you cannot do yourself_.

_Reorient your thinking, all of you. You insist that what is lethal or
cosmically important must be huge. You insist that anything which
transcends a horror must be greater horror_.

_The amulet was indeed the ultimate weapon. Its effect is not to
destroy, but to stop useless conflict. At this moment there is a chain
reaction occurring throughout this planet’s atmosphere affecting only
one rare isotope of nitrogen. In times to come, your people will
understand its radiochemistry; it is enough for you now to know that its
most significant effect is to turn on the full analytical powers of the
mind whenever fear is experienced. Panic occurs when analysis is shut
off. Embarrassment occurs when fear is not analyzed. Hereafter, no
truck-driver will fear to use the word ‘exquisite,’_ _no propagandist
will create the semblance of truth by repeating falsehoods, no human
group will be able to instill fears about any other human group which
are not common to the respective individuals of the groups. There will
be no fear-ridden movements of securities, and no lovers will be with
each other and afraid to state their love. In large issues and in small
ones, the greater the emergency the greater will be the stimulation of
the analytical powers_.

_That is the meaning and purpose and constitution of the ultimate
weapon. To you it is a gift. There are few races in cosmic history with
a higher potential than yours, or with a more miserable expression of
it. The gift is yours because of this phenomenon_.

_As for us, our quest is as stated to you. We were to seek out the
weapon and bring it back with us. We gave it to you instead, by
manipulation of your impulses, Naome, and yours, Sig, with the radio.
Earth needs it more than we do_.

_But we have not failed. The radio-chemistry of the nitrogen-isotope
reaction and its catalyses are now widely available to us. It will be
simplicity itself for us to recreate the weapon, and the time it will
take us is as nothing_ ..

_ … For we are a race which commands the fluxes of time, and we can
braid a distance about our fingers, and hold the Alpha and Omega
together in the palms of our hands_.

“The probes are gone,” said Tillie, after a long silence.

Reluctantly, they removed their hands from the communicator, and flexed
them.

Cris said, “Tillie, where is the ship?”

She smiled. “Remember? ‘You insist that what is cosmically important
must be huge.’ ” She pointed. “That is the ship.”

They stared at the bulbous arrowhead. It rose and drifted toward the
door. It paused there, tilted toward them in an obvious salute, and
then, like a light extinguished, it was gone.

Naome sprang to her feet. “Is it all true, about the propaganda, the
panic, the—the lovers who can speak their minds?”

Naome said, “Testing. Testing. Sig Weiss, I love you.”

Sig picked her up and hugged her. “Come on, all of you. I want to walk
clear down to the corners and have a beer with the old man. I want to
tell him something I’ve never said before—that he’s my neighbor.”

Cris helped Tillie up. “I think he stocks some real V-type halters.”

Outside, it was a greener world, and all over it the birds sang.



EXCALIBUR AND THE ATOM


IN A FACE that was a statement of strength, two deep lines formed
parentheses. They enclosed a mouth that was a big gentleness. Into the
mouth he thrust the soggy end of the pretzel stick he had been dunking
in his coffee. He grunted. The classified ad read:

_Lose something? Or maybe you want something found. Or maybe you just
want something. Convince me it exists, pay my expenses, and I’ll charge
you a fee for finding it. Hadley Guinn, HE 6-2420_.

“A hell of a way to get business,” he said to the coffee container. It
had two flyspecks and a brown stain that together looked like a grinning
rat. “Go ahead,” he growled. “Laugh.”

She came in then, straight through the waiting room into his office.
“Hadley Guinn?” She had a voice to go with olive skin, the kind with a
glow under it.

“You read signs on doors?”

“I still have to ask questions. You forgot to wear your dog-tag.” She
came forward and sat down. She moved across the floor as if she were on
tracks. She sat down as if she were folding wings.

“Have a wet pretzel?”

“Thanks, no. I just threw one away.” She regarded him evenly. She had
not smiled, she had not raised a brow or arched a nostril. She was
everything in the world that was completely composed. She was about
twenty, with blue-black hair. Her blue eyes didn’t belong with that
complexion at all. They didn’t belong with her age either. They were
wise eyes. They were ten thousand years old. She wore a black dress with
a built-on cape around her shoulders and a neckline down to here. She
used a brown-red lipstick that went with the skin but not at all with
the eyes or the dress. On her it looked fine.

“Reckon it’ll rain tomorrow?” he asked eventually.

She took the remark at face value. “Not in Barenton.”

“Where’s Barenton?”

“Sorry” she said. “Classical reference. There’s a hawthorne bush there.”

“Would that be the one you’re beating around?”

The thick lashes did not bat. “You can find anything?”

“I’m near enough to being legal to be able to handle the language,” he
said. He quoted: “ ‘Convince me it exists …’ ”

“I see. If it’s too much trouble, you’re not convinced.”

He quoted: “ ‘… pay my expenses …’ ”

“Mmm. And then the fee comes automatically.”

“When I find it. You examine more clauses than the guy who manicures for
Clyde Beatty.”

She said, deadpan, “That job really gives one pause.”

His appreciation was in his eyes and in the parentheses. He left it
there. “It was nice of you to drop in, Miss Jones.”

“Morgan,” she said.

He drained the container, crushed it, filed it in the wastebasket. He
swept the remaining pretzel sticks into the drawer. “Lunch time’s over,”
he explained. “Shall we dance?”

“Not while we have to watch our steps … What’s your special signal that
means you’re about to go to work?”

“I answer a businesslike question.”

She nodded. “Want to find something for me?”

He waited.

She said, coolly, “Want to find something for me if I convince you that
it is, and pay your expenses?”

He said nothing.

“In advance?”

“Certainly,” he said.

“Very well. I’m looking for a stone. It’s a big one—seven or eight
karats. Not a diamond. A diamond looks like a piece of putty beside it.
It glows in the dark.”

“Where is it?”

She shrugged.

“Well, is it loose, or in a ring, or what?”

“It’s on a cup. It looks like gold, but it isn’t. The cup holds about a
quart, and it has a five-sided pedestal and a five-sided foot.”

He closed his eyes, looked at the mental picture her words drew, and
said, “Got a lead?”

“There’s a man in town who almost had it once. His name’s Percival.”

Guinn reached under the desk and scratched his lower shinbone. “You mean
the Caveman?”

“That’s the man.”

“Hell. He doesn’t have any use for baubles. He doesn’t even believe in
money.”

“You meet all kinds of people,” she said gently.

“All right. I’ll go see him. What else do you know about this cup?”

“What do you want to know?”

“Where did it come from? Where was it last seen? Why do you want it?”

“No one knows where it came from. The stone is supposed to have come
from the sky. The cup was made in the Middle East more than two thousand
years ago. It’s been seen only twice, and that was too long ago to
bother about. I do know it’s been seen near here. As for why I want
it …” The wise eyes looked deep into his. “I want it very badly,” she
whispered.

The intensity of her gaze, of her voice, gave him a genuine shock. It
was the first break in her incredible composure and he hadn’t been ready
for it.

“I’ll look for it,” he said.

She stood up. “Here’s five to start with.”

He watched her open her purse. “Five? Don’t knock yourself out, Miss
Morgan.”

“There’ll be more when you need it,” she said. She put five bills down
on the desk. They were C-notes.

“It’s that important?” he asked.

“At least that important,” she said soberly.

“Guys get killed over things that important.”

“Lots of guys have gotten killed over this.” She looked at him for a
moment. “Shall I pick up those bills now?”

“Allow me,” he said graciously. He scooped them, stacked them, fingered
his smooth brown wallet out of his hip pocket and slipped the money into
it. “Now tell me more.”

She looked him straight in the eye and shook her head very slowly,
twice. Her eyes, her wise eyes, slid in their long sockets as her head
moved. “It’s your cooky, Guinn.”

He shrugged. “You’re just going to make me use up more of your expense
money. What’s your first name?”

“Morgan.”

“All right, if you don’t want to tell me. Where can I get in touch with
you?”

“For the time being,” she said coolly, “I’ll worry about that.” She
stood up. “Be careful.”

“Should I really be careful?”

“I keep telling you,” she said, “this job isn’t just difficult.” She
turned and walked out.

When she got to the outer door, he called her: “Miss Morgan!”

“Yes?”

“Goodbye.”

She set the shoulder strap of her bag and passed the doorknob from one
hand to the other as she sidled through it. “You’re so formal,” she
said, and was gone.

Guinn sat staring at the door. His face was completely impassive; he was
suddenly conscious of it, that he was imitating hers. He grunted loudly,
spread one big hand and drummed the desk top, once.

He saw the girl called Morgan crossing the sidewalk. He knew how women
walked. He’d never seen one move like this. He wondered some things
about her and then felt his wallet without taking it out. He bent it;
his sensitive fingers could feel it crackle. They were nice new bills.

He shook his head and went back to the desk. From the second drawer he
took a shoulder harness and strapped it on. In the middle drawer were
two guns. He took the dull-gray .32 and slipped the magazine out. He
ejected the shell that was in the breech, pressed it into the magazine
and, holding the cocking-piece back, twisted the breech-block and broke
the gun. He sighted the bore to the window, nodded, and deftly put the
gun together again, returning the top cartridge to the breech. He
dropped it into the holster, picked up the other gun, thought for a
moment and then put it back. It clinked. He bent, peered, palmed out a
four-fifths of rye. He sighted it exactly and as carefully as he had the
gun-bore, then put it back in the drawer.

He went to the door, felt for his keys, thumbed the spring catch. The
bolt shot out with a disapproving _tsk!_ He pulled at his square chin,
returned to the desk, opened the middle drawer again and found an unpaid
telephone bill in a well-thumbed envelope. He took out his wallet, put
three of the C-notes in with the bill, and dropped the envelope back in
the drawer. He felt the bottle staring at him, muttered, “If that’s the
way you feel,” and resentfully drank from it. There were only a couple
of fingers left. Then he went out and slammed the door behind him.

It wasn’t quite two o’clock.

There was a two-year-old station wagon on the street that looked as if
it had run two hundred thousand miles and rolled sidewise the last four.
A lean youth sat on the front fender with his feet on a fireplug. On the
pavement by the plug were four dog-eared cheesecake magazines.

Guinn asked him, “What goes, Garry? You take the pledge?”

The youth looked down at the magazines. “Those I don’t need,” he said,
and flashed a sudden, loose-lipped grin. He had clumped hair that looked
like the oozings at the top of a cotton-bale, and steel-gray eyes that
were very pale pink all around the edges. “I just seen a chick, hey. She
has hair like this, see,” and he made a motion as if he were saluting
with both hands at once, “and it’s so black it’s blue. She’s stacked
like wheatcakes, but with honey. Mostly, she’s got a face like a
pyramid.”

“You mean a sphinx.”

“Same thing. So why should I look at pictures? Hey—you know her, hey?”

Guinn reached in through the window of the station wagon and opened the
door. “A client.” He got in.

Garry trotted around the street side, grasped the window frame, and
pulled. The door opened and sagged. He got in, lifted the door and
pulled it until it latched, and tramped on the starter. The motor
responded instantly and quietly. “Yeah, huh,” said Garry
enthusiastically. “What’s she want?”

Guinn said shortly, “Just because this wagon’s a dog doesn’t mean you
have to keep it by a hydrant all the time. Let’s go.”

The car moved forward. Garry said, “Is she—”

“Take the hill road and turn off at the Spur.”

Garry nodded. “Will she—”

“I changed the subject twice,” said Guinn.

Garry tightened his lips and raised his eyebrows in a facial shrug.
Guinn sat silently, his big hands lax on his knees, his eyes on the
road.

After a time he said, “I mean that about the fireplugs.”

“Well,” said Garry, “I got to have some place to put my feet.”

“Put ’em in your pockets.”

About two miles further on Garry asked, “Now, how am I going to do that
and keep my pants on?”

The two lines at the corners of Guinn’s mouth deepened. Suddenly he
straightened. “Slow down.”

There was a girl on the road, hobbling painfully along toward them.
Guinn said, “That kid’s hurt … no; busted a heel off. Stop, Garry.”

He leaned out. “Something wrong, sister?”

She made no effort to approach the car. “I’m all right.” She wore a
strapless sun-back dress that flared out at the hips. She was a copper
blonde with angry green eyes. Her left hand clutched the top hem of the
dress; in her right she held a limp handbag made of the same purple
linen as her dress.

“The hell you are,” said Guinn. He peered at her. “Don’t I know you?
Your name’s … Lynn.”

She sighed and crossed the road shoulder. “That’s right. I deal off the
arm at Crenley’s Cafeteria. You’re that detective in the Miles
Building.”

“What’s the matter?”

The slight identification seemed to make a large difference. She came
close to the car. She wiped her brow with the back of the hand that held
the bag. “It’s real hot,” she said with a small smile, as if apologizing
for the weather. “Oh, I just guessed wrong. Day off, fellow says it’s a
nice day for a spin, get ’way out in the country, and suddenly I get an
offer. Or walk.” She shrugged, clutched tighter at her neckline. “I
walked.”

“There was some wrestling,” said Guinn.

“Uh-huh. Tore my dress, the stinker. For that I wiped off his collarbone
with his ear.

“Good.” He looked at his watch. “I don’t have much time to run you back
in. Have to spend most of the afternoon up on the Spur. But I should be
back in town before seven. You’re welcome to come along.”

She hesitated, looked down the hot, dusty road toward the town and then
at the inviting shade inside the station wagon. Then, “Why not?” she
said. “I’m off till tomorrow. Gosh, thanks, Mr. Guinn.”

He reached back and opened the door and she climbed in. Garry let in the
clutch. Lynn said, “That feels good, that breeze.”

Guinn fumbled in the glove compartment. “There ought to be—yeah—here it
is.” His hand closed on a small plastic case which he passed back to the
girl. “Sorry I don’t seem to stock your color.”

“Wh—Oh! A needle and these little rolls of thread. You are a Boy Scout!”

“Yeah, huh,” muttered Garry.

Lynn said, “Don’t look around, will you? I’m not … not wearing anything
under this, and if I’m going to sew it from the inside I’ll have to pull
it right down.”

“Go ahead,” said Guinn.

They bowled along in silence through the hot afternoon. The right-hand
wheels rumbled on the shoulder, sang again on tarmac. They rumbled
again. Guinn looked up sharply to see Garry’s eyes fixed on the
rear-view mirror. He reached up and turned it on its swivel and with the
same movement snapped his thumbnail so hard on the bridge of Garry’s
nose that tears came to the driver’s eyes. Neither man said a word, and
Lynn was apparently too busy to notice.

They turned off on the Spur road and began to climb. At the second
hairpin the blacktop ceased. At the fourth there were no more retaining
walls. At the seventh the road had yielded up its last cottage driveway
and was a two-track meander through neglected hilltop fields. In the
middle of one of these Garry stopped the car.

“More?”

“Go ahead,” said Guinn.

“You know,” said Garry resignedly, and inched over the track until the
car poked its battered snout into woods. Garry glanced at Guinn, who sat
as if in deep thought and gave no orders. The car moved through
underbrush and there, abruptly, was the track again, winding through the
woods.

“Oh, how lovely!” said Lynn.

It was certainly restful; an underwater-green light, sun-spangled in
shifting patches of gold.

“Whoa.”

There was a glitter of chrome ahead, as offensive as a belch in a
theater audience. Garry braked. Guinn stared thoughtfully at the
low-slung Town-and-Country convertible which blocked the track a hundred
shaded yards ahead, and at the gray rock outcropping beyond it. There
was a flash of white; a baby goat curvetted on the rocks, then another
and another.

“Pull ’way over,” said Guinn. “Far enough so that Chrysler can get out
if he wants to. But keep your eye on him.”

There was a sound from Lynn—a quickly checked almost-syllable. Guinn
swung around.

She was staring at the convertible, sitting bolt-upright, and her green
eyes were round. “What is it, Lynn?”

“I could be wrong, but I think that’s the—the fellow who—”

“We’ll take care of him.”

“Oh, please. I don’t want any trouble.”

Garry turned around and said jovially, “Oh, it won’t be any trouble,
miss.”

He tooled the car between the trees and got it off the road. Guinn
watched him narrowly. He’d known that combination of joviality and
slitted eyes from ’way back. “Garry—”

“I don’t like to see women pushed around,” said Garry. He switched off.

Guinn got out, closed the door, leaned his elbows on the window ledge.
“Lynn …”

She took her apprehensive eyes from the convertible. “Mmm?”

“You’ll be all right with Garry. He’s harmless. He likes to look, but
he’s afraid to touch.” He thumped Garry’s shoulder. “If anyone shoots at
you,” he told him, “try to catch the slug in your head, where it won’t
make any difference.”

Garry laughed with the same ominous cheerfulness. “How soon’ll you be
back?”

“Shortly.” He turned away and struck into the woods at about forty-five
degrees away from the road.

He worked his way carefully, keeping a constant watch on the convertible
and on the area between it and the rocks. Nothing moved. There was no
one in sight in or around the Chrysler when he drew abreast of it. He
made no attempt to get closer, but moved steadily toward the rocks. Once
he stopped and listened. He made another fifty feet and stopped again.
There was a high, thin cry, faint and close. It sounded like a
hoarse-voiced three-year-old child repeating a single vowel sound:
_Ei-ee! Ei-ee!_

He stepped into the clearing around the rocks. Out of the corner of his
eye something dark flashed out of sight around a projection in the gray
stone.

Guinn slid back into the brush and waited. He reached inside his jacket
and fingered the butt of his .32.

The black thing barely showed, disappeared again.

Hollow, faint, near, insistent came the childlike
_Ei-ee … ei-ee … ei-ee …_

Guinn lifted his gun, kicked off the safeties, crouched lower.

Explosively, the black thing leaped out into the open. Guinn’s breath
caught in his throat and he quelled the trigger reflex of his right hand
by an enormous application of will. A black goat kid pranced into the
open, ran and leapt high over some invisible obstacle created in its own
fantastically playful imagination, hit the ground with all four feet
together, back arched, head down. It gave an infantile snort and raced
away, its little hooves making astonishingly soft little sounds on the
rocks, like a cat’s feet on parquet flooring.

“Percival!” Guinn called.

_Ee-ee … ei-ee …_

From the woods came the sound of a starter. Not the station wagon, for
the motor turned over all of four times before it caught, a delay that
Garry wouldn’t stand for in anything he drove. Must be the Chrysler.

Guinn hesitated only a second, recalled that Garry was between the
Chrysler and the outside world, then stepped out into the clearing. He
heard the convertible grind into reverse, cut into low and then a
dwindling second. He shrugged and moved across to the rocks and around
them, swiftly and watchfully. Nothing moved. Somewhere a goat bleated,
and another answered.

Then there was a wide cave-mouth.

“Percival?”

No answer, except that repetitive, high-pitched cry.

Guinn ducked into the cave and sprang to one side, feeling for that
silhouetted second like a towed artillery target. A sixth sense told him
there was nothing human inside. He shut his eyes tight as if to squeeze
the residual sunlight out of them like some dazzling juice.

At last he could see. Book rack. A hard mattress on the scrupulously
leveled and swept clay floor. Goatskins. And back in the corner,
something small and white that wept and wept.

He crossed, knelt beside it. It was a newborn goat kid, a day or so old,
its wobbly and beseeching head stretched toward the light.

He patted its neck and it slapped his wrist with a tongue as rough as a
finishing rasp. Then he flicked his gaze over the cave again. He ran his
hand over the books, glanced at their titles. Krishnamurti, Malory,
Tennyson, Gibrahn, Swedenborg. White’s _The Sword in the Stone_, C.S.
Lewis’s _That Hideous Strength_. Theosophy, anthropology, _Ancient
British Landmarks_.

“Busy boy,” he muttered. He turned to the mattress, touched it.

It was wet.

He could detect, as he bent over it, the acrid not unpleasant odor of
fresh clean perspiration. He threw off the shaggy goatskin. Under it the
mattress was sopping. But this wasn’t perspiration.

It was blood.

_“Ei-ee …”_ mourned the kid.

“Hold tight, baby,” he soothed. He knelt and scrutinized the floor
carefully in the band of sunlight which streamed in through the
cave-mouth.

“Um-hm!” Blood again; a spot, a starred droplet, a smear. Once he had
seen them it was easy enough to follow them outside (“I’ll be back,
baby,” he told the kid), across the clearing, through a band of woodland
(where, on a flat rock, there was a full scarlet handprint) and into the
meadow behind the outcropping.

The goats were there, massed together like a bed of flowers, their heads
all turned toward him, their eyes like shining seeds. He stopped, and
here a head fell, and there, and one by one they began to graze
absently. But none of them wandered far from the still figure on the
grass.

He went to it and the goats fell back before him, warily and attentive.

Percival lay face downward on the grass. Guinn knew it was Percival
because of the single length of white linen wrapped around his waist,
and because of the tumbled gray shoulder-length hair. The hair had blood
on it.

He turned the body over, and Percival moaned. He wasn’t dead, and that,
under the circumstances, was a pity.

Guinn took out his carefully folded display handkerchief, shook it open,
and wiped out the blood-filled eyes. “It’s Hadley Guinn,” he said
softly. “You’ll be all right now.”

“Mo,” whispered Percival. No one could have made an ‘n’ sound from a
mouth and tongue in that condition.

“Who did it?”

Percival breathed deeply, twice, and his eyes began to glaze. Guinn
shook him, almost roughly. “You’ve got to tell me who did this to you.”
He turned the handkerchief, dabbed very gently at the tattered mouth.

Slowly the eyes regained some life. “Gwim?”

“Guinn, yes; Hadley Guinn. I’ll help you, Percival. Who did this to
you?”

“Gwim … g o o’ boy, Gwim.” He coughed. Guinn caught the blood.
“Who … fent … oo?”

Guinn closed his eyes and ran over forty possibilities. Then, “Who sent
me? Never mind that, Percival, man. Tell me, you’ve got to tell me—”

Percival tossed his head impatiently. “Who? Who?”

“All right. It was a dame called Morgan.”

The painful distortion of the wrecked mouth might have been a smile.
Percival nodded. “Gh-h-issen …”

Guinn translated this as listen … “I’m listening, Percival,” he said
softly.

Percival’s gnarled hand came up, pointed. The sharp old index finger dug
into his knee to punctuate the crippled, halting speech. “… Hynd guh
ghuid umgh-ozhiush …”

Watching those tortured eyes, Guinn felt grief and panic mount. He
tried. He tried desperately hard. “Wait: you say
hy … hie … fi … _find_ … guh … duh … the? _The. Find the_. Find the
what, Percival?”

“Ghuid … Dhuid …”

“Doo-id? D … Druid?” Is it _Druid_, Percival?”

Percival nodded weakly, rapidly. His hand patted Guinn’s knee as if in
vast approval. “Um … amgh-ozhiush.”

“Amgh … Amgrozihi-ess …”

Percival spread his hand in a helpless gesture. Guinn said, “Was that
close? Is that almost it, Percival? _Amghrozhi-ess?_”

Percival nodded weakly. Guinn could all but see his soul leaving his
body. “Who did it? Who, Percival—who?”

“M-m-m …”

“Please, please … try.”

“Mugh-gug.”

“Mur … murdered. Murdered. Yes, Percival—who did it?”

“M-m-m …”

Guinn put the great head down softly and stood up. He hurt. He hurt away
down inside where his roiling anger lived—way under anything he could
control.

He hurt enough to measure his wonderment when as a kid with a dog he had
run into Percival and his goats; when he used to sit in the cave and
hear that great rolling voice tell tales of ancient times, and the gods
men worshipped when the world was younger, when faith had the place that
knowledge has now. There were great tales of the future, too, when the
reverence now given knowledge will be replaced by understanding.

He hurt enough to measure his delight when Percival would gravely give
him his choice of goat’s milk or turnip juice to drink, and when the
hermit gave him a great white ram’s skin for his own. (It lay over the
foot of his bed to this day.)

He hurt enough to measure his shame when as an enlightened teenager he
had been part of a gang that went up to jeer and throw mud at the
“nekkid looney.” (For Percival lived naked in the warm weather and in
goat-skins in the cold, always courteously donning his strip of linen
when anyone came by.) They’d taken pictures and had themselves a hell of
a laugh over it; and Guinn couldn’t live with it and went up to
apologize, and the hermit greeted him as a friend.

Percival was part of the mountain—part of the world. He was part of a
very real world of rocks and flowers, wind and winter and eternal
wildness—a world on which chrome and neon and nuclear energy and power
politics grew like acne on a great calm face. He had never done harm to
a living soul. He had never sought a human being out nor turned one
away. He was on the mountain when Guinn was born and he should have been
there when Guinn died, because he was part of the eternity that every
man should have, somewhere, to turn to when he needs it.

Something died and was born in Guinn as he stood looking down at the
great torn face. “Take care of him,” he said to the goats. “I’ll send
somebody up …”

From the cave the kid cried and cried.

“Oh, yes, baby. You’ve got it just right.”

He scooped up a startled nanny and headed for the cave. As he reached
the entrance he heard a shot from the woods.

“Sorry, lady,” he said. He flung the nanny through the cave-mouth with
one fluid sweep of his two arms, hoping against hope that she and the
kid would get together, and sprinted for his car.

As he passed the place where the Chrysler had been parked there was
another shot, and the moan of the Town-and-Country’s motor. He pounded
up to the station wagon just in time to see the convertible break
through the underbrush and disappear into the meadow.

Lynn was gone. Garry lay beside the car. There was a hole in the side of
his head and another at the back, and he was very bloody.

Guinn was around at all largely because he had the knack of selecting
priorities among simultaneous emergencies, and because, having been born
with the knack, he’d spent most of his life developing it.

When he knelt beside Garry’s body he knew he had feelings about it, but
he filed them away for later. The priority he noticed immediately was a
smell and a sound; a steady trickle of liquid on dead leaves, and the
acrid fumes of gasoline.

He dropped to his belly and looked under the car. A stream of gas the
size of a pencil lead was flowing out of the tank. He pulled himself up
by a doorhandle, opening the door as he moved, scooped up the rear seat
and got a folding bucket from under it, and ran around to shove it under
the tank. He felt the hole, a jagged oval rip cut by a .32 or something
larger.

“Don’t go away,” he said to Garry.

He opened the right rear door, pulled at the scarred upholstery. It came
off its snap-fasteners with a sound like teeth going into peanut
brittle. In the shallow space between upholstery and the outer panel
were row on row of parts, neatly clipped with spring clamps. There were
spark plugs, three spare distributor caps, ignition wire and a number of
other things that it’s better to have and not need than need and not
have.

Guinn’s hands were a blur. He found what he was looking for:
spider-expansion bolts and washers, and a screwdriver. He dove under the
car, slipped the bolt through the washer and a gasket, and forced the
bolt into the hole in the tank. He spun it with the screwdriver with a
palm-on-palm technique he had learned in his wartime stretch in an
aircraft factory, until the spider inside spread and the washer seated
tightly over the hole. The he wrenched off the tank cap and slopped in
the fuel which had been caught in the bucket.

The whole operation had taken somewhat over ninety seconds.

Guinn hurled the bucket, screwdriver and upholstered panel into the back
of the station wagon. He lifted Garry swiftly and gently and spread him
out on the seat behind the driver’s. There were cargo straps. He whipped
one around Garry’s chest, one around his thighs, and cinched them down.
He took one precious moment to touch the youth’s head with big,
sensitive fingers, feeling carefully between the two holes. He pursed
his lips worriedly, slid under the wheel and kicked the motor over. A
patient rear fender took yet another wound-stripe as he slithered the
car around, caromed off a tree, and headed out. He leaned forward, his
hands placed lightly at “ten and two” like a racing driver’s. He let the
wheel shimmy through his fingers, and he drove.

Two shots. Garry got one. The gas tank got the other. The man who had
cut up Percival’s face had Lynn. Hadley Guinn was out to get that man.

On the third hairpin turn he craned over the edge as his wheels kicked
stones out into space. Down below him he saw a dust cloud. He let his
foot give four more ounces to the accelerator.

On the fourth turn he actually saw the convertible taking the last
straightaway into the Spur road. Guinn groaned. He had two more hairpins
to negotiate.

Or had he? The road zig-zagged down the mountain face, but that didn’t
necessarily mean he had to …

This far down the hill, the grade flattened out. From this stretch there
was about a four-to-one slope to the road below. From that road the
grade was a mere thirty degrees or so.

“So what the hell,” he growled, and pulled on the wheel.

For an endless second he had strictly a bird’s-eye view all across the
windshield. Then the front end came swooping downward. There was a nasty
crunch as the road shoulder ground into the muffler pipe under the car’s
center of gravity, and then he was off the road, headed down the slope.

There wasn’t time to think. There was just time to fight. He locked the
brakes when the machine would slide straight, let it roll when it wanted
to turn. He diddled the brakes and outguessed the wheel. A small
avalanche accompanied him, and a rising cloud of dust joined hands with
the growing dusk to make seeing tough.

Then the front wheels hit the shallow ditch of the next level of the
switchback road. There was a harrowing snap as the bumper bulldozed into
the ditch and broke off, and then the car was slanting across the road
and down again off the other side. The underside took another blow,
though not as severe this time, as the car levered over the edge. And
once more the nightmare of rolling too fast and not sliding straight
enough.

There was no appreciable ditch at the bottom, and it was a blacktop
road. Guinn hauled the wheel over and the rubber screamed as he gunned
down the Spur road. Looking across country he could see the convertible
streaking along the township highway that would take it across the river
and into the city.

Guinn bore down to the floor, and the station wagon laid its ears back
and went. With it, it carried an unholy din of scraping metal which
suddenly ceased as the muffler and exhaust stack tore loose and
skittered into the ditch. The car bellowed with an open throat. Guinn
nodded grimly. Made to order; he could crowd six or seven miles more per
hour out of the old dog without that manifold back pressure.

He took the turn into the township road altogether too fast, and had the
rear end into and out of the ditch on the far side of the turn. And then
he was on the straightaway, and with the convertible a distant beetle
ahead of him. He glanced back at the mountain, grinned tightly as he saw
the long scar of his tracks straight down its naked face. He’d gotten a
half-mile jump on the Chrysler by short-circuiting those two hairpins.

He checked ahead for traffic and then twisted to look back at Garry. The
youth lay limp and pale in his straps. The bleeding seemed to have
stopped for the time being. Guinn prayed that his probing fingers had
been right.

Glancing ahead again, he felt a leap of joy as he saw that he was
gaining on the convertible. Traffic was light, happily, and there was
nothing between him and the other car. He pulled out the choke lever a
tiny fraction and did his best to put his foot through the floorboards.
He took his right hand off the wheel, fingered his gun out of its
holster and wedged it between his right buttock and the seat.

Suddenly he stiffened, peered. The convertible was just about to gain
the bridge, which carried the road on its own level as steep banks fell
to the water below. And at the other end of the bridge, coming toward
them, was the great hulking mass of a lowboy trailer carrying a
fifty-ton power shovel. The bridge was wide enough for two lanes of
ordinary traffic, but getting the Chrysler past it was going to be a
trick.

He saw a single flicker of the convertible’s brake lights, and then its
driver apparently decided to bull through. Guinn saw the lowboy tractor
lumbering as far over to his side of the bridge as it could, and the
trailer reluctantly following. The swelling sides of the shovel’s cab
bulged far over the center-line of the roadway.

The brake lights flared again. The convertible would clear the tractor
and probably the side of the shovel, but the rear end of the trailer was
still slightly angled across the road.

The convertible braked, and braked again, and each time a huge bite was
taken out of the distance between Guinn and his quarry. He was less than
two hundred feet behind when it happened.

The Chrysler found its opening and hurtled through. It must have nipped
the back corner of the lowboy the lightest of touches, and it was all
but scraping the guard rail on the right. In that split second the
right-hand door of the Chrysler opened. It was rear-hinged door; the
wind flipped it wide. Its edge struck the guard rail and broke it
off—and a slim figure in purple rose in the air and arched over the
rail.

“Lynn!”

In the same instant he had to wrench his wheel right, then left to get
through the same gap, a blessed inch or two wider now as the trailer
straightened out on its side of the roadway. It had all happened so fast
that the lowboy crew probably saw none of it, except two cars driving
too damn fast.

Now Guinn _really_ had a priority to choose.

He could go after his man and run him to earth—with the idea that Lynn
might be hurt—drowned or crushed—in that wild leap over the rail. Or he
could swing right at the end of the bridge, where an underpass connected
with the River Road, and try to save her—knowing that the Chrysler would
be miles away.

He peered at the license plate and knew he wouldn’t forget it. He
realized, too, that with Lynn out of the Chrysler, half his reason for
catching it was gone. Of course, catching Percival’s murderer was reason
enough, but—

He cursed, and as he swept off the end of the bridge, pulled right. The
convertible arrowed ahead.

Down under the first pier of the bridge, Guinn pulled up. He glanced
worriedly at Garry. “You’ll just have to wait, son,” he murmured.

He slipped his gun back in its holster and ran down to the water’s edge.
His first searching look was upward, at the roadway above. There was no
sign of a body on the rail or on the second pier, seventy-five feet or
so out in the river. She’d fallen clear, then. And on the upstream side.
And then he saw her—the merest glimpse of water-darkened copper blonde
hair, the flash of an arm against the brown stone of the pier.

He kicked off his shoes, shoved his gone in one and his wallet in the
other, ran down a flight of stone boat-landing steps and plunged into
the river.

He swam strongly out to the pier, wondering how he could have been so
stupid as to have left his jacket on, figuring what the hell, it was a
tropical and not very unwieldy; no point wasting it now. He gained the
pier almost under the bridge, for the current ran fairly strongly here.
He pulled himself up on its platform-like surface, which was only a foot
or so above water level, and walked squishily to the upstream end.

She was there, clinging weakly to the stone, breathing in deep gasps.
When she saw him she yelped. “Oh!” She took in some water, coughed
violently. He knelt and grasped her wrist.

The coughing subsided. “Mr. Guinn …” She pushed her hair back. One side
of her face and one shoulder were scarlet. “I didn’t … see you come up.
I was … just getting my wind back … before I … tried to make … the
bank.”

“Are you all right?”

“Oh, sure, except I … hit awful hard … I’m—Mr. Guinn, I’m mother naked!”

“That was a smart move.”

“It wasn’t a move! Strapless dress and no bra and … when I hit I just
skinned right out of it! Shoes and all … Even my … Oh, this is awful!”

“I’ve got news for you,” said Guinn, his eyes twinkling. “I’ve seen the
like before.”

“I’m terribly sorry about it,” she said surprisingly. “But … I got away
from him, didn’t I?”

“That you did. Don’t talk now. Get your wind back and I’ll give you a
tow in. We’ve got to get to a hospital, but quick.”

“Hospital? I’m—”

“Not you. Garry.”

“He’s—he’s dead!”

“Not him. The slug slipped in under his temple and skinned around his
big thick skull and came out over his ear, near the back. Concussion,
maybe, but I don’t think there’s a fracture.”

“Oh, come on.” She turned immediately shoreward with long competent
strokes.

Guinn let her get out into the stream and then dove after her, coming up
a little ahead. He swam with a side-stroke, watching her. She suddenly
coughed again.

“Thought it was too soon,” he said. “Float.”

“Oh, I’m all—”

“Float,” he said. Submissively, she did. He got a hand under her chin
and towed her, his long legs supplying a powerful scissor kick, his free
hand gathering armloads of distance. Lynn lay back, completely relaxed,
filling her lungs gratefully. Again the current carried them downstream
a little way and they had to work their way up the stone embankment to
the landing.

“Please go ahead,” she said. “I’m not prissy, but—”

“Don’t fret,” he said kindly. He scrambled up the steps and went to
where he had left his shoes. Lynn hesitated, then ran up the steps and
started toward the car, which was parked out of sight of the riverside
roadway under the bridge. She was perhaps halfway there when there was a
flash and a roar from the road. A heavy calibre slug nicked a small
sapling at Lynn’s elbow. She squeaked.

“This way,” snapped Guinn. “Jump!”

She ran to him; he motioned her past so that the first bridge pier was
between her and the source of the shots. Guinn dropped back to the stone
steps, backed down them until he had cover.

It was growing dark as reluctantly as any early summer night will.
Guinn’s eyes passed the car parked on the other side of the River Road
twice before he noticed it looming in the shadow of a dogwood tree.

It was the Chrysler.

He took careful aim and snapped two shots at it. There was a distinctly
audible gasp, then a moan. Guinn sprinted toward it. A bullet struck the
ground at his feet and another tugged at his sleeve. He fired and hit
the dirt. Before he could so much as raise his head the starter
whinnied, the motor caught, and the car moved off. It turned and sped up
the ramp to the bridge level. Guinn fired once more, stood fuming for a
moment, and then went back to the girl. She was flattened against the
river side of the pier.

“It’s okay now,” he said. He turned and went to the station wagon. She
followed. “Was that my ardent swain?” she asked in a shaken voice.

He got in the car and opened the other door for her. “It was.” He took
off his jacket, wrung it out over the ground, shook it, and handed it
across to her. She put it over her shoulders and climbed in. “He must
have had an attack of second thought. Wondered if you had killed
yourself or not. Came back to see. You showed up nicely against the dark
river. He couldn’t see the station wagon, and didn’t notice me in this
brown suit. It must have been a big surprise to him to get lead thrown
back at him. Who is he, anyway?”

“I don’t know him, really. His name’s Mordi. He came into the—”

“Morty?”

“Mordi. He came into the hash house a few times. Dark. Dresses well.
Very quiet.” She shuddered. “I’ll look out for those quiet ones after
this. Steel traps … dynamite sticks … they’re nice and quiet, un_-til.”_

He started the motor, backed, turned, and got onto the River Road. She
said suddenly, “Mr. Guinn …”

“Mmm?”

She hesitated. Then, “Mind if I take this off again? You’ll think I’m
terrible, but it’s so clammy. And it’s warm this evening and somehow it
doesn’t seem to matter. Though I don’t know how I’ll ever get out of the
car in town.”

“Go ahead,” said Guinn. “It’s getting dark. The passing parade will
think you’re still in that strapless job. You’re right—it matters as
much as or as little as you let it. When we get to the hospital I’ll see
if there isn’t a nurse’s uniform I can swipe for you.”

She peeled off the jacket and draped it over the seat between them. She
crossed her arms and rubbed her shoulders for a moment, then sat
demurely with her hands on her lap.

He said, “You took a hell of a chance with that high-dive.”

“Not so much,” she said. “I used to swim there a lot. The channel’s real
deep between the bank and that second pier, and I knew that. I noticed
the way that car door opened when I was with him this afternoon. I knew
it would slam wide open if I just opened it a little and I was waiting
my chance. When he had to swing so near the rail to pass that
trailer—that was it. I got my feet under me and dove right off the seat.
I used to go off there all the time. It’s forty-two feet,” she added.

“At about forty-two miles an hour, just then,” he said: “Lucky you
didn’t break your back.”

“Well, I didn’t.”

He glanced at her admiringly. “Do you have to work at that hash-house?”

“It’s a job.”

“You’ve got a better one if you want it.”

“With you? Do you mean it?”

“Yup.”

“Oh, I’d love it. I’d just love it.”

A conquest, thought Guinn.

She said, “I could maybe see him every day.”

“See who?”

“Garry.”

Not my conquest, he thought, and allowed himself one of his rare grins.
“He’s a good kid.”

“He’s the bravest man I’ve ever known! Why, when that man came up out of
the woods like that …”

“Tell me about it.”

“I was a little afraid of him at first, Garry I mean,” she said. “The
way he was looking at me. Then he started to talk. I never heard anybody
talk the way he does. Not as if I was a girl. Just as if I was … well,
people. About the car and you and jet aircraft and banana cream pie and
the National League. It was …” She paused. “Anyway, we heard the other
car start. Garry put a hand on my arm and said not to worry. That was
all, just ‘Don’t worry.’ I wish I could tell you how—safe—it made me
feel.

“The car came up, and sure enough it was him—Mordi, the man I’d been
riding with before I met you. He looked out at us and then stopped his
car. He leaned out for a long time and looked at me and at Garry and the
station wagon, and then he got out and came up to us. I never saw such
cold eyes on a human being in my life, and they shouldn’t be, they’re
not the right color to be so cold.

“Garry got out and they stood looking at each other. Finally Mordi said,
‘Nobody cuts in on me, cottonhead.’

“Garry said, ‘Beat it, cottonmouth. Nothing around here belongs to you.’

“So the man said to me, ‘He’s so wrong, ain’t he, sugar?’

“And I said, ‘He’s so right.’

“He came up close, then, and told me I was going back with him. I just
shook my head. Then Garry said, ‘That’ll do for now, tailor-dummy.
Goodbye again.’ And he reached inside his jacket. When he did that,
Mordi pulled out a gun and shot him in the head.”

Guinn’s eyes seemed to get smaller. “Garry never carries a gun,” he
said. “I’ll have to tell him some things about raising on a three-card
straight.”

“He’s too honest to get away with a bluff,” said Lynn.

“Oh,” said Guinn. The smile appeared again.

Lynn said, “He reached in and got my wrist. I didn’t know he was going
to pull so hard, so suddenly. He hauled me out and I was flat on my face
before I knew what was happening. Then he hit me.” She put her hand
behind her neck, stroked. “I guess I went out, and I didn’t come to all
at once, either. Everything was sort of dreamy for the longest time.”

“I know that punch,” said Guinn.

“I was in his car,” she continued. “He wasn’t. I heard another shot. I
remember thinking he must have gone back to finish Garry. Or maybe you.”

“Shot a hole in my gas tank,” said Guinn.

“Oh. Well, before I was completely out of it, we were charging down the
hill. He drove very fast. He laughed at me. He’s crazy … what’d he want
to kill a man over me for?”

“I don’t want to take a compliment away from a lady,” said Guinn, “but
it wasn’t over you. He killed somebody up there, and we were the only
ones who’d seen him around. He knew what he was doing. That’s why he
came back just now to make sure you were out of the running. He seems
to’ve missed me altogether. I guess while I was catfooting over toward
the rocks on one side, he was sneaking back on the other.

She shuddered. “He laughed at me,” she said. “He-he touched me, too.”

“I’ll speak to him about that sometime soon,” said Guinn.

The county hospital was just outside the city limits, across the highway
from forest land. It was quite dark when they reached it. Guinn pulled
up across the road from the big brick pylons which flanked the entrance
to the hospital drive.

“Out,” he said.

She looked at him, wide-eyed. “What?”

He chuckled. “Cheer up. I’m not pulling a Mordi on you. Has it occurred
to you that I’ve got to drive up to the emergency ward, floodlights and
all, and that a couple of interns will be out to tote Garry in? Of
course, I could explain that I’m helping you home from a floating crap
game where you lost your shirt …”

She opened the door. “Hurry back,” she said.

He watched her cross the road shoulder and enter the woods. He shrugged
into his damp jacket. It was clammy, but would cover his holster. Then
he pulled into the drive. He turned at the parking court, wondering
about the mental processes of landscapers who built graceful curves into
a road which so often would have life or death at the end of it, and
swung in under the brightly-lit port-cochere.

A grizzled guard hobbled over to him, peered. “Had Guinn! Back again?”

“With a customer. Get a couple of butchers out here with a stretcher,
will you, Jerry?”

He followed the old man in and went over to the registration window.
“Hello, Cheryl.”

A blonde woman with a face like the most comfortable of sofa pillows
looked up through the glass. When she saw him she smiled. It was like
the kind of lamplight that goes with that kind of pillow. “Hadley!”

“I brought Garry in,” he said bluntly. “Someone creased his head.”

She rose. “Is he—”

“Doesn’t look too bad. But I’d like to know right away. I’m on a case.
Will you take care of the gunshot report for me?”

“Oh, yes.” She got out the form, slid it through to him.

He signed it on the bottom line. “One more thing. I know you people do
the best you can, but I’d like you to think up something even better for
Garry. Whatever he needs, hear? I mean anything.”

He got his wallet out and thumbed through its inside compartment. An
expression of almost stupid astonishment slackened his features.

Cheryl said, “What is it, Hadley? You been robbed?”

“No …” His eyes came back to earth. “No, Cheryl, I should say not.” He
pulled bills out of the wallet.

C-notes. Five of them.

He closed his eyes. There was that center drawer of his desk. In it, the
telephone company’s envelope. In the envelope, three of the C-notes the
Morgan chick had given him. Five minus three left two. There ought to be
two hundred in the wallet. There were five.

“What is it, Hadley?”

He looked at her. “Just trying to figure out whether or not I’d tipped a
waiter. Here.” He slid two of the bills through the hole. They settled
to her disk like a couple of pigeons on a roof. That’s extra, over the
bill. I got more.”

“You don’t have to—”

“I do have to. I just want to know he’s a bit more than all right.
Uh … you don’t have to talk to him about it.”

She smiled. “The way you treat him, he thinks you hate him.” She picked
up the money.

“So he keeps on trying hard to make me happy. If he thought I was happy,
why should he bother?”

“You’re a softy, Hadley Guinn.”

“You’re a pretty hard character yourself.” He winked at her. “Oh.
Cheryl—”

“Yes, Had.”

“Can you dredge me up a nurse’s uniform? Not the starched job—one of
those lab wraparounds.”

“What on earth for?”

“My Sunday school’s putting on a pageant,” he explained. “I’m to be
Florence Nightingale.”

“Idiot. What size?”

“About Miss Roark and a half.” Miss Roark was the trim one in the
super’s office.

“Sure, Hadley.” She went through a door at the back of the office. Guinn
turned. They were bringing Garry in. He looked very white. Guinn
followed the interns into the receiving ward. A tired man with wakeful
eyes waved the interns toward an examining table. “Hello, Jim.”

The doctor thumped his shoulder. “Good to see you. That’s your Number
One boy, isn’t it? Garry what’s-his-name?”

“Yeah. Can you give me a verdict quickly. I got to go.”

“What happened to him?”

The doctor bent over Garry’s head while Guinn told him. Then he rolled
Garry’s lids back, peered at the eyes. He put on his stethoscope and
prodded around with it.

“He might need a transfusion. Concussion possibly. Shock certainly. He
might have trouble with the hearing on that side for a while. He’s a
lucky boy.”

“How long will the transfusion take me?”

“No time at all. Not for you, Guinn. He’s Type B, you’re A. Don’t worry
about it. We have lots in the bank. You won’t do.”

“You can tell by my astral vibrations?”

The doctor laughed. “I can tell by memory. The last time you two gave
blood for the Red Cross he asked me what your blood type was, and swore
a blue streak when he found out his was different. He thought he might
be useful to you some time.”

“Hell.” Guinn looked at the still face. “Take care of him, Jim.”

“Sure.” He bent over the patient again. Guinn read that one casual
syllable all the way through, and in it found what sort of care Garry
was going to get. He said, “Thanks, Jim,” and went out.

Cheryl was waiting for him with a neatly folded paper package.
“Hadley …”

“Oh, thanks, Cheryl. The uniform.” He took it.

She said, “I think I ought to tell you. There was someone here today
boning through the hospital records. Yours especially.”

“Looking for what? That bone operation?”

She shook her head. “That’s in the journals—how they picked a .44 slug
piece by piece out of your bone marrow. No, Hadley, the birth records.”

His face went absolutely expressionless. “Who was it?”

“A girl. A really beautiful girl.”

“Probably from a matrimonial agency trying to answer some maiden’s
prayer. What kind of authority did she have?” Cheryl recoiled at the way
the last words grated out. Guinn touched her shoulder. “Sorry. Well?”

“She had identification from the State Census. Strictly kosher. I just
thought you ought to know.” Her eyes were very soft. “Hadley, it makes
more difference than it should to you. Not the investigator. You know.”

“My birth records. Yes, I know. Maybe it does. It makes a difference to
any of us.” He looked down at the package, crinkled the paper. “Hey, I
got to get out of here. Thanks for everything, Cheryl.”

“For nothing, honey. Hadley, I won’t ask you about your business, but if
you’ve got to go near any more gun fights, let’s not have any more
hospital cases on your side. Hm?”

He went to the door, waved. “I’ll be good.” She cared. She gave a damn.
It’s fine to know somebody gives a damn. “By the way, what was the name
of the nosy chick?”

Cheryl said, “Morgan.”

Hadley steered through the pylon-guarded entrance, wheeled across the
highway, and stopped. He waited.

Nothing happened.

He slid across the seat and peered into the black wall of the forest.
Nothing.

He got back behind the wheel. He lit a cigarette. That took a little
time. He opened the package, wadded up the paper and tossed it back over
the seat, unfolded the crisp white dress and draped it over the seat
next to him. That took some time too.

She didn’t come.

He uttered a sudden snort of disgust. Of course! The lights. He shifted,
angled the car close in to the ditch, and shut off the lights and motor.

It was very quiet out there. The forest slept, but for all its sleep it
was alive with little creaks and whisperings. He climbed out, and
something made him close the door very quietly.

There was no wind. Somewhere a train uttered a two-toned cry, and the
mountains threw it back like a wailing wall. The hospital was a
gold-checkered garment tossed carelessly on a hassock, with the checks
showing randomly back, up, across. The emergency entrance blazed
defiantly at the patient blackness, and from the whole structure came a
hum of power; machines turning, water running, life flowing, coming in,
going out.

The woods had their low, live sound, too, but it was at odds with the
hospital and everything it represented. The forest had its light, too.

It took Guinn a while to see the light, because his pupils were still
tensed from the brilliance of the receiving ward. It was not firelight,
and it wasn’t a flashlight. It looked like the third or fourth
reflection of a welder’s arc, but without an arc’s flicker. Nor was it
steady, like a magnesium flare; it waxed and waned irregularly, like the
sound of a crowd at a prize fight. And it was very, very dim.

Guinn hesitated. Had Lynn seen the light? Probably. She had been very
alone and very watchful, crouching naked in the dark. Had she then gone
to investigate? It could be. She had more guts than most regiments. If
he went in there, he might miss her. If she got to the car and he wasn’t
there, would she wait for him?

What else?

He reached in the window, got his keys out of the ignition and the dress
from the front seat. His clothes were still damp, but the night was very
warm. He folded the dress and tucked it inside his jacket, on the right
side. Then he headed for the brush.

The thicket just over the ditch was like an ancient boxwood, tangled and
impenetrable. He cast to the right until he found what looked like an
opening. He had to fight the branches, and he did so quietly. He got
through, and found himself in a patch of wood that was very like virgin
forest—a solid roof overhead and very little underbrush. He could see
the light much better now, waxing and waning through the stark trunks.
The going was good, and the possibility of Lynn’s being back here made a
lot more sense. The first thing she would have done would be to get
through the hedge; after that, the light must have beckoned her
strongly.

He forged ahead, unconsciously taking on the sliding stride of a natural
woodsman, finding and avoiding projecting roots and rocks. His eyes were
wide; he felt that an infrared picture would show his pupils almost as
big as his irises. Bigger, maybe. His lips twitched at the fantastic
thought, and he switched it out of his mind.

He began to hear the voice.

There is a passage in Ravel’s _Bolero_ where the composer, either
through a thorough scientific knowledge of vibratory physics or
instinctively, under the guidance of his trained ears, gives the great
droning solo theme to the clarinet, and adds a piccolo part. That
piccolo, on paper, is sheer nonsense. It plays the same theme at the
same intervals, but in a different and totally unrelated key. It makes
almost as little sense on the piano. Orchestrated, it creates one of the
most astonishing effects known to music. Its compulsion, as it restates
the already hypnotic theme, is indescribable—and largely a function of
the psychological susceptibilities of the listener. In acoustical terms,
what is happening is that the clarinet, more than most instruments,
projects harmonics with its basic tone. Ravel’s amazing treatment uses a
piccolo, which is very stingy with its overtones, to reinforce the
usually inaudible fifth harmonic of the clarinet. The effect is that of
a new voice, never heard before, speaking with the familiar tones of a
friend.

This little-known piece of musicology flashed through Guinn’s mind as he
heard the voice. The analogy was an exact one, for that was precisely
what was happening, except that the voice which stated the basic tone
was something more than human. It was certainly a single voice, but it
had the quality of a great many ranges, from the highest tenor to the
most shattering _basso profundo_, all speaking in unison. The second
voice, the one pitched in a disharmony that served to reinforce a single
one of the qualities of the main voice—that second one was familiar. In
the rare moments that his acute ear could tune it away from its
accompanying diapason, Guinn knew that he had heard those full, high,
sweet tones before.

Something began to bother him. He had moved forward a hundred feet
before he realized what it was. His legs; the voice; the light—they were
meshing too closely in their movements. Furiously, he identified it; he
was walking in time to a beat which was created by the sound and the
changing light. Not that they changed with any predictable regularity.
Far from it. But as if they were part of some incredibly complex,
rigidly fixed ritual, they touched and fled from and syncopated a basic
beat—a beat faster than a quiet heart, forcefully held slower than a
frightened and guarded one. He broke stride, fiercely defending his
independence.

The light seemed to have its source in a circular area of the forest
floor, and the voice was born somewhere in the light. The ground rose
gently as he walked; suddenly, then, he saw it all.

There was a dip in the forest, a saucer-like depression thirty yards or
so across. As he reached its lip, the entire scene below was revealed to
him, suddenly, completely, as if a great curtain had parted.

A tremendous oak stood in the center of the depression. Its mighty
spread had waned off anything but moss that had tried to grow around it,
so that there was a smooth clearing around it. Standing at its base was
the biggest man Guinn had ever seen.

He was standing in the clearing, his face upturned, his arms out toward
the oak. He looked like an old oak himself. His skin was dark brown, his
face gnarled, his arms knotted and powerful. They stretched out like
winter limbs from the dazzlingly white sleeveless robe which covered him
from his shoulders to his bare feet. The light-source was his robe, and
his lips were the source of the great voice.

Behind him knelt Lynn, sitting on her heels, with her back arched and
her hands on the ground behind her. Her head was up, her tangled, fine
hair thrown back. Her teeth shone and her eyes blazed. Her lips moved.
The second, harmonic voice was hers, in its highest register. It was
modulated exactly to his magnificent chanting; she spoke so perfectly in
concert with him that they might both have been controlled by the same
mind, like two pipes of an organ under the knowing hand of a master.

The chant at first seemed wordless. Guinn slowly realized it was not. It
was a series of syllables, most of them long drawn vowel sounds without
diphthongs, like those in an Irish brogue. They were separated by
unearthly consonants, staccato and clean. The language was like nothing
he had ever heard, but it was good to listen to.

He stood there for uncounted moments, forgetting to breathe, completely
entranced. There was an intensity to the light which changed with the
quality of the sounds, and there was a quality to the light which
changed with the sounds’ pitch. It was a thing which had to be
experienced to be understood, and once that understanding occurred, it
was inexpressible.

The huge dark man dropped one of his massive hands to the wide white
belt that was clasped around his waist. From it he drew a long, slightly
curved dagger that gleamed like gold. He held it point upward in both
hands. Guinn followed his gaze, and saw that it was pointed at a cluster
of dark green leaves and white berries on the tree-trunk. The dagger
began to move upward toward it.

This, later, was the most inexplicable thing of all to Guinn. For at no
time did the man change his position. He did not lose his grasp on the
knife; he kept both hands on its hilt. The tree did not move. Yet—

The knife went out and up, slowly and steadily. It reached the trunk of
the oak, turned and sliced off the clump of glossy green. The man,
standing twenty feet away from the tree, had bridged the gap between him
and a growth twelve feet from the ground. His arms had not stretched; in
no way did he seem out of proportion. In fact, the movement seemed
utterly right. Guinn felt that he had seen a movement in a new
direction, and that he could not be surprised. He seemed to have known
of that direction for a long time but never had bothered to look that
way before.

The plant fell. One of the great brown hands was there before it, caught
it, laid it on the moss before the knotted feet.

Then the man turned, stood facing outward, away from the tree. Lynn’s
body turned as he turned, and now she knelt with her back toward him,
her arms down, her long slim hands palm-upward on the ground.

Guinn’s eyes flicked to the hand holding the knife, to the smooth white
back bowed before him. He reached into his left armpit and eased the .32
out.

Shockingly, the chant stopped. The silence was deafening, unbearable.
The light was unchanging, muted. There was a great expectancy in the
wood.

He looked around the clearing. So compelling had been the tableau by the
oak that he hadn’t taken in the edges of the scene at all.

The bushes around the depression looked as if they were filled with
rhinestones—with emeralds, rubies—with … _eyes!_

And they were eyes. The low branches held silent birds, their little
heads turned sidewise so that one eye could take in the scene. From a
tree-fork at his shoulder hung the luxuriously dressed form of a
raccoon, which stared fixedly at the big man. Guinn looked down. What he
had thought was a small stump was a fox, not six feet away from him. Its
black, wet nose tossed delicate spangles of light as it pressed its head
down and forward toward the oak. On the ground in front of it—almost
between its paws—was a chipmunk, staring brightly, and holding its deft
small hands together in frozen ecstasy.

There was a deep crooning. Guinn looked back at the dark man. He had not
moved, but the sound came from him. And Lynn’s high, sweet supplement
was there too; he could see the flexing of her ribcage as she drew
breath between the mesmeric phrases.

Something moved at the lip of the depression, forty-five degrees across
from Guinn’s viewpoint, and directly in front of Lynn.

One … no, two big brown rabbits came toward her. They did not hop. They
moved belly-down, like stalking cats. It affected Guinn almost more than
anything else had. The animals were in the throes of some strange
supplication, and their completely uncharacteristic gait caused a deep
pain in him somewhere.

They reached the girl, and lay down, one across each of her hands. She
lifted them. They drooped, motionless except for their hind legs, which
were taut, stiff, quivering in rapid spasm.

Still singing, Lynn rose to her feet and brought the rabbits to the big
man. Guinn realized how big he was. Lynn was a tall girl, but her head
barely reached the level of the man’s heart. The rabbits were large
ones—eight- or nine-pound jacks; but both, lying side by side, barely
covered the huge dark hand from thumb-base to fingertips.

Holding both rabbits in one hand, the man turned to face the tree again.
Lynn was suddenly silent. The man shouted four crackling syllables, and
with a single sweep of his golden dagger, sliced off the rabbits’ heads.

The muscles of Guinn’s jaw crackled audibly. He became conscious of a
long-forgotten fact—that his automatic was in his right hand. He raised
it, took the barrel in his left, held it while he released the cramped
right fingers and flexed them until he felt they could be trusted. Then
he grasped the molded grip again, got his index finger under the guard.

The big man was moving now, holding the twitching bodies downward. Dark
blood was spouting, and with it he was sprinkling the roots of the tree.
As Guinn brought his gun hand up, the man disappeared around the tree.

The huge shadow of the tree moved opposite the light source, sweeping
across the clearing like a monstrous hand brushing away flies. And at
its touch the animals scattered like flies, an approaching, passing,
receding wave of squeaks and squawks, whimpers, growls, hoots and
rustlings. Behind the passing shadow the tree-limbs moved and their
leaves fluttered, and the underbrush whipped and thrashed. Before it,
the forest was spangled with the gleaming of their fixed eyes.

Then the big man rounded the trunk, still holding the carcasses. Their
blood dripped now instead of spurting, and he held them close to the
roots and moved slowly.

When his circuit was completed he stopped, dropped the rabbits, and
turned toward Lynn, who stood watching him tensely, her lips parted, her
head up. And Guinn brought up his gun and fired. He aimed over the man’s
left shoulder, purposely high.

The man’s hand came up in unison with Guinn’s. Just behind the crash of
Guinn’s gun came a distinct _thunk!_

And Guinn found himself gaping down at that laughing dark face—laughing
so that the leaves shivered—and following the movement of the small
object being tossed in the huge hand.

The giant had caught Guinn’s bullet not only in his hand, but between
his thumb and forefinger.

You’re acting like a rube, he snarled at himself. The hand is quicker
than the eye—even the private eye. He tightened his grip on himself, on
his gun. “Sorry to interrupt,” he said into the echoing silence that
followed the giant’s laughter, “But the lady was with me.”

“You interrupted nothing,” said the giant pleasantly. “We were quite
finished.”

“Who are you?” Guinn snapped.

The man looked at him thoughtfully. “You know who I am.”

“I do?”

“You do. When you admit that you do, you’ll seek me out. Until then …”
He made a courtly gesture, a sort of casual salute. Then the light—went
out.

Guinn bit his tongue and cursed. The darkness had hit his eyeballs like
a physical blow, and he literally sagged under the impact. He stood in
the blackness, shaking, sweating, waiting.

Gradually there was a leaf-torn sky again, the dim presence of tree
trunks. Somewhere a mouse squeaked. Overhead he heard the tiny,
unlubricated sound of a bat. A breath of wind passed, and the forest
seemed to exhale quietly.

“Lynn …”

“Yes, I’m here.”

“Is he—”

“He’s gone.” He heard her feet as she left the mossy carpet and crossed
dead leaves. She was climbing toward him. He put out his hand. It
touched her body; soft, warm, unafraid. His throat was dry and burning
and his flesh was cold and clammy. He found her hand and said again,
“Are you all right?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Where is he?” he whispered. “He must be standing down there.”

“He isn’t,” she said positively. “He’s gone.”

He peered down into the blackness, and abruptly there was a sort of
flow, a warm radiation of comfort and relaxation. There was proportion
and reality in the world again. “Yes,” he said, surprising himself.
“He’s gone.”

Hand in hand they followed the glow, the mechanical hum of the hospital,
which was now visible. “Lynn, what happened?”

“I saw the light,” she said quietly. “I went to see. I think I was
afraid at first. I thought if I knew what the light was I wouldn’t be
afraid any more, so I went to look. He was …”

She fell behind as they passed between close-set trees, then caught up
and took his hand again. “He was—waiting for me. It was as if I knew
him, knew what to do … You saw, didn’t you?”

“Yes. Lynn, what was it for? Who is he?”

She was silent as they worked their way through the blackness. She was
quiet for so long that he squeezed her hand and said, “Well?”

She said, “If you’re around somebody a whole lot—your brother or someone
you go to school with or something—do you suddenly stop and say ‘What’s
your name?’ It was sort of like that. No, I never saw him before. I
never did those things before. But it didn’t occur to me to ask any
questions.”

He said, because he wanted to know, “He didn’t touch you?”

“Oh, no!”

“I believe,” said Guinn, “that two things and two things get you four
things. I believe that every effect has a cause, and every reaction is
there because of some action.” He paused, and then said almost
plaintively, “I’ve got to believe that, Lynn!”

She chuckled. She was certainly not laughing at him. She reached her
other hand over and patted his wrist. “Hard guy,” she said.

They reached the hedge. Guinn fumbled along it for an opening. He
stopped suddenly. “I plumb forgot.” He reached inside his jacket and got
the nurse’s uniform, shook it out. “This won’t look like Fifth Avenue,”
he said apologetically.

“What is—Oh! A dress! Thank you …” She shrugged into it, and as she
buttoned the belt, she said, “I didn’t feel naked until you handed me
that.”

In an obscure way, he felt like apologizing. He didn’t. He said, “I
didn’t feel you were.” He turned to the hedge, added, “You suppose I’m
getting old?”

“Do you suppose I’m getting brazen?”

It was the right answer. Something was going on here—some shift in
perspective, some new element in the atmosphere. “Come on.”

They broke through and emerged into the highway some hundred yards below
the parked station wagon. They walked silently, each deeply immersed in
thought. Lynn spoke once: “Is Garry—”

“He’s going to be all right.”

“I knew that,” she said wonderingly. “I seem to’ve known that all along.
Remember when I got into the car, when he was lying on the seat? I
didn’t do anything for him. I barely even looked at him. I didn’t have
to; I _knew_ he was all right.”

Then they reached the car, got in. Guinn found his keys, started the
car. They pulled into the highway and moved off toward the town. It
wasn’t easy to talk against the roar of the unmuffled exhaust, and they
didn’t try too hard. Lynn gave him her address, and when they reached
the town he found it without trouble. He pulled up in front of it. It
was frame house with a vine-covered porch and a picket fence. There was
a sign on a post in the lawn that said ROOMS TRANSIENT PERMANENT.

Lynn got out. Guinn leaned across the seat and looked up at her. “I owe
you an outfit.”

“You do not. I owe you a whole lot more.”

“A clout on the neck?”

“I got hit much harder than that,” she twinkled. “Shall I come to your
office tomorrow?”

“Call me,” he said. Her face seemed to fall a trifle. He said, “I meant
what I said about that, Lynn. Square yourself with your boss at the
cafe.”

“Thanks. Oh, thanks so much.”

“I’m ahead.” He waved his hand and started the car. He had to turn it
around, and he sped past her place again she was still on the porch,
tiptoe on her bare feet, waving.

Guinn parked the car in front of his building and sagged for a moment.
He felt as if he had earned the luxury of letting his back bend for a
few seconds. He thought.

He thought about Lynn, and about the extraordinary scene in the wood,
about the man in the convertible who shot at girls and flayed off the
skin on people’s faces, strip by strip. He thought back and back through
his day’s work until he got to lunch time, where it started. The Morgan
girl and her vagueness and her fantastic expense money. He took out his
wallet.

In it were five one-hundred-dollar bills.

He sat very quietly, with his eyes closed.

She’d given him five centuries. He’d put three in the drawer before he
left. At the hospital he’d found he had five left, not two. He’d given
two hundred to Cheryl. Now he had five left instead of three.

He thought, there are two kinds of things going on around here. One is
the kind of thing I understand, and the other is the kind of thing I
don’t understand.

Is that simple enough? he asked himself.

It should be.

I understand about guys who make rough passes at girls. I understand
about guys who torture people to get information from them. I even
understand about girls who have guts enough to dive out of a moving car
over the railing of a forty-foot cliff.

But I don’t understand about men who can coax rabbits out to have their
throats cut, and can pluck a .32 slug out of the air. I don’t understand
a guy who makes a chanting and somehow controls a girl’s voice to
synchronize with it like that. And I especially don’t understand about
this money.

Guinn sat up a little straighter: He knew he would be better off if he
forgot the things he couldn’t understand. He also knew that he couldn’t.
What he could do was seal them up in the back of his mind. Maybe he’d
find the bridge between the known and the unknown; maybe some silly
little piece of evidence would show up that would be the missing link.
Until then, he wasn’t going to beat his brains out.

He swung the door open, pulled out the ignition key, dropped it in his
pocket and climbed out. He stretched. He felt tired. He kicked the car
door closed and went into the building.

Old George, the night elevator man, was asleep on a battered rung chair,
his Adam’s apple still pretending it was a chin, and chewing. Guinn
walked up the two flights. He was glad to be back. He thumbed out his
door key and let himself into the dark waiting room, crossed to the
inner office, turned on the light.

“Hello,” somebody said gravely.

He stood dangling his key stupidly. He was stiff with shock. Shock was a
vise on his abdomen, a clamp on his heart, a quick-freeze on his lungs.
He didn’t show it.

“Please shut it. There’s a draft,” said the girl called Morgan.

Guinn tossed the key, caught it, put it away. He crossed the office and
got behind the desk and sat down. He glowered at her. She sat where she
had been before. Her legs were crossed and her hair gleamed and she
still had the most exquisite mouth he had ever seen. Her skin was still
young and her eyes ancient. Instead of the caped dress, she now wore a
lime-colored number with a demure little white collar buttoned under her
chin. There was another button an inch above her waistline. Between the
two buttons the material separated, no wider than a finger, all the way
down. This was a garment with something to say, and it made its points.

“I’d like a progress report,” she said.

He snorted and reached for the phone, dialed. While he waited for the
connection, he glared at her. If she had grinned at him he would have
thrown the phone at her. She didn’t grin. She watched him levelly, and
waited.

“Sam,” Guinn said into the phone. “Yeah, I know it’s late. Look, I want
you climb into your jalopy and take a trip. No—not tomorrow; now! Don’t
say that, chum. You know I wouldn’t call you if it wasn’t important.
Okay, then … That’s better.

“I want you to get up to Percival’s cave. Yeah. No, he won’t. Somebody
knocked him off today. Damn you, would I kid about a thing like that?
All right then. Sorry, I knew him a long time. Anyway, the wagon’s come
and gone by now, but his goats are still up there. I want you to round
’em up and take care of them. Yeah. And don’t forget to milk the
nannies. They’ve missed one milking already, maybe two, and that’s no
good. It hurts ’em.

“Right. All right, Sam. You’re okay, you short-tempered old scut. Stay
with ’em; I’ll be up in the morning. Sam—thanks.”

He put the phone down, took out his wallet, got out the five bills,
dropped them on the desk, and pushed them across the desk with a pencil
eraser. “Here.”

She lowered her lids to look at the money. Her lashes almost touched her
cheeks. When she was asleep they probably did. “What’s that for?”

“It’s your money. I don’t want it. I don’t want your case, either.”

She nodded, almost placidly.

She picked up the money, opened the chartreuse and black handbag she
carried, and dropped the money into it. “That’s not all the money you’ve
gotten from me, is it?”

“I gave you five.”

Her gaze dropped to the desk. He cursed suddenly, viciously, ripped the
drawer open and got the telephone bill. The old envelope tore in two as
he pulled the banknotes out of it.

Three bank notes. C-notes.

He looked up at her, his face frozen. “The hand,” he said, “is quicker
than the—” He stopped, because he remembered saying, or thinking, the
same thing just recently. This afternoon, or was it—

She took the money and put it away in her purse. She asked, without
smiling, without frowning either: “Why don’t you want the case?”

He said, “I wouldn’t be so foolish as to accuse you of sending me up on
the Hill when you did just so old Percival would get what he got. But it
figures the same way. I’ll never live so long that I’ll forget this
afternoon—or the fact that you had something to do with it.”

“How do you figure that?”

He reached behind him and switched on a hot plate. He swizzled the pot
that stood on it to see how much water was in it. Satisfied, he turned
back to her. “You’ve been asking questions about this stone, this cup,
or whatever it is. Some hood figured it was valuable, went after it.
Percival got—Miss Morgan, do you know what was done to him?”

“I can imagine.”

He snorted. “The hell you can.”

She considered him in her expressionless way. “I take it you’re going to
drop the whole thing, then.”

“I didn’t say that. I said I didn’t want your case. How far I chase down
my own affairs is up to me.”

Her expression changed, but there was no saying exactly how. It wasn’t
in the eyes, the mouth. It was, if anything, something inside. But now
she looked pleased.

He was annoyed. “I gave you the money,” he said pointedly. When she
simply sat, watching him, he said, “And tomorrow I change that lock.”

“Locks mean nothing to me,” she said.

“They do to me, if they’re mine. Miss Morgan, I think I’m taking up too
much of your time.”

“Oh, no.” She shook her head solemnly.

He rummaged into his desk, found a jar of instant coffee and some
restaurant-style containers. He spooned the powder into a container,
switched off the hot plate, and poured steaming water into the coffee.
He sat stirring it, looking at her. He didn’t offer her any.

From his top right-hand drawer he got a handful of pretzel sticks.
Dunking one, he stuck the end into his mouth.

“This is where you came in,” he said.

She nodded.

“Damn it!” he exploded. “What are you after?”

She said, “Wouldn’t it be better with rye?”

He had the container to his lips as she spoke. His nostrils distended.
There’s a distinctive odor to strong black coffee with a dollop of rye
in it—and this had it.

Guinn’s first reaction was to drop it; his second to throw it. His third
was to drink it. He did none of these things. He put it down with a
consciously controlled rock-steadiness. He selected a pretzel-stick
carefully and dunked it. It tasted of rye. He finished it slowly, wiped
his hand across his mouth, and took out a cigarette. As he clawed a book
of matches up from the desk, the girl raised one hand from her lap and
pointed a finger at him. Something like a swift butterfly of flame
whisked across from the finger to his cigarette, and was gone. He drew
back violently, followed by a faint curl of tobacco smoke. He
automatically dragged on the cigarette. It was lit, and the unexpected
gout of smoke made him cough. He thought he smelled ozone.

“Do something else casual,” said the girl, as quietly and offensively as
ever. “I can keep this sort of thing up all night.”

“Okay,” he said harshly. “What’s your story, Miss Morgan?”

“Look in your wallet.”

“I know what’s in the wallet.”

“You do?”

A dangerous light came into his eyes. Silently he took out his wallet,
opened it, drew out five one-hundred dollar bills and put them and the
wallet down side by side on the desk.

“Very good.” He wet his lips. I guess this means that the two yards I
left at the hospital for Garry are phoney—if they’re there at all. I’m
beginning to like you, Miss Morgan.”

“No,” she said quickly. “They’re real. They’re all real.”

“They come from some place.”

“They come from people who won’t miss it—or who shouldn’t have it.”

“How?”

“You wouldn’t understand.” There was no effrontery in her voice; she was
stating a flat fact.

“I’m a pretty understanding guy,” he said.

She rose and came close to the desk. She smelled of vanilla, and,
faintly, of mignonette. She glanced back at the chair and gestured
slightly. It slid across to her. It must have been lifted a fraction of
an inch off the floor, because it made no sound. She sat in it and said,
“Do you think you’re going crazy?”

“No,” he said positively. “If that’s what you’re after, you’ve done
everything wrong.”

“How so?”

He stretched out his legs. “I don’t know that you’ve earned a lecture on
the secrets of my success. But I don’t mind telling you that I can be
puzzled but not mystified. If I throw that switch, the hotplate lights
up. I understand that. If Einstein tells me that light can only go just
so fast, I don’t understand it, but I accept it. If another five yards
shows up in that wallet I won’t understand it—” His fist came down with
a crash—” and damn if I accept it. Now, quit your skylarking around,
or—”

“Or?”

He shrugged, suddenly, and smiled. “Or make sense.”

The smile, apparently, worked. She smiled too, and it was the first
time. He’d seen a lot of wonderful things today, but nothing like this.

“Pour us a drink, and I’ll talk sense.”

“I haven’t got any liq—” he began, and then caught the bare suggestion
of an amused crinkle at the corners of her age-old eyes. He opened the
top drawer, then remembered what he had done with the bottle. He scooped
it up out of the wastepaper basket and held it up. It had about two
fingers in it. He raised his eyebrows resignedly and found a couple of
shot-glasses under “G” in the filing cabinet. He poured. There was just
enough to fill both glasses, and when he put the bottle down there was
about two fingers of liquor surging around the bottom.

They lifted their glasses. It didn’t look like any rye he had ever seen.
It had gold flecks which were in constant, dazzling motion, and it
seemed to have an elusive blue cast to its gleaming amber. Her glass
touched his, and one of her fingers, and he experienced a distinct and
pleasant shock.

He drank.

For a split second he thought he had swallowed nothing at all, so
smoothly did it go down. Then his earlobes warmed up like radiant
heaters, and there came a feeling in his throat as if it had grown an
internal pelt of finest mink.

“This you get for nothing?”

She shook her head. “From nothing. But it isn’t easy.”

“It’s worth the trouble.” He poured again. “Talk.”

She lowered her eyes for a moment, then said, “I’ve been looking for you
for a long time.”

“I thought it was a stone you were looking for.”

“Oh, it is. But you’re the only man who can find it.”

“There’re a lot of private eyes.”

“There’s only one like you.”

He turned on her suddenly. “You were smelling around the hospital
records.”

She nodded. “I had to find something out.”

“Did you?”

“Yes.”

“Now you know why I’m so lucky.”

“What do you mean?”

“You know the old stories about the seventh son of a seventh son,” he
said harshly. “Well, like a guy called Geosmith once said, I’m the
seventh bastard of a seventh bastard.”

“Why do you make jokes that hurt you?”

“I like to be the first one to make ’em. You get your nose rubbed in a
thing like that.”

“And things like your real name?”

“You did snoop.”

“I had to know.”

“Why? To find that stone?”

“Yes,” she said. “You have it.”

“Not unless you planted it on me, like this cabbage.” He flicked the
banknotes with his fingernail.

“You can be ever so sure I didn’t,” she said seriously. “I want it too
badly. I just want to …” Her fingers curled. She had long slender,
strong fingers. “… to hold that cup. Just to hold it in these two
hands.”

He looked at her tense face wondering where all the cold poise had gone.
“Well, it ought to be a snap. I have it, you want it. Tell me where I’ve
hidden it and I’ll hand it over.”

“I can’t tell you where it is. You’ve got to find it yourself.”

“I thought you were going to talk sense.”

She sighed. “Has it dawned on you yet that this is a slightly unusual
case?”

He glanced again at the money. “Seems so.”

“Then you have to take what comes as sense. Guinn, is a radio set
magic?”

“Not to me it isn’t.”

“But it would be to a bushman.”

“Mmm. So now I’m a bushman. I see what you mean. You’re using my own
arguments on me. If there’s anything I don’t understand in all this,
it’s because I don’t have the background for it. Don’t worry, I’m not
going to get superstitious.”

“All right. But a lot of this is going to demand new thinking—a new kind
of thinking from you.”

“Do it to me.”

“All right. You went up on the Hill today. You picked up a girl called
Lynn. She’d had some trouble with a man named Mordi. When you got to
Percival, you found him in terrible shape. He talked to you and then
died. When you got back to your friend Garry, you found him wounded by
this same Mordi. You then—”

“Now, wait. Were you there?”

“No.”

“Then—”

“It was just something you had to go through.”

“What are you talking about?”

“Shall I start again from the beginning? You are a very special person,
Hadley Guinn. You, and only you can find that cup. And the stone on it.
Unless and until you find out who you are, you won’t know where that cup
is or how to find it. You can’t be told—it’s absolutely essential that
you figure it out for yourself. In order to be able to figure it out,
you’ve got to go through certain things. You’ll keep on going through
these things until you do figure it out—or die in the attempt. You
already have all the evidence you need, but you won’t look in the right
direction. You’ve got a psychological block as big as a house that keeps
you from it. You’ll have to find it, or die. And if you’re going to find
it, it damn well better be soon!”

“Suppose I don’t?”

“We … you … won’t have to worry any more.”

“I’m not worried now.”

“Yes you are.”

He studied his hands. “Yeah,” he grunted. “You’re right about that.” He
thought for a moment. “Those things I have to … go through. You mean
like finding old Percival that way?”

She nodded. “And everything else that’s happened since I walked in
here.”

“Sort of … staged?”

“You can call it that.”

He pushed back his chair and stood up, looming over her like a cliff.
“Did you have something to do with it?”

“Something.”

“With what happened to Percival? To Garry?” His voice was rich with
self-control.

She looked up at him with perfect composure. “Percival volunteered.”

“Volun—for that!”

“He knew who you were. He’s known for years. He’s watched over you and
guided you more than you’ll ever know. He knew what you were before I
did—and I’ve known it for a long time. As for Garry, what happened to
him had to happen, because you had to feel just that way about
something. You’re in a bigger play than you think you are. Now, sit down
and stop blowing up like a sea squab, or I’ll stick a pin in you and
bust you.”

Slowly, he sat down. “You better talk some more.”

“I will. Lynn was in it for the same reason. Don’t you see? Percival was
the symbol of a lot of large issues to you. I don’t have to draw you a
diagram about them. They all came to a focus in him, and with his death
they came front and center.”

“Did he have to die that way?” growled Guinn.

“He did.” She held up a commanding hand. “I told you—I’m ‘talking
sense’, just as you asked me to. Damn you, you’ll hold still for it.
Garry is something you protect and teach, and he matters very much to
you on those terms. You saved his life by your quick thinking, taking
the car down the mountain face that way, getting him to the hospital in
time—”

“You’ll remember I stopped on the way.”

“That was on the agenda. You had a choice to make, and you gave it to
Lynn. You let her danger be more important to you than either Mordi or
Garry’s life.”

“I suppose that strip act was part of it.”

“Of course it was! You had to see how she reacted to you under
circumstances that would have had her hysterical with anyone else. She
trusted you because she could trust you—because you are you.”

“Go on.” His eyes were closed, his vision turned inwards.

“Cheryl,” said the girl. “Someone who cared. Doctor Jim. Someone you
trusted. And the ritual of the oak. Something you had to see.”

“Why that?”

“Because, with a mind that refuses to see anything that isn’t straight
cause and effect, you had to witness effects with causes you’ll never
understand—and trust your own eyes! The same goes for the money and this
liquor. Pour me some more, by the way.”

There wasn’t much in the bottle—only a couple of fingers. Resignedly, he
poured, and filled his own glass.

“Miss Morgan,” he said carefully, “you are very beautiful and you have a
great bag of tricks. But your story is as full of holes as a yard of
cheesecloth. I don’t know what you’re after, but from where I sit you’re
a rich bitch with a warped sense of humor and an army of spies. Shut
up!” he barked as her extraordinary eyes flamed with indignation.

“I still think Percival died because you’ve been wandering around
yammering about some secret treasure he’s supposed to’ve been on to.
That’s the kind of story that gets believed about eccentrics like him
who’ve never given a hoot about money. I think you’re responsible for
his murder because of it. I don’t know but what you hired Lynn to help
you pull the wool over my eyes, to slip extra money into my wallet, to
pull that fancy performance in the woods. I haven’t figured out yet how
half this sleight-of-hand was pulled, but I will. I’ll sweat some of it
out of Lynn and dope the rest out for myself.”

“Why, you—”

“If that fairy story of yours was true, that this whole thing was
scripted out to put me through some paces, it’d mean outside
circumstances that widen to where you couldn’t have had a damn thing to
do with them. What about the timing of that lowboy trailer—was that
arranged?”

“Yes!”

He snorted. “The effect that old Percival had on me when I was a kid?”

“Yes!”

Sarcastically, he said, “The old oak tree growing just there?”

“Yes, yes, _yes!_ All of it! How can I make you understand?
Everything—the big things, like your being born when you were, like the
building of the bridge just where it was, just that width—and the little
things—like old Joe being asleep when you got here, so that even when
you were tired you climbed the steps rather than bother him. Like the
first phone call you made being an arrangement to take of Percival’s
goats. You’re you, damn it; but today, you’ve had to be more you than
ever before. In every way that’s important because you’ve got to realize
who you are!”

Her intensity was like the radiation from a cherry-red ingot, a thing to
narrow the eyes, against which to throw up futile hands. He shook his
head in bewilderment. “Why do you go on with this?” he asked in genuine
curiosity. “What’s in it for you? Lady, how crazy can you get?”

She wrung her hands. “I can’t tell you who you are,” she mourned. “I
can’t, I can’t … because if I did, that little wrinkle in your silly
head would kink up and switch out all the circuits. You’ve been holding
that knowledge locked up in your stubborn skull for years, and you won’t
look at it. You’re born to the part, bred to it, trained for it, and you
won’t make the simple admission to yourself.” She knitted her brows. Her
full lower lip sucked in and her white teeth came down on it. She
lowered her head and sat tensely, and a crystal tear welled out under
her long lashes and lay twinkling on her high dark cheekbone.

He went to her and put a hand on her shoulder. “You’ve had a tough time,
Miss Morgan,” he said. His voice shook, and he realized with a shot of
fury that her breakup had affected him more profoundly than he thought
he was capable of.

She took his hand and pressed it against her wet cheek. “You’re such a
wonderful fool,” she said brokenly.

He didn’t know how his hand slid from her cheek to her throat. Her head
came up abruptly and he found his eyes inches away from hers. Down, down
in her eyes something glowed and called and promised. In those
incredible eyes was a hunger, a yearning, and an overwhelming gladness
fighting, fighting to emerge.

He stood like that for minutes. Finally he said hoarsely, “This won’t
gain you a thing. It won’t make me believe a word of that.….of yours.”
The word he used was filthy, viciously used.

“I know,” she whispered. “It doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter …”

And so the full spectrum was completed, and he was himself more than he
had ever been before.

Lynn yawned. The office was swept. The files were in order, the
furniture dusted, the waiting room davenport vacuumed and plumped, the
paneling oiled. The bills were paid. The phone almost never rang, and
when it did all she could do was note the caller’s name and promise that
Mr. Guinn would call back when he returned.

“Hey—Had! Are you—” There was a step.

Lynn leapt to her feet, smoothed her hair, and ran to the waiting room.

He was there, tall, stooped, a patch on his temple and a clump of
bandage on his neck looking like a misplaced tuft of his cotton hair.

“Garry! Garry—oh!”

She was in his arms before he knew it. She hugged him until he grunted,
put him away at arms’ length, ran eager rapid fingers over his lips and
cheeks.

“Wait a minute, hey—” he spluttered. He colored violently. “Lynn, I was
hoping … I was thinking of some way to maybe see you again sometime … I
didn’t figger that—Gee. Hey.”

“You idiot, you fool you,” she crooned. “Darling, sit down. You must be
tired. I thought you’d be in the hospital for another week. I’ve missed
you so! You don’t know, you just—oh, Garry, am I making a fool of
myself? Am I?”

“Gosh,” he said. “I don’t think so.” He put his hands awkwardly on her
shoulders. “I think this is all right.”

She spun in close to him, put her cheek on his chest. His heart was
going like a riveting gun. They sat on the davenport and at last he
kissed her.

At length he came up for air. “Ain’t felt like this since I won the sack
race at the county fair,” he said. “Where’s Had?”

“I don’t know,” she said.

“You working here now?”

She nodded. “He wanted me to, since that day. You know. He told me to
call him and I did and he wasn’t there. I felt real bad. And about ten
in the morning old Sam came around. He brought me a note from Mr. Guinn
and the keys. He said Mr. Guinn had sent him up to take care of
Percival’s goats—”

“He would,” said Garry.

“Yes, and Mr. Guinn had come up early in the morning and told him to
go.”

“What did the note say?”

“I’ll show you.” She skipped into the office, opened a file drawer and
came out with a rumpled piece of paper. “I’ll read it.”

“ ‘I’ve got some thinking to do. I’ll be back shortly after I arrive.
Don’t look for me. Here are the keys. Straighten up the place for me.
You’ll find money in the top drawer of the desk. If you find any bills,
pay them. If you get any calls, stall them. Take fifty a week for
yourself and give Garry anything he needs.’ Garry, I’m to give you
anything you need.”

“Haw!” grinned Garry. “He thinks of everything. That all?”

“No. ‘If you see that Morgan girl, tell her I still don’t believe her,
but …’ Here the writing gets all squiggly. ‘… but I’ll keep looking
until I find what she’s after. And I almost think I might.’ That’s all.”

“Have you seen the girl?”

“No. She hasn’t so much as called. Who is she?”

“The most …” He flushed. “I like you better,” he said lamely.

“You just better!”

“I bet I know where he is,” said Garry. “Though maybe he wouldn’t want
to hang around there now. Still …”

“Where?”

“Still up there with the goats. He used to say that if ever he got mixed
up in too much detail, that was the place to go. Said nobody could think
little things up there.”

“That’s where we’ll start looking,” said a voice, and it laughed.

Garry and Lynn sprang apart, and then Lynn cowered up close against
Garry.

Standing in the doorway was a dark, spare man with cold black eyes. His
left arm was in a splint, though not in a sling. His jacket was draped
over his left shoulder, and its drape gave him a chilling, vampire look.
In his right hand was a heavy automatic.

“Mordi!”

“The whole thing suits me fine,” said Mordi. “Nothing’s going sour this
time, buster. I want to be the first to congratulate you. You got a
chick that will look at you, and I got a gun that will look at the
chick. There’s nothing you can do so fast that I can’t—” He described
the process of shooting Lynn in terms that made Garry’s lips go white.

“What do you want?”

“Same thing your boss wants. Either I get it first or he does. If he
does, I get it right afterward. Come on, lovebirds. We’re taking a
trip.” His black eyes slitted. “And look, little smarty, you better just
follow my instructions and not pull another fast one, because I’m not
holding this gun for fun.”

Garry took a step toward him and Lynn flung her arms around him. “Garry,
don’t, don’t …”

Guinn threw the old book aside and stretched. “Morning, Matty,” he
smiled.

The nanny stretched her long neck further inside the cave. _“Eh-eh-eh!”_
she answered.

“Okay, okay.”

He rolled off the goat-hair mattress and stooped to go through the
entrance. The nanny skipped away from him and stopped again a few feet
out in the clearing. _“Eh-eh.”_

“I’m coming, honey.”

He followed the goat through the neck of woods to the meadow. “Oh, for
Pete’s sake! Can’t you stay out of trouble? You want to grow up to be a
detective?” He strode over to the ruins of an ancient fieldstone wall.
Tangled in a whip-vine was a week-old kid. Its clumsy thrashings had
brought it under a flat stone which had fallen across a rock and a stump
in such a way that the little animal was caught, painlessly, but
effectively, under the stone with its legs spraddled out and its silly
head springing up out of the shrubbery like a barrage balloon. “Up you
come,” said Guinn, heaving the rock away. He picked up the kid and freed
its legs from the vine. It bawled shrilly, and the nanny fretted
impatiently beside him. He set the kid down and it staggered to the
nanny and hooked on to a teat with exaggerated smackings and droolings
and a series of frantic, contented little grunts. Guinn chuckled and
walked away.

The mist was a sea which had turned the hills into a wind-borne
archipelago. There had been sun up here for two hours, but the valleys
were still submerged, asleep. Guinn breathed the good air and let his
gaze reach and reach into the indeterminate area where mist and sky met.
Eight days of this had brought a great peace and purpose to him, and for
forty-eight hours now he had even forgotten that he was out of
cigarettes.

The goats were company and a modicum of trouble, anchoring him to a
duty. The sky and the stars and the sun and rain were things he could
drift in, but the goats never let him lose himself. It was a good place
to be, a good way to be.

And the books …

“… There was a man spawned by the powers of darkness, born of a virgin,
destined to be the antichrist. And the virgin Blaise told her confessor,
who believed when others would not, and baptized the child, taking him
from the control of his dark father …”

“… asleep under a rock in Barenton in Brittany amongst the hawthornes.
And when the rain fails them, then do the peasants call to him, and
strike the rock, and he calls down succor for the thirsty land.”

_(What was it he had heard about Barenton? Oh yes; when that Morgan girl
had first come in: “Reckon it’ll rain tomorrow?” and she had said, not
in Barenton.” And he had asked, “Where’s Barenton?” and she had said
“Sorry. Classical reference. There’s a hawthorne bush there.”)_

“… a precious stone is brought to earth by angels, and committed to the
guardianship of a line of kings. It is self-acting and food-providing,
and the light issuing from it extinguishes the light of candles. No man
may die within eight days of beholding it, and the weeping maiden who
bears it retains perennial youth …”

_(So if there’s a drought at Barenton, he’s no longer under the stone
…)_

He went back into the cave to read some more. Lovely, lovely stuff,
those legends. What had turned him from them?

_(The echoes in his mind, the jeering kids at school. The smug young
substitute teacher who had labeled his desk after an absence “The Siege
Perilous”—the old name given the empty place at a great table when a
knight was out searching for the … for the …)_

Before noon he heard the scuttle of hooves and the sharp snort of the
big billy called Bucko.

He ran outside. Bucko was on the high bluff behind the cave. Guinn
scrambled up the rocks. “Easy, Bucko,” he said. Bucko turned to him and
back toward the forest, his great head high, his heavy horns curving
down and back so that the tips all but touched his massive shoulders.

Guinn stood up and peered. He could see nothing, hear nothing—wait;
there was a sound. A distant groan, a complex sound.

It was the whining of a car in low gear, travelling rough ground so that
the driver’s foot bounced on the accelerator.

The sound came closer. Guinn automatically reached for his armpit and
cursed. His gun was in the cave with his clothes. He hadn’t had them on
in four days; why bother? The goats didn’t mind …

He turned to go down when a brilliant flash caught his eye—the sun on
chrome. Then he knew that by the time he gained the cave again the car
would be in the clearing. Strangers or friends—fine. He could put
something on and come out to greet them. But if this visitor were no
stranger, and no friend …

He’d take his chances out here in the open.

The car pulled into the clearing. Guinn knelt behind the gray peak of
rock that jutted up like a chimney, and froze. From the ground he would
look like another conformation of the rocks silhouetted against the
bright sky.

The car door opened. It was a Nash sedan. Garry was driving. He got out
and walked straight away from the car for perhaps ten feet when, at a
low growl from the car, he stopped. He stood still, trembling. Even from
that distance Guinn could see the sweat standing out on his forehead.

The rear door opened. Lynn got out. Her face was chalky, and her
red-gold hair was vivid against it. She was staring straight ahead, and
her eyes were as round as an auger-hole.

Behind her came Mordi, crouching, watchful. He kept an automatic
steadily on the girl. Guinn could hear his voice clearly as it grated,
echoed among the rocks.

“All right, cottonhead. Peek inside. If he’s there, call him out.”

Garry stood still, and the torment on his face was indescribable.

The automatic barked, and a slug whined twice in a crazy double
ricochet. Garry whirled. Lynn snatched at her skirt, whimpering. She
fingered a bullet hole in her skirt, low on her hip. “No!” she cried to
Garry. “It didn’t touch me!”

“The next one will,” promised Mordi faithfully. “Go on, cottonhead.”

Garry stalked forward like a zombie. Mordi closed with Lynn, putting the
muzzle of his gun against her back. They followed.

Garry stooped and disappeared in the cave. He was out in a moment. “He
isn’t there.”

“He’s been there,” said Mordi.

“No.”

“You’re a liar.” He shoved Lynn so hard with the gun that she stumbled.
Mordi stood back until she was on her feet again. Then he snapped,
“Inside, Sister!” He pushed her roughly into the opening. “You,” he said
to Garry, “stand right where you are, where I can see you. One step any
way, and I start shooting.” He ducked into the cave.

Guinn was suddenly conscious of pain in his hands, and he took them off
the rock. One fingernail was broken and bleeding. He looked down. Garry
was standing stiff and trembling in the clearing in front of the
cave-mouth. Guinn thought of leaping down from the rock, landing on
Garry, bearing him away from the cave-mouth, and then realized that it
wasn’t Garry that Mordi would start shooting at.

He looked around frantically.

There was a movement in the wood.

Someone, palefaced, slender, stood in the shadows. Clad in a mottled
green cloak, she was all but invisible. When his eyes rested on her
face, it relaxed visibly, as if she had been standing in an agony of
tension, waiting for him to see her.

“Morgan!”

_(The memory flitted through his tortured mind. “What’s your first
name?” “Morgan.” “All right, if you don’t want to tell me.”)_

“Morgan …” he breathed. “Morgan le Fay …”

She nodded. She raised something in her hands—a three-foot clump of
evergreen with yellow-green flowers, a cluster of white berries …

_(“… and when the missal shall be found upon the oak, then shall the
Druid sever it with a golden knife. And sacrifice shall be made, the
living blood feeding the roots of the tree …”)_

She stepped out into the clearing at the side of the outcropping, and
with one clean sweep of her arm, she threw the mistletoe.

Guinn stood, stretched, and caught it. Two fierce thoughts collided in
his mind. The first was that this was no time for kissing games; he’d a
damn sight rather had an automatic rifle than this shrubbery. The other
sprang from the remembered passage in Percival’s old book: _“… when the
missal shall be found upon the oak, then shall the Druid …”_

Druid. The Druid.

Percival had muttered, through his tattered tongue, something about the
Druid. The one Guinn was to find. The one who had a golden knife, who
had said “When you admit you know me, you shall seek me out.”

His name! What in time was his name?

The hawthorne bush … under a flat stone in Barenton, in Brittany, he
sleeps.… But there is a drought in Brittany. He sleeps no longer.

Percival’s bloody wreck of a mouth floated before his eyes.
_“Amghozhiush …”_

“Amgro—Ambrozhi—_Ambrosius. Merlin Ambrosius!”_

In his mind, he screamed it, over and over.

Hollowly, Mordi’s voice boomed out below. “You lying bastard! He was
here! His clothes, his gun—I’ll teach you to lie to me!”

The automatic roared once and again. Coming from the cave, it sounded
like artillery. Garry put his arms out, and on his face was an
expression of delighted amazement that distorted itself into a
tormented, rubbery grimace. “But, Lynn,” he said softly. He looked down
at his chest, and suddenly there were two bright splotches on his shirt.
Chin on chest, he vomited blood on the splotches and toppled.

A horrible garble of sound came from the cave—Mordi’s roar of laughter
and Lynn’s terrible shriek. She bolted out into the open. Mordi was
after, on her in two bounds. He twisted one arm behind her until she
fell to her knees, then struck her on the back of the neck with his
splinted forearm. She collapsed without a sound.

Guinn uttered a low growl—precisely the sound made by a furious mastiff.
He tensed and sprang—

And he couldn’t move.

He looked up.

Standing beside him, with one gigantic arm extended and an expression of
perfect calm on his dark face, stood the Druid—the man he had seen cut
the mistletoe from the oak tree.

“You called me,” he said. His tones rang, but somehow Guinn knew he
couldn’t be heard by Mordi.

“Let me go,” said Guinn between his teeth. “Damn you to hell, let me
go!”

The Druid was not touching him, but there was no question of the fact
that the paralysis came from that extended arm. “Stand up,” said the
giant.

Slowly, Guinn stood up. “Let me go,” he said again. “Garry’s dying!”

“He will die if you do not do as I say,” said the giant.

Guinn gritted his teeth and, as if moving in a heavy fluid, turned and
glanced down. Mordi was working over Garry, lifting him, dragging him.
He could hear Garry’s bubbling breath and weak coughs. Peering down,
Guinn saw him prop the dying man in a sitting position at the
cave-mouth, facing in.

“A lung job,” gasped Mordi. “You’ll go slowly, buster. Which is good.
There’s something I’ll want you to watch.”

He went out into the clearing and picked up Lynn’s limp form—both wrists
in one hand, a twist under her so that she was draped over his right
shoulder. He half carried, half dragged her into the cave. There was the
sound of tearing cloth. “We’ll get this out of the way, hey, smarty?”

Garry tried to speak, but blood choked him.

Guinn whimpered in frustration as the invisible power drew at him,
turned him around to face the great, calm, kindly face of the Druid.

“Your Quest,” said Merlin Ambrosius. “There is nothing more important
than your Quest. End your search and you shall have your heart’s
desire.”

The calm power flowed into him from that huge face. Suddenly, without
effort, he understood. He understood it all, from all its beginnings to
its incredible present to all possible endings. He put up his hands and
closed his eyes.

There was a flow from the Druid to his whole being, and an answering
flow up through the rocks from the core of the earth itself. There was
an emanation from everything that lived around him—the trees, the grass,
the silent goats that stared up at him as once oxen stared up at a Star.
Butterflies sank to the earth and were still, and all the birds were
with him, silently striving.

In his empty hands he felt a weight. He pulled his mind together and
threw it all into a mighty effort; and his thumbs curled over something
carven, and there was a high center of gravity there, so that he must
balance what he held.

Then he knew it was done, and that out of himself and the earth and all
things which had ever lived, the Search he had made all his life (most
of it unwittingly) was over. He and his substance had been the assembly
point for the thing which had left its mysterious mark on all histories
and all myths.

He opened his eyes, and was not dazzzled by its light, though it was far
brighter than that of the high sun.

It was a chalice, apparently filled with wine. It was infinitely
graceful, and each curve and carven line had a basic meaning.

There was a clinking and a rustle, and a weight on his shoulders, and a
mighty, comforting burden around his waist. He found himself clad in
golden chain-mail, marvelously made. It was covered by a long white
silken surplice, and it blazed in the light of the unbelievable stone
set in the cup.

“Will you yield it to me?” asked Merlin. His great dark eyes were full
of years and hunger and … and supplication. There was no power in him to
take this cup.

Guinn turned, looked down. Garry sagged against the rocks.

But Guinn was free now. He leaped. He had one brief glimpse of Merlin’s
pleading hands, and then he struck the ground jarringly.

“Mordred!” he cried in a great voice. “Come out!”

The answer was a shot that roared from the open throat of the cave.
Guinn saw, to his amazement, a .45 slug appear in midair three inches
away from the cup he still held, and, flattening, fall to the ground.

Mordi had apparently fired before he looked, for he now came out of the
cave. His clothes were disheveled and his dark face was flushed. “Well,
well. If it isn’t the pure boy himself, all dressed up for Sunday. All
right—give it here.”

From the corner of his eye, Guinn saw Morgan moving forward, like a
stalking cat.

“Throw down that gun,” said Guinn.

Mordi laughed. He raised the gun and sighted it carefully at Guinn’s
forehead, and pulled the trigger.

The gun bucked in his hand.

He stared at it, unbelievingly. It was melting. It was falling together
like a water-filled balloon with a fast leak. It flowed and dripped down
and ran between his fingers. There was no heat. It simply melted.

He looked up, saw Morgan. She had a strange, luminous smile on her face,
and was looking up at the peak of the rock. Mordi looked up too.

Merlin stood there, his arms folded. “Would you kill the bearer of the
Grail?”

Mordi cursed. He shook his fist at the giant and bellowed: “I, Mordred
pen Dragon, of the true line of the Kings of pen Dragon, Guardians of
the Grail, I am your master, Merlin Ambrosius, and you are committed to
my service. I command you to deliver it to me!”

Morgan gasped. Guinn, startled, looked at her. “It’s true, it’s true,”
she keened. Tears streamed down her face.

“Quickly,” she said. She ran to him. “Give me the Grail. You can’t kill
while you hold it.” He hesitated only a fraction of a second, and then
thrust it into her hands. Her face matched the Grail’s radiance as she
took it.

Mordi made a lunge for her, but she skipped back out of the way, and
that was when Guinn’s fist hit him. It bowled him right off his feet and
up against the rock.

Guinn leaped on him. Mordi, with his back to the rock, lashed out with
both feet and caught Guinn on his mailed chest. Guinn went flying
backwards, to land in a tangle of surplice and chain, with his heavy
two-handed sword twined into the heap. Mordi leaped on him, kicked at
his head. Guinn ducked, and the heel of Mordi’s shoe cut a long crease
in his scalp. Guinn rolled over, got his feet under him and tossed the
surplice back out of the way. He advanced on Mordi.

“Merlin, your protection!” screamed Mordi.

“To my sorrow,” said the giant, and his voice was like the theme of a
dirge. He threw up his hands.

Guinn loosed a straight right that had all the power of his blood, bones
and hatred behind it.

And it was as if there were a wall of plexiglass between him and Mordi.
The fist bounced off nothingness, and the diverted blow threw Guinn down
on one knee. His arm tingled to the shoulder. He bobbed to his feet and
circled, warily. He rushed, and was again warded off.

“Now this,” said Mordi, “is real fun.” He dropped his hands. “Come in
again, brother bastard. Did I ever tell you how many guys tried to be
your father?”

From the cave-mouth, Garry coughed, and from the sound of it, it would
be about his last. Morgan, carrying the Grail, darted to him, pulled his
head back, thrust the glowing chalice in front of his glazing eyes. Over
her shoulder she cried, “Your sword! Use your sword!”

The sword, to Guinn, was no more than a nuisance. He hadn’t had time to
look at the buckle nor to fumble with it, or he would have shucked it
off to get it out of the way. But so far Morgan had been right. He
backed off and drew the sword. Merlin and Morgan, having seen such
things done before with skill, must have been appalled. Guinn had to run
it out of the scabbard hand under hand down the blade before he could
get it all the way out.

He got his hands on the long hilt, and the weapon seemed to take on a
life of its own. Mordi staggered back a pace or two and raised his arms.

“Merlin—protect me!”

The glittering blade went up, back, and to one side, and came forward in
a screaming arc.

“Protect me—”

“Against _Excalibur?”_ said the giant, his great voice shaking with
laughter. And then the blade struck Mordi’s neck and passed through it
as if it had been a puff of smoke.

The body stood upright for fully two seconds, a pulsing fountain of
blood replacing the head. Then it fell. The head rolled over twice and
stopped at Guinn’s feet, the eyelids batting flirtatiously, the tongue
running in and out like that of a rude little boy.

Merlin came down from the crest. Guinn did not see him do it. It was as
if he had disappeared from the top and reappeared at the bottom. Perhaps
that was the case.

From his robe he produced a silver chain. He held out a hand to Morgan,
and she came to him, walking mechanically, and stopped before him with
her head down.

“On the day the Grail passes from the guardianship of the pen Dragons,”
Merlin intoned, “Morgan le Fay, called the Wild, shall be chained and
given into slavery.”

He cast one end of the chain to Morgan’s slender wrist. It nestled there
as if drawn by some magnetism, and by some marvel that Guinn did not
understand, formed what appeared to be a broad silver link about her
wrist.

“We don’t have slaves,” Guinn said stupidly.

Morgan knelt at his feet. “She is yours if you wish it,” said Merlin.

Leaning on his great sword, Guinn reached and took the chain. “Stand up,
Morgan,” he said. “You embarrass me.” He tugged at the chain. “Merlin,
take this thing off her.”

Merlin sighed. “As you wish.” He made the slightest of gestures and the
chain fell away. “But I warn you—she is called the Wild for good reason.
She is that which appears to be something else. She is the very source
of the term ‘fey.’ ”

“Wild I may be,” said Morgan in a low voice, “but I feel I shall be
tamed for this one’s lifetime—yes, and all his others.”

Guinn walked to the cave-mouth and knelt by Garry. “He’s still alive! If
only we could get him to a doctor!”

“There will be time,” said Morgan, with a peculiar quirk to her mouth.

There was a moan from the cave. Guinn bent and peered in. He turned and
took the Grail from Morgan. “Give her a hand,” he said, and turned away.

Merlin stood looking hungrily at the Grail. “May I drink?”

Guinn looked at him quizzically. “I don’t know, Merlin,” he said
honestly. “I’m going to need a whole mess of indoctrination here. I
don’t know what I should or shouldn’t do.”

“It will do nothing but good, believe me.”

“Can’t you wait a bit?”

“Ay.” Merlin heaved an enormous sigh. “But after waiting near two
thousand years, it isn’t easy.”

Lynn stumbled out of the cave. Her clothes were torn, and there were
ugly fingernail scratches on her shoulders. She flung herself on Garry
and lay in a twisted ecstasy of tortured sobs.

Morgan knelt and held her. “Give her the Grail,” she said urgently to
Guinn. “Make her walk with it while she weeps. While she weeps!”

Guinn gently lifted the sobbing girl. “Lynn, honey. Here. Here—take
this.”

Lynn strained toward Garry. Guinn tilted her face up and only then did
she see his shining armor and great sword. She blinked in surprise. And
then the radiance of the Grail suffused her. She put out her hands
blindly and he gave it to her.

“Here, dear,” called Morgan from a short distance.

Her sobs gradually subsiding, Lynn walked to her and gave her the
chalice. Morgan took it, narrowed her eyes, and suddenly the astonished
Lynn was arrayed in a beautifully draped Grecian dress.

“Now, what was that for?” asked Guinn.

Merlin smiled. “Don’t you remember the qualities of the Grail? ‘The
weeping maiden who bears it shall retain perennial youth.’ Morgan is a
woman with the values and compassions of a woman.”

“Oh, yes,” said Guinn devoutly, remembering his last meeting with
Morgan. “Merlin, help me out of this hardware.”

“So be it,” said Merlin. He reached out and took the sword, and the
golden chain-mail vanished, surplice and all.

“Hey!” Guinn yelped, and dove into the cave. He found his clothes and
pulled them on.

“How do you feel, boy?”

They were in the car, working gently down the switchback road toward the
town. Garry lay on the wide back seat, with his head on Lynn’s lap.
Morgan and Guinn were in front. (Merlin, who scorned any mechanical
transportation, was left behind “to take care of the goats,” he had
said. Morgan had explained to him that old Sam would find the goats in
an empty lot near his place in town. “You’ll understand how, one day.”)

Garry grinned weakly. “I feel pretty damn itchy,” he said. “But I’m
gonna be all right.”

Guinn glanced quickly at Morgan and she nodded. “He will be. No man can
die within eight days once he’s seen the Grail.”

Guinn glanced into the rear-view mirror again. There was no doubt of the
fact that Garry was alive and chipper.

“Okay,” he said, “I’ve been in the dark altogether too damn much. Let’s
have it. Where did all this start?”

She smiled, and touched his shoulder. “It’s a big thing and requires big
thinking, darling.”

“I can try.”

She settled back in her seat. “Well, first, you’ve got to get used to
the idea of a race of beings so enormous, so powerful, that you can’t
fully comprehend them. You just have to know they’re there.”

“Gods?”

“Do ants think elephants are gods? Do birds think locomotives are gods?
By all means believe in God, but if you do, do Him the justice to
believe that he is a God to the Great Beings as well.”

“Theology later,” said Guinn. “Go on.”

“When it became evident that this planet would support such as we, the
Great Ones supplied guidance for us. They put it on Earth and went on.
It is not their custom to stop and watch a civilization grow. They do
what they do in order to prevent imbalances that might disrupt little
corners of the universe. Once a race in this very system blew up its
planet, you know. Their balances prevent that. Or they should. And now
they will again.”

“What is this—guidance?”

“A permeating, controlling force for each of the great basics of life:
growth and decay. A better way of putting it is the anabolism and the
catabolism which together comprise metabolism. There is a force that
builds and a force that destroys; one that delivers heat and one that
absorbs it. It’s light and dark. It’s _yin_ and _yang_, the oldest
symbol known to man—a circle divided in two by the S-shaped line inside
of it, one half light, one half dark.”

“Good and evil.”

“No!” she said explosively. “Not that! Good and evil are erroneous human
concepts that derive from the terrible mistake that was made here.”

“What mistake?”

“Mythology contains many a mention of it, though few regard it as the
disaster it was. You see, only one of these forces has been fully
operating on earth. The other is crippled, subdued.”

“What happened?”

Morgan wrinkled her brow. “First, let me explain what the effect of this
imbalance is. If you put a cup on a table, and extend your hand to pick
it up, you are moving directly toward an established aim. If you shove
your arm all the way, as far as it will go, you’ll push the cup all the
way across and send it crashing to the floor on the other side. Yet no
one can deny that your force was applied to the desired end, in the
right direction, with the correct motivations.

“There is nothing evil or dangerous or harmful on this planet except
excess. There’s no such thing as a deadly poison; there’s just too much
of a poison. Too much pleasure is pain; too much fear (a fine survival
characteristic) or too much anger (and that’s another) means madness.”

“I think I see. Then which of these powers was crippled?”

“The power of darkness—destruction—anabolism.”

“You’re out of your head! This planet’s loaded with it!”

She shook her head sagely. “It’s building—building gone out of control.
It’s the cause of technology’s outstripping the spirit. Every nation
that smashes every other nation does it through a desire to construct
something—a political philosophy, an empire, a personal fortune or a
personal power. It’s construction that’s killing us off. It’s cancer!”

“I never thought of it that way.”

“Humans don’t. How can they? They’re born to it. But that can all be
changed. It’s up to you.”

“Me?”

“You. Only you have the power to give the Grail to Merlin.”

“What has that to do with it?”

“Remember your reading about him? What was his parentage?”

“He was—he was born of a virgin.”

“That’s right. That is the way the guidances are placed on a planet
Merlin’s the antichrist—yes. But don’t recoil from that word. I tell you
it has nothing to do with evil—everything to do with balance.”

“What would the world be like with that force in it?”

“That requires a whole new system of thought. It’s hard to put into
human language. Have you ever heard of someone committing a crime for
his own benefit?”

“All the time.”

“Well, try to imagine a culture in which it would be impossible to
construct that sentence, because ‘crime’ and ‘benefit’ couldn’t exist in
the same idea-sequence!”

He was quiet for a long time. At last he said, “Mankind as a unit of
free things, eh? Each with the full consciousness of the whole species?”

She shrugged. “Action is a light force, inhibition a dark one. The name
you have for rational inhibition is conscience. Imagine all mankind with
a cohesive conscience, and you’ll get the picture.”

Guinn wet his lips. “And what about you? And the Druids?”

“There’s a long word for me. I’m a metempsychotic. I get transferred
complete from one body to another, with complete memory. That’s how I
can do the things I do. None of it’s magic. It’s just that for me there
have been no dark ages. It’s all soundly scientific. The money in your
wallet? A kind of teleportation. The chair that moved by itself?
Telekinesis.

“The same thing’s true of the Druids. ‘Druid’ isn’t the name of a
religious sect, by the way; it’s a title, like ‘chancellor’ or
‘minister’. They’re metempsychotics too, but for the dark powers. I’m
neutral. I imagine I’m a sort of recording device for the Great Ones.”

“And how did the one force get crippled?”

“These guidances are put among humans in human terms. The antichrist was
baptized! His mother confessed her visitation to a man who had the power
to do it. And that is Merlin—fully possessed of the dark powers, but
unable to use them for their intended purposes!”

“And the Grail?”

“Pure and simple, a power source. That jewel is a reservoir of vital
energy. It was left in charge of a line of kings—the most cohesive form
of authority at that time—and of them, the revered Arthur pen Dragon … I
hope I’m not knocking over any childhood idols.”

“Not mine,” said Guinn sullenly.

“King Arthur was a petty, self-righteous little martinet with a weak
mind and a strong arm. He fell in accord with a renegade Druid who got
him to turn the Grail completely to the powers of light. It shouldn’t be
denied them, of course; but neither should it be monopolized. The Grail
itself, in its symbolized chalice form, was put into an immaterial form,
keyed to the very special aura of a certain kind of man, a man _who
couldn’t exist as long as the dark powers were crippled!_

“So we—Merlin and I—searched until we found suitable material, and then
made what environmental changes we could until we got one. You. Percival
almost made it, but not quite. He wasn’t—well—dirty enough.”

“Thanks.”

“It’s been tough sledding. Merlin had to keep his powers under forced
draft by any means he could. That ritual you saw is one of the ways. The
combination of auras of hypnotized animals, a virgin, oak, mistletoe and
fresh-killed mammals is a tremendous recharge. With the Grail it won’t
be necessary.”

“And Mordi?”

“A madman. Happened to be a genealogist and found that he was of the
true pen Dragon stock—the last of the pure line, most fortunately. Got
to fooling around with old rituals and found that the Druids, even
Merlin himself, were bound to him. He wanted the Grail as a personal
power-source—which, God knows, it certainly is.”

Guinn drove thoughtfully for a while. Then, “I called him Mordred.”

Morgan laughed. “There may be more pattern behind this than anyone—even
Merlin and I—know. For we have a Gareth and his Lynette; we had a
Percival, the good man who almost had the Grail. And Mordred, the deputy
King who turned so evil.”

“There was a gasp from the back seat. Lynn said, “Mordi—he saw the
Grail. He’ll live eight days?”

“At least,” said Morgan cheerfully. And Guinn, holding the wheel, saw a
flash of that bodiless head, blinking and tonguing up at him. Then he
thought of Gary propped up against the cave entrance, dying, and
watching … and he drove without speaking.

“So it’s up to you, chum,” said Morgan. “Give Merlin the Grail, and
restore some balance to this rock, or don’t, and we’ll keep on building
Babel.”

“Excalibur and the atom, is that it? Wait. The atom bomb is a disruptive
dark-power device if anything ever was. Right?”

“Right,” said Morgan. “A feeble victory for Merlin’s side. It’s the
H-bomb we’re worried about. That’s _fusion—_that’s building. Darling, if
you give Merlin the Grail, that damned thing … won’t … work!”

Garry said, weakly, “Hey, boss. Just who are you?”

When Guinn didn’t answer, Morgan laughed and said, “He’s Hadley Guinn.
He got his last name from the only name anyone knew his mother by. It
was Guinevere. He called himself Hadley because he got sick and tired of
getting kidded about his real name.” She hugged him. “In a couple
thousand years, he’ll get over that.”

Guinn took a deep breath and said it, all by himself—the one word that
had been anathema to him all his life, that had poisoned the whole Round
Table legend for him.

“Galahad,” he said. “By God, I’m Galahad, that’s who I am!”

And when they test the H-bomb, you’ll know what he decided.



THE INCUBI OF PARALLEL X


IT’S SMALLER, GARTH thought as he lay on his belly on top of the hill
and looked down, through carefully parted branches, at Gesell Hall. The
Hall had towered over him when he was a child, last year, last week,
last night, in his dreams. And now, at the moment he had schooled
himself for, waited for since the day his world had ended, he could feel
no thrill, no triumph—only it’s smaller.

The great building, with its rambling wings, its twisted, broken power
receptor antennae, its yellow weed-grown courts, lay as if in the hollow
of some mighty neck, with a cliff and a mountain shoulder shrugging it
into its crowded, cluttered, sheltered state.

I should have known, he thought. I was only a kid when I left—when the
Ffanx—

He lost himself in the restimulated dream, the clear mental picture of
his toy spaceship, hovering in midair on a pillar of koolflame fire, and
his child’s dream of worlds, and then the shrill thunder of jets—real
jets, Ffanx jets—which had brought an end to his dream and his childhood
and his world.

Garth Gesell slipped a long-fingered hand under his abdomen and hauled
out a knobby root which rowelled him. _It was there_, he thought, _right
there by the main building. The Ffanx came, and I ran around to the
front and through the double doors, and right in to Dad and Mooley. And
the roof came down, and Mooley, the cat, ran through fire and was naked
and agonized, and then there was Dad’s head with a splinter through the
bridge of his nose and the end of it in a ruined eye, talking to
me … talking out of a mountain of rubble, out of torture, out of
gentleness and greatness, asking me to save a race and a world and a
system …_

Well, he was back. Not back home, for this was enemy territory now. All
the backslid, savage world was enemy territory for anyone who ventured
out of his settlement, and Garth’s adopted village was many a long day’s
march behind him. Behind him, too, were years of growth and training and
of living with the nagging, driving force of his childhood promise to
his father: I shall open the Gateway.

“I shall open the Gateway.” He said it aloud, intensely, in a deep
re-dedication to his father’s wish. And then he threw himself violently
to one side.

His watchful subconscious, his trained hearing, were a shade too slow to
avoid the blow completely. The short, stubby spear whacked him painfully
between the shoulder-blades instead of burying itself in his back. He
rolled back over it, snatching it up as he rolled, and bounced to his
feet in a single fluid motion, striking upward with the spear. He got a
quick impression of a tall, wide, golden figure which, without moving
its feet, bent gracefully aside to avoid the spear’s hungry point. Then
there was a sharp blow on Garth’s wrist and the spear went flying end
over end into the undergrowth.

Garth stood, shaken and helpless, grasping his wrist, and looked up into
the easy smile of the stranger.

“Move fast, don’t you?” said the man. He had a broad, cleancut face and
the rasping, rapid speech of a Northerner. He stood with his thick legs
apart, the knees slightly flexed. Garth had the impression that from
that stance the man could move instantly in any direction, including
straight up. “But not fast enough for Bronze,” the man added.

Garth understood the name and the reason for it—the golden skin and
yellow hair, the rivet-studded belt and boots were obviously a personal
trade-mark. In his hand Bronze held a polished throwing-stick, the
source of the stubby, bullet-like spear. He slowly whacked the end of it
into a wide, horny palm as he studied Garth. “What are you after?”

Garth thumbed over his shoulder at the crumbling building down in the
green hollow. “What do you call that place?”

“Gesell.”

“I am Gesell too.”

Bronze’s face turned into a mask. He stepped past Garth, dropping his
throwing-stick into the quiver of spears which hung behind his right
shoulder. He stooped and picked up Garth’s weapon and handed it back to
him.

Garth carefully avoided saying, “Thanks.”

“I heard you say you’d open the Gateway.”

Garth nodded.

Bronze said, “Could I help you?” and in that moment Garth knew he’d won.
He suppressed a smile. “I don’t need help,” he said.

“You might,” said Bronze.

Garth shrugged as if he didn’t care. In reality, he cared a great deal.
He had known for a long time that he’d have to recruit some help, and he
liked the looks of those big shoulders, and of the obvious skill that
had gone into the man’s trappings and weapons. “What’s it to you if I
open the Gateway?”

Bronze licked his lips. Then, with no attempt to conceal his motives, he
said, “There’s women in there. Thousands of ’em. The best, the smartest
on this world or off it.” He paused. “I come here all the time. I sit up
here and look down at the Hall and try to figure a way in.” He spread
his big hands. “If you were trying to stop me from getting to those
women, I wanted to kill you. If you can help me get to them, I’m on your
side. All the way. See?”

“Fair enough,” said Garth, and let the grin come through this time. “Not
enough women around here for you?”

“Not enough women in the whole damn world. Seven in Prellton—that’s my
village—and a hundred men. Over the hill there, in Haddon’s Town,
there’s twice as many women and three times as many men.”

“So you want the Gateway open so you can cut loose with the whole lot of
’em?”

“Me?” cried Bronze. “No, man, I just want one. Just one woman, all for
me.”

“I see you’re a reasonable man,” said Garth, smiling. “You can go with
me.”

Bronze looked as if Garth had given him a kingdom, and a pair of wings
to boot. “I heard of you Gesells.”

“You heard of my father,” said Garth.

“They still tell stories about him.”

If there has to be a shrine, there’s bound to be a legend, thought
Garth. “Why didn’t you try breaking into the Hall?”

“Some tried, one time or another,” said Bronze. He cast a quick, fearful
glance down into the hollow. “They’re all dead.”

“That’s what I heard.” Garth studied Bronze thoughtfully. “Ever see it
happen?”

“Once.” Bronze swung his spear quiver off his shoulder and squatted on
the bank, running the spears nervously through his thick fingers as he
spoke, testing their points, their grooved hafts. “I was to watch, me
and Rob O’Bennet and his fighting-boys. Flan of Haddon’s Town and his
men got the main assault because they have the larger settlement. We
were to storm down and back them once they’d breached the Hall.” He
paused and wet his lips. His amber eyes were haunted. “Two Guardians the
Hall had, then as now—two only, just two against the two hundred of us.
Flan’s boys raised a yell you could hear over the mountain, and charged.
Not a sign of life from the Hall until they were half across the court
there—” he pointed—“and then the Guardians stepped out, one from the
north corner, one from the south, by the little door. There was blast of
green fire the like of which words won’t handle.” Bronze covered his
eyes as he spoke. “I saw it stretch between the two Guardians for a half
second, and then I was dazzle-blinded.

“When I could see again my brave boys were gone, leaving me writhing my
burned eyes into the grass here. And down there in the court lay Flan
and thirty-eight of his boys, smoking and black.”

He paused while the terrifying picture died behind his eyes.
“Afterward,” he said, “a party of us went over to Haddon’s Town to see
if so many dead hadn’t left a widow for us, but they had the place
well-stockaded.”

Garth made no comment. “Tell me what you know of the Guardians.”

“I’ll tell you little enough,” said Bronze. “But if I said what I’d
heard I’d be talking a month or more. All you ever see of them is that
pointed cowl and the long habit that goes to the ground. Some say
they’re men and women—or were. Some say they’re monsters from the other
side of the Gateway.”

“We’ll soon see,” said Garth.

“You’re a Gesell,” said Bronze, his voice hoarse with suppressed
excitement. “You can just walk in like a guest.”

“I can not,” said Garth shortly. “I hate to disappoint you, Bronze, but
a lot of water has gone over the dam since the Ffanx conquered us. My
father built the Gateway twenty years ago, thinking that it would guard
those women for the month or so it took to smash the Ffanx. They killed
my father and closed the Gateway. And by then the world was a ruin, with
the women gone and the men fighting over the handful who were left, and
the secret of the Gateway locked up in the brain of an eight-year-old
child. And now the Hall is a shrine, and the guards are Guardians,
science is magic and each part of the world fights every other part.”

“What are you saying? You can’t just walk in, and you a Gesell?”

“Everything’s changed,” said Garth patiently. “I’ve listened to every
traveler’s tale, read every record—there are damned few enough—and it
all comes to the one stupidity: I am the only man alive who can open the
Gateway, and those dedicated fools down there will kill me on sight if I
go near it.

“How do I know you’re a Gesell?” said Bronze, in reawakened suspicion.

“You don’t,” said Garth. Without looking up or turning, he made one
sudden, brief movement. The tube seemed to leap from his right holster
into his hand. “Look, Bronze.”

Bronze’s face went stony. “What is it? What is that thing?”

Garth pressed the stud on the side of the tube. A beam of light leaped
from the tube to bathe Bronze’s terrified face. The big man cried out,
and then sat frozen, eyes shut in terror. Garth turned it off and
dropped it back into the holster. “My name is Gesell,” he said
conversationally, “but I don’t give a hub-forted damn if you believe it
or not.”

“What was it?” What did it do? That light, that white light—”

“Just light,” said Garth, and laughed. He slapped the big man on his
meaty shoulder. “Stop your chattering.”

“You shouldn’t ‘a done that,” said Bronze hoarsely. “You didn’t have to
scare me like that, Gesell. I said I’d help. I wasn’t backing out. I
believe you.”

“Good. Now shut up and let me figure this out.”

They stood at the crest of a wooded slope that fell away almost
vertically to the clearing below. The Hall stood in the center of the
clearing, and beyond it was another rise—the mountain shoulder itself,
not quite as high as the elevation on which they hid. The weed-grown
court offered no shelter except a couple of giant trees, one of which
towered over the central building. One thick branch held a mighty,
protective arm over the low roof. Garth stared at it and at the opposite
slope.

“Bronze!”

Bronze was by him, almost crowding him in his eagerness to serve. “What,
Gesell?”

“Just how good are you with that womera of yours?”

“Good enough, Gesell. I once killed a deer at ninety yards.”

“How many?”

“Seventy,” said Bronze, finding himself fixed by Garth’s deep eyes. He
gulped and grinned.

“It’s damn near a hundred and fifty over to the top of the bluff—see it
there, the sheer rock straight over the Hall?”

“Uh-huh. I could peg a spear over there. Wouldn’t hit too hard, though.”

“Could you put it exactly there?”

Confidently, Bronze made a ring of his thumb and forefinger. “I could
put it through that.”

“Show me.”

Bronze selected a spear and fitted the butt of it to the cup-shaped hook
in the end of his throwing stick. He tested the ground under his feet,
glanced overhead to check for overhanging brush, and moved a little to
the left. For a moment he stood poised, fixing the opposite cliff with a
hypnotic eye. Then he moved. His arm was a blur, and the stick itself
was invisible. It all but crackled as it cleft the air.

For a brief moment Garth lost sight of the spear altogether. Then his
quick eye caught its flicker just before it stopped, deep-buried in a
tree-trunk at the lip of the rock cliff. He held his breath, and in a
second or so he heard, through the warm afternoon air, the soft, solid
_thunk_ of its impact.

Incredible! He thought. He said, boredly, “Not too bad. I’d hate to
depend on that thing if there was any wind, though.”

Garth threw off his belt. He stood up in a single garment, a skin-tight
shorts-and-tunic combination of midnight blue, with a narrow white
stripe all the way around under his armpits and another just below his
waistline. Raising his arms he felt along this line and drew out a small
ring, which he slid along the stripe. It was, judging by the wide eyes
and slack mouth, Bronze’s first view of a slide fastener.

Garth repeated the movement with a second ring on the lower stripe, and
drew off the center portion of his tunic over his head—a single,
resilient tube of soft, thin fabric. He ran its edge through his
fingers, stopped, and carefully picked out a thread, which he worked
free. Ignoring the astounded Bronze, he began to unravel the material.

“What you doing?”

Garth said, “Make yourself useful. I want you to sweep the ground
clean—really clean—some place where it’s solid. I want an area six by
six feet without so much as a straw on it, with clear air above it. Get
to it.”

Willing and mystified, Bronze did as he was told. By the time Garth had
thirty feet of thread cleared, the area was ready and Bronze, panting,
was back at Garth’s side. Garth took pity on him—he was obviously about
to burst with curiosity. He held up the thread. “Break off a piece for
me, Bronze boy.”

Bronze took the end of the thread, wrapped it around his fists,
and—“Wait!” laughed Garth.

He picked up two heavy pieces of tree branch, unwound the thread from
the big unresisting fists, and took a couple of turns of the thread
around each piece of wood, leaving about six inches of thread between
them. “Now try it,” he said. “Grip the wood, not the thread.”

Puzzled, Bronze grasped the two pieces of wood and pulled. The thread
went taut with a musical twang which rose in pitch as Bronze pulled. A
look of utter amazement crossed his broad face. He relaxed, turned the
two pieces of wood so that he wound up more thread and had only two
inches between them. He set his back against a tree, knotted his jaw,
and, with his great hands close to his chest, began to pull. His triceps
swelled until the stretched skin shone. His body moved visibly away from
the tree that he leaned against as his scapular muscles bunched and
crawled.

There was a muffled crackling from his shoulders, and Garth stepped
forward in alarm. Then one of the pieces of wood gave. The thread sliced
through it like a scythe through a stand of wheat, and Bronze stood
gasping, staring foolishly at the cleancut stub of branch in his hand.
The thread fell away, unstretched, unbroken.

“I gave you the wood,” Garth grinned, “because it would’ve sliced
through your paws.”

“What Ffanx stuff is that?” gasped Bronze.

“That isn’t Ffanx stuff; it’s strictly human. Molecularly condensed
fibre spun under massive ion bombardment, if that makes any never mind
to you. It has linear cohesion in the order of six tons test and eight
and a half tons breaking strain. And it has no rotary cohesion at all.”

“Yeah,” said Bronze, “but what is it?”

“It’s what you’re going to tie to a spear and fire over the gulch for
me. Now let’s get busy and flake it out here. There’s four hundred yards
of it in this shirt. Half that should be enough. We’ll give it a little
more.”

For two hours, as the afternoon shadows grew long, they worked, laying
the thread meticulously in a series of small coils. Each turn of each
coil lay flat and obedient. Slowly, the coils began to carpet the
cleared area. They talked little, except toward the end of the laborious
job. Finally—“That should do it,” Garth said.

Bronze straightened up and punched himself in his aching kidneys. “I’m
hungry.”

“Feed us,” said Garth.

Bronze took up his quiver and throwing-stick without a word, and glided
away through the underbrush. Within a quarter of an hour he was back,
carrying two large rabbits. One had a ragged hole through the head just
behind the eyes, and the other was still impaled through the ribcage and
heart by one of the stubby spears. Bronze squatted down, pulled out a
worn knife, and with the swift casualness of long practice, gutted and
skinned one of the animals and handed the warm and dripping quarters to
Garth.

“Now listen to me,” Garth said with his mouth full. “I don’t know for
sure who those Guardians are. But this I do know for sure—that green
fire you saw doesn’t come from them. It comes from under the ground—an
energy field activated by something they carry under those long
robes … Why do I bother to explain anything to you?”

“I’m listening,” grunted Bronze, spitting out a piece of gristle.

“All right. Now get this, it takes two Guardians, both on the line of
those underground cables, to set off that fire. But _it takes two of
them to do it_. Do you understand? If I can get one of them out of the
way, you can jump the other one without any danger.”

“Uh?” Bronze wiped rabbit blood off his chin.

“Are you following this? I’m going to leave you in a minute, and I want
to know I can depend on you. Are you going to take my word for it—that
you can tackle a Guardian without danger of getting burned?”

Bronze looked at him. “You said I could, didn’t you?” he asked simply.

Garth let the grin come through again. “I think we’re going to make it,
Bronze boy,” he said. “Now here’s the plan.”

The night was cool and still, but Garth, naked except for his belt, his
boots, and the briefest of shorts—which were all that was left of his
tunic—was warm and slick with sweat as he completed the long, silent
climb to the top of the bluff. He filled and emptied his lungs in deep,
open-throated gasps as he felt his way along the lip of the sheer rock
wall of the cliff. He found the bald spot and the tree into which Bronze
had sunk his test spear that afternoon.

He stepped behind the tree in which Bronze’s spear still stuck, and,
reaching around it with his flashlight in his hand, sent a quick, white
beam up the trunk.

Then he waited.

There was a crescent moon in the sky, a chunky moon that urgently wanted
to be gibbous. Somewhere a katydid cried for the grease like the
proverbial squeaky wheel, and a tree-toad plucked away at its piano-wire
heartstrings. Over the brink was blackness—eighty feet or better,
straight down—and then, away from the cliff’s shadow, a hundred yards
from the base of the bluff, stood the arched shadow of the great tree
with its limb stretched out over the main building like a giant frozen
in a gesture of benison.

Where was Bronze? The opposite hill was a featureless mass of shadow and
shifting moonlight. Was he there, sighting carefully on the place where
he had seen Garth’s gleam of light? Or was he gone, freed from the spell
of wonderment and awe that Garth had put on him, strolling back toward
his village to spend tonight and the rest of his musclebound life with
idle speculation about the time he almost helped to open the Gateway?

The katydid and the treefrog suddenly were more than Garth could bear.
With a snort of impatience he stepped from behind the tree. Immediately
there was a whining whisper that crescendoed closer—air fanned his nose
and eyes, and something slammed into the tree trunk. He went to his
knees, staring up into blackness and then, in spite of himself, laughed.
“I hope I’ve used up all my dumbness for tonight,” he thought ruefully.
He had known the impossibility of Bronze’s hitting the tree again,
especially in the dark—and had almost stepped out of the shelter of the
tree-trunk in time to catch the spear with his silly head.

The spear hadn’t stuck in the tree, for he had cautioned Bronze to bury
the point in a piece of heartwood; he’d never have been able to pull it
out of the tree, and, to do what he had to do, the thread-end must be
free.

He fumbled about for the spear and found it. From his belt-pouch he drew
a pair of molded gloves, thin, light, impenetrable, made of the same
condensed matter as his tunic. Slipping them on, he picked up the spear
and purely by touch found the thread. He brought it in hand over hand,
yards of it, until suddenly it jerked sharply, twice, in his grip. He
grinned. That was Bronze’s “Good luck!”

Taking a bight of the thread, he walked once around the tree, thrust the
loop of the bight under the main part where it would be pinched between
that part and the tree-trunk. A slight tug on the free end would cast
the line adrift.

He took a deep breath and walked to the cliff-edge. Everything depended
on his estimates of the distances involved.

_This is it, he thought_. Carefully he took the thread at the point his
measurements had brought him to, and tied it to the back of his belt. He
knelt and swept a space on the ground, and carefully recoiled the line
so it would flake away freely. Then he went to the edge of the cliff,
reached up over his head, and got his gloved hands on the anchored part
of the line, where it passed tautly from tree to tree across the hollow.
He watched then, and tried not to think.

The buildings were dark, except for a dim orange light in the main Hall.
He could see a flickering, an occasional movement as if restless figures
inside passed and re-passed the light.

_What the hell was Bronze doing over there?_ Had he forgotten what he
was supposed to do next? The big, stupid, slow …

From the other side of the canyon came a titanic crashing as a boulder
went bounding down the slope, and with it a blood-chilling yell that
echoed and re-echoed and faded repetitively off into the distance. It
sounded like a score of lost souls calling and answering from strategic
points up and down both sides of the valley.

_What a set of pipes!_ Garth thought, and stepped off the cliff.

He could feel the rod-hard, stretched thread humming in his hands as the
gentle night wind stroked it. He hung for a moment, then put one hand
before the other. And again. And again. His body began to swing forward
and back as he went along the line. He swore under his breath and
checked the movement by a swift, synchronized run-and-stop, run-and-stop
with his hands.

His shoulders began to ache and he tried to forget it. He hung by one
hand for a moment and allowed himself the luxury of bringing the other
arm down, flexing the fingers. Hand over hand over hand over hand …

He put his hands together and crossed the wrists, so that his body
turned to look back the way he had come. The shadowed cliff he had left
was already distant, one with the hill-blackness that surrounded the
buildings. He went on. Before and below him, the great tree came closer
and closer and closer as he inched along. Too close?

He swung along, arms all but numb, shoulders an agony, hands reduced to
two stiffly disobedient hooks that grasped, released, grasped, released,
with greater and greater reluctance.

There was some sort of commotion by the building. Someone called out. A
Guardian? At that moment he couldn’t have defined a Guardian, and
wouldn’t have cared. The universe was one hand after another.

It came! He had watched for it each second, and when it came it took him
totally by surprise. There was the faintest of tugs at his belt as the
free end of the line drew tight, and then, far behind him, the thread
whipped away from the tree he had left.

He dropped like a nighthawk.

The ground struck his knee a single, stunning blow and then he was
hurtling upward toward the eaves of the Hall. He reached the top of his
swing and all the strain was suddenly gone from his arms. For a single,
terrifying split-second he was afraid his cramped hands would not let
go. Then he was free of the line. He concentrated his whole being into
keeping his balance, flexing his knees.

The dark roof came up and took him. He gathered the shock in his
thigh-muscles, turned one shoulder down and rolled.

Then for a long, luxurious minute he lay still and rested.

After Bronze shoved the boulder over the edge and roared his terrible
challenge into the night, he scuttled like a frightened rabbit through
the dark tunnel of a trail that angled down the slope. “Crazy, crazy,”
he muttered. It couldn’t work, that crazy plan of Gesell’s. It was
marvelous, heroic, brilliant, but—crazy. And he, Bronze, was crazy too,
to think of helping. He’d go home. He’d had enough—enough to tell all
Prellton about for the rest of his life.

But in spite of his thoughts, his legs carried him cautiously down the
slope to the deadly courtyard of Gesell Hall.

“Line,” said a low voice.

It was the cowled figure of a Guardian, waiting quietly in the moonlight
to unleash hot green death.

“Now I’m going home,” thought Bronze, quite coldly and rationally.

He stayed where he was.

Then he saw the other Guardian, moving as if on a track—slowly,
steadily, with no hint of a leg-motion—just an inhuman glide. Snails
move like that. Centipedes. The stories of monsters from the other side
of the Gateway suddenly flooded into his mind.

Bronze saw something else. If the second Guardian moved farther out,
away from the Hall, he, Bronze, would be in a straight line between the
two of them—

There was an abrupt, intense feeling in his stomach, as if his dinner
rabbit had come to life again and had hopped. He rose to his feet. His
mouth was dry.

The second Guardian was now out of sight, still moving toward that point
which would bracket Bronze in verdant flame.

“Line,” said the second voice, and then came the first of the two
greatest shocks of Bronze’s life.

With a glare of bright white light, a face appeared in midair—twenty
feet off the ground—in front of the blank wall of the building.

“Guardian!” sang a deep, organlike voice.

The face was Garth Gesell’s.

“Gesell!” gasped a Guardian. Sobbing, he ran toward the light. The other
followed slowly. Bronze could begin to see, in the nimbus of light from
the radiant face, Gesell’s whole body. It hung in the air, perhaps a
third of the way down the wall, with one arm thrust forward. The other
hand seemed to be behind his back.

“Stop!” intoned the voice. “Remove your habits, Guardian, for I have
returned!”

The Guardian from the left faltered, stopped. He stripped off his robe
and cast it aside. The other followed suit. The two naked figures moved
toward the building, like sleepwalkers. And as they did so, the shining
face slid slowly and majestically to the ground. The Guardians fell to
their knees and bowed to the earth at his feet. The light disappeared.

“Bronze?” Garth spoke quietly, but the syllable snapped Bronze out of
his awed reverie. He leapt to his feet and sprinted across the wide
court, to receive his second mighty shock.

Garth stood erect against the wall, and Bronze realized the stiffness of
utter exhaustion in his stance. “Watch ’em,” Garth whispered, and turned
his flashlight on the two reverent figures.

One of them was a girl.

The long-tethered wild horses reared up in Bronze’s brain. There was an
explosion of desire that jolted him to the marrow. He bent quickly and
took her arm. “Stand up, you.”

She did.

She looked at him from wide, untroubled eyes. She made no attempt to
cover herself or to cower. She met his gaze, and simply waited.

There were two kinds of women on Earth—the Escaped, and the Returned.
The Escaped had been passed over by the hunting Ffanx—by chance, by
luck, by sheer animal cunning on the part of the women or the men who
hid them. They had been fair game for the Ffanx while the Ffanx ruled
Earth, and they were fair game for any of the hundred-odd men who were
left to compete for each of them.

And of the Earth’s few women, perhaps one in a thousand was Returned.
Almost invariably the Ffanx had slaughtered the women. But once in a
long, long while they let the woman go. Why, no human ever understood.
Perhaps it was capriciousness, perhaps it was done for experimentation.
But in the rough ethic of a heterogeneous, dark-age society—all that was
left of Earth culture after the Ffanx had conquered and then were
destroyed in their turn—these women were sacrosanct. They had paid.
Their very existence on the planet was a narrative and a dirge; they
were the walking sorrow of Earth. And they were not to be touched. It
was all that could be done for their loss and their loneliness. They
knew it, and they walked without fear.

The wild horses within Bronze settled. They gentled, quieted, as if some
firm, known hand had touched their flaring nostrils.

“Sister,” he said, “I’m sorry.”

She barely inclined her head. She turned then to Garth and said in a low
voice, “What can we do for the master?”

Garth sighed. “I have come a long way. My friend and I need rest. Guard
as you always have, and in the morning there will be a new day, and
nothing will ever be the same again for any of us.”

The girl touched the shoulder of the other Guardian. “Come.”

He rose. He was a slender, dark-browed youth with the wild frightened
eyes of a chipmunk. He had white flesh and stick-like arms, and a very
great dignity. “Master,” he said to Garth. In his tone was subservience,
but an infinitely proud sense of service rather than a humble one. He
and the girl went into the building.

“Sexless,” said Bronze. It was an identification only, there was no
scorn.

Garth said, “I’m tired.”

“You sleep. I’ll watch,” said Bronze.

“You can sleep too,” said Garth. “We’re in, Bronze. Really in.”

“Bronze …”

The big man was on his feet, weapons in hand, before Gesell’s voice had
ceased. He cast about the room, saw no immediate menace, and crossed to
the bed. “You all right?”

Garth stretched luxuriously. “Never better, though I feel as if my
shoulder-joints needed oiling … what’s for breakfast?”

Bronze went to the door and flung it open, filling his mighty lungs to
shout. He didn’t. The girl was standing there, waiting.

Garth saw her. “Come in—Good Lord, girl, you must be freezing!”

“I haven’t had your permission …” she said gravely.

“Go dress. And tell the other Guardian to put on some clothes. What’s
your name?”

“Viki.”

“What’s his name—that other Guardian?”

“Daw, Master.”

“Good. My name’s not Master. It’s Garth, or Gesell, whichever suits you.
This is Bronze. Is there anything to eat?”

“Yes, Garth Gesell.”

Garth pursed his lips. Her intonation of his name was infinitely more
adoring, even, than her “Master.” He said, “We’ll be out in a minute. I
want you to eat with us, do you understand? You and the other, both.”

“A great honor, Garth Gesell.” She smiled, and it did wonders for the
fine-drawn austerity of her face.

She waited a moment, and when Garth apparently had nothing more to say,
she left. She backed to the door.

Breakfast was an acutely uncomfortable affair. They ate at a small
square table in the hall under the portrait of the first Gesell. It
might have been a picture of Garth five or ten years older. They had
always looked alike.

Viki, now dressed in the conventional short flowing tunic fastened only
by a wide belt, sat demure and quiet, speaking only when spoken to, and
screening her constant gaze at Garth with her long lashes. Daw stared
straight ahead out of round, permanently astonished eyes, and tried
hard, apparently, to avoid looking directly at Gesell. Bronze grinned
broadly at Garth’s discomfiture and ignored the prim looks of the two
Guardians.

Garth waited until the meal was finished, and then put his palms down on
the table. “We have work to do.”

They turned to him so raptly and obediently that for a moment he lost
his train of thought. Bronze looked as if he was about to laugh. Garth
shot him a venomous look and said to the Guardians, “But I want you to
talk first. I’ve been away a long time. I want the history of this place
as you know it, especially where it concerns the Gateway.”

Viki and Daw looked at one another. Garth said, “Come on, come on—”

Daw composed himself, folded his hands on the edge of the table, and
cast his eyes down. “In the year of the Ffanx,” he intoned, “on the
meadows of Hack and Sack, there appeared a blue light shaped like a
great arched doorway, filled with a flickering mist.”

“We trust in Gesell,” muttered Viki.

“And there came from this archway a creature as long as a hand and as
heavy as four times its mass in lead castings. It sniffed at the air,
and it took up some soil, and it lifted a box which it held to its head,
and it smelled out our women. It called, then; and out of the archway
came more of its kind in the hundreds of thousands, wearing strange
trappings and bringing machines to work evil. And these were the Ffanx.”

“We trust in Gesell,” murmured the girl.

Garth opened his mouth to speak, and closed it abruptly. He had a quick
ear, and he had rapidly caught the cadences of Daw’s voice. No one
speaks like that naturally. This wasn’t a report, it was a singsong
ritual.

“At first the world wondered, at first the world laughed at the Ffanx.
For the Ffanx were so tiny, and their ships were like toys, and they
spread over Earth without harming a soul, and submitted to capture and
acted like comical dolls. They covered the planet and when they were
ready—they struck.”

He put his head down on his folded hands as he spoke the last two words.
Viki droned, “We trust in Gesell.”

Daw straightened up and now his voice deepened. His eyes were wide, and
fixed on nothing in the room. As he spoke, Garth found himself
fascinated by the almost imperceptible motion of Bronze’s shaggy head as
it nodded in time to the dactylic beat of Daw’s speech.

“They struck at our women. They found them in homes and in caves and in
churches: killed them by millions. Their weapons were hammers of force
from the sky, inaudible sounds that drove strong men to kill their own
daughters and slaughter themselves. And then the foul Ffanx would sweep
in their bodies.

“And sometimes they herded them, flashing about in their sleek little
airships, smashing the men and propelling the foot-weary women along to
great pens in the open. They walled them about with their fences of
force and destroyed all attacks from outside, and then at their leisure
they killed all our females, this one today and then that one, and two
or two thousand tomorrow. And Earth saw its blackest, its sorriest day …

“Earth was united in madness.”

“We trust in Gesell.”

“Gesell was a giant who lived on a hill, a worker of wonders who turned
from his works to the solving of problems for Earth. Of all men on
Earth, he alone learned the nature of Ffanx and the land whence they
came and the spell he could cast to destroy them. It was he who devised
a retreat for the women that not even Ffanx could detect. He set up a
Gateway and passed women through it—women with beauty and women with
mind, and any and all of the women with child who could come to the
Gateway.

“And the Earth had turned savage, and men lost their reason and stormed
up the hill of Gesell, and they tried to pass into the gateway and get
to the women. With some it was hunger, with some it was cowardice. So
Gesell, all unwilling, constructed defenses, appointed the Guardians,
gave instructions to kill all who came in attack, be they human or
Ffanx.”

“We trust in Gesell.”

“And this is the Word of Gesell:

“ ‘Guard the Gateway with your lives. Make no attempt to open it, or the
Ffanx will find it and take the treasure it hides. When the time is
right, the women will open the Gateway themselves—or I or another Gesell
will open it from this side. But guard it well.’

“That is the Word of Gesell, and the end of his word; and he alone knows
if there was to be more; for that was the end of Gesell. The Ffanx came
and killed him, but dying, he cast a great spell and they died. They
died on two worlds and the menace is done with. And Earth is in darkness
and waits for Gesell to return, and the Gateway to open. And meanwhile
the Word of Gesell is the hope of the world:

“Guard the Gateway.”

Daw’s voice died away. Bronze sat as if mesmerized. Viki’s lips moved
silently in the response.

Garth slapped his hand down suddenly, shockingly. “This is going to
hurt,” he gritted. “Daw, where did that—that recitation come from? Where
did it start?”

“It’s the Word of Gesell,” said Daw, wonderingly. “Everybody—”

“We repeat it morning and night,” Viki interposed, “to strengthen us in
our duty.”

“But whose phrases are they? Who made it up?”

“Garth Gesell, _you_ must know … or perhaps you are testing us.”

“Will you answer the question?”

“I learned it from Daw,” said Viki.

“I learned it from Soames, who had it from Elbert and Vesta, who were
taught by Gesell himelf.”

Garth closed his eyes. “Elbert … Holy smoke! He was the …” He stopped
himself in time. He remembered Elbert—a dreamy scholar with whom his
father used to have long and delightful philosophical discussions, and
who, at other times, pushed a broom around the laboratories. Garth began
to see the growth of this myth, born in the poetic mind of a misfit.

He looked into their rapt faces. “I’m going to tell you the same story
that you told me,” he said flatly, “but without the mumbo-jumbo.”

“Gesell was my father. He was a great man and a good one. He was _not_
nine feet tall, Bronze. And—” he turned to the Guardians—“he was not a
‘worker’ of spells.

“Now to your legend. ‘The meadows of Hack and Sack’ are swampland just
south of what used to be, before the Ffanx came, the greatest city on
Earth. The real name is Hackensack. The blue arch wasn’t magic, it was
science—it was the same thing as the Gateway itself, though of a
slightly different kind.

“The Ffanx were small and heavy because they came from an area where
molecular structure is far more compressed than it is here. And they
struck at our women for a good reason. It wasn’t viciousness and it
wasn’t for sport. It was, to them, a vital necessity. And that necessity
made it useless to think of driving them off, defeating them. They had
to be _destroyed_, not defeated. I won’t go into the deeper details of
inter-dimensional chemistry. But I want you to know exactly what the
Ffanx were after—you’ll understand them a lot better.

“There is no great difference, physically, between men and women. I
mean, bone structure, metabolism, heart and lung and muscular function
are different in quality but not in kind. But there is one thing that
women produce that men do not. It’s a complex protein substance called
extradiol. One of its parts is called extradiol _beta-prime_, and is the
only way in which human extradiol differs from that of other female
animals. With it, they’re women. Without it, they’re nothing … cold,
sexless … ruined.

“So it was this substance that the Ffanx were after. You’ve heard the
tales of what they wanted. Women. But they didn’t want them as women.
They were after _extradiol_ for the best reason on Earth or off it:

_“It made them immortal!”_

Bronze’s jaw dropped. Viki continued to gaze raptly at Garth. Daw’s
heavy brows were drawn together in an expression that looked more like
fear and worry than perplexity.

“Think about that for a minute. Think of what would happen if we of
Earth found a species of animal which carried a substance which would do
that for us … we’d hunt it ruthlessly and mercilessly.”

“Wait a minute,” Bronze said. “You mean that these Ffanx couldn’t die
from a spear-wound?”

“Lord, no—they weren’t immortal in that sense. Just from old age which,
in any species, is a progressive condition caused by dysfunction of
various parts—particularly connective tissue. A complicated extract of
human extradiol _beta_ would restore the connective tissues of the Ffanx
and keep them healthy for thirty of our years or more. Then another shot
would keep ’em that way, and so on.”

“Just where is the Ffanx world?” asked Daw, and then colored violently
as if embarrassed by the sound of his own voice.

“That’s a little difficult to explain,” said Garth carefully. “Look,
suppose that door—” he pointed to an interior doorway—“opened into more
than one room. You can almost imagine it; say you’d have to go through
the door from an acute angle to get into the first room, go straight
through to get into a second. You might call the second world Parallel
X.

“The Gateway and the blue arch at Hackensack were doorways between
worlds—between universes. These universes exist at the same time in the
same space—but at different vibratory rates … I don’t expect you to
understand it, no one really does. The theory’s an old one. No one gave
it much consideration until the Ffanx got here.”

Bronze asked, “If it’s a doorway, like you say, why didn’t the Ffanx
find the way in to the world where the women went?”

Garth smiled. “Remember the doorway there? Suppose you were quite
familiar with the way that door opened to one of two rooms. Then
supposing I came along and pointed out that instead of going straight in
or turning left, you could go _up_ and find yourself in still a third
room. It’s like that. The Ffanx just never thought of going into their
inter-dimensional arch in the particular direction that would wind them
up in the Gateway world.

“There was always the possibility that the Ffanx _might_ think of it,
though, and you can bet that the women were warned and were ready to
fight. But to get back to the story—I have to tell it all to you so you
can understand what we’re going to do next; and I will have you
understand it, because I don’t want help from people who just take
orders, I want help from people who think.

“All right, let’s go on. I’m trying to give you an idea of what my
father was—a man who worked and worried and made mistakes and was happy
and frightened and brave and all the other things you are.

“He was a scientist, a specialist in molecular structure. In the early
days of the invasion he got hold of a couple of Ffanx. You’ll remember
that they weren’t attacking then. My Dad was the only man who was ever
able to communicate with them, and he did it without their realizing
what he was doing. A specialist in condensed matter can produce a lot of
weird effects. One of the things he found out was that thought itself is
a vibration very similar to the brainwaves of a Ffanx-type mind; that
is, the currents that produced thought in their brains could be changed
directly into waves his instruments could detect and translate. He got
no details, but he did get some broad concepts. One of them was that the
blue arch was the only exit that they had ever made from their world;
they had never traveled to other planets in their universe. Another was
the nature of their quest on Earth. When he found that out, he killed
his specimens, but by then it was too late.

“He took those little bodies apart literally atom by atom. And he found
out how to destroy them. It was simple in itself, but hard to get to, an
isotope of nitrogen which, if released in their world, would set up a
chain reaction in their atmosphere. Due to the differences between the
molecules of the two universes—they have a table of elements just like
ours, but denser—their atmospheric hydrogen could be commuted to free
hydrogen and arsenic tri-hydride, with a by-product of nitrogen ions
that would kick off the reaction again and again … I see I’m talking
gobbledegook. Sorry.

“Suffice it to say that my father knew what would destroy the Ffanx, but
he had to make it himself. By that time the Ffanx had destroyed
communications and the world was in chaos. It took time, as he knew it
would. So he built the Gateway.

“He got the idea from the Ffanx’ own blue arch, which he had seen from a
distance. He took careful readings on that strange blue light and
guessed what it was. And in trying to build another like it—I think he
planned to invade them where they didn’t expect it—he stumbled on the
Gateway.

“It gave a weird red-orange light instead of a blue one, and the
atmosphere on the other side was breathable, which the Ffanx world’s was
not—they had to wear helmets and carry an air-supply while they were on
Earth. He went through and looked the place over. There was timber and
water and, as far as he could find out, no civilization or dangerous
animals—just insects and some little rabbit-like creatures so tame they
could be caught by hand. And he got the idea of using it as a sanctuary
for the world’s women while he worked on the weapon that would destroy
the Ffanx.

“You know the rest of that story—how the women came, all he could send
word to—and then how he had to build defenses against the panic-struck,
woman-hungry mobs that stormed this place.

“I was just a boy of eight when Dad finished the weapon. It was an
innocent-looking eight-inch capsule filled with compressed gas. He
planned to go up to Hackensack, traveling at night and hiding in the
daytime, and set up a projector to peg it into the blue arch.

“The day after he showed it to me the Ffanx came … I’m convinced they
didn’t know how near they were to the thing that would wipe them out.
I’ll never know why they came just then … maybe there was a party of
women on the way up the canyon. Anyway, a flight of their little ships
appeared, and they let go one of their force-beams on the lab-building—I
guess because it was the nearest to the canyon-trail—and stove the roof
in. Dad was crushed and the building burned.”

Garth took a deep breath. His eyes burned. “I spoke to him while he
died. Then I left, with the capsule.”

“So it was you who put the poison through the blue arch,” said Bronze.
“I’d always heard it was Gesell.”

“It was Gesell,” said Viki devoutly.

“I did, yes. Anyway, when that capsule burst in their world, they had a
fine arseniated atmosphere. The hydrogen they breathed was arsenic
tri-hydride within minutes after it got to their bloodstreams. I don’t
know how long it took to kill off every last one of them on their
planet, but it couldn’t have been long. And it got all the Ffanx here,
too. They all had to go back to renew their air supplies. I don’t think
we’ll ever hear of a living Ffanx again.”

“And where have you been all these years?”

“Growing up. Studying. Dad’s orders. He was the most fore-sighted man
who ever lived. He couldn’t be sure of just what would happen in the
near future, but he knew what the possibilities were, and acted on all
of them. One of the things he did was to prepare a hypnopede—it’s a
gadget that teaches you while you sleep—no bigger than your two fists.
It was designed for me, in case anything happened, and it covered the
basic principles of the Gateway, and a long list of reference books. I
lived with that thing, month after month, and when I was old enough to
move around safely under my own power I began to travel. I went to city
after city and pawed through the ruins of their libraries and boned up
on all of it—atomic theory, strength of materials, higher math,
electronics—until I could begin to get experimental results.”

He looked around the table. “Are you people ready to give me a hand with
the Gateway?”

“We took a vow—” said Viki. Garth interrupted her. “Let’s have none of
that!”

Viki continued with perfect composure. “We took a vow to serve Gesell
through life and past death, and I see no reason to change it. Do you,
Daw?”

“I agree.” Daw’s face was strained. Garth thought for a second that Daw
was going to argue the point. But perhaps he was wrong …

“Good,” said Garth. “Now—when the Ffanx destroyed the laboratory, they
smashed the Gateway generators, as you know. I think I can restore them.
With your help I know I can.”

“Hey wait,” said Bronze. “What about that prediction that the women
would open it from the other side?”

“They’re supposed to have the facilities,” said Garth. “There’s just one
piece of evidence we have that proves we’ve got to do it—they haven’t
opened the Gateway.”

“Why not, d’you suppose?”

Garth shrugged. “Afraid to, maybe. Maybe something’s happened to them.
Who knows? Let’s find out.”

Viki spoke up, timidly. “Garth Gesell—it’s been years since they went
through. Will they be … I mean, do you suppose there are …” She
floundered to a halt.

“Even women in their late thirties and forties can do some good to the
world now,” Garth answered. “And don’t forget—many of them were with
child. There’ll be new blood for Earth. However, one of the most
important considerations is the women themselves. Among them were some
of the best brains on Earth. Architects and doctors, and even a
machine-tool designer. But the biggest treasure of all is Glory Gehman.
She was my Dad’s friendly enemy—almost as good as he was in his
specialty, and a lot better in several more. If she’s still alive,
she’ll do more to get the world back on its feet than any thousand
people alive today. You’ll see … you’ll see. Come on, let’s get to
work!”

The days that followed were a haze of activity. Garth traced the old
power-supply, and to his delight found it in prime condition. It had
been used for little but the Guardians’ flame, all other equipment
having been pretty well smashed or gone into disuse. The super-batteries
which fed it were neo-tourmaline, a complex crystal that had the power
of storing enormous quantities in its facets. Garth’s first task was to
restore the great sundishes which charged the crystals. His father had
designed them to replace the broadcast power that he had used before he
developed the condensed-matter crystal.

The Guardians—Garth had abandoned that term, but Bronze still insisted
on using it—worked like beavers—Viki worshipfully and silently, Daw in a
feverish way which puzzled Garth and angered Bronze. Bronze himself had
to be watched to keep him from bossing the others. Garth kept him under
control by doubting aloud whether he could do this or that, or by
wondering if he was strong enough to move this over to there. “You think
I can’t,” Bronze would mutter, and attack the task as if it were a
deadly enemy.

Twice Garth called them all into the new laboratory and announced that
the Gateway was ready. The first time nothing happened when he threw the
switch, and it took him eight days to trace out the circuits and to test
the vibratory controls. The second time a sheet of cool orange flame
leaped into being, quivered and flickered for a moment, and then
collapsed.

At each of these occasions Bronze berated Garth for letting the
Guardians see it. “Here you got them thinking you’re a superman,” he
said disgustedly, “and then you let them watch you pull a blooper.”

Garth was alone in the makeshift laboratory when he succeeded. He had
bent to replace a crystal which was a few thousandths of a cycle out of
phase, and he turned back to the Gateway apparatus—and there it was.

Quietly, noiselessly, it hung there, so beautiful it made him gasp, so
welcome he could hardly believe his eyes. It was red-orange at the
bottom, shading to gold at the top.

He spun to the switch. It was still open. Then he realized that his
synchronization of the quartz frequency-crystals and the tourmaline
power-crystals was so perfect that the Gateway had come of its own
accord. He had known that the phenomenon was self-sustaining, he hadn’t
known that it was self-starting.

He closed the switch as a safety-measure, and stood looking at the
Gateway. “Got it,” he muttered. And he could all but feel his father’s
presence with him, dark eyes glowing, his hand ready with the reward the
boy used to prize so highly—the warm clasp of a shoulder.

Garth glanced at the door, thinking of Bronze and the others. Then he
shrugged. “Let ’em sleep. They’ll need it.”

He stepped through the Gateway.

In her small cell Viki slept lightly. She was dreaming about Gesell, as
she often did. Her early training with old Soames had been partly
hypnopedic, and like most sleep-training, it tended to be restimulated
by sleep itself. Part of it pictorialized itself as a dream of the main
foyer in Gesell Hall, where the great portrait of Gesell hung. She
seemed to be watching the picture, which refused to be a picture of the
elder Gesell, but of Garth. And as she watched, the long, white-browed
face began to turn pale. The face was composed, but the eyes conveyed a
worriment that grew into terror and then into agony. As she stared at
it, frozen, the dream picture suddenly ripped down the middle with a
sound she was never to forget as long as she lived.

She bounded out of bed and stood gasping in the middle of the floor. Her
sense of presence returned to her. She glanced around her and then
bolted for the door.

In a silent panic she raced for the laboratory, threw the door open.

Between the tall grid-electrodes over which Garth had slaved for so many
weeks there was a sheet of flame. Viki stared it, awed, and then
realized what was so very strange about it; it radiated no heat. She
approached it cautiously.

On the floor by the lower frame of the apparatus lay a human hand.

She knew that hand. Heaven knows she had spent enough mealtimes watching
its deft movement from under her lowered lashes. She had seen it probing
the complexities of the apparatus often enough, and had marveled at its
skilled strength.

“Garth Gesell …” she moaned.

She stooped over the hand and only then did she realize that it was
thrust through the flame as if through a curtain.

She seized it and pulled. She saw the forearm, the elbow … “Bronze!” she
screamed. She set her small bare feet against the lower frame and lifted
and pulled.

Garth Gesell’s body slid out. It was flecked with blood. Blood flowed
slowly from his nostrils and ears. His lifeless face held just the
expression of terror and agony she had seen in her dream. His flesh was
mottled and his lips were blue.

She screamed again, a wordless cry of fury at the fates rather than one
of fear. She flipped the body over on its face, turned the head to one
side, put her fingers in the unresisting mouth and drew the tongue
forward. Then she knelt with her left knee between his thighs and began
to apply artificial respiration. “Bronze!” She called again and again,
with each measured pressure of her sure hands.

Bronze appeared at the door, looking like a war-horse, his nostrils
dilated, his muscular chest gleaming with sweat. “What is—what are you
doing to him?” He strode forward, his big hand out to pluck her away
from Gesell.

She put her head back and said “Stop.” It was said quietly but with such
intensity that he halted as if he had run into a wagon-tongue in the
dark. Daw came in, rubbing his eyes.

She ignored the men. She lay down on the floor beside Garth and put her
face next to his.

“Viki!” said Daw in horror. “Your vows …”

“Shut up,” she hissed, and put her mouth against Garth’s.

Bronze said, “What the hell’s she …”

“Leave her,” said Daw in a new voice.

Bronze’s startled expression matched Daw’s natural one.

Bronze followed his gaze. Exactly in synchronization, Viki’s cheeks and
Garth’s expanded and relaxed. In the sudden silence, they could hear the
breath whistle in Viki’s arched nostrils.

“Gesell …” whispered Viki hoarsely. She put her mouth against Garth’s
again.

Suddenly his head jerked back. Feebly, he coughed.

“She did it,” muttered Bronze. “Viki—you did it.”

Viki rolled like a cat and bounded to her feet. She dipped her hand in a
waterbucket and sloshed the freezing mass into the middle of Garth’s
back. He gasped, a great gulping inhalation, and began to cough again.
“Get alcohol,” said Viki tightly.

They rolled Garth over and Daw lifted his head. They forced a few drops
of ethyl alcohol into Garth’s mouth. He shuddered.

“Somebody kissed me,” he said. He lay back, breathing deeply.
“The … Gateway … women are dead. It’s no use.”

“What was it?” asked Daw. “Was the air poisonous?”

“No … it was all right—what there was of it. There just wasn’t enough. I
don’t know what caused it, but something has used up most of the air in
that world. I passed out before I’d gone any real distance. And the
women …”

“Didn’t you see any signs of them?”

“Not a thing. The world seemed empty. Parallel X …”

There was a silence. Then Garth asked, “Well—where do we go from here?”

Daw suddenly leaped to his feet. “Gesell!” he cried. “Great Gesell,
forgive me!”

Garth looked up at him curiously. “Daw I’ve told you a thousand times
not to call me—”

“You!” spat Daw. “You—impostor! You apostate! You’re the devil! You came
here in the guise of the great Gesell in order to invade the sanctuary
of Gesell’s women. No Gesell would tire, no Gesell would fail. No Gesell
would respond to the clutches of a female.”

Bronze was on his feet. “Now, listen, you—”

Daw threw out his skinny arms dramatically. “Go on—kill me; I deserve a
hundred deaths for my failure as a Guardian. But I die in defense of
Gesell and his works. It’s the least I can do.” He suddenly flew at
Bronze. “Kill me now—kill me!”

Bronze put out one mighty arm and caught the front of Daw’s tunic. Daw
flailed away helplessly. His arms were far shorter than Bronze’s, and
all he could do was to rain blows on the iron biceps and kick feebly at
the man’s boots.

“What shall I do?” said the amazed Bronze. “Shall I squash him?”

“Don’t harm him,” said Garth. “But I guess you better put him to sleep.”

Bronze brought his free hand up and over and put a hammerlike blow on
the very top of Daw’s head. The little Guardian went limp. Bronze draped
him across the crook of his elbow like a spare blanket.

“What about you?” he said to the girl.

Viki stared up at him out of wide eyes and turned to Garth. “I serve
Gesell.”

Garth said tiredly. “There seem to be three Gesells around here. My Dad,
who’s dead. Me. And some sort of King Arthur-type myth. Which one are
you serving?”

“Only you,” she breathed. She rose gracefully, cast a look of utmost
scorn at the feebly twitching Daw, excused herself and left the room.

“Let her go,” said Garth to Bronze.

“She’s liable to blow up the joint,” protested Bronze.

“I think not.”

“You can be wrong, Garth Gesell.”

Garth grinned wryly. “You know that, and still you stick around. I wish
these dedicated charmers felt the same way. I just can’t live up to what
they want me to be.”

“Maybe you can’t,” growled Bronze. “But you should. I told you and told
you you should.” He hefted Daw. “What’ll we do with this?”

“Try to talk some sense into him.”

“Let me twist his head off first. Then you can put the sense in with a
trowel.”

Garth chuckled. “That won’t be necessary. I know what’s wrong with him.
Bronze, many people who take readily to dedicated service do it only
because it’s a substitute for ordinary living, which they don’t want to
face. That isn’t by any means true of all of ’em, but it is of our boy
here. Life these days isn’t easy, I don’t have to tell you that. As a
Guardian, Daw had an even, dependable existence where he knew what he
had to do and knew exactly how to do it. He saw no reason why that
should ever change. And then I came along and reduced him to the level
of a guy who is changing his environment a lot now so that it can be
changed still more later, and he didn’t like it.”

“That sounds good. Now can you pound that all into his head with one
wallop? Or shall I stand guard over him for a year or so while you lead
him by the hand out of a swamp he made himself to wallow in?”

“Easy, easy,” said Garth ruefully.

“Dammit, you need it,” growled Bronze. “Something’s wrong with the
Gateway world. Something was wrong with your idea of walking into Gesell
Hall that day I met you, but that didn’t stop you.” Bronze wet his lips.
“I guess I’m a little bit like that Daw, after all. You got to be what I
think you should be before I’ll play along with you.”

They found Viki in the laboratory, staring at the Gateway, which flamed
and flickered coldly in its frames. Garth and Bronze ranged up beside
her.

“If we could only move around in there,” said Garth. “If we could only
know what happened to the air-pressure.”

“The Ffanx did it,” said Viki.

“Let him do the thinking, sister,” said Bronze with the odd combination
of bluntness and courtesy he affected with her.

“There are no more Ffanx, Viki,” said Garth. “If I’m sure of anything, I
am sure of that.”

“I know that,” said Viki. “I mean that the Ffanx moved from dense air
into rarefied air—you said so.”

Garth struck himself a resounding wallop on the forehead. “Bronze,” he
said in an awed tone of voice, “she has the brains.”

“Huh?”

“Air helmets! Here I was so defeated that I couldn’t see the one thing
that was staring me in the face. Come on. The machine shop!”

The helmets they turned out in the next few days were makeshift but
serviceable. Using the domed tops of aluminum pressure tanks and a
series of welded bands, and a tightly-gasketed piece of plexiglass, they
had the basic design. Soft, thick edging of foam rubber sealed the
shoulder, chest and back. The air supply was liquid air passed through a
tiny but highly efficient chemical heater. “We want no oxygen drunks on
this trip,” Garth explained.

They locked Daw up in the north storeroom. Garth tried to talk to him
but found him completely intractable. He was like a man in a trance. He
would speak only to the original Gesell, using his name to call down
maledictions on the heads of the impostors.

“What shall we take with us?”

They stood before the Gateway—Bronze impatient and excited, Garth
thoughtful, Viki her reserved, willing self. Green floodlights and a
smoke generator had been strategically placed on the defense line in the
canyon, keyed to the detectors so that any intruder would be badly
frightened if he came onto the Court. It was defense enough for the
short time they planned to be away.

“My spears,” said Bronze.

“No,” Garth said. “Take this instead.” He tossed over his old blaster.
“It’s more compact. I mean no insult to that throwing arm of yours,
little man, but the blaster has a little more range.”

“Thanks.” Bronze turned it over admiringly. “Did I ever tell you that if
you hadn’t been carrying this when I first met you I’d have knocked you
off? I never met a man with one before.”

Garth laughed. “I hadn’t had charges for it for more than four years. It
was good protective coloration. But there are plenty of charges now.
Viki—”

“I have my dagger. And an extra air tank.”

“Good. I’ll take two extra tanks. That ought to hold us.

“Now here’s the plan. We have no radio. I was able to weld in some thin
plates to my helmet—I should be able to hear in there. I don’t think you
two will be able to unless you touch helmets. I won’t be able to hear
you but I can hear outside sounds. So once we get in there, we’re pretty
much on our own. All I can say is—keep together and don’t go too far.
Mind you, this is just a preliminary recon patrol. Later we can go back
in with more and better equipment. Ready?”

Bronze raised a thumb and forefinger in the ancient sign.

“Right!” Viki nodded tensely.

Garth wheeled, settled his helmet down on its shoulderpieces. The others
followed suit.

Then Garth plunged through the Gateway.

The three huddled together as they emerged from the Gateway.

They found themselves on a stony plain that stretched out and away as
far as the eye could reach. There were the looming shadows of distant,
tremendous mountains. The rocks were soft and coarse, and of the same
orange-to-gold shading that characterized the Gateway.

Garth glanced around at the Gateway, and understood how in his previous
visit he had missed it. It flickered and flamed as dimly as a candle in
the sunlight. He touched his two companions and pointed back at it. They
nodded, and he knew they understood the need for caution. In that
wilderness of boulders, it would be easy to lose it completely.

He recalled the first Gateway, his father’s, which had debouched on a
flat plain, smaller than this. There had been rocks here and there, but
nothing like the monstrous, crumbling boulders which surrounded them
now. He wondered, as he had many times in the past few days, if the
elder Gesell’s specifications had been wrong in some subtle way, and if
this was, as Bronze had suggested, a different dimensional world from
that to which the women had been sent. In the maze of advanced
mathematics involved in the construction of a Gateway, any small slip
might have far-reaching results.

His thought broke off sharply. Through the two thin discs welded into
the sides of his helmet he could hear a high-pitched, shattering roar.
He looked up—

It was a helicopter—but such a machine as a mad aeronautical engineer
might dream of in a nightmare!

It was huge and it was slow. It was altogether too slow. Its great
blades had a radius of nearly two hundred feet. It settled downward much
faster than it seemed to, for its size was so deceptive; the vanes
rotated no faster than the wings of an ancient Dutch windmill.

It came to rest a hundred yards away. Its size was incredible. As it
rested on the ground, the roof of the fuselage was all of eighty feet
from the ground. The door opened.

Garth swept the helmets of the other two against his with one motion.
They contacted with a deafening clang.

“Hide!” he barked. “In the rocks … get out of sight!”

He turned and dove for shelter. Just to his right a huge flat rock,
which had apparently once stood on edge, leaned over at about eighty
degrees. Under it was just enough space for him to slide into with his
helmet protruding.

He looked first for his companions. Bronze was huddled behind a round
boulder. Viki was running back toward the Gateway, zigzagging in a
panic-struck search for adequate shelter. He saw her trip and fall, and
an airtank went bounding away from her shoulder. She rose groggily to
her feet and tried to run again.

Garth looked back toward the helicopter. What he saw confirmed the surge
of fear he had experienced as its door had opened.

Four women approached with great leaping strides. They were dressed in
odds and ends—a ragged halter, a smooth tunic, a slashed skirt. Each was
dressed differently and casually. One carried a monstrous knobbed club.
All were belted and had long daggers. Around the neck of the leader was
a black chain from which swung a mighty jewel, which glowed and sparkled
in the universally orange-gold light. The jewel was brilliantly,
shockingly green—the characteristic glittering green of neo-tourmaline.
But Garth had never seen a crystal of that size. It was gem-cut, and
must have been all of forty inches from crown to apex. And the woman
carried it comfortably at the end of its ten-foot stick-like mounting,
on its chain with links the size of anchor-cable, because she herself
was seventy-five feet tall.

Garth was conscious of a pounding in his ears. At first he thought it
was the earth-shaking tread of the four giantesses—for the other three
were almost as tall as the first. Then he realized that the pounding was
caused by the simple fact that in his shock he had forgotten to breathe.

He turned and looked for his companions. Bronze was slack and awed,
gaping skyward at the leader’s tremendous head. Viki was nowhere to be
seen—

And neither was the Gateway. It was gone.

The leader stopped not twenty yards away, and bent, scanning the ground,
fingering her jeweled pendant. Her face was distant, composed and cool.
She was very beautiful, with long-lashed eyes and high-arched brows and
a complexion like unveined marble.

“Bronze!” Garth screamed, for the second woman, a blonde with masses of
flowing golden hair, had circled, and was behind Bronze as he stared up
at the leader. The blonde raised her club, a thirty-foot mass that must
have weighed all of a ton. She spoke—a deep, unintelligible strumming.
Bronze, of course, could not hear Garth’s cry of warning.

The leader straightened up and glanced at the blonde. She said something
equally incomprehensible—the frequency of their voice-tones was down in
the subsonic—and the blonde reluctantly put down the club.

And then, to Garth’s horror, the leader bent and shot out a mighty hand.
Bronze tried to scuttle aside, but the hand closed on him, lifted him
high in the air.

Then it was that Garth recognized the giantess. He knew he had seen that
cool, beautiful face before—long, long before, when he was a child.

Bronze squirmed and fought that gigantic grip. Garth saw him twist free,
ball up and kick with both feet at the huge thumb. He slipped out of the
grasp when the hand had carried him forty feet in the air. The giantess
fell to one knee and reached out, catching him deftly. She held him up
before her great calm face and watched him squirm.

Bronze suddenly struck out with both hands, twisted to one side, and got
his hand on the blaster.

“_Don’t Don’t”_ screamed Garth. He knew what that blaster could do at
short range. But his raging was useless, he could not be heard.

The giantess fumbled for a second and then, with her left hand, brought
up the pendant by its stick-like handle. She held the jewel close to
Bronze as if it were a strange magnifying glass.

Bronze whipped the blaster out and up, and just as it bore on the huge,
calm face, the great thumb moved on a stud on the handle of the
jewel-mounting.

A blaze of green fire reached out from the jewel and enveloped Bronze’s
chest, turning to dazzling white where it struck him. The jewel deepened
in color and seemed to thicken, to grow more solid.

The magnetic buckles of Bronze’s helmet harness suddenly parted, and the
internal pressure did the rest. The helmet popped off his head and flew
up and around, swinging by the one back strap that was caught between
his waist and the imprisoning hand.

Then the blaster spoke.

“Don’t!” screamed Garth uselessly. “That’s Glory Gehman!”

But instead of the shattering roar he expected, his earplates detected
only a muffled f-f-ft! A weak tongue of fire, perhaps ten or twelve
inches long, flickered wanly from the bore of the blaster, and then
faded. Bronze writhed once, then went limp.

The great figure that looked like Glory Gehman held Bronze up like a
tiny limp doll and called to the other women. They crowded around. The
blonde reached with long, delicate fingers and lifted up the dangling
helmet, pointed at Glory Gehman’s ears. Garth noticed for the first time
that her ear pendants were made of Ffanx helmets, or rather a
tremendously oversize version of them. The leader shook her head and
laughed, and gently forced Bronze’s helmet back on his head. Holding her
face very close, as if she were threading a needle in bad light, she set
the buckle-magnets back in their grooves and gently tested the
air-lines. Then the leader walked off toward the helicopter, while the
other three resumed their search of the ground.

Garth’s eye caught a glint of metal a few yards away—the spare airtank
Viki had dropped. But of Viki there was no sign, and gone, too, was the
Gateway.

Garth Gesell was alone on this earth, a pygmy hiding under a rock like a
beetle, while he was being hunted by colossi obviously bent on
destroying his kind.

A great bare foot pressed the earth close to him. He could hear the
stones crackle. He crept farther back in the narrow fissure which held
him. He knew that the next step the giantess took might be on top of
that flat rock, and that would be then end of Gesell on any world save
for a revered memory.

And a fat lot of good the reverence would do him as he lay crushed under
a rock.

“For Gesell,” sang Daw as he hooked the cable around the frame of the
Gateway. Then something struck his back and side and sent him sprawling.
He kept his hold on the cable as he fell, and part of him was gratified
to feel it catch on the frame. He knew it had contacted, and he knew it
without looking at the Gateway for the flickering gold light was
abruptly gone.

He rolled and came up on one knee.

Lying on the floor, doubled up in pain as she nursed a bleeding foot,
was Viki. She squeezed her eyes as tight as they would shut; even
through the thick transparent plastic of her helmet Daw could see the
silent tears she forced out.

She sat up and looked around her, then sprang to her feet and leaped to
the framework. That brought her up against the rear wall of the
laboratory. She stood for a moment feeling it with incredulous fingers,
then turned and stepped out again.

Apparently it was only then that she saw Daw.

She slid the magnetic buckles apart and wrenched off her helmet. Her
hair and eyes were wild.

“Daw. The Gateway!”

“A false Gateway for a false Gesell,” intoned Daw.

She looked around at the dead framework again, and then at Daw. “What
are you doing here?”

“The hand of Gesell freed me for his good works,” said Daw. “I found a
weak spot in the ceiling of the storeroom. Now, more than ever, I know
the truth and reason behind my act. For you were spared, sister, spared
from your own infamies, and saved, as a sworn Guardian, for the true
Gesell.”

She looked at him, bewildered.

He explained to her, patiently, exultantly. “You were led to return from
the company of evil, just as I obeyed Gesell’s command to do away with
the false Gateway.”

“Return? I didn’t return!” she said frantically. “I fell. I was running,
looking back and up at—at—” She closed her eyes and shuddered. “And then
I hurt my foot, and fell … Daw, what has happened to the Gateway?”

“Gone,” he said, and smiled. “And good riddance. Come, sister. Let us go
to the great portrait and receive more messages.”

“Daw, we’ve got to fix it! He’s in trouble. They’ll kill him, they’ll
kill him!”

“You confirm it. Death to the impostor. It is Gesell’s will!”

Understanding dawned on Viki. “You closed it?”

He bowed his head. “It was the wish of Gesell. I am but a poor
instrument …”

She was on him like a tiger-cat. “You fool. You crazy, blind fool! Show
me what you did. We’ve got to fix it. We’ve got to, Daw. Garth Gesell is
the true Gesell, don’t you understand? And he’ll die in there if we
don’t help him!”

“That Gateway,” said Daw in stentorian tones, “is a falsehood, a devil’s
trick. When Gesell wants it to open he will open it, without wires and
crystals and steel. As a Guardian I shall see the end of this
contraption, and never again will I be duped.” He turned, his eyes
blazing, and caught up a sledgehammer. “Never again will there be a
Gateway in Gesell Hall until Gesell himself opens it!”

“Daw you’re mad! Stop!”

He stalked past her. She took one step after him and stopped. She saw
the hooked piece of cable Daw had dropped. She leapt forward, caught up
the free end, and as Daw raised the hammer high over his head, his right
foot placed itself near the hook.

Viki stepped to one side, to be sure of a good contact, and pulled the
cable violently. The hooked end caught Daw’s ankle, whipped it out from
under him. He staggered, lost control of the hammer. The twelve-pound
head fell toward him. He lurched aside and it caught him on the
shoulder. He fell heavily, trying to turn. His jaw cracked against the
stone floor.

He lay still, uttering a series of tortured sounds as he tried to pull
himself together.

Viki stood over him like an avenging angel, waiting.

Daw rolled over, sat up. His hand went quiveringly to his shoulder. He
looked up at her out of round, bloodshot eyes.

“Guardian …” he said.

“Help me fix the Gateway, Daw,” she said.

“You’re misled, sister.”

“I won’t discuss it with you. And don’t start that cant about my sacred
duty. Get up!”

Daw rose and fixed her with his mad eyes. “I am counseled by Gesell,” he
said painfully, “and now I counsel you.”

She closed her eyes in a visible effort at self-control. “Are you going
to help me?”

“Why do you pursue this folly? What is the compulsion of this—this
Garth?” The last word came out with contempt.

“I love him,” she said.

There was a crashing silence. It was the silence of utter shock—the
silence of death itself, for indeed nothing moved, not even breath.

Finally Daw’s suddenly white lips moved, slackened, moved again. “You
love him,” he whispered. “You?”

She was just as pale. “We all have our own kind of cowardice,” she said.
“Bronze once told me what Garth Gesell thought of your madness. He said
you were a Guardian because you had retired from a real world. You’ve
gone mad trying to save the old ways for yourself. You can doom the
world to the new savagery if by doing it you can return to patrolling
the Court and humbling yourself before the portrait.”

Daw half raised his arms as if to ward off her hot words. He kept his
eyes fixed on her, and when she stopped he said only,

“You’re Escaped!”

“Yes!” she cried, “Damn you! You never knew, did you? One of the rules
you made up for yourself was that only the poor robbed hulk of a woman,
with her womanhood completely gone, could become a Guardian. It’s what
you chose to believe and what I let you believe. I told you we all have
our form of cowardice. Mine was to pretend I was Returned. I stole the
privilege of those poor creatures who had been discarded by the Ffanx. I
lived with them and learned their ways. They walk in safety all over the
world, and I took their coloration. And when the chance came to hide
further under the cowl of a Guardian, I took it. I let myself sleep
safely here. But I’m awake now …” Her lower lip became full, and her
eyes grew very bright. “… awake and I love him, I love him, I love
him …”

She lapsed into silence. She heard Daw grind his teeth.

“Slut!” he said hoarsely. “To think that for these years I’ve been
living next to a—a—” In his mounting rage he stopped using words, and
instead uttered a series of creaking, dripping animal sounds.

“Now that we know what we are, Guardian,” she said coldly, “Let’s fix
the Gateway.”

“I am the Guardian and I am the Gateway, and in me alone is the trust,
the duty, the fidelity, the—”

Suddenly he was upon her, raging. Gone was the last vestige of control.
Gone was the carefully schooled impersonality of Guardian behavior, gone
was the deeply conditioned, pitying reverence for the woman Returned.

His wild leap bowled her off her feet. They rolled over and over on the
floor. Daw didn’t strike out at her with fists; he clawed. He pulled her
hair and her clothes. He raked his fingernails down her body, twisted
her, grasped and clutched and pawed.

At first she tried to get away, to protect herself. She writhed and
scrambled and fell and pushed at him. Suddenly he was kneeling by her,
both hands full of her hair, both arms stiff, pinning her head down to
the floor. The pain of her scalp turned to terror—a rowelling primitive
terror that was like nothing she had ever known in intensity. And in the
briefest moments it was surpassed by another, new emotion. She had been
afraid before, in her life, but this was something different.

For as he bent over her, brought his face close to her, she looked up
into his eyes. They were round, staring, veined and toned with red. His
jaws were open, and his bitten, bloody tongue flashed insanely in and
out. Blood and froth splashed on her face, and at its touch, this
transcending new emotion overtook her like a great flood-tide.

It was more than horror. It was disgust and revulsion raised to a peak
almost impossible to contain. In one great surge she rose. She felt her
hair tear away with a kind of savage joy. How she found the holds she
never was to know, but one slim hand fastened into the side of Daw’s
neck and the other on his thigh. She sprang straight up under him with
her feet solidly planted and every dyne of energy in her healthy legs,
back and shoulders behind the movement. Daw’s body went straight up.

When the weight came off her hands he was nearly at arm’s length over
her head. She dug in her nails and kept her grip, and as he began to
fall she pulled hard with her left hand, which was on his neck. Head
down he hurtled, with all her convulsive strength speeding him on his
way. He struck …

For a long time she stood like a cast-iron statue, her unseeing eyes on
the thing which lay there, its misshapen head all but concealed, twisted
grotesquely under the scrawny body. Then she became dimly conscious of
an ache that became a pain that became a roaring agony—the knotting
muscles in her calves, cramping with the onset of nervous shock. She
tottered backwards, brought up against the wall.

She crouched there, breathing in great open-throated gasps. Suddenly she
began to cry—high, squeaky crying that tore her throat and burned her
eyes. She cried for a long time.

But the next day, and the next and the next, found her working.

Garth lay under the rock, his heart beating suffocatingly, but his eyes
studying the amazing spread of calloused flesh that was the giant foot.
Another came down beside it, and the first one lifted and kicked over a
massive boulder nearby. Garth felt his sheltering rock vibrate
alarmingly. He bunched his shoulders and waited.

At last the feet moved away. He edged out and lay prone, hardly daring
to lift his head. The three women were working away from him, scanning
the ground carefully. He got on all fours and scuttled backward into the
shadow of a projecting rock, pulled himself to his feet and looked
around.

The Gateway was gone. Viki was gone—probably through the Gateway, he
surmised. Bronze was gone—captured certainly, dead probably. He wondered
what that green fire had been. It looked like neo-tourmaline, but the
rays had not burned Bronze’s body, at least not as far as he had been
able to see. It was a little like the damper crystals that his father
had developed, to capture and store energy.

But a crystal as big as that, with the pulling power it must have,
couldn’t be turned on a human being without out snuffing out the man’s
tiny store of electro-chemical.

“Bronze …” he said aloud.

Big, bluff, faithful Bronze, with his quick temper and his
hammer-thinking. Garth got a flash of memory—Bronze’s face when Garth
had pulled him up short, pointed out some end result of Bronze’s
impulsiveness. He used to get a puzzled, slightly hurt expression on his
broad face, but he always began nodding his head in agreement before he
had figured out if Garth was right or not.

Garth’s eyes felt hot. Then, with a profound effort of will, he shut his
mind to his regrets and concentrated on his surroundings.

Moving carefully, he worked his way over to the spare tank that Viki had
dropped. He worried it in between the two tanks he already carried. He’d
live a little longer with it. “Though what for,” he muttered, “I
wouldn’t know.” He gave a last, despairing glance to the site of the
Gateway and began to move toward the distant helicopter.

A hundred feet away he found a leaf—a tremendous thing, eleven feet long
and nearly five feet broad at its widest. He picked it up gratefully. It
was very light and spongy. He pulled the stem over his shoulder and
walked through the rocks, dragging it. The leaf was almost exactly the
color of the soil, and ideal camouflage. All he need do would be to drop
it flat and pull it over himself.

He was two-thirds of the way to the plane when a thudding from the earth
warned him. He looked back and saw the three women coming rapidly. They
seemed to be sauntering, but their stride was twenty to twenty-five
feet, and they covered ground at a frightening pace. He dropped and
covered himself. The steps came nearer and nearer, until he wondered how
the earth itself stood up under that monstrous tread. Then they were
past. He got up. They walked with their heads up, talking their booming
syllables. They were obviously searching no longer.

He began to run. He had no choice except to stay with these creatures.
What he would do, where he would go if they took off, he simply did not
know.

They climbed into the cabin, one by one. He could see the landing
gear—tremendous wheels as tall as a two-story house—spread as they took
the weight of the giants.

There was a belly-thumping cough and the incredible rotor-blades began
to turn.

Garth flung down his leaf and ran straight toward the ship, trusting to
luck that he wouldn’t be seen. When he was under the slow-whirling tips
of the rotor he still had what seemed an impossible distance to run. He
found some more energy somewhere and applied it to his pumping legs.

A tire lost the swelling at the base that indicated weight-bearing. It
lifted free. Garth swerved slightly and made for the other. It leapt
upward as he approached. He ran despairingly under it. Only the
nose-wheel was left. Without slackening speed he rushed it. Fortunately
it was smaller than the others—the rim of the wheel was only about as
high as his collarbone when the tire rested on the ground. But it was
off the ground when he got there. He grunted with effort and made a
desperate leap.

His outthrust arm went through the lightening hole just as the wheel
jerked upward. He crooked his elbow grimly as his momentum swung his
flailing legs under the tire. Then he got his other arm through the
hole. It was just big enough for his head and the upper part of his
shoulders. The air-tanks kept him from wriggling further.

Then, to his horror, he saw the strut above him fold on a hinge.

The wheel was retractable!

He had to turn his whole body to look upward through his helmet-glass,
and somehow he managed it. He had no way of gauging how deep the wheel
recess was. Was it deep enough to accept the wheel—and him too?

He looked down.

It would have to be deep enough … the craft was a hundred feet up and
rising rapidly!

He doubled up and got one toe on the edge of the lightening hole. He
could just grasp the fork of the wheel. He swarmed up it, caught the
other arm of the fork and lay belly down on the top part of the
tire-tread. Then the wheel was inside, and the great bayflaps swung
closed. The inside of the recess touched his back, squeezed, and
stopped.

He couldn’t move, but he wasn’t crushed.

It was night.

Garth crouched by a building the size of a mountain. It was built of
wooden planks that looked like sections of a four-lane highway.

He tried to forget the flight, though he knew it would haunt him for
years—the cramped position, the slight kink in his airhose and the large
kink in his neck which had caused him such misery, and finally the
horror of the landing, when the wheel he clung to had contacted and
rolled. Stiff as he was, he’d had to hit the ground ahead of it and leap
out of the way.

He moved along the wall, looking for a way in. He would try the doorways
as a last resort, for not only were they at the top of steps with
seven-foot risers but they were flooded with light.

He stumbled and fell heavily into a dark hollow scooped out at the
ground line. It was about four feet deep. He got to his knees, caught a
movement in the dim light, and froze. Before him was a black opening
through which he could see the bright-yellow stripes of artificial light
seeping between enormous floorboards. And in the dim light he was aware
of something which crouched beside him in the dark. It was horny and
smooth, and at one end two graceful, sensitive whips trembled and
twirled.

It was a cockroach, very nearly as long as his leg.

He wet his lips. “After you, friend,” he said politely.

As if it had heard him, the creature flirted its antennae and scuttled
into the hole. Garth drew a deep breath and followed.

It was black and brilliant, black and brilliant under that floor. Twice
he fell into holes, and one of them was wet. Filthy and determined, he
explored further and further, until he lost all sense of direction. He
didn’t know where the entrance hole was and he no longer cared very
much. He knew what he was looking for and at last he found it.

Near one wall was a considerable hump on the rough earth floor he walked
on. A wide, oval patch of light above showed the presence of a
tremendous knot-hole. He climbed toward it.

The wood was soft under his fingers, like balsa. He began tearing out
chunks of it, widening the knot-hole. The earth here was about three
feet under the hole, so he had to squat and work upward. It was
extremely tiring, but he kept at it until he had a hole large enough to
put his head through.

Because of the small size of his helmet glass, he had to put his head
almost all the way up before he could see anything. And because of the
brilliance above, he had to stay there a moment to accustom his eyes to
the glare—What he saw made him, for the first time in his life, fully
understand the phrase “And when I looked, I thought I was going to
faint!”

He dropped back down the hole and lay gasping, with reaction. One of the
giantesses was sitting on the floor, propped up by one arm stretched out
behind her. And he had busily dug his hole and thrust out his head
exactly between her wide-spread thumb and forefinger!

He sat up and looked about him very carefully indeed. He followed the
mammoth outline of the girl’s shadow, where it crossed the lines of
light between the floorboards. And then he lay back patiently to wait
until she moved.

He must have dozed, and in the meantime become immune to the thunderous
shuffling and subsonic bellowings of the creatures above, for when he
opened his eyes again the shadow was gone. He knelt and cautiously put
his head up through the hole.

The floor stretched away from him like a pampa. There were eight or nine
of the huge women in the room, as far as he could see. Several were in a
stage of dress which, under different circumstances, he might have found
intriguing.

He pressed up harder. The tanks caught on the edge of the hole. He
gritted his teeth and pushed with his legs under the floor and his arms
above. He felt the wood yield under his hands. Then the tanks ripped
their way through and he was at last in the room.

He backed cautiously up to the baseboard, darting glances in every
direction. Making sure that none of the women was looking in his
direction, he darted for the only patch of shadow he could see—a
loose-hung fishnet that covered a window, serving as sort of a drape. He
slid behind it and peered through the mesh. It seemed to be indifferent
concealment; yet, from their point of view, he knew he would be hard to
locate.

He paused to switch tanks—his air was getting foul—and then took stock.

The women were gathered around a table near the center of the room,
rumbling and gesticulating in their strange, slow-motion fashion. None
were looking his way. He looked down to the right. A small table stood
in the corner and there was another fishnet behind it. Garth moved
toward it, passing one leg which was like a redwood tree and, reaching
up, twined his hands in the wide mesh of the drape. It sagged alarmingly
as his weight came on it. He waited until it was still and then climbed
up a few feet. Putting both feet into the mesh he jumped hard to test
it. It sagged again, but held.

To the underside of the table seemed the longest thirty feet he had ever
determined to travel, but he started up. The fishnet seemed to stretch a
foot for every eighteen inches he climbed. He looked down and saw it
touch the floor, then begin piling up.

He suddenly remembered the incredible density of the tiny Ffanx
invaders, and a great light dawned in his brain.

Excitedly he climbed higher, higher, and at last reached the table top.
He swung onto it, teetered for a hair-raising moment on the edge,
recovered his balance, and stood on the wooden surface. Sure enough, his
footprints showed on the table top as he walked away from the edge.

There was a piece of electrical equipment on the table, which he
ignored. He went to the far edge, crouched by the side of the machine,
and gazed across to the center table around which the giants were
gathered.

His blood froze.

Under a glaring floodlight, in the center of the enormous table, lay a
sealed glass cage. Lying in it, devoid of his helmet, lay Bronze’s body.
The leader, the one who looked so very much like Glory Gehman, was
handling the delicate controls of a remote-apparatus which passed a
series of rods through the pressure sleeves into the cage. At the end of
the rods were clamps, clumps of white material as rough as coconut
fibre, tweezers, a swab, and a gleaming scalpel as long as a two-handed
sword.

If they’re being that particular about atmosphere, he thought, Bronze
must be alive!

The flood of joy this thought brought him died a quick death, for it was
followed by … and they’re about to vivisect him.

He yielded to a short moment of panic and despair. He rushed back toward
the drape as if to slide down it and attack the women by force. He
stopped, then got hold of himself.

He looked around him. Suddenly, he straightened and smiled. Then he went
into furious action.

“Isn’t he pretty!”

The women gathered about the tiny figure. “We shouldn’t cut him up until
the rest of the girls have a chance to look at him. He’s just a doll!”
said one.

“You’ve forgotten that all the Ffanx are just dolls,” said the leader
coolly. “Do you propose to lead thirty-two hundred women, one by one,
past this little devil? You’d have a wave of hysteria I’d as soon not
have to handle. Let’s keep to ourselves what we have here. We’ll learn
what we can and file it away.”

“Oh, you’re so duty-bound,” said the blonde petulantly. “Well, go ahead
if you must.”

They crowded closer. The leader propped her elbows on the table to
steady her hands, and carefully manipulated the clamps. One descended
over each thigh of the tiny figure and trapped it firmly to the floor of
the cage. Two more captured the biceps, and another pair settled over
the wrists. Then the scalpel swung up and positioned itself. The leader
suddenly stopped.

“Did you leave that thing on?”

In unison they swung toward the corner. One of the women walked over and
looked. “No, but the tubes are warm.”

“It’s a warm night,” said another. “Go ahead. Cut.”

They gathered about the table again. The blade turned, descended slowly.

“STOP!” roared a voice—a deep, masculine voice.

“A man!” squeaked one of the women. Another quickly drew her tunic
together and belted it. A third squeaked “Where? Where? I haven’t seen a
man in so long I could just—”

“Glory Gehman!” said the voice. “Hally Gehman—short for
‘Hallelujah’—remember?”

“Gesell!” gasped the leader.

“The fool,” growled the blonde. “I knew a man wouldn’t be able to leave
us alone. This is his idea of a joke—but he set up the Gateway to play
it. No wonder these little devils got through.” She raised her voice.
“Where are you?”

The blonde snapped her fingers. “It’s a broadcast of some sort,” she
said. “He hasn’t answered you once, Glory!” She turned to the corner.
“What’s my name, Dr. Gesell?”

There was a pause. Somewhere there was a squeaky sound, like the distant
chattering of a field creature. “Everybody calls you Butch, towhead,”
said the voice. “Come over here, tapeworms.”

“The recorder!”

“They raced across the room, clustered around the small table.

“I thought you said it was turned off? Look—the tape’s moving!” Glory
reached out a hand to turn it off.

“Don’t turn it off,” said the voice. “Now, listen to me. You’ve got to
believe me. I’m Gesell. No matter what you see, no matter what you
think, you’ve got to understand that. Now, hear me out. You’ll get your
opportunity to test my identity after I’m finished.”

“No one but Gesell ever called me Hally,” said Glory.

“Shh!” hissed the blonde.

“I’m right here in this room, and you’ll see me in a moment. But before
you do, Glory, I want to spout some math at you.”

“Remember the vibratory interaction theory of matter? It hypothesized
that universes interlock. Universe A presents itself for _x_ duration,
one cycle, then ceases to exist. Universe B replaces it; C replaces B; D
replaces C, each for one micro-milli-sub-_n-_second of time. At the end
of the chain, Universe A presents itself again. The two appearances of
Universe A are consecutive in terms of an observer in Universe A. Same
with B and C and all the others. Each seems to its observers to be
continuous, whereas they are actually recurrent. All that’s elementary.

“Here are the formulae for each theoretical universe in a limited series
of four inter-recurrent continua …”

There followed a series of mathematical gobbledegook which was
completely unintelligible to everyone in the room but Glory Gehman. She
listened intently, her high-arched brows drawn together in deep thought.
She drew out a tablet and stylus from her pocket and began to calculate
rapidly as the voice went on.

“Now notice the quantitative shift in the first phase of each cycle. To
achieve an overall resonance there has to be a shift. To put it in
simple terms, if you drew a hyperbolic curve with a trembling hand, the
curve is the overall resonance of the whole series of small cyclic
motions. And there’s only one way in which that can have a physical
effect—in the continuum itself. Each cycle occurs in a slightly altered
condition of space-time. That accounts for the super-density of the
Ffanx and everything they owned and handled. What was normal to us was
rarefied to them. We saw them as dense little androids, and they saw us
as rarefied-molecule giants. There must be some point in the cycle where
they are rarefied in terms of our condition. But space characteristics
are only part of the continuum. The time-rate must alter with it.

“According to my calculations you have been here for something more than
seven but less than eight-and-a-half months, and are waiting with
considerable patience for the three-year minimum it would take to
prepare the cyanide capsule for the Ffanx world.

“It’s with mixed feelings that I inform you that the Ffanx war was over
twenty-two Earth years ago. Dr. Gilbert Gesell died in a Ffanx raid that
closed the Gateway. The Gateway has been opened again momentarily, but
something has gone wrong with it—I don’t know what. I must tell you too
that in terms of Earth standards you cute cuddly creatures are in the
neighborhood of seventy-five feet tall.

“So check your figures before you fly off the handle and kill any small
dense creature which arrives through a Gateway wearing a breathing
helmet. It might be Dr. Gesell’s little boy Garth, grown up to be all of
seven inches tall, and recording into your tape at its highest speed and
playing it back slowly …”

“I’m clinging to the fishnet just under the level of the table-top.
Treat me gently, sisters. I’ve come a long way.”

There was a concerted lunge for the drape, a concerted reaction of
horror away from it. “Ffanx,” someone blurted. “Kill it!”

“We have to kill it,” said the blonde. “We can’t take chances, Glory.”
Behind her voice was the concentrated horror of the conquest of
Earth … the forcefield pens … the hollow, piteous presence of the
handful of “returned” women. “This could be a new Ffanx trick, a new
weapon …”

“The math is …”

“The hell with the math!” screamed a girl from the edge of the crowd.

“She’s right!”

“She’s _right!”_

“Kill it!”

Garth stepped over to the table top and walked toward the tape machine.
The circle of women widened instantly. Garth muscled the huge controls,
placed his helmet firmly against the microphone, and chattered shrilly
as the tape raced through the guides. Then he rewound, stopped the
spools, and began the playback:

“I got that, and I must say I expected it. You’ll follow your own
consciences in the end, but be sure it’s your conscience and not your
panic that you follow. I want to tell you this, though: Earth is a mess.
There’s a new dark age back there. It’s slipped into a tribal
state—polyandrous in some places, feudal in others, matriarchal in many.
You three thousand women, and the daughters that many of you will bear,
will mean a great deal to Earth.”

The chattering ran high.

“Polyandrous?”

“One woman—several husbands.”

“Lead me to it! Poly wants an androus!”

“If he’s seven inches high here, we’d be seventy-five feet tall there.
Oh my!”

Garth’s voice cut in. “You’ll want to know how you can get back to Earth
size, or how to get to Earth when its size corresponds to yours. I can
tell you. But I’m not going to. If you can argue about my life, I can
bargain with it.”

A pause. “Now tell me if you’ve killed that boy over there.” Slyly,
Garth added, “Go look at him again. He’s six-three, and a hundred and
two percent man.”

One, two, two more drifted over to the big table, to look with awed eyes
at the magnificent miniature.

Glory, as if sensitive to a voice-tone she had noticed, snatched up the
mike. “No, he isn’t dead. He would have been, but he fired with a
blaster just as I put the neo-tourmaline soaker field on him. The
blaster threw out all the energy the crystal could absorb.”

Garth held up his arms for the mike. When his voice came again, it said,
“Glory, get together the best math minds you have here. I want to give
you some raw material to work on.”

There was a sudden crash of sound. To Garth it was a great thudding bass
that struck at his helmet like soft-nosed bullets. To the women it was a
shrill siren-alarm.

Glory yelped, “Get the ’copter warm. Asta, Marion, Josephine this time.
Jo—check the transistor leads on the direction finder in the plane. It
kept losing a stage of amplification this morning.” She turned to the
microphone. “That’s a Gateway. We’ll damn soon find out whether the
Ffanx war is over or not. I’m going to park you with your friend there.
Just pray that these cats will obey orders while I’m gone.” She dropped
the mike and raced to the big table. “Butch. Put that one in with the
other. If you touch either one of them until I get back, so help me I’ll
pry you loose from your wall eyes. You hear me.”

“You’ll be sorry for that,” snapped the blonde. “When you find out that
these lousy Ffanx have been sending out a homing signal for their
playmates—they’re telepathic, you know—then you can apologize.”

“On bended knee,” said Glory. “Meantime, A-cup, do as you’re told.” She
ran out.

“Come on. Orders is orders.”

Garth watched them come. He took one step backward, then relaxed. He had
shot his bolt, and all he could do was to wait. The pudgy one picked him
up gingerly, tried to carry him at arm’s length, found he was too heavy,
and hurried across the floor with him. She set him down gently on the
table. One of the women hurried up with a small edition of the cage.
Garth stepped in and a gate was sealed. A tube was fitted to it, and
Garth heard air hissing in. He was grateful for the increased pressure,
his skin had felt raw and distended for hours.

The pudgy one lifted the small cage bodily and set it on top of the
larger glass cell in which Bronze lay. A lever was flipped, and Garth
dropped ungracefully into the large one.

His first act was to run to Bronze and feel his pulse. It was weak but
steady. Garth unbuckled his helmet and pulled it off, then knelt by
Bronze.

“Bronze …”

No answer.

“Bronze!”

No answer.

“Bronzie boy … look at all those women.”

“Gug?” Bronze’s eyes opened and he blinked owlishly.

Garth chuckled. “Bronze, you were after women. Look, man.”

Bronze’s gaze got as far as the glass wall, tested its shaky focus, and
then penetrated outward. He sat bolt upright. “For me?”

Then he keeled over in a dead faint.

Garth sat and chafed his wrists, laughing weakly. Then, after a while,
he went to sleep.

The pudgy one was relieved after a while. Butch waved away her own
relief and stayed, elbows on the table, head low, glaring hatred and
fear at the men. There was some sort of distant call. All the other
women left. But the big blonde still stayed.

Garth had a dream in which he was chasing a girl in a brown cowl. She
ran because she feared him, but he chased her because he knew he could
show her there was nothing to fear. As he gained on her, he heard
Bronze’s voice.

“Garth.” It was very quiet. Intense, but weak.

Garth sat up abruptly. Something hard and sharp whacked him in the
forehead. There was a gout of blood. He fell back, dazed, then opened
his eyes. He saw that Butch had maneuvered the point of the scalpel
within a few inches of his forehead as he slept. He could see her
looking at him, her face twisted in slow-motion convulsions of laughter.
The all but inaudible boom of her voice was a tangible thing threatening
the glass.

Garth turned to Bronze. He was lying on his back with one of the
U-shaped clamps on his throat. It was pressing just tight enough to pin
him down, just tight enough to keep his face scarlet. His breath rasped.
“Garth,” he whispered.

Garth staggered to his feet. Blood ran into his eyes. There was another
deep hoot of laughter from outside. Garth wiped the blood away and
staggered toward Bronze. The scalpel whistled down and across his path.
He dodged, but lost his footing and fell.

There was a thunderous pounding on the table. Butch was apparently
having herself a hell of a time.

Garth looked at the scalpel. It hung limply. He crawled toward Bronze. A
tweezer-clamp shot out and caught his ankle. He pulled free of it,
leaving four square inches of skin in its serrated jaws. He went on
doggedly. He reached Bronze, put a foot on each side of the big man’s
neck, got a good grip on the U-clamp and pulled it upward. Bronze rolled
free, his great lungs pumping. The flat of the scalpel hit Garth between
the shoulder-blades and knocked him sprawling next to Bronze.

“How long have we been here?” asked Bronze painfully.

“Day—day and a half. On Earth, that’s eight, nine months. Wonder what
Viki’s doing?”

He looked around, suddenly sat up. Butch was gone.

“Here come the rest of them. We’ll know pretty soon.”

They stood up and watched the slow, distance-eating march of the giants.

“They’re carrying something … Will you look at those faces, Bronze!”

“They look wild.”

“Glory … See her? The tall cool one.”

“I see a tall one,” said Bronze, deadpan.

“She’s putting something on the big table here. Hey, what is that
thing?”

“Looks like a tombstone.”

Garth said, “I’ve heard of making the prisoner dig his own grave, but
this—”

The stone was put in the small box and aired. Big hands lifted it and
set it on their roof.

“Get out from under.”

The stone dropped, teetered. Garth leapt up and steadied it. It settled
back on its base.

It was a rough monolith, about three feet tall, cut from soft,
snow-white limestone. In it was a chamber with a glass door.

“Will you ever look at that,” breathed Bronze.

Garth stared.

Cut into the stone were the words,

THE GATEWAY
OF
GESELL

“I don’t get it,” said Garth.

Bronze said, “Look in the thing. The little door.”

Garth peered, and saw a plastic scroll. He opened the door, took out the
scroll and unrolled it. In exquisitely neat script it read:

_This is your Gateway to all that is human;_

_to all that sweats, and cries, and tries;_

_to all hungers, to all puzzlement;_

_to mistakes compounded_,

_to mysteries cleared_,

_to growth, to strength, to complication_,

_to ultimate simplicity_.

_Friends, be welcome_,

_others be warned_.

_Gesell is your gate_

_As he was mine_.

_A closed gate should never be guarded_.

_My gate it open, I guard it well_.

_        Gesell knows I love him_.

_        Please tell him I know it too_.

                _Viki (Escaped)_

There was a long quiet.

“Escaped,” said Garth. “Escaped.”

There was a thump over their heads. The airlock box had been placed
there. There was a speaker baffle into it. It dropped. Bronze caught it,
handed it to Garth.

Garth looked out through the wall and saw Glory, her calm face suffused,
her eyes misty.

“Garth Gesell, you’ve read the scroll. I brought it because I didn’t
want you to wait; I didn’t want you to just hear about it. She fixed
your Gateway, Garth, and shoved the stone through so we’d find it. Then,
when we were whooping and bawling properly, she let us find her.

“We couldn’t have trusted any calculations, any statements. But we
examined her and she’s Escaped—oh, beyond question. That we could trust.
For the one thing the Ffanx would never spend, not even to bait a trap
for the biggest game, was a single drop of extradiol, which she carries
unmolested. Viki’s given us back a world, Garth, just by loving you …

“Are you ready to start on the calculations?”

Garth leaned against the wall near the speaker. Standing upright seemed
to make his heart labor. “Not until I’ve seen Viki,” he said.

There was a pause. Then Glory’s voice again, “Bronze. Put on that
helmet.”

Unquestioningly, Bronze did. The airlock box thumped above them. Garth
sat down and leaned against the wall. His heart would not be quiet.

Bronze was suddenly beside him, helmeted. He clasped Garth’s shoulder so
hard it hurt, and as suddenly was gone. There was a slight scuffling
sound. Garth turned. Bronze, in the lock, was lowering someone into the
cage. Then the upper box was taken away.

She stood and looked at him gravely, unafraid. But this time there was a
world of difference.

He put out his arms. He, or she, moved. Perhaps both. He pressed her
cheek against his, and when he took it away, both were wet. So one of
them wept.

Perhaps both.

With her mathematical staff, Glory said, “He was quite right about the
shift, you see. He and Viki and Bronze can go back through their own
Gateway. But we’ll have to open another. We go to a world where we will
be only three times the size of the natives. There we build still
another Gateway. And that will be Earth, and we’ll be home.”

“If it’s as easy as that,” asked the pudgy one, “Why did we have to be
so cautious? Why didn’t we go straight to that intermediate world and
wait there?”

“Because,” said Glory Gehman, “the intermediate world is the Ffanx
planet. Do you see?”

Earth keeps a solemn festival at the meadows of Hack and Sack, through
whose blue arch came first death, and then life.



NEVER UNDERESTIMATE


“SHE WAS BRAZEN, of course,” said Lucinda, passing the marmalade, “but
the brass was beautifully polished. The whole thing made me quite angry,
though at the same time I was delighted.”

Meticulously Dr. Lefferts closed the newly-arrived _Journal of the
Microbiological Institute_, placed it on the copy of _Strength of
Materials in Various Radioisotopic Alloys_ which lay beside his plate,
and carefully removed his pince-nez. “You begin in mid-sequence,” he
said, picking up a butter knife. “Your thought is a predicate without a
stated subject. Finally, your description of your reactions contains
parts which appear mutually exclusive.” He attacked the marmalade. “Will
you elucidate?”

Lucinda laughed good-naturedly. “Of course, darling. Where would you
like me to begin?”

“Oh.…” Dr. Lefferts made a vague gesture. “Practically anywhere.
Anywhere at all. Simply supply more relative data in order that I may
extrapolate the entire episode and thereby dispose of it. Otherwise I
shall certainly keep returning to it all day long. Lucinda, why do you
continually do this to me?”

“Do what, dear?”

“Present me with colorful trivialities in just such amounts as will make
me demand to hear you out. I have a trained mind, Lucinda; a fine-honed,
logical mind. It must think things through. You know that. Why do you
continually _do_ this to me?”

“Because,” said Lucinda placidly, “if I started at the beginning and
went right through to the end, you wouldn’t listen.”

“I most certainly … eh. Perhaps you’re right.” He laid marmalade onto an
English muffin in three parallel bands, and began smoothing them
together at right angles to their original lay. “You are right, my dear.
That must be rather difficult for you from time to time … yes?”

“No indeed,” said Lucinda, and smiled. “Not as long as I can get your
full attention when I want it. And I can.”

Dr. Lefferts chewed her statement with his muffin. At last he said, “I
admit that in your inimitable—uh—I think one calls it _female_ way, you
can. At least in regard to small issues. Now do me the kindness to
explain to me what stimuli could cause you to”—his voice supplied the
punctuation—“feel ‘quite angry’ and ‘delighted’ simultaneously.”

Lucinda leaned forward to pour fresh coffee into his cooling cup. She
was an ample woman, with an almost tailored combination of svelteness
and relaxation. Her voice was like sofa-pillows and her eyes like blued
steel. “It was on the Boulevard,” she said. “I was waiting to cross when
this girl drove through a red light under the nose of a policeman. It
was like watching a magazine illustration come to life—the bright yellow
convertible and the blazing blonde in the bright yellow dress … darling,
I do think you should call this year’s bra manufacturers for
consultation in your Anti-Gravity Research division. They achieve the
most baffling effects … anyway, there she was and there by the car was
the traffic cop, as red-faced and Hibernian a piece of typecasting as
you could wish. He came blustering over to her demanding to know
begorry—I think he actually did say begorry—was she color-blind now, or
did she perhaps not give a care this marnin’?”

“In albinos,” said Dr. Lefferts, “color perception is—”

Lucinda raised her smooth voice just sufficiently to override him
without a break in continuity. “Now, here was an errant violation of the
law, flagrantly committed under the eyes of an enforcement officer. I
don’t have to tell you what should have happened. What _did_ happen was
that the girl kept her head turned away from him until his hands were on
the car door. In the sun that hair of hers was positively dazzling. When
he was close enough—within range, that is—she tossed her hair back and
was face to face with him. You could see that great lump of bog-peat
turn to putty. And she said to him (and if I’d had a musical notebook
with me I could have jotted down her voice in sharps and flats)—she
said, ‘Why, officer, I did it on purpose just so I could see you up
close.’ ”

Dr. Lefferts made a slight, disgusted sound. “He arrested her.”

“He did not,” said Lucinda. “He shook a big thick finger at her as if
she were a naughty but beloved child, and the push-button blarney that
oozed out of him was as easy to see as the wink he gave her. That’s what
made me mad.”

“And well it should.” He folded his napkin. “Violations of the law
should be immediately pun—”

“The law had little to do with it,” Lucinda said warmly. “I was angry
because I know what would have happened to you or to me in that same
situation. We’re just not equipped.”

“I begin to see.” He put his pince-nez back on and peered at her. “And
what was it that delighted you?”

She stretched easily and half-closed her eyes. “The—what you have called
the _femaleness_ of it. It’s good to be a woman, darling, and to watch
another woman be female skillfully.”

“I quarrel with your use of the term ‘skillfully,’ ” he said, folding
his napkin. “Her ‘skill’ is analogous to an odor of musk or other such
exudation in the lower animals.”

“It is _not,”_ she said flatly. “With the lower animals, bait of that
kind means one thing and one thing only, complete and final. With a
woman, it means nothing of the kind. Never mind what it _might_ mean;
consider what it _does_ mean. Do you think for a moment that the blonde
in the convertible was making herself available to the policeman?”

“She was hypothesizing a situation in which—”

“She was hypothesizing nothing of the kind. She was blatantly and
brazenly getting out of paying a traffic fine, and that was absolutely
all. And you can carry it one step further; do you think that for one
split second the policeman actually believed that she was inviting him?
Of course he didn’t! And yet that situation is one that has obtained
through the ages. Women have always been able to get what they wanted
from men by pretending to promise a thing which they know men want but
will not or cannot take. Mind you, I’m not talking about situations
where this yielding is the main issue. I’m talking about the infinitely
greater number of occasions where yielding has nothing to do with it.
Like weaseling out of traffic tickets.”

“Or skillfully gaining your husband’s reluctant attention over the
breakfast table.”

Her sudden laughter was like a shower of sparks. “You’d better get down
to the Institute,” she said. “You’ll be late.”

He arose, picked up his book and pamphlet, and walked slowly to the
door. Lucinda came with him, hooking her arm through his. Suddenly he
stopped, and without looking at her, asked quietly, “That policeman was
a manipulated, undignified fool, wasn’t he?”

“Of course he was, darling, and it made a man of him.”

He nodded as if accepting a statistic, and, kissing her, walked out of
the house.

_Darling_, she thought, _dear sweet chrome-plated, fine-drawn,
high-polished blueprint … I think I’ve found where you keep your
vanity_. She watched him walk with his even, efficient, unhurried stride
to the gate. There he paused and looked back.

“This has been going on too long,” he called. “I shall alter it.”

Lucinda stopped smiling.

“May I come in?”

“Jenny, of course.” Lucinda went to the kitchen door and unhooked it.
“Come in, come in. My, you’re prettier than ever this morning.”

“I brought you violets,” said Jenny breathlessly. “Just scads of ’em in
the woods behind my place. You took your red curtains down. Is that a
new apron? My! You had Canadian bacon for breakfast.”

She darted in past Lucinda, a small, wiry, vibrant girl with sunlit hair
and moonlight eyes. “Can I help with the dishes?”

“Thank you, you doll.” Lucinda took down a shallow glass bowl for the
violets.

Jenny busily ran hot water into the sink. “I couldn’t help seeing,” she
said. “Your big picture window.… Lucinda, you _never_ leave the
breakfast dishes. I keep telling Bob, someday I’ll have the routines you
have, everything always so neat, never running out of anything, never in
a hurry, never surprised … anyway, all the way over I could see you just
sitting by the table there, and the dishes not done and all … is
everything all right? I mean, don’t tell me if I shouldn’t ask, but I
couldn’t help.…” Her voice trailed off into an ardent and respectful
mumble.

“You’re such a sweetheart,” Lucinda said mistily. She came over to the
sink carrying clean dishtowels and stood holding them, staring out past
Jenny’s head to the level lawns of the village. “Actually, I did have
something on my mind … something.…”

She related the whole conversation over breakfast that morning, from her
abrupt and partial mentioning of the anecdote about the blonde and the
policeman, to her husband’s extraordinary and unequivocal statement
about women’s power over men: _This has been going on too long. I shall
alter it_.

“Is that all?” Jenny asked when she had finished.

“Mm. It’s all that was said.”

“Oh, I don’t think you should worry about that.” She crinkled up her
eyes, and Lucinda understood that she was putting herself and her young
husband in the place of Lucinda and Dr. Lefferts, and trying to
empathize a solution. “I think you might have hurt his feelings a
little, maybe,” Jenny said at length. “I mean, you admitted that you
handled him in much the same way as that blonde handled the policeman,
and then you said the policeman was a fool.”

Lucinda smiled. “Very shrewd. And what’s your guess about that parting
shot?”

Jenny turned to face her. “You’re not teasing me, asking my opinion,
Lucinda? I never thought I’d see the day! Not you—you’re so wise!”

Lucinda patted her shoulder. “The older I get, the more I feel that
among women there is a lowest common denominator of wisdom, and that the
chief difference between them is a random scattering of blind spots. No,
honey, I’m not teasing you. You may be able to see just where I can’t.
Now tell me: what do you think he meant by that?”

“_‘I shall alter it,’ ”_ Jenny quoted thoughtfully. “Oh, I don’t think
he meant anything much. You showed him how you could make him do things,
and he didn’t like it. He’s decided not to let you do it any more,
but—but.…”

“But what?”

“Well, it’s like with Bob. When he gets masterful and lays down the law
I just agree with him. He forgets about it soon enough. If you agree
with men all the time they can’t get stubborn about anything.”

Lucinda laughed aloud. “There’s the wisdom!” she cried. Sobering, she
shook her head. “You don’t know the doctor the way I do. He’s a great
man—a truly great one, with a great mind. It’s great in a way no other
mind has ever been. He’s—different. Jenny, I know how people talk, and
what a lot of them say. People wonder why I married him, why I’ve stayed
with him all these years. They say he’s stuffy and didactic and that he
has no sense of humor. Well, to them he may be; but to me he is a
continual challenge. The rules-of-thumb that keep most men in line don’t
apply to him.

“And if he says he can do something, he can. If he says he will do
something, he will.”

Jenny dried her hands and sat down slowly. “He meant,” she said
positively, “that he would alter your ability to make him do things.
Because the only other thing he could have meant was that he was going
to alter the thing that makes it possible for any woman to handle any
man. And that just couldn’t be. How could he change human nature?”

“How? How? He’s the scientist. I’m not. I simply eliminate that ‘how’
from my thinking. The worrisome thing about it is that he doesn’t think
in small ways about small issues. I’m afraid that’s just what he
meant—that he was going to change some factor in humanity that is
responsible for this power we have over men.”

“Oh … really,” said Jenny. She looked up at Lucinda, moved her hands
uneasily. “Lucinda, I know how great the doctor is, and how much you
think of him, but—no one man could do such a thing! Not outside of his
own home.” She grinned fleetingly. “Probably not inside of it, for very
long.… I never understood just what sort of a scientist he is. Can you
tell me, I mean, aside from any secret projects he might be on? Like
Bob, now; Bob’s a high-temperature metallurgist. What is the doctor,
exactly?”

“That’s the right question to ask,” Lucinda said, and her voice was
shadowed. “Dr. Lefferts is a—well, the closest you could get to it would
be to call him a specializing non-specialist. You see, science has
reached the point where each branch of it continually branches into
specialties, and each specialty has its own crop of experts. Most
experts live in the confines of their own work. The doctor was saying
just the other day that he’d discovered a fluorine-boron step-reaction
in mineralogy that had been known for so long that the mineralogists had
forgotten about it—yet it was unknown to metallurgy. Just as I said a
moment ago, his mind is great, and—different. His job is to draw
together the chemists and the biologists, the pure mathematicians and
the practical physicists, the clinical psychologists and the engineers
and all the other -ists and -ologies. His speciality is scientific
thought as applied to all the sciences. He has no assignments except to
survey all the fields and transfer needed information from one to the
other. There has never been such a position in the Institute before, nor
a man to fill it. And there is no other institute like this one on
earth.

“He has entrée into every shop and lab and library in this Institute. He
can do anything or get anything done in any of them.

“And when he said ‘I shall alter it,’ he meant what he said!”

“I never knew that’s what he did,” breathed Jenny. “I never knew that’s
what … _who_ he is.”

“That’s who he is.”

“But what can he change?” Jenny burst out. “What can he change in us, in
all men, in all women? What is the power he’s talking about, and where
does it come from, and what would … will … happen if it’s changed?”

“I don’t know,” Lucinda said thoughtfully, “I—do—not—know. The blonde in
the convertible … that sort of thing is just one of the things a woman
naturally does, because she is a woman, without thinking of it.”

Unexpectedly, Jenny giggled. “You don’t plan those things. You just do
them. It’s nice when it works. A better roast from the butcher. A
reminder from one of the men at the bank that a cheque’s overdrawn, in
time to cover it.”

“I know,” smiled Lucinda, “I know. It’s easy and inaccurate to say that
all those men are on the prowl—or all those women either. A few are, but
most are not. The willingness of men to do things for women has survived
even equal opportunities and equal pay for women. The ability of women
to get what they want from men lies completely in their knowledge of
that willingness. So the thing my husband wants to alter—_will_
alter—lies in that department.”

“Lucinda, why don’t you just ask him?”

“I shall. But I don’t know if I’ll get an answer. If he regards it as a
security matter, nothing will get it out of him.”

“You’ll tell me, won’t you?”

“Jenny, my sweet, if he tells me nothing, I can’t tell you. If he tells
me and asks me to keep his confidence, I won’t tell you. If he tells me
and puts no restrictions on it, I’ll tell you everything.”

“But—”

“I know, dear. You’re thinking that it’s a bigger thing than just what
it might mean to the two of us. Well, you’re right. But down deep I’m
confident. I’d pit few women against most men and expect them to win
out. But anytime all womankind is against all mankind, the men don’t
stand a chance. Think hard about it, anyway. At least we should be able
to figure out where the attack is coming from.”

“At least you admit it’s an attack.”

“You bet your sweet life it’s an attack. There’s been a woman behind
most thrones all through history. The few times that hasn’t been true,
it’s taken a woman to clean up the mess afterward. We won’t give up
easily, darling!”

“ ‘The north wind doth blow, and we shall have snow,’ and so on,” said
Lucinda as she lit the fire. “I’m going to need a new coat.”

“Very well,” said Dr. Lefferts.

“A fur coat this time.”

“Fur coats,” pronounced the doctor, “are impractical. Get one with the
fur inside. You’ll keep warmer with less to carry.”

“I want a fur coat with the fur outside, where it shows.”

“I understand and at times admire the decorative compulsions,” said the
doctor, rising from the adjusted cube he used for an easy chair, “but
not when they are unhealthy, uneconomical, and inefficient. My dear,
vanity does not become you.”

“A thing that has always fascinated me,” said Lucinda in a dangerously
quiet voice, “in rabbits, weasels, skunks, pumas, pandas, and mink, and
all other known mammals and marsupials, is their huge vanity. They _all_
wear their fur outside.”

He put on his pince-nez to stare at her. “Your logic limits its factors.
I fund such sequences remarkable because of the end results one may
obtain. However, I shall not follow this one.”

“If you’re so preoccupied with efficiency and function,” she snapped,
“why do you insist on wearing those pince-nez instead of getting corneal
lenses?”

“Functional living is a pattern which includes all predictable
phenomena,” he said reasonably. “One of these is habit. I recognize that
I shall continue to like pince-nez as much as I shall continue to
dislike rice pudding. My functionalism therefore includes these glasses
and excludes that particular comestible. If you had the fur-coat habit,
the possibility of a fur coat would be calculable. Since you have never
had such a coat, we can consider the matter disposed of.”

“I think some factors were selected for that sequence,” said Lucinda
between her teeth, “but I can’t seem to put my finger on the missing
ones.”

“I beg your pardon?”

“I said,” appended Lucinda distinctly, “that speaking of factors, I
wonder how you’re coming with your adjustments of human nature to
eliminate the deadliness of the female.”

“Oh, that. I expect results momentarily.”

“Why bother?” she said bitterly. “My powers don’t seem to be good enough
for a fur coat as it is.”

“Oh,” he said mildly, “were you using them?”

Because she was Lucinda, she laughed. “No, darling, I wasn’t.” She went
to him and pressed him back into the big cubicle chair and sat on the
arm. “I was demanding, cynical, and unpleasant. These things in a woman
represent the scorched earth retreat rather than the looting advance.”

“An excellent analogy,” he said. “Excellent. It has been a long and
bitter war, hasn’t it? And now it’s coming to an end. It is an
extraordinary thing that in our difficult progress toward the
elimination of wars, we have until now ignored the greatest and most
pernicious conflict of all—the one between the sexes.”

“Why so pernicious?” she chuckled. There are times when it’s rather fun.

He said solemnly, “There are moments of exhilaration, even of glory, in
every great conflict. But such conflicts tear down so much more than
they build.”

“What’s been so damaging about the war between the sexes?”

“Though it has been the women who made men, it has been largely men who
have made the world as we know it. However, they have had to do so
against a truly terrible obstacle: the emotional climate created by
women. Only by becoming an ascetic can a man avoid the oscillations
between intoxication and distrust instilled into him by women. And
ascetics usually are already insane or rapidly become so.”

“I think you’re overstating a natural state of affairs.”

“I am overstating,” he admitted, “for clarity’s sake, and off the
record. However, this great war is by no means natural. On the contrary,
it is a most unnatural state of affairs. You see, _homo sapiens_ is, in
one small but important respect, an atypical mammal.”

“Do tell.”

He raised his eyebrows, but continued. “In virtually all species but
ours, the female has a rigidly fixed cycle of conjugal acceptability.”

“But the human female has a—”

“I am not referring to that lunar cycle, unmentionable everywhere except
in blatant magazine advertisements,” he said shortly, “but a cycle of
desire. Of rut.”

“A pretty word.” Her eyes began to glitter.

“Mahomet taught that it occurred every eight days, Zoroaster nine days,
Socrates and Solomon agreed on ten. Everyone else, as far as I can
discover, seems to disagree with these pundits, or to ignore the matter.
Actually there are such cycles, but they are subtle at best, and differ
in the individual from time to time, with age, physical experience,
geography, and even emotional state. These cycles are vestigial; the
original, _natural_ cycle disappeared early in the history of the
species, and has been trembling on the verge ever since. It will be a
simple matter to bring it back.”

“May I ask how?”

“You may not. It is a security matter.”

“May I then ask what effect you expect this development to have?”

“Obvious, isn’t it? The source of woman’s persistent and effective
control over man, the thing that makes him subject to all her
intolerances, whims, and bewildering coyness, is the simple fact of her
perennial availability. She has no regular and predictable cycle of
desire. The lower animals have. During the brief time that a female
mouse, a marten, or a mare is approachable, every male of her species in
the vicinity will know of it and seek her out; will, in effect, drop
everything to answer a basic call. But unless and until that call
occurs, the male is free to think of other things. With the human
female, on the other hand, the call is mildly present at all times, and
the male is _never_ completely free to think of other things. It is
natural for this drive to be strong. It is unnatural indeed for it to be
constant. In this respect Freud was quite correct; nearly every neurosis
has a sexual basis. We are a race of neurotics, and the great wonder is
that we have retained any of the elements of sanity at all. I shall
liberate humanity from this curse. I shall restore the natural
alternations of drive and rest. I shall free men to think and women to
take their rightful places as thinking individuals beside them, rather
than be the forced-draught furnaces of sexual heat they have become.”

“Are you telling me,” said Lucinda in a small, shocked voice, “that you
have found a way to—to neuterize women except for a few hours a month?”

“I am and I have,” said Dr. Lefferts. “And incidentally, I must say I am
grateful to you for having turned me to this problem.” He looked up
sharply. “Where are you going, my dear?”

“I’ve got to th-think,” said Lucinda, and ran from the room. If she had
stayed there for another fifteen seconds, she knew she would have
crushed his skull in with the poker.

“Who-oh, Lucinda? How nice. Come in … why, what’s the matter?”

“Jenny, I’ve got to talk to you. Is Bob home?”

“No. He’s got night duty at the high-temperature lab this week. Whatever
is wrong?”

“It’s the end of the world,” said Lucinda in real anguish. She sank down
on the sofa and looked up at the younger woman. “My husband is putting
a—a chastity belt on every woman on earth.”

“A _what?_”

“A chastity belt.” She began to laugh hysterically. “With a time-lock on
it.”

Jenny sat beside her. “Don’t,” she said. “Don’t laugh like that. You’re
frightening me.”

Lucinda lay back, gasping. “You should be frightened … Listen to me,
Jenny. Listen carefully, because this is the biggest thing that has
happened since the deluge.” She began to talk.

Five minutes later Jenny asked dazedly, “You mean—if this crazy thing
happens, Bob won’t … won’t _want_ me most of the time?”

“It’s you who won’t do any wanting. And when you don’t, he won’t
either.… It isn’t that that bothers me so much, Jenny, now that I’ve had
a chance to think about it. I’m worried about the revolution.”

“What revolution?”

“Why, this is going to cause the greatest upheaval of all time! Once
these cycles become recognized for what they are, there will be
fireworks. Look at the way we dress, the way we use cosmetics. Why do we
do it? Basically, to appear to be available to men. Practically all
perfumes have a musk or musk-like base for that very reason. But how
long do you think women will keep up the hypocrisy of lipstick and
plunging necklines when men _know_ better—_know_ that they couldn’t
possibly be approachable all the time? How many men will let their women
appear in public looking as if they were?”

“They’ll tie us up in the house the way I do Mitzi-poodle,” said Jenny
in an awed tone.

“They’ll leave us smugly alone with easy minds for three weeks out of
four,” said Lucinda, “and stand guard over us like bull elks the rest of
the time, to keep other men away.”

“Lucinda!” Jenny squeaked and covered her face in horror. “What about
other women? How can we compete with another woman when she’s—she’s—and
we’re not?”

“Especially when men are conditioned the way they are. Women will want
to stick to one man, more likely than not. But men—men, building up
pressures for weeks on end …”

“There’ll be harems again,” said Jenny.

“This is the absolute, final, bitter end of any power we ever had over
the beasts, Jenny—do you see that? All the old tricks—the arch
half-promise, the come-on, the manipulations of jealousy—they’ll be
utterly meaningless! The whole arsenal of womankind is based on her
ability to yield or not to yield. And my husband is going to take the
choice away from us. He’s going to make absolutely certain that at one
time we can’t yield, and at another time we must!”

“And they’ll never have to be nice to us at either time,” added Jenny
miserably.

“Women,” said Lucinda bitterly, “are going to have to work for a
living.”

“But we do!”

“Oh, you know what I mean, Jenny! The lit-tul wife in the lit-tul
home … that whole concept is based on women’s perpetual availability.
We’re not going to be able to be homemakers, in that sense, at monthly
intervals.”

Jenny jumped up. Her face was chalky. “He hasn’t stopped any war,” she
ground out. Lucinda had never seen her like this. “He’s started one, and
it’s a beaut. Lucinda, he’s got to be stopped, even if you—we have to.…”

“Come on.”

They started for Dr. Lefferts’ house, striding along like a couple of
avenging angels.

“Ah,” said Dr. Lefferts, rising politely. “You brought Jenny. Good
evening, Jenny.”

Lucinda planted herself in front of him and put her hands on her hips.
“You listen to me,” she growled. “You’ve got to stop that nonsense about
changing women.”

“It is not nonsense and I shall do nothing of the kind.”

“Dr. Lefferts,” said Jenny in a quaking voice, “can you really do
this—this awful thing?”

“Of course,” said the doctor. “It was quite simple, once the principles
were worked out.”

“It _was_ quite simple? You men you’ve already—”

Dr. Lefferts looked at his watch. “At two o’clock this afternoon. Seven
hours ago.”

“I think,” said Lucinda quietly, “that you had better tell us just
exactly what you did, and what we can expect.”

“I told you it is a security matter.”

“What has my libido to do with national defense?”

“That,” said the doctor, in a tone which referred to _that_ as the
merest trifle, “is a side issue. I coincided it with a much more serious
project.”

“What could be more serious than.…”

“There’s only one thing _that_ serious, from a security standpoint,”
said Lucinda. She turned to the doctor. “I know better than to ask you
any direct questions. But if I assume that this horrible thing was done
in conjunction with a superbomb test—just a guess, you understand—is
there any way for an H-blast to bring about a change in women such as
you describe?”

He clasped both hands around one knee and looked up at her in genuine
admiration. “Brilliant,” he said. “And most skillfully phrased. Speaking
hypothetically—hypothetically, you understand,” he interjected, waving a
warning finger, “a hydrogen bomb has an immense power of diffusion. A
jet of energy of that size, at that temperature, for even three or four
microseconds, is capable of penetrating the upper reaches of
stratosphere. But the effect does not end there. The upward displacement
causes great volumes of air to rush in toward the rushing column from
all sides. This in turn is carried upward and replaced, a process which
continues for a considerable time. One of the results must be the
imbalance of any distinct high or low pressure areas within several
thousand miles, and for a day or two freak weather developments can be
observed. In other words, these primary and secondary effects are
capable of diffusing a—ah—substance placed in the bomb throughout the
upper atmosphere, where, in a matter of days, it will be diffused
throughout the entire envelope.”

Lucinda clasped her hands in a slow, controlled way, as if one of them
planned to immobilize the other and thereby keep both occupied.

“And is there any substance … I’m still asking hypothetical questions,
you understand—is there anything which could be added to the hydrogen
fusion reaction which might bring about these—these new cycles in
women?”

“They are not new cycles,” said the doctor flatly. “They are as old as
the development of warm-blooded animals. The lack of them is, in
biological terms, a very recent development in an atypical mammal; so
recent and so small that it is subject to adjustment. As to your
hypothetical question”—he smiled—“I should judge that such an effect is
perfectly possible. Within the extremes of temperature, pressure, and
radiation which take place in a fusion reaction, many things are
possible. A minute quantity of certain alloys, for example, introduced
into the shell of the bomb itself, or perhaps in the structure of a
supporting tower or even a nearby temporary shed, might key a number of
phenomenal reaction chains. Such a chain might go through several phases
and result in certain subtle isotopic alterations in one of the
atmosphere’s otherwise inert gases, say xenon. And this isotope, acting
upon the adrenal cortex and the parathyroid, which are instrumental in
controlling certain cycles in the human body, might very readily bring
about the effect we are discussing in an atypical species.”

Lucinda threw up her hands and turned to Jenny. “Then that’s it,” she
said wearily.

“What’s ‘it’? What? I don’t understand,” whimpered Jenny. “What’s he
done, Lucinda?”

“In his nasty, cold-blooded hypothetical way,” said Lucinda, “he has put
something in or near an H-bomb which was tested today, which is going to
have some effect on the air we breathe, which is going to do what we
were discussing at your house.”

“Dr. Lefferts,” said Jenny piteously. She went to him, stood looking
down at him as he sat primly in his big easy chair. “Why—_why?_ Just to
annoy us? Just to keep us from having a little, petty influence over
you?”

“By no means,” said the doctor. “I will admit that I might have turned
my ambition to the matter for such reasons. But some concentrated
thought brought up a number of extrapolations which are by no means
petty.”

He rose and stood by the mantel, pince-nez in hand, the perfect picture
of the Pedant At Home. “Consider,” he said. _“Homo sapiens_, in terms of
comparative anatomy, should mature physically at 35 and emotionally
between 30 and 40. He should have a life expectancy of between 150 and
200 years. And he unquestionably should be able to live a life
uncluttered by such insistent trifles as clothing conventions,
unfunctional chivalries, psychic turmoils and dangerous mental and
physical escapes into what the psychologists call romances. Women should
phase their sexual cycles with those of the seasons, gestate their young
longer, and eliminate the unpredictable nature of their psycho-sexual
appetites—the very basis of all their insecurity and therefore that of
most men. Women will not be chained to these cycles, Jenny, and become
breeding machines, if that’s what you fear. You will begin to live in
and with these cycles as you live with a wellmade and serviced automatic
machine. You will be liberated from the constant control and direction
of your somatic existence as you have been liberated from shifting gears
in your car.”

“But … we’re not conditioned for such a change!” blazed Lucinda. “And
what of the fashion industry … cosmetics … the entertainment
world … what’s going to become of these and the millions of people
employed by them, and the people dependent on all those people, if you
do a thing like this?”

“The thing is done. As for these people …” He paused, “Yes, there will
be some disturbance. A considerable one. But in overall historical
terms, it will be slight and it will be brief. I like to think that the
television serviceman is one who was liberated by the cotton gin and the
power loom.”

“It’s … hard to think in historical terms just now,” said Lucinda.
“Jenny, come on.”

“Where are you going?”

She faced him, her blued-steel eyes blazing. “Away from you. And I—I
think I have a warning to give to the women.”

“I wouldn’t do that,” he said dryly. “They’ll find out in time. All
you’ll succeed in doing is to alert many women to the fact that they
will be unattractive to their husbands at times when other women may
seem more desirable. Women will not unite with one another, my dear,
even to unite against men.”

There was a tense pause. Then Jenny quavered, “How long did you say
this—this thing will take?”

“I did not say. I would judge between thirty-six and forty-eight hours.”

“I’ve got to get home.”

“May I come with you?” asked Lucinda.

Jenny looked at her, her full face, her ample, controlled body. A
surprising series of emotions chased themselves across her young face.
She said, “I don’t think … I mean … no, not tonight; I have
to—to—goodnight, Lucinda.”

When she had gone, the doctor uttered one of his rare chuckles. “She has
absorbed perhaps a tenth of this whole concept,” he said, “but until
she’s sure of herself she’s not going to let you or any woman near her
husband.”

“You … you complacent _pig!”_ said Lucinda whitely. She stormed
upstairs.

“Hello … hello—Jenny?”

“Lucinda! I’m—glad you called.”

Something cold and tense deep inside Lucinda relaxed. She sat down
slowly on the couch, leaned back comfortably with the telephone cradled
between her cheek and her wide soft shoulder. “I’m glad you’re glad,
Jenny darling. It’s been six weeks … how are you?”

“I’m … all right now. It was pretty awful for a while, not knowing how
it would be, waiting for it to happen. And when it did happen, it was
hard to get used to. But it hasn’t changed things _too_ much. How about
you?”

“Oh, I’m fine,” said Lucinda. She smiled slowly, touched her tongue to
her full lower lip. “Jenny, have you told anyone?”

“Not a soul. Not even Bob. I think he’s a little bewildered. He thinks
I’m being very … understanding. Lucinda, is it wrong for me to let him
think that?”

“It’s never wrong for a woman to keep her knowledge to herself if it
makes her more attractive,” said Lucinda, and smiled again.

“How’s Dr. Lefferts?”

“He’s bewildered too. I suppose I’ve been a little … understanding too.”
She chuckled.

Over the phone she heard Jenny’s answering laughter. “The poor things,”
she said. “The poor, poor things. Lucinda—”

“Yes, honey?”

“I know how to handle this, now. But I don’t really understand it. Do
you?”

“Yes, I think I do.”

“How can it be, then? How can this change in us affect men that way? I
thought _we_ would be the ones who would be turned off and on like a
neon sign.”

_“What?_ Now wait a minute, Jenny! You mean you don’t realize what’s
happened?”

“That’s just what I said. How could such a change in women do such a
thing to the men?”

“Jenny, I think you’re wonderful, wonderful, wonderful,” breathed
Lucinda. “As a matter of fact, I think women are wonderful. I suddenly
realized that you haven’t the foggiest notion of what’s happened, yet
you’ve taken it in stride and used it _exactly_ right!”

“Whatever do you mean?”

“Jenny, do you feel any difference in yourself?”

“Why, no. All the difference is in Bob. That’s what I—”

“Honey, there _isn’t_ any difference in you, nor in me, nor in any other
woman. For the very first time in his scientific life, the great man
made an error in his calculations.”

There was a silence for a time, and then the telephone uttered a soft,
delighted, long-drawn-out “Oh-h-h-h-h …”

Lucinda said, “He’s sure that in the long run it will have all the
benefits he described—the longer life expectancy, the subduing of
insecurities, the streamlining of our manners and customs.”

“You mean that all men from now on will …”

“I mean that for about twelve days in every two weeks, men can’t do
anything with us, which is restful. And for forty-eight hours they can’t
do anything without us, which is”—she laughed—“useful. It would seem
that _homo sapiens_ is still an atypical mammal.”

Jenny’s voice was awed. “And I thought we were going to lose the battle
of the sexes. Bob brings me little presents every single day, Lucinda!”

“He’d better. Jenny, put down that phone and come over here. I want to
hug you. And”—she glanced over at the hall closet, where hung the symbol
of her triumph—“I want to show you my new fur coat.”



THE SEX OPPOSITE


BUDGIE SLID INTO the laboratory without knocking, as usual.

She was flushed and breathless, her eyes bright with speed and
eagerness. “Whatcha got, Muley?”

Muhlenberg kicked the morgue door shut before Budgie could get in line
with it. “Nothing,” he said flatly, “and of all the people I don’t want
to see—and at the moment that means all the people there are—you head
the list. Go away.”

Budgie pulled off her gloves and stuffed them into an oversized
shoulder-bag, which she hurled across the laboratory onto a
work-surface. “Come on, Muley. I saw the meat-wagon outside. I know what
it brought, too. That double murder in the park. Al told me.”

“Al’s jaw is one that needs more tying up than any of the stiffs he
taxis around,” said Muhlenberg bitterly. “Well, you’re not getting near
this pair.”

She came over to him, stood very close. In spite of his annoyance, he
couldn’t help noticing how soft and full her lips were just then. _Just
then—_and the sudden realization added to the annoyance. He had known
for a long time that Budgie could turn on mechanisms that made every one
of a man’s ductless glands purse up its lips and blow like a trumpet.
Every time he felt it he hated himself. “Get away from me,” he growled.
“It won’t work.”

“What won’t, Muley?” she murmured.

Muhlenberg looked her straight in the eye and said something about his
preference for raw liver over Budgie-times-twelve.

The softness went out of her lips, to be replaced by no particular
hardness. She simply laughed good-naturedly. “All right, you’re immune.
I’ll try logic.”

“Nothing will work,” he said. “You will not get in there to see those
two, and you’ll get no details from me for any of that
_couche-con-carne_ stew you call a newspaper story.”

“Okay,” she said surprisingly. She crossed the lab and picked up her
handbag. She found a glove and began to pull it on. “Sorry I interrupted
you, Muley. I do get the idea. You want to be alone.”

His jaw was too slack to enunciate an answer. He watched her go out,
watched the door close, watched it open again, heard her say in a very
hurt tone, “But I do think you could tell me _why_ you won’t say
anything about this murder.”

He scratched his head. “As long as you behave yourself, I guess I do owe
you that.” He thought for a moment. “It’s not your kind of a story.
That’s about the best way to put it.”

“Not my kind of a story? A double murder in Lover’s Lane? The maudlin
mystery of the mugger, or mayhem in Maytime? No kidding, Muley—you’re
not serious!”

“Budgie, this one isn’t for fun. It’s ugly. Very _damn_ ugly. And it’s
serious. It’s mysterious for a number of other reasons than the ones you
want to siphon into your readers.”

“What other reasons?”

“Medically. Biologically. Sociologically.”

“My stories got biology. Sociology they got likewise; stodgy truisms
about social trends is the way I dish up sex in the public prints, or
didn’t you know? So—that leaves medical. What’s so strange medically
about this case?”

“Good night, Budgie.”

“Come on, Muley. You can’t horrify _me.”_

“That I know. You’ve trod more primrose pathology in your research than
Krafft-Ebing plus eleven comic books. No, Budgie. No more.”

“Dr. F.L. Muhlenberg, brilliant young biologist and special medical
consultant to the City and State Police, intimated that these aspects of
the case—the brutal murder and disfigurement of the embarrassed
couple—were superficial compared with the unspeakable facts behind them.
‘Medically mysterious,’ he was quoted as saying.” She twinkled at him.
“How’s that sound?” She looked at her watch. “And I can make the early
editions, too, with a head. Something like DOC SHOCKED SPEECHLESS—and a
subhead: Lab Sleuth Suppresses Medical Details of Double Park Killing.
Yeah, and your picture.”

“If you dare to print anything of the sort,” he raged, “I’ll—”

“All right, all right,” she said conciliatingly. “I won’t. I really
won’t.”

“Promise me?”

“I promise, Muley … _if—_”

“Why should I bargain?” he demanded suddenly. “Get out of here.”

He began to close the door. “And something for the editorial page,” she
said. “Is a doctor within his rights in suppressing information
concerning a murderous maniac and his methods?” She closed the door.

Muhlenberg bit his lower lip so hard he all but yelped. He ran to the
door and snatched it open. “Wait!”

Budgie was leaning against the doorpost lighting a cigarette. “I _was_
waiting,” she said reasonably.

“Come in here,” he grated. He snatched her arm and whirled her inside,
slamming the door.

“You’re a brute,” she said rubbing her arm and smiling dazzlingly.

“The only way to muzzle you is to tell the whole story. Right?”

“Right. If I get an exclusive when you’re ready to break the story.”

“There’s probably a kicker in that, too,” he said morosely. He glared at
her. Then, “Sit down,” he said.

She did. “I’m all yours.”

“Don’t change the subject,” he said with a ghost of his natural humor.
He lit a thoughtful cigarette. “What do you know about this case so
far?”

“Too little,” she said. “This couple were having a conversation without
words in the park when some muggers jumped them and killed them, a
little more gruesomely than usual. But instead of being delivered to the
city morgue, they were brought straight to you on the orders of the
ambulance interne after one quick look.”

“How did you know about it?”

“Well, if you must know, I was in the park. There’s a shortcut over by
the museum, and I was about a hundred yards down the path when I …”

Muhlenberg waited as long as tact demanded, and a little longer. Her
face was still, her gaze detached. “Go on.”

“… when I heard a scream,” she said in the precise tone of voice which
she had been using. Then she began to cry.

“Hey,” he said. He knelt beside her, put a hand on her shoulder. She
shoved it away angrily, and covered her face with a damp towel. When she
took it down again she seemed to be laughing. She was doing it so badly
that he turned away in very real embarrassment.

“Sorry,” she said in a very shaken whisper. “It … was that kind of a
scream. I’ve never heard anything like it. It did something to me. It
had more agony in it than a single sound should be able to have.” She
closed her eyes.

“Man or woman?”

She shook her head.

“So,” he said matter-of-factly, “what did you do then?”

“Nothing. Nothing at all, for I don’t know how long.” She slammed a
small fist down on the table. “I’m supposed to be a reporter!” she
flared. “And there I stand like a dummy, like a wharf rat in
concussion-shock!” She wet her lips. “When I came around I was standing
by a rock wall with one hand on it.” She showed him. “Broke two
perfectly good fingernails, I was holding on so tight. I ran toward
where I’d heard the sound. Just trampled brush, nothing else. I heard a
crowd milling around on the avenue. I went up there. The meat-wagon was
there, Al and that young sawbones Regal—Ruggles—”

“Regalio.”

“Yeah, him. They’d just put those two bodies into the ambulance. They
were covered with blankets. I asked what was up. Regalio waved a finger
and said ‘Not for school-girls’ and gave me a real death-mask grin. He
climbed aboard. I grabbed Al and asked him what was what. He said
muggers had killed this couple, and it was pretty rugged. Said Regalio
had told him to bring them here, even before he made a police report.
They were both about as upset as they could get.”

“I don’t wonder,” said Muhlenberg.

“Then I asked if I could ride and they said no and took off. I grabbed a
cab when I found one to grab, which was all of fifteen minutes later,
and here I am. Here I am,” she repeated, “getting a story out of you in
the damnedest way yet. You’re asking, I’m answering.” She got up. “You
write the feature, Muley. I’ll go on into your icebox and do your work.”

He caught her arm. “Nah! No you don’t! Like the man said—it’s not for
school-girls.”

“Anything you have in there _can’t_ be worse than my imagination!” she
snapped.

“Sorry. It’s what you get for barging in on me before I’ve had a chance
to think something through. You see, this wasn’t exactly two people.”

“I know!” she said sarcastically. “Siamese twins.”

He looked at her distantly. “Yes. ’Taint funny, kiddo.”

For once she had nothing to say. She put one hand slowly up to her mouth
and apparently forgot it, for there it stayed. “That’s what’s so ugly
about this. Those two were … torn apart.” He closed his eyes. “I can
just see it. I wish I couldn’t. Those thugs drifting through the park at
night, out for anything they could get. They hear something … fall right
over them … I don’t know. Then—”

“All right, all right,” she whispered hoarsely. “I can hear you.”

“But, damn it,” he said angrily, “I’ve been kicking around this field
long enough to know every documented case of such a creature. And I just
can’t believe that one like this could exist without having been written
up in some medical journal somewhere. Even if they were born in Soviet
Russia, some translation of a report would’ve appeared somewhere.”

“I know Siamese twins are rare. But surely such a birth wouldn’t make
international headlines!”

“This one would,” he said positively. “For one thing, Siamese twins
usually bear more anomalies than just the fact that they are attached.
They’re frequently fraternal rather than identical twins. More often
than not one’s born more fully developed than the other. Usually when
they’re born at all they don’t live. But these—”

“What’s so special?”

Muhlenberg spread his hands. “They’re perfect. They’re costally joined
by a surprisingly small tissue-organ complex—”

“Wait, professor, ‘Costally’—you mean at the chest?”

“That’s right. And the link is—was—not major. I can’t understand why
they were never surgically separated. There may be a reason, of course,
but that’ll have to wait on the autopsy.”

“Why wait?”

“It’s all I can do to wait.” He grinned suddenly. “You see, you’re more
of a help than you realize, Budge. I’m dying to get to work on them, but
under the circumstances I have to wait until morning. Regalio reported
to the police, and I know the coroner isn’t going to come around this
time of night, not if I could show him quintuplets in a chain like
sausages. In addition, I don’t have identities, I don’t have relatives’
releases—you know. So—a superficial examination, a lot of wild guesses,
and a chance to sound off to you keep myself from going nuts.”

“You’re _using_ me!”

“That’s bad?”

“Yes—when I don’t get any fun out of it.”

He laughed. “I love those incendiary statements of yours. I’m just not
flammable.”

She looked at him, up and a little sidewise. “Not at all?”

“Not now.”

She considered that. She looked down at her hands, as if they were the
problems of Muhlenberg’s susceptibility. She turned the hands over.
“Sometimes,” she said, “I really enjoy it when we share something else
besides twitches and moans. Maybe we should be more inhibited.”

“Do tell.”

She said, “We have nothing in common. I mean, but _nothing_. We’re
different to the core, to the bone. You hunt out facts and so do I, but
we could never share that because we don’t use facts for the same thing.
You use facts only to find more facts.”

“What do you use them for?”

She smiled. “All sorts of things. A good reporter doesn’t report just
what happens. He reports what he _sees—_in many cases a very different
thing. Any way …”

“Wonder how these biological pressures affected our friends here,” he
mused, thumbing over his shoulder at the morgue.

“About the same, I’d judge, with certain important difficulties. But
wait—were they men or women, or one of each?”

“I didn’t tell you, did I?” he said with real startlement.

“No,” she said.

He opened his mouth to answer, but could not. The reason came.

It came from downstairs or outside, or perhaps from nowhere or
everywhere, or from a place without a name. It was all around them,
inside, behind them in time as well as space. It was the echo of their
own first cry when they lost the first warmth and found loneliness,
early, as everyone must. It was hurt: some the pain of impact, some of
fever and delirium, and some the great pressure of beauty too beautiful
to bear. And like pain, it could not be remembered. It lasted as long as
it was a sound, and perhaps a little longer, and the frozen time after
it died was immeasurable.

Muhlenberg became increasingly conscious of an ache in his calves and in
the trapezoid muscles of his back. They sent him a gradual and
completely intellectualized message of strain, and very consciously he
relieved it and sat down. His movement carried Budgie’s arm forward, and
he looked down at her hand, which was clamped around his forearm. She
moved it away, opening it slowly, and he saw the angry marks of her
fingers, and knew they would be bruises in the morning.

She said, “That was the scream. The one I heard. Wasn’t once enough?”

It was only then that he could look far enough out of himself to see her
face. It was pasty with shock, and wet, and her lips were pale. He leapt
to his feet. “Another one! _Come on!_”

He pulled her up and through the door. “Don’t you understand?” he
blazed. “Another one! It can’t be, but somewhere out there it’s happened
again—”

She pulled back. “Are you sure it wasn’t …” She nodded at the closed
door of the morgue.

“Don’t be ridiculous,” he snorted. _“They_ couldn’t be alive.” He
hurried her to the stairs.

It was very dark. Muhlenberg’s office was in an aging business building
which boasted twenty-five-watt bulbs on every other floor. They hurtled
through the murk, past the deepest doorways of the law firm, the doll
factory, the import-export firm which imported and exported nothing but
phone calls, and all the other dim mosaics of enterprise. The building
seemed quite deserted, and but for the yellow-orange glow of the
landings and the pathetic little bulbs, there were no lights anywhere.
And it was as quiet as it was almost dark; quiet as late night; quiet as
death.

They burst out onto the old brownstone steps and stopped, afraid to
look, wanting to look. There was nothing. Nothing but the street, a
lonesome light, a distant horn and, far up at the corner, the distinct
clicking of the relays in a traffic-light standard as they changed an
ignored string of emeralds to an unnoticed ruby rope.

“Go up to the corner,” he said, pointing. “I’ll go down the other way.
That noise wasn’t far away—”

“No,” she said. “I’m coming with you.”

“Good,” he said, so glad he was amazed at himself. They ran north to the
corner. There was no one on the street within two blocks in any
direction. There were cars, mostly parked, one coming, but none leaving.

“Now what?” she asked.

For a moment he did not answer. She waited patiently while he listened
to the small distant noises which made the night so quiet. Then, “Good
night, Budge.”

“Good—_what?_”

He waved a hand. “You can go home now.”

“But what about the—”

“I’m tired,” he said. “I’m bewildered. That scream wrung me like a
floor-mop and pulled me down too many stairs too fast. There’s too much
I don’t know about this and not enough I can do about it. So go home.”

“Aw, Muley …”

He sighed. “I know. Your story. Budgie, I faithfully promise you I’ll
give you an exclusive as soon as I have facts I can trust.”

She looked carefully at his face in the dim light and nodded at what she
saw there. “All right, Muley. The pressure’s off. Call me?”

“I’ll call you.”

He stood watching her walk away. Quite a gal, he thought. He wondered
what had moved her to make that odd remark about inhibitions. They’d
certainly never bothered her before. But—perhaps she had something
there. Sometimes when you take what is loosely called “everything,” you
have an odd feeling that you haven’t gotten much. He shrugged and ambled
back toward the laboratory, pondering morphology, teratology, and a case
where _monstra per defectum_ could coexist with _monstra per fabricam
alienam_.

Then he saw the light.

It flickered out over the street, soft and warm. He stopped and looked
up. The light showed in a third-story window. It was orange and yellow,
but with it was a flaring blue-white. It was pretty. It was also in his
laboratory. No—not the laboratory. The morgue.

Muhlenberg groaned. After that he saved his breath. He needed it badly
by the time he got back to the laboratory.

Muhlenberg dove for the heavy morgue door and snatched it open. A great
pressure of heat punted a gout of smoke into the lab. He slammed the
door, ran to a closet, snatched out a full-length lab smock, spun the
faucets in the sink and soaked the smock. From another cabinet he
snatched up two glass-globe fire extinguishers. He wrapped the wet cloth
twice around his face and let the rest drop over his chest and back.
Cradling the extinguishers in one bent forearm, he reached for the side
of the door and grabbed the pump-type extinguisher racked there.

Now, suddenly not hurrying, he stepped up on the sill and stood on
tiptoe, peering through a fold of the wet cloth. Then he crouched low
and peered again. Satisfied, he stood up and carefully pegged the two
glass extinguishers, one straight ahead, one to the right and down. Then
he disappeared into the smoke, holding the third extinguisher at the
ready.

There was a rising moan, and the smoke shook like a solid entity and
rushed into the room and away. As it cleared, Muhlenberg, head and
shoulders wrapped in sooty linen, found himself leaning against the
wall, gasping, with one hand on a knife-switch on the wall. A three-foot
exhaust fan in the top sash of one window was making quick work of the
smoke.

Racks of chemicals, sterilizers, and glass cabinets full of glittering
surgeon’s tools lined the left wall. Out on the floor were four massive
tables, on each of which was a heavy marble top. The rest of the room
was taken up by a chemist’s bench, sinks, a partitioned-off darkroom
with lightproof curtains, and a massive centrifuge.

On one of the tables was a mass of what looked like burned meat and
melted animal fat. It smelled bad—not rotten bad, but acrid and—and
_wet_, if a smell can be described that way. Through it was the sharp,
stinging odor of corrosive chemicals.

He unwound the ruined smock from his face and threw it into a corner. He
walked to the table with the mess on it and stood looking bleakly at it
for a time. Suddenly he put out a hand, and with thumb and forefinger
pulled out a length of bone.

“What a job,” he breathed at length.

He walked around the table, poked at something slumped there and
snatched his hand away. He went to the bench and got a pair of forceps,
which he used to pick up the lump. It looked like a piece of lava or
slag. He turned on a hooded lamp and studied it closely.

“Thermite, by God,” he breathed.

He stood quite still for a moment, clenching and unclenching his square
jaw. He took a long slow turn around the seared horror on the morgue
slab, then carefully picked up the forceps and hurled them furiously
into a corner. Then he went out to the lab and picked up the phone. He
dialed.

“Emergency,” he said. “Hello, Sue. Regalio there? Muhlenberg. Thanks.…
Hello, Doc. Are you sitting down? All right. Now get this. I’m fresh out
of symmetrical teratomorphs. They’re gone.… Shut up and I’ll tell you! I
was out in the lab talking to a reporter when I heard the damnedest
scream. We ran out and found nothing. I left the reporter outside and
came back. I couldn’t’ve been out more’n ten-twelve minutes. But
somebody got in here, moved both stiffs onto one slab, incised them from
the thorax to the pubis, crammed them full of iron oxide and granulated
aluminum—I have lots of that sort of stuff around here—fused ’em with a
couple of rolls of magnesium foil and touched ’em off. Made a great big
messy thermite bomb out of them.… No, dammit, of _course_ there’s
nothing left of them! What would you think eight minutes at seven
thousand degrees would do?… Oh, dry up, Regalio! I don’t know who did it
or why, and I’m too tired to think about it. I’ll see you tomorrow
morning. No—what would be the use of sending anyone down here? This
wasn’t done to fire the building; whoever did it just wanted to get rid
of those bodies, and sure did a job.… The coroner? I don’t know what
I’ll tell him. I’m going to get a drink and then I’m going to bed. I
just wanted you to know. Don’t tell the press. I’ll head off that
reporter who was here before. We can do without this kind of story.
‘Mystery arsonist cremated evidence of double killing in lab of medical
consultant.’ A block from headquarters, yet.… Yeah, and get your driver
to keep his trap shut, too. Okay, Regalio. Just wanted to let you know.…
Well, you’re no sorrier’n I am. We’ll just have to wait another couple
hundred years while something like that gets born again, I guess.”

Muhlenberg hung up, sighed, went into the morgue. He turned off the fan
and lights, locked the morgue door, washed up at the laboratory sink,
and shut the place up for the night.

It was eleven blocks to his apartment—an awkward distance most of the
time, for Muhlenberg was not of the fresh-air and deep-breathing
fraternity. Eleven blocks was not far enough to justify a cab and not
near enough to make walking a negligible detail. At the seventh block he
was aware of an overwhelming thirst and a general sensation that
somebody had pulled the plug out of his energy barrel. He was drawn as
if by a vacuum into Rudy’s, a Mexican bar with Yma Sumac and Villa-Lobos
on the jukebox.

_“Olé, amigo,”_ said Rudy. “Tonight you don’ smile.”

Muhlenberg crawled wearily onto a stool _“Deme una tequila_ sour, and
skip the cherry,” he said in his bastard Spanish. “I don’t know what I
got to smile about.” He froze, and his eyes bulged. “Come back here,
Rudy.”

Rudy put down the lemon he was slicing and came close. “I don’t want to
point, but who _is_ that?”

Rudy glanced at the girl. _“Ay,”_ he said rapturously. _“Que chuchin.”_

Muhlenberg remembered vaguely that _chuchin_ was untranslatable, but
that the closest English could manage with it was “cute.” He shook his
head. “That won’t do.” He held up his hand. “Don’t try to find me a
Spanish word for it. There isn’t any word for it. Who is she?”

Rudy spread his hands. _“No sé.”_

“She by herself?”

_“Si.”_

Muhlenberg put his chin on his hand. “Make my drink. I want to think.”

Rudy went, his mahogany cheeks drawn in and still in his version of a
smile.

Muhlenberg looked at the girl in the booth again just as her gaze swept
past his face to the bartender. “Rudy!” she called softly, “are you
making a tequila sour?”

_“Si, senorita.”_

“Make me one too?”

Rudy beamed. He did not turn his head toward Muhlenberg, but his dark
eyes slid over toward him, and Muhlenberg knew that he was intensely
amused. Muhlenberg’s face grew hot, and he felt like an idiot. He had a
wild fantasy that his ears had turned forward and snapped shut, and that
the cello-and-velvet sound of her voice, captured, was nestling down
inside his head like a warm little animal.

He got off the bar stool, fumbled in his pocket for change and went to
the jukebox. She was there before him, slipping a coin in, selecting a
strange and wonderful recording called _Vene a Mi Casa_, which was a
_borracho_ version of “C’mon-a My House.”

“I was just going to play that!” he said. He glanced at the jukebox. “Do
you like Yma Sumac?”

“Oh, yes!”

“Do you like _lots_ of Yma Sumac?” She smiled and, seeing it, he bit his
tongue. He dropped in a quarter and punched out six sides of Sumac. When
he looked up Rudy was standing by the booth with a little tray on which
were two tequila sours. His face was utterly impassive and his head was
tilted at the precise angle of inquiry as to where he should put
Muhlenberg’s drink. Muhlenberg met the girl’s eyes, and whether she
nodded ever so slightly or whether she did it with a single movement of
her eyelids, he did not know, but it meant “yes.” He slid into the booth
opposite her.

Music came. Only some of it was from the records. He sat and listened to
it all. Rudy came with a second drink before he said anything, and only
then did he realize how much time had passed while he rested there,
taking in her face as if it were quite a new painting by a favorite
artist. She did nothing to draw his attention or to reject it. She did
not stare rapturously into his eyes or avoid them. She did not even
appear to be waiting, or expecting anything of him. She was neither
remote nor intimate. She was close, and it was good.

He thought, in your most secret dreams you cut a niche for yourself, and
it is finished early, and then you wait for someone to come along to
fill it—but to fill it exactly, every cut, curve, hollow and plane of
it. And people do come along, and one covers up the niche, and another
rattles around inside it, and another is so surrounded by fog that for
the longest time you don’t know if she fits or not; but each of them
hits you with a tremendous impact. And then one comes along and slips in
so quietly that you don’t know when it happened, and fits so well you
almost can’t feel anything at all. And that is it.

“What are you thinking about?” she asked him.

He told her, immediately and fully. She nodded as if he had been talking
about cats or cathedrals or cam-shafts, or anything else beautiful and
complex. She said, “That’s right. It isn’t all there, of course. It
isn’t even enough. But everything else isn’t enough without it.”

“What is ‘everything else’?”

“You know,” she said.

He thought he did. He wasn’t sure. He put it aside for later. “Will you
come home with me?”

“Oh, yes.”

They got up. She stood by the door, her eyes full of him, while he went
to the bar with his wallet.

_“¿Cuánto le debo?”_

Rudy’s eyes had a depth he had never noticed before. Perhaps it hadn’t
been there before. _“Nada,”_ said Rudy.

“On the house? _Muchissimo gracias, amigo.”_ He knew, profoundly, that
he shouldn’t protest.

They went to his apartment. While he was pouring brandy—brandy because,
if it’s good brandy, it marries well with tequila—she asked him if he
knew of a place called Shank’s, down in the warehouse district. He
thought he did; he knew he could find it. “I want to meet you there
tomorrow night at eight,” she said. “I’ll be there,” he smiled. He
turned to put the brandy carafe back, full of wordless pleasure in the
knowledge that all day tomorrow he could look forward to being with her
again.

He played records. He was part sheer technician, part delighted child
when he could demonstrate his sound system. He had a copy of the
Confucian “Analects” in a sandalwood box. It was printed on rice-paper
and hand-illuminated. He had a Finnish dagger with intricate scrollwork
which, piece by piece and as a whole, made many pictures. He had a clock
made of four glass discs, the inner two each carrying one hand, and each
being rim-driven from the base so it seemed to have no works at all.

She loved all these things. She sat in his biggest chair while he stared
out at the blue dark hours and she read aloud to him from “The Crock of
Gold” and from Thurber and Shakespeare for laughter, and from
Shakespeare and William Morris for a good sadness.

She sang, once.

Finally she said, “It’s bedtime. Go and get ready.”

He got up and went into the bedroom and undressed. He showered and
rubbed himself pink. Back in the bedroom, he could hear the music she
had put on the phonograph. It was the second movement of Prokofiev’s
“Classical” Symphony, where the orchestra is asleep and the high strings
tiptoe in. It was the third time she had played it. He sat down to wait
until the record was over, and when it was, and she didn’t come or speak
to him, he went to the living-room door and looked in.

She was gone.

He stood absolutely still and looked around the room. The whole time she
had been there she had unostentatiously put everything back after they
had looked at it. The amplifier was still on. The phonograph was off,
because it shut itself off. The record album of Prokofiev, standing
edge-up on the floor by the amplifier, was waiting to receive the record
that was still on the turntable.

He stepped into the room and switched off the amplifier. He was suddenly
conscious that in doing so he had removed half of what she had left
there. He looked down at the record album; then, without touching it, he
turned out the lights and went to bed.

You’ll see her tomorrow, he thought.

He thought, you didn’t so much as touch her hand. If it weren’t for your
eyes and ears, you’d have no way of knowing her.

A little later something deep within him turned over and sighed
luxuriously. Muhlenberg, it said to him, do you realize that not once
during that entire evening did you stop and think: this is an Occasion,
this is a Great Day? Not once. The whole thing was easy as breathing.

As he fell asleep he remembered he hadn’t even asked her her name.

He awoke profoundly rested, and looked with amazement at his alarm
clock. It was only eight, and after what he had been through at the lab
last night, plus what he had drunk, plus staying up so late, this
feeling was a bonus indeed. He dressed quickly and got down to the lab
early. The phone was already ringing. He told the coroner to bring
Regalio and to come right down.

It was all very easy to explain in terms of effects; the burned morgue
room took care of that. They beat causes around for an hour or so
without any conclusion. Since Muhlenberg was so close to the Police
Department, though not a member of it, they agreed to kill the story for
the time being. If relatives or a carnival owner or somebody came along,
that would be different. Meantime, they’d let it ride. It really wasn’t
so bad.

They went away, and Muhlenberg called the paper.

Budgie had not come to work or called. Perhaps she was out on a story,
the switchboard suggested.

The day went fast. He got the morgue cleaned up and a lot done on his
research project. He didn’t begin to worry until the fourth time he
called the paper—that was about five p.m.—and Budgie still hadn’t come
or called. He got her home phone number and called it. No; she wasn’t
there. She’d gone out early to work. Try her at the paper.

He went home and bathed and changed, looked up the address of Shank’s
and took a cab there. He was much too early. It was barely
seven-fifteen.

Shank’s was a corner bar of the old-fashioned type with plate-glass
windows on its corner fronts and flyblown wainscoting behind them. The
booths gave a view of the street corner which did the same for the
booths. Except for the corner blaze of light, the rest of the place was
in darkness, punctuated here and there by the unreal blues and greens of
beer signs in neon script.

Muhlenberg glanced at his watch when he entered, and was appalled. He
knew now that he had been artificially busier and busier as the day wore
on, and that it was only a weak effort to push aside the thoughts of
Budgie and what might have happened to her. His busyness had succeeded
in getting him into a spot where he would have nothing to do but sit and
wait, and think his worries through.

He chose a booth on the mutual margins of the cave-like darkness and the
pallid light, and ordered a beer.

Somebody—let’s be conventional and call him Mr. X—had gone ’way out of
his way to destroy two bodies in his morgue. A very thorough operator.
Of course, if Mr. X was really interested in suppressing information
about the two pathetic halves of the murdered monster in the park, he’d
only done part of the job. Regalio, Al, Budgie and Muhlenberg knew about
it. Regalio and Al had been all right when he had seen them this
morning, and certainly no attempts had been made on him. On the other
hand, he had been in and around the precinct station and its immediate
neighborhood all day, and about the same thing applied to the ambulance
staff.

But Budgie …

Not only was she vulnerable, she wasn’t even likely to be missed for
hours by anyone since she was so frequently out on stories. Stories!
Why—as a reporter she presented the greatest menace of all to anyone who
wanted to hide information!

With that thought came its corollary: Budgie was missing, and if she had
been taken care of he, Muhlenberg, was next on the list. Had to be. He
was the only one who had been able to take a good long look at the
bodies. He was the one who had given the information to the reporter and
the one who still had it to give. In other words, if Budgie had been
taken care of, he could expect some sort of attack too, and quickly.

He looked around the place with narrowing eyes. This was a rugged
section of town. Why was he here?

He had a lurching sense of shock and pain. The girl he’d met last
night—that couldn’t be a part of this thing. It mustn’t be. And yet
because of her he found himself here, like a sitting duck.

He suddenly understood his unwillingness to think about the significance
of Budgie’s disappearance.

“Oh, no,” he said aloud.

Should he run?

Should he—and perhaps be wrong? He visualized the girl coming there,
waiting for him, perhaps getting in some trouble in this dingy place,
just because he’d gotten the wind up over his own fantasies.

He couldn’t leave. Not until after eight anyway. What else then? If they
got him, who would be next? Regalio, certainly. Then Al. Then the
coroner himself.

Warn Regalio. That at least he might do, before it was too late. He
jumped up.

There was, of course, someone in the phone booth. A woman. He swore and
pulled the door open.

_“Budgie!”_

He reached in almost hysterically, pulled her out. She spun limply into
his arms, and for an awful split second his thoughts were indescribable.
Then she moved. She squeezed him, looked up incredulously, squeezed him
again. “Muley! Oh, Muley, I’m so glad it’s you!”

“Budgie, you lunkhead—where’ve you been?”

“Oh, I’ve had the most awful—the most wonderful—”

“Hey, yesterday you cried. Isn’t that your quota for the year?”

“Oh, shut up. Muley, Muley, no one could get mixed up more than I’ve
been!”

“Oh,” he said reflectively, “I dunno. Come on over here. Sit down.
Bartender! Two double whiskey sodas!” Inwardly, he smiled at the
difference in a man’s attitude toward the world when he has something to
protect. “Tell me.” He cupped her chin. “First of all, where have you
been? You had me scared half to death.”

She looked up at him, at each of his eyes in turn. There was a
beseeching expression in her whole pose. “You won’t laugh at me, Muley?”

“Some of this business is real un-funny.”

“Can I _really_ talk to you? I never tried.” She said, as if there were
no change of subject, “You don’t know who I am.”

“Talk then, so I’ll know.”

“Well,” she began, “it was this morning. When I woke up. It was such a
beautiful day! I went down to the corner to get the bus. I said to the
man at the newsstand, _‘Post?’_ and dropped my nickel in his cup, and
right in chorus with me was this man …”

“This man,” he prompted.

“Yes. Well, he was a young man, about—oh, I don’t know how old. Just
right, anyway. And the newsdealer didn’t know who to give the paper to
because he had only one left. We looked at each other, this fellow and
I, and laughed out loud. The newsy heard my voice loudest, I guess, or
was being chivalrous, and he handed the paper to me. The bus came along
then and we got in, and the fellow, the young one, I mean, he was going
to take a seat by himself but I said come on—help me read the paper—you
helped me buy it.”

She paused while the one-eyed bartender brought the drinks.

“We never did look at the paper. We sort of … talked. I never met anyone
I could talk to like that. Not even you, Muley, even now when I’m trying
so. The things that came out … as if I’d known him all my—no,” she said,
shaking her head violently, “not even like that. I don’t know. I can’t
say. It was fine.”

“We crossed the bridge and the bus ran alongside the meadow, out there
between the park and the fairgrounds. The grass was too green and the
sky was too blue and there was something in me that just wanted to
explode. But good, I mean, good. I said I was going to play hookey. I
didn’t say I’d like to, or I felt like it. I said I was going to. And he
said let’s, as if I’d asked him, and I didn’t question that, not one
bit. I don’t know where he was going or what he was giving up, but we
pulled the cord and the bus stopped and we got out and headed cross
country.”

“What did you do all day?” Muhlenberg asked as she sipped.

“Chased rabbits. Ran. Lay in the sun. Fed ducks. Laughed a lot. Talked.
Talked a _whole_ lot.” Her eyes came back to the present, back to
Muhlenberg. “Gosh, I don’t know, Muley. I tried to tell myself all about
it after he left me. I couldn’t. Not so I’d believe it if I listened.”

“And all this wound up in a crummy telephone booth?”

She sobered instantly. “I was supposed to meet him here. I couldn’t just
wait around home. I couldn’t stomach the first faint thought of the
office. So I just came here.

“I sat down to wait. I don’t know why he asked me to meet him in a place
like—what on earth is the matter with you?”

“Nothing,” choked Muhlenberg. “I was having an original thought called,
‘It’s a small world.’ ” He waved her forthcoming questions away. “Don’t
let me interrupt. You first, then me. There’s something weird and
wonderful going on here.”

“Where was I? Oh. Well, I sat here waiting and feeling happy, and
gradually the feeling went away and the gloom began to seep in. Then I
thought about you, and the murder in the park, and that fantastic
business at your lab last night, and I began to get scared. I didn’t
know what to do. I was going to run from here, and then I had a
reaction, and wondered if I was just scaring myself. Suppose he came and
I wasn’t here? I couldn’t bear that. Then I got scared again
and—wondered if he was part of the whole thing, the Siamese-twin murder
and all. And I hated myself for even thinking such a thing. I went into
a real hassle. At last I squared myself away and figured the only thing
to do was to call you up. And you weren’t at the lab. And the coroner
didn’t know where you’d gone and—oh-h-h, _Muley!”_

“It meant that much?”

She nodded.

“Fickle bitch! Minutes after leaving your lover-boy—”

She put her hand over his mouth. “Watch what you say,” she said
fiercely. “This was no gay escapade, Muley. It was like—like nothing
I’ve ever heard of. He didn’t touch me, or act as if he wanted to. He
didn’t have to; it wasn’t called for. The whole thing _was_ the whole
thing, and not a preliminary to anything else. It was—it was—oh, _damn_
this language!”

Muhlenberg thought about the Prokofiev album standing upright by his
amplifier. Damn it indeed, he thought. “What was his name?” he asked
gently.

“His—” She snapped her head up, turned slowly to him. She whispered, “I
never asked him.…” and her eyes went quite round.

“I thought not.” Why did I say that? he asked himself. I almost know.…

He said, suddenly, “Budgie, do you love him?”

Her face showed surprise. “I hadn’t thought about it. Maybe I don’t know
what love is. I thought I knew. But it was less than this.” She frowned.
“It was more than this, though, some ways.”

“Tell me something. When he left you, even after a day like that, did
you feel … that you’d lost something?”

She thought about it. “Why … no. No, I didn’t. I was full up to here,
and what he gave me he left with me. That’s the big difference. No
love’s like that. Can you beat that? I didn’t _lose_ anything!”

He nodded. “Neither did I,” he said.

“You _what?”_

But he wasn’t listening. He was rising slowly, his eyes on the door. The
girl was there. She was dressed differently, she looked trim and
balanced. Her face was the same, though, and her incredible eyes. She
wore blue jeans, loafers, a heavy, rather loose sweater, and two
soft-collar points gleamed against her neck and chin. Her hair hardly
longer than his own, but beautiful, beautiful.…

He looked down, as he would have looked away from a great light. He saw
his watch. It was eight o’clock. And he became aware of Budgie looking
fixedly at the figure in the door, her face radiant. “Muley, come on.
Come on, Muley. There he is!”

The girl in the doorway saw him then and smiled. She waved and pointed
at the corner booth, the one with windows on two streets. Muhlenberg and
Budgie went to her.

She sat down as they came to her. “Hello. Sit there. Both of you.”

Side by side they sat opposite her. Budgie stared in open admiration.
Muhlenberg stared too, and something in the back of his mind began to
grow, and grow, and—“No,” he said, incredulously.

“Yes,” she said, directly to him. “It’s true.” She looked at Budgie.
“She doesn’t know yet, does she?”

Muhlenberg shook his head. “I hadn’t time to tell her.”

“Perhaps you shouldn’t,” said the girl.

Budgie turned excitedly to Muhlenberg. “You know him!”

Muhlenberg said, with difficulty, “I know … know—”

The girl laughed aloud. “You’re looking for a pronoun.”

Budgie said, “Muley, what’s he mean? Let me in on it.”

“An autopsy would have shown it, wouldn’t it?” he demanded.

The girl nodded. “Very readily. That was a close call.”

Budgie looked from one to the other. “Will somebody tell me what in
blazes this is all about?”

Muhlenberg met the girl’s gaze. She nodded. He put an arm around Budgie.
“Listen, girl reporter. Our—our friend here’s something … something new
and different.”

“Not new,” said the girl. “We’ve been around for thousands of years.”

“Have you now!” He paused to digest that, while Budgie squirmed and
protested, “But—but—but—”

“Shush, you,” said Muhlenberg, and squeezed her shoulders gently. “What
you spent the afternoon with isn’t a man, Budgie, any more than what I
spent most of the night with was a woman. Right?”

“Right,” the girl said.

“And the Siamese twins weren’t Siamese twins, but two of our friend’s
kind who—who—”

“They were in syzygy.” An inexpressible sadness was in the smooth,
almost contralto, all but tenor voice.

“In what?” asked Budgie.

Muhlenberg spelled it for her. “In some forms of life,” he started to
explain, “well, the microscopic animal called paramecium’s a good
example—reproduction is accomplished by fission. The creature elongates,
and so does its nucleus. Then the nucleus breaks in two, and one half
goes to each end of the animal. Then the rest of the animal breaks, and
presto—two paramecia.”

“But you—he—”

“Shaddup,” he said. “I’m lecturing. The only trouble with reproduction
by fission is that it affords no variation of strains. A single line of
paramecium would continue to reproduce that way until, by the law of
averages, its dominant traits would all be nonsurvival ones, and bang—no
more paramecia. So they have another process to take care of that
difficulty. One paramecium rests beside another, and gradually their
contracting side walls begin to fuse. The nuclei gravitate toward that
point. The side walls then break down, so that the nuclei then have
access to one another. The nuclei flow together, mix and mingle, and
after a time they separate and half goes into each animal. Then the side
walls close the opening, break away from one another, and each animal
goes its way.

“That is syzygy. It is in no sense a sexual process, because paramecia
have no sex. It has no direct bearing on reproduction either—that can
happen with or without syzygy.” He turned to their companion. “But I’d
never heard of syzygy in the higher forms.”

The faintest of smiles. “It’s unique with us, on this planet anyway.”

“What’s the rest of it?” he demanded.

“Our reproduction? We’re parthenogenetic females.”

“Y-you’re a female?” breathed Budgie.

“A term of convenience,” said Muhlenberg. “Each individual has both
kinds of sex organs. They’re self-fertilizing.”

“That’s a—a what do you call it?—a hermaphrodite,” said Budgie. “Excuse
me,” she said in a small voice.

Muhlenberg and the girl laughed uproariously; and the magic of that
creature was that the laughter couldn’t hurt. “It’s a very different
thing,” said Muhlenberg. “Hermaphrodites are human. She—our friend
there—isn’t.”

“You’re the humanest thing I ever met in my whole life,” said Budgie
ardently.

The girl reached across the table and touched Budgie’s arm. Muhlenberg
suspected that that was the very first physical contact either he or
Budgie had yet received from the creature, and that it was a rare thing
and a great compliment.

“Thank you,” the girl said softly. “Thank you very much for saying
that.” She nodded to Muhlenberg. “Go on.”

“Technically—though I know of no case where it has actually been
possible—hermaphrodites can have contact with either sex. But
parthenogenetic females won’t, can’t, and wouldn’t. They don’t need to.
Humans cross strains along with the reproductive process.
Parthenogenesis separates the two acts completely.” He turned to the
girl. “Tell me, how often do you reproduce?”

“As often as we wish to.”

“And syzygy?”

“As often as we must. Then—we must.”

“And that is—”

“It’s difficult. It’s like the paramecia’s, essentially, but it’s
infinitely more complex. There’s cell meeting and interflow, but in tens
and then dozens, hundreds, then thousands of millions of cells. The join
begins here—” she put her hand at the approximate location of the human
heart—“and extends. But you saw it in those whom I burned. You are one
of the few human beings who ever have.”

“That isn’t what I saw,” he reminded her gently.

She nodded, and again there was that deep sadness. “That murder was such
a stupid, incredible, unexpected thing!”

“Why were they in the park?” he asked, his voice thick with pity. “Why,
out there, in the open, where some such human slugs could find them?”

“They took a chance, because it was important to them,” she said
wearily. She looked up, and her eyes were luminous. “We love the
outdoors. We love the earth, the feel and smell of it, what lives from
it and in it. Especially then. It was such a deep thicket, such an
isolated pocket. It was the merest accident that those—those men found
them there. They couldn’t move. They were—well, medically you could call
it unconscious. Actually, there—there never was a consciousness like the
one which comes with syzygy.”

“Can you describe it?”

She shook her head slowly, and it was no violation of her complete
frankness. “Do you know, you couldn’t describe sexuality to me so that I
could understand it? I have no—no comparison, no analogies. It—” she
looked from one to the other—“it amazes me. In some ways I envy it. I
know it is a strife, which we avoid, for we are very gentle. But you
have a capacity for enjoying strife, and all the pain, all the misery
and poverty and cruelty which you suffer, is the cornerstone of
everything you build. And you build more than anyone or anything in the
known universe.”

Budgie was wide-eyed. “You envy _us. You?_”

She smiled. “Don’t you think the things you admire me for are rather
commonplace among my own kind? It’s just that they’re rare in humans.”

Muhlenberg said slowly, “Just what is your relationship to humanity?”

“It’s symbiotic, of course.”

“Symbiotic? You live with us, and us with you, like the
cellulose-digesting microbes in a termite? Like the yucca moth, which
can eat only nectar from the yucca cactus, which can spread its pollen
only through the yucca moth?”

She nodded. “It’s purely symbiotic. But it isn’t easy to explain. We
live on that part of humans which makes them different from animals.”

“And in turn—”

“We cultivate it in humans.”

“I don’t understand that,” said Budgie flatly.

“Look into your legends. We’re mentioned often enough there. Who were
the sexless angels? Who is the streamlined fat boy on your Valentine’s
Day cards? Where does inspiration come from? Who knows three notes of a
composer’s new symphony, and whistles the next phrase as he walks by the
composer’s house? And—most important to you two—who really understands
that part of love between humans which is not sexual—because we can
understand no other kind? Read your history, and you’ll see where we’ve
been. And in exchange we get the building—bridges, yes, and aircraft and
soon, now, space-ships. But other kinds of building too. Songs and
poetry and this new thing, this increasing sense of the oneness of all
your species. And now it is fumbling toward a United Nations, and later
it will grope for the stars; and where it builds, we thrive.”

“Can you name this thing you get from us—this thing that is the
difference between men and the rest of the animals?”

“No. But call it a sense of achievement. Where you feel that most, you
feed us most. And you feel it most when others of your kind enjoy what
you build.”

“Why do you keep yourselves hidden?” Budgie suddenly asked. “Why?” She
wrung her hands on the edge of the table. “You’re so beautiful!”

“We have to hide,” the other said gently. “You still kill anything
that’s … different.”

Muhlenberg looked at that open, lovely face and felt a sickness, and he
could have cried. He said, “Don’t you ever kill anything?” and then hung
his head, because it sounded like a defense for the murdering part of
humanity. Because it was.

“Yes,” she said very softly, “we do.”

“You can _hate_ something?”

“It isn’t hate. Anyone who hates, hates himself as well as the object of
his hate. There’s another emotion called righteous anger. That makes us
kill.”

“I can’t conceive of such a thing.”

“What time is it?”

“Almost eight-forty.”

She raised herself from her booth and looked out to the corner. It was
dark now, and the usual crowd of youths had gathered under the
street-lights.

“I made appointments with three more people this evening,” she said.
“They are murderers. Just watch.” Her eyes seemed to blaze.

Under the light, two of the youths were arguing. The crowd, but for a
prodding yelp or two, had fallen silent and was beginning to form a
ring. Inside the ring, but apart from the two who were arguing, was a
third—smaller, heavier and, compared with the sharp-creased, bright-tied
arguers, much more poorly dressed, in an Eisenhower jacket with one
sleeve tattered up to the elbow.

What happened then happened with frightening speed. One of the arguers
smashed the other across the mouth. Spitting blood, the other staggered
back, made a lightning move into his coat pocket. The blade looked for
all the world like a golden fan as it moved in the cyclic pulsations of
the streetlamp. There was a bubbling scream, a deep animal grunt, and
two bodies lay tangled and twitching on the sidewalk while blood gouted
and seeped and defied the sharpness of creases and the colors of ties.

Far up the block a man shouted and a whistle shrilled. Then the street
corner seemed to become a great repulsing pole for humans. People ran
outward, rayed outward, until, from above, they must have looked like a
great splash in mud, reaching out and out until the growing ring broke
and the particles scattered and were gone. And then there were only the
bleeding bodies and the third one, the one with the tattered jacket, who
hovered and stepped and waited and did not know which way to go. There
was the sound of a single pair of running feet, after the others had all
run off to silence, and these feet belonged to a man who ran fast and
ran closer and breathed heavily through a shrieking police whistle.

The youth in the jacket finally turned and ran away, and the policeman
shouted once around his whistle, and then there were two sharp reports
and the youth, running hard, threw up his hands and fell without trying
to turn his face away, and skidded on it and lay still with one foot
turned in and the other turned out.

The girl in the dark sweater and blue jeans turned away from the windows
and sank back into her seat, looking levelly into the drawn faces across
the table. “Those were the men who killed those two in the park,” she
said in a low voice, “and that is how we kill.”

“A little like us,” said Muhlenberg weakly. He found his handkerchief
and wiped off his upper lip. “Three of them for two of you.”

“Oh, you don’t understand,” she said, and there was pity in her voice.
“It wasn’t because they killed those two. It was because they pulled
them apart.”

Gradually, the meaning of this crept into Muhlenberg’s awed mind, and
the awe grew with it. For here was a race which separated insemination
from the mixing of strains, and apart from them, in clean-lined
definition, was a third component, a psychic interflow. Just a touch of
it had given him a magic night and Budgie an enchanted day; hours
without strife, without mixed motives or misinterpretations.

If a human, with all his grossly efficient combination of functions,
could be led to appreciate one light touch to that degree, what must it
mean to have that third component, pure and in essence, torn apart in
its fullest flow? This was worse than any crime could be to a human; and
yet, where humans can claim clear consciences while jailing a man for a
year for stealing a pair of shoes, these people repay the cruelest
sacrilege of all with a quick clean blow. It was removal, not
punishment. Punishment was alien and inconceivable to them.

He slowly raised his face to the calm, candid eyes of the girl. “Why
have you shown us all this?”

“You needed me,” she said simply.

“But you came up to destroy those bodies so no one would know—”

“And I found you two, each needing what the other had, and blind to it.
No, not blind. I remember you said that if you ever could really share
something, you could be very close.” She laughed. “Remember your niche,
the one that’s finished early and never exactly filled? I told you at
the time that it wouldn’t be enough by itself if it _were_ filled, and
anyone completely without it wouldn’t have enough either. And you—” She
smiled at Budgie. “You never made any secret about what you wanted. And
there the two of you were, each taking what you already had, and
ignoring what you needed.”

“Headline!” said Budgie, “Common Share Takes Stock.”

“Subhead!” grinned Muhlenberg, “Man With A Niche Meets Girl With An
Itch.”

The girl slid out of the booth. “You’ll do,” she said.

“Wait! You’re not going to leave us! Aren’t we ever going to see you
again?”

“Not knowingly. You won’t remember me, or any of this.”

“How can you take away—”

“Shush, Muley. You know she can.”

“Yes, I guess she—wait though—wait! You give us all this knowledge just
so we’ll understand—and then you take it all away again. What good will
that do us?”

She turned toward them. It may have been because they were still seated
and she was standing, but she seemed to tower over them. In a split
second of fugue, he had the feeling that he was looking at a great light
on a mountain.

“Why, you poor things—didn’t you know? Knowledge and understanding
aren’t props for one another. Knowledge is a pile of bricks, and
understanding is a way of building. Build for me!”

They were in a joint called Shank’s. After the triple killing, and the
wild scramble to get the story phoned in, they started home.

“Muley,” she asked suddenly, “what’s syzygy?”

“What on earth made you ask me that?”

“It just popped into my head. What is it?”

“A non-sexual interflow between the nuclei of two animals.”

“I never tried that,” she said thoughtfully.

“Well, don’t until we’re married,” he said. They began to hold hands
while they walked.



BABY IS THREE


I FINALLY GOT in to see this Stern. He wasn’t an old man at all. He
looked up from his desk, flicked his eyes over me once, and picked up a
pencil. “Sit over there, Sonny.”

I stood where I was until he looked up again. Then I said, “Look, if a
midget walks in here, what do you say—sit over there, Shorty?”

He put the pencil down again and stood up. He smiled. His smile was as
quick and sharp as his eyes. “I was wrong,” he said, “but how am I
supposed to know you don’t want to be called Sonny?”

That was better, but I was still mad. “I’m fifteen and I don’t have to
like it. Don’t rub my nose in it.”

He smiled again and said okay, and I went and sat down.

“What’s your name?”

“Gerard.”

“First or last?”

“Both,” I said.

“Is that the truth?”

I said, “No. And don’t ask me where I live either.”

He put down his pencil. “We’re not going to get very far this way.”

“That’s up to you. What are you worried about? I got feelings of
hostility? Well, sure I have. I got lots more things than that wrong
with me or I wouldn’t be here. Are you going to let that stop you?”

“Well, no, but—”

“So what else is bothering you? How you’re going to get paid?” I took
out a thousand-dollar bill and laid it on the desk. “That’s so you won’t
have to bill me. _You_ keep track of it. Tell me when it’s used up and
I’ll give you more. So you don’t need my address. Wait,” I said, when he
reached toward the money. “Let it lay there. I want to be sure you and I
are going to get along.”

He folded his hands. “I don’t do business this way, Son—I mean, Gerard.”

“Gerry,” I told him. “You do, if you do business with me.”

“You make things difficult, don’t you? Where did you get a thousand
dollars?”

“I won a contest. Twenty-five words or less about how much fun it is to
do my daintier underthings with Sudso.” I leaned forward. “This time
it’s the truth.”

“All right,” he said.

I was surprised. I think he knew it, but he didn’t say anything more.
Just waited for me to go ahead.

“Before we start—_if_ we start,” I said, “I got to know something. The
things I say to you—what comes out while you’re working on me—is that
just between us, like a priest or a lawyer?”

“Absolutely,” he said.

“No matter what?”

“No matter what.”

I watched him when he said it. I believed him.

“Pick up your money,” I said. “You’re on.”

He didn’t do it. He said, “As you remarked a minute ago, that is up to
me. You can’t buy these treatments like a candy bar. We have to work
together. If either one of us can’t do that, it’s useless. You can’t
walk in on the first psychotherapist you find in the phone book and make
any demand that occurs to you just because you can pay for it.”

I said tiredly, “I didn’t get you out of the phone book and I’m not just
guessing that you can help me. I winnowed through a dozen or more
head-shrinkers before I decided on you.”

“Thanks,” he said, and it looked as if he was going to laugh at me,
which I never like. “Winnowed, did you say? Just how?”

“Things you hear, things you read. You know. I’m not saying, so just
file that with my street address.”

He looked at me for a long time. It was the first time he’d used those
eyes on me for anything but a flash glance. Then he picked up the bill.

“What do I do first?” I demanded.

“What do you mean?”

“How do we start?”

“We started when you walked in here.”

So then I had to laugh. “All right, you got me. All I had was an
opening. I didn’t know where you would go from there, so I couldn’t be
there ahead of you.”

“That’s very interesting,” Stern said. “Do you usually figure everything
out in advance?”

“Always.”

“How often are you right?”

“All the time. Except—but I don’t have to tell you about no exceptions.”

He really grinned this time. “I see. One of my patients has been
talking.”

“One of your ex-patients. Your patients don’t talk.”

“I ask them not to. That applies to you, too. What did you hear?”

“That you know from what people say and do what they’re about to say and
do, and that sometimes you let’m do it and sometimes you don’t. How did
you learn to do that?”

He thought a minute. “I guess I was born with an eye for details, and
then let myself make enough mistakes with enough people until I learned
not to make too many more. How did you learn to do it?”

I said, “You answer that and I won’t have to come back here.”

“You really don’t know?”

“I wish I did. Look, this isn’t getting us anywhere, is it?”

He shrugged. “Depends on where you want to go.” He paused, and I got the
eyes full strength again. “Which thumbnail description of psychiatry do
you believe at the moment?”

“I don’t get you.”

Stern slid open a desk drawer and took out a blackened pipe. He smelled
it, turned it over while looking at me. “Psychiatry attacks the onion of
the self, removing layer after layer until it gets down to the little
sliver of unsullied ego. Or: psychiatry drills like an oil well, down
and sidewise and down again, through all the muck and rock, until it
strikes a layer that yields. Or: psychiatry grabs a handful of sexual
motivations and throws them on the pinball-machine of your life, so they
bounce on down against episodes. Want more?”

I had to laugh. “That last one was pretty good.”

“That last one was pretty bad. They are all bad. They all try to
simplify something which is complex by its very nature. The only
thumbnail you’ll get from me is this: no one knows what’s really wrong
with you but you; no one can find a cure for it but you; no one but you
can identify it as a cure; and once you find it, no one but you can do
anything about it.”

“What are _you_ here for?”

“To listen.”

“I don’t have to pay somebody no day’s wage every hour just to listen.”

“True. But you’re convinced that I listen selectively.”

“Am I?” I wondered about it. “I guess I am. Well, don’t you?”

“No, but you’ll never believe that.”

I laughed. He asked me what that was for. I said, “You’re not calling me
Sonny.”

“Not you.” He shook his head slowly. He was watching me while he did it,
so his eyes slid in their sockets as his head moved. “What is it you
want to know about yourself, that made you worried I might tell people?”

“I want to find out why I killed somebody,” I said right away.

It didn’t faze him a bit. “Lie down over there.”

I got up. “On that couch?”

He nodded.

As I stretched out self-consciously, I said, “I feel like I’m in some
damn cartoon.”

“What cartoon?”

“Guy’s built like a bunch of grapes,” I said, looking at the ceiling. It
was pale gray.

“What’s the caption.”

“ ‘I got trunks full of ’em.’ ”

“Very good,” he said quietly.

I looked at him carefully. I knew then he was the kind of guy who laughs
way down deep when he laughs at all.

He said, “I’ll use that in a book of case histories some time. But it
won’t include yours. What made you throw that in?” When I didn’t answer,
he got up and moved to a chair behind me where I couldn’t see him. “You
can quit testing, Sonny. I’m good enough for your purposes.”

I clenched my jaw so hard, my back teeth hurt. Then I relaxed. I relaxed
all over. It was wonderful. “All right,” I said. “I’m sorry.” He didn’t
say anything, but I had that feeling again that he was laughing. Not at
me, though.

“How old are you?” he asked me suddenly.

“Uh—fifteen.”

“Uh—fifteen,” he repeated. “What does the ‘uh’ mean?”

“Nothing. I’m fifteen.”

“When I asked your age, you hesitated because some other number popped
up. You discarded that and substituted ‘fifteen.’ ”

“The hell I did! I _am_ fifteen!”

“I didn’t say you weren’t.” His voice came patiently. “Now what was the
other number?”

I got mad again. “There wasn’t any other number! What do you want to go
pryin’ my grunts apart for, trying to plant this and that and make it
mean what you think it ought to mean?”

He was silent.

“I’m fifteen,” I said defiantly, and then, “I don’t like being only
fifteen. You know that. I’m not trying to insist I’m fifteen.”

He just waited, still not saying anything.

I felt defeated. “The number was eight.”

“So you’re eight. And your name?”

“Gerry.” I got up on one elbow, twisting my neck around so I could see
him. He had his pipe apart and was sighting through the stem at the desk
lamp. “Gerry, without no ‘uh!’ ”

“All right,” he said mildly, making me feel real foolish.

I leaned back and closed my eyes.

Eight, I thought. Eight.

“It’s cold in here,” I complained.

Eight. Eight, plate, state, hate. I ate from the plate of the state and
I hate. I didn’t like any of that and I snapped my eyes open. The
ceiling was still gray. It was all right. Stern was somewhere behind me
with his pipe, and he was all right. I took two deep breaths, three, and
then let my eyes close. Eight. Eight years old. Eight, hate. Years,
fears. Old, cold. _Damn_ it! I twisted and twitched on the couch, trying
to find a way to keep the cold out. I ate from the plate of the—

I grunted and with my mind I took all the eights and all the rhymes and
everything they stood for, and made it all black. But it wouldn’t stay
black. I had to put something there, so I made a great big luminous
figure eight and just let it hang there. But it turned on its side and
inside the loops it began to shimmer. It was like one of those movie
shots through binoculars. I was going to have to look through whether I
liked it or not.

Suddenly I quit fighting it and let it wash over me. The binoculars came
close, closer, and then I was there.

Eight. Eight years old, cold. Cold as a bitch in the ditch. The ditch
was by a railroad. Last year’s weeds were scratchy straw. The ground was
red, and when it wasn’t slippery, clingy mud, it was frozen hard like a
flowerpot. It was hard like that now, dusted with hoar-frost, cold as
the winter light that pushed up over the hills. At night the lights were
warm, and they were all in other people’s houses. In the daytime the sun
was in somebody else’s house too, for all the good it did me.

I was dying in that ditch. Last night it was as good a place as any to
sleep, and this morning it was as good a place as any to die. Just as
well. Eight years old, the sick-sweet taste of porkfat and wet bread
from somebody’s garbage, the thrill of terror when you’re stealing a
gunnysack and you hear a footstep.

And I heard a footstep.

I’d been curled up on my side. I whipped over on my stomach because
sometimes they kick your belly. I covered my head with my arms and that
was as far as I could get.

After a while I rolled my eyes up and looked without moving. There was a
big shoe there. There was an ankle in the shoe, and another shoe close
by. I lay there waiting to get tromped. Not that I cared much any more,
but it was such a damn shame. All these months on my own, and they’d
never caught up with me, never even come close, and now this. It was
such a shame I started to cry.

The shoe took me under the armpit, but it was not a kick. It rolled me
over. I was so stiff from the cold, I went over like a plank. I just
kept my arms over my face and head and lay there with my eyes closed.
For some reason I stopped crying. I think people only cry when there’s a
chance of getting help from somewhere.

When nothing happened, I opened my eyes and shifted my forearms a little
so I could see up. There was a man standing over me and he was a mile
high. He had on faded dungarees and an old Eisenhower jacket with deep
sweat-stains under the arms. His face was shaggy, like the guys who
can’t grow what you could call a beard, but still don’t shave.

He said, “Get up.”

I looked down at his shoe, but he wasn’t going to kick me. I pushed up a
little and almost fell down again, except he put his big hand where my
back would hit it. I lay against it for a second because I had to, and
then got up to where I had one knee on the ground.

“Come on,” he said. “Let’s go.”

I swear I felt my bones creek, but I made it. I brought a round white
stone up with me as I stood. I hefted the stone. I had to look at it to
see if I was really holding it, my fingers were that cold. I told him,
“Stay away from me or I’ll bust you in the teeth with this rock.”

His hand came out and down so fast, I never saw the way he got one
finger between my palm and the rock, and flicked it out of my grasp. I
started to cuss at him, but he just turned his back and walked up the
embankment toward the tracks. He put his chin on his shoulder and said,
“Come on, will you?”

He didn’t chase me, so I didn’t run. He didn’t talk to me, so I didn’t
argue. He didn’t hit me, so I didn’t get mad. I went along after him. He
waited for me. He put out his hand to me and I spit at it. So he went
on, up to the tracks, out of my sight. I clawed my way up. The blood was
beginning to move in my hands and feet and they felt like four
point-down porcupines. When I got up to the roadbed, the man was
standing there waiting for me.

The track was level just there, but as I turned my head to look along
it, it seemed to be a hill that was steeper and steeper and turned over
above me. And next thing you know, I was lying flat on my back looking
up at the cold sky.

The man came over and sat down on the rail near me. He didn’t try to
touch me. I gasped for breath a couple of times, and suddenly felt I’d
be all right if I could sleep for a minute—just a little minute. I
closed my eyes. The man stuck his finger in my ribs, hard. It hurt.

“Don’t sleep,” he said.

I looked at him.

He said, “You’re frozen stiff and weak with hunger. I want to take you
home and get you warmed up and fed. But it’s a long haul up that way,
and you won’t make it by yourself. If I carry you, will that be the same
to you as if you walked it?”

“What are you going to do when you get me home?”

“I told you.”

“All right,” I said.

He picked me up and carried me down the track. If he’d said anything
else in the world, I’d of laid right down where I was until I froze to
death. Anyway, what did he want to ask me for, one way or the other? I
couldn’t of done anything.

I stopped thinking about it and dozed off.

I woke up once when he turned off the right of way. He dove into the
woods. There was no path, but he seemed to know where he was going. The
next time I woke from a crackling noise. He was carrying me over a
frozen pond and the ice was giving under his feet. He didn’t hurry. I
looked down and saw the white cracks raying out under his feet, and it
didn’t seem to matter a bit. I bleared off again.

He put me down at last. We were there. “There” was inside a room. It was
very warm. He put me on my feet and I snapped out of it in a hurry. The
first thing I looked for was the door. I saw it and jumped over there
and put my back against the wall beside it, in case I wanted to leave.
Then I looked around.

It was a big room. One wall was rough rock and the rest was logs with
stuff shoved between them. There was a big fire going in the rock wall,
not in a fireplace, exactly; it was a sort of hollow place. There was an
old auto battery on a shelf opposite, with two yellowing electric light
bulbs dangling by wires from it. There was a table, some boxes and a
couple of three-legged stools. The air had a haze of smoke and such a
wonderful, heartbreaking, candy-and-crackling smell of food that a
little hose squirted inside my mouth.

The man said, “What have I got here, Baby?”

And the room was full of kids. Well, three of them, but somehow they
seemed to be more than three kids. There was a girl about my age—eight,
I mean—with blue paint on the side of her face. She had an easel and a
palette with lots of paints and a fistful of brushes, but she wasn’t
using the brushes. She was smearing the paint on with her hands. Then
there was a little Negro girl about five with great big eyes who stood
gaping at me. And in a wooden crate, set up on two sawhorses to make a
kind of bassinet, was a baby. I guess about three or four months old. It
did what babies do, drooling some, making small bubbles, waving its
hands around very aimless, and kicking.

When the man spoke, the girl at the easel looked at me and then at the
baby. The baby just kicked and drooled.

The girl said, “His name’s Gerry. He’s mad.”

“What’s he mad at?” the man asked. He was looking at the baby.

“Everything,” said the girl. “Everything and everybody.”

“Where’d he come from?”

I said, “Hey, what is this?” but nobody paid any attention. The man kept
asking questions at the baby and the girl kept answering. Craziest thing
I ever saw.

“He ran away from a state school,” the girl said. “They fed him enough,
but no one bleshed with him.”

That’s what she said—“bleshed.”

I opened the door then and cold air hooted in. “You louse,” I said to
the man, “you’re from the school.”

“Close the door, Janie,” said the man. The girl at the easel didn’t
move, but the door banged shut behind me. I tried to open it and it
wouldn’t move. I let out a howl, yanking at it.

“I think you ought to stand in the corner,” said the man. “Stand him in
the corner, Janie.”

Janie looked at me. One of the three-legged stools sailed across to me.
It hung in midair and turned on its side. It nudged me with its flat
seat. I jumped back and it came after me. I dodged to the side, and that
was the corner. The stool came on. I tried to bat it down and just hurt
my hand. I ducked and it went lower than I did. I put one hand on it and
tried to vault over it, but it just fell and so did I. I got up again
and stood in the corner, trembling. The stool turned right side up and
sank to the floor in front of me.

The man said, “Thank you, Janie.” He turned to me. “Stand there and be
quiet, you. I’ll get to you later. You shouldn’ta kicked up all that
fuss.” And then, to the baby, he said, “He got anything we need?”

And again it was the little girl who answered. She said, “Sure. He’s the
one.”

“Well,” said the man. “What do you know!” He came over. “Gerry, you can
live here. I don’t come from the school. I’ll never turn you in.”

“Yeah, huh?”

“He hates you,” said Janie.

“What am I supposed to do about that?” he wanted to know.

Janie turned her head to look into the bassinet. “Feed him.” The man
nodded and began fiddling around the fire.

Meanwhile, the little Negro girl had been standing in the one spot with
her big eyes right out on her cheekbones, looking at me. Janie went back
to her painting, and the baby just lay there same as always, so I stared
right back at the little Negro girl. I snapped, “What the devil are you
gawking at?”

She grinned at me. “Gerry ho-ho,” she said, and disappeared. I mean she
really disappeared, went out like a light, leaving her clothes where she
had been. Her little dress billowed in the air and fell in a heap where
she had been, and that was that. She was gone.

“Gerry hee-hee,” I heard. I looked up, and there she was, stark naked,
wedged in a space where a little outcropping on the rock wall stuck out
just below the ceiling. The second I saw her she disappeared again.

“Gerry ho-ho,” she said. Now she was on top of the row of boxes they
used as storage shelves, over on the other side of the room.

“Gerry hee-hee!” Now she was under the table. “Gerry ho-ho!” This time
she was right in the corner with me, crowding me.

I yelped and tried to get out of the way and bumped the stool. I was
afraid of it, so I shrank back again and the little girl was gone.

The man glanced over his shoulder from where he was working at the fire.
“Cut it out, you kids,” he said.

There was a silence, and then the girl came slowly out from the bottom
row of shelves. She walked across to her dress and put it on.

“How did you do that?” I wanted to know.

Janie said, “It’s easy. She’s really twins.”

“Oh,” I said. Then another girl, exactly the same, came from somewhere
in the shadows and stood beside the first. They were identical. They
stood side by side and stared at me. This time I let them stare.

“That’s Bonnie and Beanie,” said the painter. “This is Baby and that—”
she indicated the man—“that’s Lone. And I’m Janie.”

I couldn’t think of what to say, so I said, “Yeah.”

Lone said, “Water, Janie.” He held up a pot. I heard water trickling,
but didn’t see anything. “That’s enough,” he said, and hung the pot on a
crane. He picked up a cracked china plate and brought it over to me. It
was full of stew with great big lumps of meat in it, and thick gravy and
dumplings and carrots. “Here, Gerry. Sit down.”

I looked at the stool. “On that?”

“Sure.”

“Not me,” I said. I took the plate and hunkered down against the wall.

“Hey,” he said after a time. “Take it easy. We’ve all had chow. No one’s
going to snatch it away from you. Slow down!”

I ate even faster than before. I was almost finished when I threw it all
up. Then for some reason my head hit the edge of the stool. I dropped
the plate and spoon and slumped there. I felt real bad.

Lone came over and looked at me. “Sorry, kid,” he said. “Clean up, will
you, Janie?”

Right in front of my eyes, the mess on the floor disappeared. I didn’t
care about that or anything else just then. I felt the man’s hand on the
side of my neck. Then he tousled my hair.

“Beanie, get him a blanket. Let’s all go to sleep. He ought to rest a
while.”

I felt the blanket go around me, and I think I was asleep before he put
me down.

I don’t know how much later it was when I woke up. I didn’t know where I
was and that scared me. I raised my head and saw the dull glow of the
embers in the fireplace. Lone was stretched out on it in his clothes.
Janie’s easel stood in the reddish blackness like some great preying
insect. I saw the baby’s head pop up out of the bassinet, but I couldn’t
tell whether he was looking straight at me or away. Janie was lying on
the floor near the door and the twins were on the old table. Nothing
moved except the baby’s head, bobbing a little.

I got to my feet and looked around the room. Just a room, only the one
door. I tiptoed toward it. When I passed Janie, she opened her eyes.

“What’s the matter?” she whispered.

“None of your business,” I told her. I went to the door as if I didn’t
care, but I watched her. She didn’t do anything. The door was as solid
tight closed as when I’d tried it before.

I went back to Janie. She just looked up at me. She wasn’t scared. I
told her, “I got to go to the john.”

“Oh,” she said. “Why’n’t you say so?”

Suddenly I grunted and grabbed my guts. The feeling I had I can’t begin
to talk about. I acted as if it was a pain, but it wasn’t. It was like
nothing else that ever happened to me before.

“Okay,” Janie said. “Go back to bed.”

“But I got to—”

“You got to what?”

“Nothing.” It was true. I didn’t have to go no place.

“Next time tell me right away. I don’t mind.”

I didn’t say anything. I went back to my blanket.

“That’s all?” said Stern. I lay on the couch and looked up at the gray
ceiling. He asked, “How old are you?”

“Fifteen,” I said dreamily. He waited until, for me, the gray ceiling
acquired walls and a floor, a rug and lamps and a desk and a chair with
Stern in it. I sat up and held my head a second, and then I looked at
him. He was fooling with his pipe and looking at me. “What did you do to
me?”

“I told you. I don’t do anything here. You do it.”

“You hypnotized me.”

“I did not.” His voice was quiet, but he really meant it.

“What was all that, then? It was … it was like it was happening for real
all over again.”

“Feel anything?”

“Everything.” I shuddered. _“Every_ damn thing. What was it?”

“Anyone doing it feels better afterward. You can go over it all again
now any time you want to, and every time you do, the hurt in it will be
less. You’ll see.”

It was the first thing to amaze me in years. I chewed on it and then
asked, “If I did it by myself, how come it never happened before?”

“It needs someone to listen.”

“Listen? Was I talking?”

“A blue streak.”

“Everything that happened?”

“How can I know? I wasn’t there. You were.”

“You don’t believe it happened, do you? Those disappearing kids and the
footstool and all?”

He shrugged. “I’m not in the business of believing or not believing. Was
it real to you?”

“Oh, hell, yes!”

“Well, then, that’s all that matters. Is that where you live, with those
people?”

I bit off a fingernail that had been bothering me. “Not for a long time.
Not since Baby was three.” I looked at him. “You remind me of Lone.”

“Why?”

“I don’t know. No, you don’t,” I added suddenly. “I don’t know what made
me say that.” I lay down abruptly.

The ceiling was gray and the lamps were dim. I heard the pipestem click
against his teeth. I lay there for a long time.

“Nothing happens,” I told him.

“What did you expect to happen?”

“Like before.”

“There’s something there that wants out. Just let it come.”

It was as if there was a revolving drum in my head, and on it were
photographed the places and things and people I was after. And it was as
if the drum was spinning very fast, so fast I couldn’t tell one picture
from another. I made it stop, and it stopped at a blank segment. I spun
it again, and stopped it again.

“Nothing happens,” I said.

“Baby is three,” he repeated.

“Oh,” I said. “That.” I closed my eyes.

That might be it. Might, sight, night, light. I might have the sight of
a light in the night. Maybe the baby. Maybe the sight of the baby at
night because of the light …

There was night after night when I lay on that blanket, and a lot of
nights I didn’t. Something was going on all the time in Lone’s house.
Sometimes I slept in the daytime. I guess the only time everybody slept
at once was when someone was sick, like me the first time I arrived
there. It was always sort of dark in the room, the same night and day,
the fire going, the two old bulbs _hanging_ yellow by their wires from
the battery. When they got too dim, Janie fixed the battery and they got
bright again.

Janie did everything that needed doing, whatever no one else felt like
doing. Everybody else did things, too. Lone was out a lot. Sometimes he
used the twins to help him, but you never missed them, because they’d be
here and gone and back again _bing!_ like that. And Baby, he just stayed
in his bassinet.

I did things myself. I cut wood for the fire and I put up more shelves,
and then I’d go swimming with Janie and the twins sometimes. And I
talked to Lone. I didn’t do a thing that the others couldn’t do, but
they all did things I couldn’t do. I was mad, mad all the time about
that. But I wouldn’t of known what to do with myself if I wasn’t mad all
the time about something or other. It didn’t keep us from bleshing.
Bleshing, that was Janie’s word. She said Baby told it to her. She said
it meant everyone all together being something, even if they all did
different things. Two arms, two legs, one body, one head, all working
together, although a head can’t walk and arms can’t think. Lone said
maybe it was a mixture of “blending” and “meshing,” but I don’t think he
believed that himself. It was a lot more than that.

Baby talked all the time. He was like a broadcasting station that runs
twenty-four hours a day, and you can get what it’s sending any time you
tune in, but it’ll keep sending whether you tune in or not. When I say
he talked, I don’t mean exactly that. He semaphored mostly. You’d think
those wandering, vague movements of his hands and arms and legs and head
were meaningless, but they weren’t. It was semaphore, only instead of a
symbol for a sound, or such like, the movements were whole thoughts.

I mean spread the left hand and shake the right high up, and thump with
the left heel, and it means, “Anyone who thinks a starling is a pest
just don’t know anything about how a starling thinks” or something like
that.

Lone couldn’t read the stuff and neither could I. The twins could, but
they didn’t give a damn. Janie used to watch him all the time. He always
knew what you meant if you wanted to ask him something, and he’d tell
Janie and she’d say what it was. Part of it, anyway. Nobody could get it
all, not even Janie. Lone once told me that all babies know that
semaphore. But when nobody receives it, they quit doing it and pretty
soon they forget. They _almost_ forget. There’s always some left. That’s
why certain gestures are funny the world over, and certain others make
you mad. But like everything else Lone said, I don’t know whether he
believed it or not.

All I know is Janie would sit there and paint her pictures and watch
Baby, and sometimes she’d bust out laughing, and sometimes she’d get the
twins and make them watch and they’d laugh, too, or they’d wait till he
was finished what he was saying and then they’d creep off to a corner
and whisper to each other about it. Baby never grew any. Janie did, and
the twins, and so did I, but not Baby. He just lay there.

Janie kept his stomach full and cleaned him up every two or three days.
He didn’t cry and he didn’t make any trouble. No one ever went near him.

Janie showed every picture she painted to Baby, before she cleaned the
boards and painted new ones. She had to clean them because she only had
three of them. It was a good thing, too, because I’d hate to think what
that place would of been like if she’d kept them all; she did four or
five a day. Lone and the twins were kept hopping getting turpentine for
her. She could shift the paints back into the little pots on her easel
without any trouble, just by looking at the pictures one color at a
time, but turps was something else again. She told me that Baby
remembered all her pictures and that’s why she didn’t have to keep them.
They were all pictures of machines and gear-trains and mechanical
linkages and what looked like electric circuits and things like that. I
never thought too much about them.

I went out with Lone to get some turpentine and a couple of picnic hams,
one time. We went through the woods to the railroad track and down a
couple of miles to where we could see the glow of a town. Then the woods
again, and some alleys, and a back street.

Lone was like always, walking along, thinking, thinking.

We came to a hardware store and he went up and looked at the lock and
came back to where I was waiting, shaking his head. Then we found a
general store. Lone grunted and we went and stood in the shadows by the
door. I looked in.

All of a sudden, Beanie was in there, naked like she always was when she
traveled like that. She came and opened the door from the inside. We
went in and Lone closed it and locked it.

“Get along home, Beanie,” he said, “before you catch your death.”

She grinned at me and said, “Ho-ho,” and disappeared.

We found a pair of fine hams and a two-gallon can of turpentine. I took
a bright yellow ballpoint pen and Lone cuffed me and made me put it
back.

“We only take what we need,” he told me.

After we left, Beanie came back and locked the door and went home again.
I only went with Lone a few times, when he had more to get than he could
carry easily.

I was there about three years. That’s all I can remember about it. Lone
was there or he was out, and you could hardly tell the difference. The
twins were with each other most of the time. I got to like Janie a lot,
but we never talked much. Baby talked all the time, only I don’t know
what about.

We were all busy and we bleshed.

I sat up on the couch suddenly.

Stern said, “What’s the matter?”

“Nothing’s the matter. This isn’t getting me any place.”

“You said that when you’d barely started. Do you think you’ve
accomplished anything since then?”

“Oh, yeah, but—”

“Then how can you be sure you’re right this time?” When I didn’t say
anything, he asked me, “Didn’t you like this last stretch?”

I said angrily, “I didn’t like or not like. It didn’t mean nothing. It
was just—just talk.”

“So what was the difference between this last session and what happened
before?”

“My gosh, plenty! The first one, I felt everything. It was all really
happening to me. But this time—nothing.”

“Why do you suppose that was?”

“I don’t know. You tell me.”

“Suppose,” he said thoughtfully, “that there was some episode so
unpleasant to you that you wouldn’t dare relive it.”

“Unpleasant? You think freezing to death isn’t unpleasant?”

“There are all kinds of unpleasantness. Sometimes the very thing you’re
looking for—the thing that’ll clear up your trouble—is so revolting to
you that you won’t go near it. Or you try to hide it. Wait,” he said
suddenly, “maybe ‘revolting’ and ‘unpleasant’ are inaccurate words to
use. It might be something very desirable to you. It’s just that you
don’t want to get straightened out.”

“I _want_ to get straightened out.”

He waited as if he had to clear something up in his mind, and then said,
“There’s something in that ‘Baby is three’ phrase that bounces you away.
Why is that?”

“Damn if I know.”

“Who said it?”

“I dunno … uh …”

He grinned. “Uh?”

I grinned back at him. “I said it.”

“Okay. When?”

I quit grinning. He leaned forward, then got up.

“What’s the matter?” I asked.

“I didn’t think anyone could be that mad.” I didn’t say anything. He
went over to his desk. “You don’t want to go on any more, do you?”

“No.”

“Suppose I told you you want to quit because you’re right on the very
edge of finding out what you want to know?”

“Why don’t you tell me and see what I do?”

He just shook his head. “I’m not telling you anything. Go on, leave if
you want to. I’ll give you back your change.”

“How many people quit just when they’re on top of the answer?”

“Quite a few.”

“Well, I ain’t going to.” I lay down.

He didn’t laugh and he didn’t say, “Good,” and he didn’t make any fuss
about it. He just picked up his phone and said, “Cancel everything for
this afternoon,” and went back to his chair, up there out of my sight.

It was very quiet in there. He had the place soundproofed.

I said, “Why do you suppose Lone let me live there so long when I
couldn’t do any of the things that the other kids could?”

“Maybe you could.”

“Oh, no,” I said positively. “I used to try. I was strong for a kid my
age and I knew how to keep my mouth shut, but aside from those two
things I don’t think I was any different from any kid. I don’t think I’m
any different right now, except for what difference there might be from
living with Lone and his bunch.”

“Has this anything to do with ‘Baby is three’?”

I looked up at the gray ceiling. “Baby is three. Baby is three. I went
up to a big house with a winding drive that ran under a sort of
theater-marquee thing. Baby is three. Baby …”

“How old are you?”

“Thirty-three,” I said, and the next thing you know I was up off that
couch like it was hot, and heading for the door.

“Don’t be foolish,” Stern said. “Want me to waste a whole afternoon?”

“What’s that to me? I’m paying for it.”

“All right, it’s up to you.”

I went back. “I don’t like any part of this,” I said.

“Good. We’re getting warm then.”

“What made me say ‘Thirty-three’? I ain’t thirty-three. I’m fifteen. And
another thing.…”

“Yes?”

“It’s about that ‘Baby is three.’ It’s me saying it, all right. But when
I think about it—it’s not my voice.”

“Like thirty-three’s not your age?”

“Yeah,” I whispered.

“Gerry,” he said warmly, “there’s nothing to be afraid of.”

I realized I was breathing too hard. I pulled myself together. I said,
“I don’t like remembering saying things in somebody else’s voice.”

“Look,” he told me. “This head-shrinking business, as you called it a
while back, isn’t what most people think. When I go with you into the
world of your mind—or when you go yourself, for that matter—what we find
isn’t so very different from the so-called real world. It seems so at
first, because the patient comes out with all sorts of fantasies and
irrationalities and weird experiences. But everyone lives in that kind
of world. When one of the ancients coined the phrase ‘truth is stranger
than fiction,’ he was talking about that.

“Everywhere we go, everything we do, we’re surrounded by symbols, by
things so familiar we don’t ever look at them or don’t see them if we do
look. If anyone ever could report to you exactly what he saw and thought
while walking ten feet down the street, you’d get the most twisted,
clouded, partial picture you ever ran across. And nobody ever looks at
what’s around him with any kind of attention until he gets into a place
like this. The fact that he’s looking at past events doesn’t matter;
what counts is that he’s seeing clearer than he ever could before, just
because, for once, he’s trying.

“Now—about this ‘thirty-three’ business. I don’t think a man could get a
nastier shock than to find he has someone else’s memories. The ego is
too important to let slide that way. But consider: all your thinking is
done in code and you have the key to only about a tenth of it. So you
run into a stretch of code which is abhorrent to you. Can’t you see that
the only way you’ll find the key to it is to stop avoiding it?”

“You mean I’d started to remember with … with somebody else’s mind?”

“It looked like that to you for a while, which means something. Let’s
try to find out what.”

“All right.” I felt sick. I felt tired. And I suddenly realized that
being sick and being tired was a way of trying to get out of it.

“Baby is three,” he said.

Baby is maybe. Me, three, thirty-three, me you Kew you.

“Kew!” I yelled. Stern didn’t say anything. “Look I don’t know why, but
I think I know how to get to this, and this isn’t the way. Do you mind
if I try something else?”

“You’re the doctor,” he said.

I had to laugh. Then I closed my eyes.

There, through the edges of the hedges, the ledges and wedges of windows
were shouldering up to the sky. The lawns were sprayedon green, neat and
clean, and all the flowers looked as if they were afraid to let their
petals break and be untidy.

I walked up the drive in my shoes. I’d had to wear shoes and my feet
couldn’t breathe. I didn’t want to go to the house, but I had to.

I went up the steps between the big white columns and looked at the
door. I wished I could see through it, but it was too white and thick.
There was a window the shape of a fan over it, too high up, though, and
a window on each side of it, but they were all crudded up with colored
glass. I hit on the door with my hand and left dirt on it.

Nothing happened, so I hit it again. It got snatched open and a tall,
thin colored woman stood there. “What you want?”

I said I had to see Miss Kew.

“Well, Miss Kew don’t want to see the likes of you,” she said. She
talked too loud. “You got a dirty face.”

I started to get mad then. I was already pretty sore about having to
come here, walking around near people in the daytime and all. I said,
“My face ain’t got nothin’ to with it. Where’s Miss Kew? Go on, find her
for me.”

She gasped. “You can’t speak to me like that!”

I said, “I didn’t want to speak to you like any way. Let me in.” I
started wishing for Janie. Janie could of moved her. But I had to handle
it by myself. I wasn’t doing so hot, either. She slammed the door before
I could so much as curse at her.

So I started kicking on the door. For that, shoes are great. After a
while, she snatched the door open again so sudden I almost went on my
can. She had a broom with her. She screamed at me, “You get away from
here, you trash, or I’ll call the police!” She pushed me and I fell.

I got up off the porch floor and went for her. She stepped back and
whupped me one with the broom as I went past, but anyhow I was inside
now. The woman was making little shrieking noises and coming for me. I
took the broom away from her and then somebody said, “Miriam!” in a
voice like a grown goose.

I froze and the woman went into hysterics. “Oh, Miss Kew, look out!
He’ll kill us all. Get the police. Get the—”

“Miriam!” came the honk, and Miriam dried up.

There at the top of the stairs was this prune-faced woman with a dress
on that had lace on it. She looked a lot older than she was, maybe
because she held her mouth so tight. I guess she was about
thirty-three—_thirty-three_. She had mean eyes and a small nose.

I asked, “Are you Miss Kew?”

“I am. What is the meaning of this invasion?”

“I got to talk to you, Miss Kew.”

“Don’t say, ‘got to.’ Stand up straight and speak out.”

The maid said, “I’ll get the police.”

Miss Kew turned on her. “There’s time enough for that, Miriam. Now, you
dirty little boy, what do you want?”

“I got to speak to you by yourself,” I told her.

“Don’t you let him do it, Miss Kew,” cried the maid.

“Be quiet, Miriam. Little boy, I told you not to say ‘got to.’ You may
say whatever you have to say in front of Miriam.”

“Like hell.” They both gasped. I said, “Lone told me not to.”

“Miss Kew, are you goin’ to let him—”

“Be quiet, Miriam! Young man, will you keep a civil—” Then her eyes
popped up real round. _“Who_ did you say …”

“Lone said so.”

“Lone.” She stood there on the stairs looking at her hands. Then she
said, “Miriam, that will be all.” And you wouldn’t know it was the same
woman, the way she said it.

The maid opened her mouth, but Miss Kew stuck out a finger that might as
well of had a riflesight on the end of it. The maid beat it.

“Hey,” I said, “here’s your broom.” I was just going to throw it, but
Miss Kew got to me and took it out of my hand.

“In there,” she said.

She made me go ahead of her into a room as big as our swimming hole. It
had books all over and leather on top of the tables, with gold flowers
drawn into the corners.

She pointed to a chair. “Sit there. No, wait a moment.” She went to the
fireplace and got a newspaper out of a box and brought it over and
unfolded it on the seat of the chair. “Now sit down.”

I sat on the paper and she dragged up another chair, but didn’t put no
paper on it.

“What is it? Where is Lone?”

“He died,” I said.

She pulled in her breath and went white. She stared at me until her eyes
started to water.

“You sick?” I asked her. “Go ahead, throw up. It’ll make you feel
better.”

“Dead? Lone is dead?”

“Yeah. There was a flash flood last week and when he went out the next
night in that big wind, he walked under a old oak tree that got gulled
under by the flood. The tree come down on him.”

_“Came_ down on him,” she whispered. “Oh, no … it’s not true.”

“It’s true all right. We planted him this morning. We couldn’t keep him
around no more. He was beginning to st—”

“Stop!” She covered her face with her hands.

“What’s the matter?”

“I’ll be all right in a moment,” she said in a low voice. She went and
stood in front of the fireplace with her back to me. I took off one of
my shoes while I was waiting for her to come back. But instead she
talked from where she was. “Are you Lone’s little boy?”

“Yeah. He told me to come to you.”

“Oh, my dear child!” She came running back and I thought for a second
she was going to pick me up or something, but she stopped short and
wrinkled up her nose a little bit. “Wh-what’s your name?”

“Gerry,” I told her.

“Well, Gerry, how would you like to live with me in this nice big house
and—and have new clean clothes—and everything?”

“Well, that’s the whole idea. Lone told me to come to you. He said you
got more dough than you know what to do with, and he said you owed him a
favor.”

“A favor?” That seemed to bother her.

“Well,” I tried to tell her, “he said he done something for you once and
you said some day you’d pay him back for it if you ever could. This is
it.”

“What did he tell you about that?” She’d got her honk back by then.

“Not a damn thing.”

“Please don’t use that word,” she said, with her eyes closed. Then she
opened them and nodded her head. “I promised and I’ll do it. You can
live here from now on. If-if you want to.”

“That’s got nothin’ to do with it. Lone _told_ me to.”

“You’ll be happy here,” she said. She gave me an up-and-down. “I’ll see
to that.”

“Okay. Shall I go get the other kids?”

_“Other_ kids—children?”

“Yeah. This ain’t for just me. For all of us—the whole gang.”

“Don’t say ‘ain’t.’ ” She leaned back in her chair, took out a silly
little handkerchief and dabbed her lips with it, looking at me the whole
time. “Now tell me about these—these other children.”

“Well, there’s Janie, she’s eleven like me. And Bonnie and Beanie are
eight, they’re twins, and Baby. Baby is three.”

“Baby is three,” she said.

I screamed. Stern was kneeling beside the couch in a flash, holding his
palms against my cheeks to hold my head still; I’d been whipping it back
and forth.

“Good boy,” he said. “You found it. You haven’t found out _what_ it is,
but now you know _where_ it is.”

“But for sure,” I said hoarsely. “Got water?”

He poured me some water out of a thermos flask. It was so cold it hurt.
I lay back and rested, like I’d climbed a cliff. I said, “I can’t take
anything like that again.”

“You want to call it quits for today?”

“What about you?”

“I’ll go on as long as you want me to.”

I thought about it. “I’d like to go on, but I don’t want no thumping
around. Not for a while yet.”

“If you want another of those inaccurate analogies,” Stern said,
“psychiatry is like a road map. There are always a lot of different ways
to get from one place to another place.”

“I’ll go around by the long way,” I told him. “The eight-lane highway.
Not that track over the hill. My clutch is slipping. Where do I turn
off?”

He chuckled. I liked the sound of it. “Just past that gravel driveway.”

“I been there. There’s a bridge washed out.”

“You’ve been on this whole road before,” he told me. “Start at the other
side of the bridge.”

“I never thought of that. I figured I had to do the whole thing, every
inch.”

“Maybe you won’t have to, maybe you will, but the bridge will be easy to
cross when you’ve covered everything else. Maybe there’s nothing of
value on the bridge and maybe there is, but you can’t get near it till
you’ve looked everywhere else.”

“Let’s go.” I was real eager, somehow.

“Mind a suggestion?”

“No.”

“Just talk,” he said. “Don’t try to get too far into what you’re saying.
That first stretch, when you were eight—you really lived it. The second
one, all about the kids, you just talked about. Then, the visit when you
were eleven, you felt that. Now just talk again.”

“All right.”

He waited, then said quietly, “In the library. You told her about the
kids.”

I told her about … and then she said … and something happened, and I
screamed. She comforted me and I cussed at her.

But we’re not thinking about that now. We’re going on.

In the library. The leather, the table, and whether I’m able to do with
Miss Kew what Lone said.

What Lone said was, “There’s a woman lives up on the top of the hill in
the Heights section, name of Kew. She’ll have to take care of you. You
got to get her to do that. Do everything she tells you, only stay
together. Don’t you ever let any one of you get away from the others,
hear? Aside from that, just you keep Miss Kew happy and she’ll keep you
happy. Now you do what I say.” That’s what Lone said. Between every word
there was a link like steel cable, and the whole thing made something
that couldn’t be broken. Not by me it couldn’t.

Miss Kew said, “Where are your sisters and the baby?”

“I’ll bring ’em.”

“Is it near here?”

“Near enough.” She didn’t say anything to that, so I got up. “I’ll be
back soon.”

“Wait,” she said. “I—really, I haven’t had time to think. I mean—I’ve
got to get things ready, you know.”

I said, “You don’t need to think and you are ready. So long.”

From the door I heard her saying, louder and louder as I walked away,
“Young man, if you’re to live in this house, you’ll learn to be a good
deal better mannered—” and a lot more of the same.

I yelled back at her, “Okay, _okay!”_ and went out.

The sun was warm and the sky was good, and pretty soon I got back to
Lone’s house. The fire was out and Baby stunk. Janie had knocked over
her easel and was sitting on the floor by the door with her head in her
hands. Bonnie and Beanie were on a stool with their arms around each
other, pulled up together as close as they could get, as if was cold in
there, although it wasn’t.

I hit Janie in the arm to snap her out of it. She raised her head. She
had gray eyes—or maybe it was more a kind of green—but now they had a
funny look about them, like water in a glass that had some milk left in
the bottom of it.

I said, “What’s the matter around here?”

“What’s the matter with what?” she wanted to know.

“All of yez,” I said.

She said, “We don’t give a damn, that’s all.”

“Well, all right,” I said, “but we got to do what Lone said. Come on.”

“No.” I looked at the twins. They turned their backs on me. Janie said,
“They’re hungry.”

“Well, why not give ’em something?”

She just shrugged. I sat down. What did Lone have to go get himself
squashed for?

“We can’t blesh no more,” said Janie. It seemed to explain everything.

“Look,” I said, “I’ve got to be Lone now.”

Janie thought about that, and Baby kicked his feet. Janie looked at him.
“You can’t,” she said.

“I know where to get the heavy food and the turpentine,” I said. “I can
find that springy moss to stuff in the logs, and cut wood, and all.”

But I couldn’t call Bonnie and Beanie from miles away to unlock doors. I
couldn’t just say a word to Janie and make her get water and blow up the
fire and fix the battery. I couldn’t make us blesh.

We all stayed like that for a long time. Then I heard the bassinet
creak. I looked up. Janie was staring into it.

“All right,” she said. “Let’s go.”

“Who says so?”

“Baby.”

“Who’s running things now?” I said, mad. “Me or Baby?”

“Baby,” Janie said.

I got up and went over to bust her one in the mouth, and then I stopped.
If Baby could make them do what Lone wanted, then it would get done. If
I started pushing them all around, it wouldn’t. So I didn’t say
anything. Janie got up and walked out the door. The twins watched her
go. Then Bonnie disappeared. Beanie picked up Bonnie’s clothes and
walked out. I got Baby out of the bassinet and draped him over my
shoulders.

It was better when we were all outside. It was getting late in the day
and the air was warm. The twins flitted in and out of the trees like a
couple of flying squirrels, and Janie and I walked along like we were
going swimming or something. Baby started to kick, and Janie looked at
him a while and got him fed, and he was quiet again.

When we came close to town, I wanted to get everybody close together,
but I was afraid to say anything. Baby must of said it instead. The
twins came back to us and Janie gave them their clothes and they walked
ahead of us, good as you please. I don’t know how Baby did it. They sure
hated to travel that way.

We didn’t have no trouble except one guy we met on the street near Miss
Kew’s place. He stopped in his tracks and gaped at us, and Janie looked
at him and made his hat go so far down over his eyes that he like to
pull his neck apart getting it back up again.

What do you know, when we got to the house somebody had washed off all
the dirt I’d put on the door. I had one hand on Baby’s arm and one on
his ankle and him draped over my neck, so I kicked the door and left
some more dirt.

“There’s a woman here name of Miriam,” I told Janie. “She says anything,
tell her to go to hell.”

The door opened and there was Miriam. She took one look and jumped back
six feet. We all trailed inside. Miriam got her wind and screamed, “Miss
Kew! Miss Kew!”

“Go to hell,” said Janie, and looked at me. I didn’t know what to do. It
was the first time Janie ever did anything I told her to.

Miss Kew came down the stairs. She was wearing a different dress, but it
was just as stupid and had just as much lace. She opened her mouth and
nothing came out, so she just left it open until something happened.
Finally she said, “Dear gentle Lord preserve us!”

The twins lined up and gawked at her. Miriam sidled over to the wall and
sort of slid along it, keeping away from us, until she could get to the
door and close it. She said, “Miss Kew, if those are the children you
said were going to live here, I quit.”

Janie said, “Go to hell.”

Just then, Bonnie squatted down on the rug. Miriam squawked and jumped
at her. She grabbed hold of Bonnie’s arm and went to snatch her up.
Bonnie disappeared, leaving Miriam with one small dress and damnedest
expression on her face. Beanie grinned enough to split her head in two
and started to wave like mad. I looked where she was waving, and there
was Bonnie, naked as a jaybird, up on the banister at the top of the
stairs.

Miss Kew turned around and saw her and sat down plump on the steps.
Miriam went down, too, like she’d been slugged. Beanie picked up
Bonnie’s dress and walked up the steps past Miss Kew and handed it over.
Bonnie put it on. Miss Kew sort of lolled around and looked up. Bonnie
and Beanie came back down the stairs hand in hand to where I was. Then
they lined up and gaped at Miss Kew.

“What’s the matter with her?” Janie asked me.

“She gets sick every once in a while.”

“Let’s go back home.”

“No,” I told her.

Miss Kew grabbed the banister and pulled herself up. She stood there
hanging on to it for a while with her eyes closed. All of a sudden she
stiffened herself. She looked about four inches taller. She came
marching over to us.

“Gerard,” she honked.

I think she was going to say something different. But she sort of
checked herself and pointed. “What in heaven’s name is _that?”_ And she
aimed her finger at me.

I didn’t get it right away, so I turned around to look behind me.
“What?”

“That! That!”

“Oh!” I said. “That’s Baby.”

I slung him down off my back and held him up for her to look at. She
made a sort of moaning noise and jumped over and took him away from me.
She held him out in front of her and moaned again and called him a poor
little thing, and ran and put him down on a long bench thing with
cushions under the colored-glass window. She bent over him and put her
knuckle in her mouth and bit on it and moaned some more. Then she turned
to me.

“How long has he been like this?”

I looked at Jane and she looked at me. I said, “He’s always been like he
is.”

She made a sort of cough and ran to where Miriam was lying flaked on the
floor. She slapped Miriam’s face a couple of times back and forth.
Miriam sat up and looked us over. She closed her eyes and shivered and
sort of climbed up Miss Kew hand over hand until she was on her feet.

“Pull yourself together,” said Miss Kew between her teeth. “Get a basin
with some hot water and soap. Washcloth. Towels. Hurry!” She gave Miriam
a big push. Miriam staggered and grabbed at the wall, and then ran out.

Miss Kew went back to Baby and hung over him, titch-titching with her
lips all tight.

“Don’t mess with him,” I said. “There’s nothin’ wrong with him. We’re
hungry.”

She gave me a look like I’d punched her. “Don’t speak to me!”

“Look,” I said, “we don’t like this any more’n you do. If Lone hadn’t
told us to, we wouldn’t never have come. We were doing all right where
we were.”

“Don’t say ‘wouldn’t never,’ ” said Miss Kew. She looked at all of us,
one by one. Then she took that silly little hunk of handkerchief and
pushed it against her mouth.

“See?” I said to Janie. “All the time gettin’ sick.”

“Ho-ho,” said Bonnie.

Miss Kew gave her a long look. “Gerard,” she said in a choked sort of
voice, “I understood you to say that these children were your sisters.”

“Well?”

She looked at me as if I was real stupid. “We don’t have little colored
girls for sisters, Gerard.”

Janie said, _“We_ do.”

Miss Kew walked up and back, real fast. “We have a great deal to do,”
she said, talking to herself.

Miriam came in with a big oval pan and towels and stuff on her arm. She
put it down on the bench thing and Miss Kew stuck the back of her hand
in the water, then picked up Baby and dunked him right in it. Baby
started to kick.

I stepped forward and said, “Wait a minute. Hold on now. What do you
think you’re doing?”

Janie said, “Shut up, Gerry. He says it’s all right.”

“All right? She’ll drown him.”

“No, she won’t. Just shut up.”

Working up a froth with the soap, Miss Kew smeared it on Baby and turned
him over a couple of times and scrubbed at his head and like to
smothered him in a big white towel. Miriam stood gawking while Miss Kew
lashed up a dishcloth around him so it come out pants. When she was
done, you wouldn’t of known it was the same baby. And by the time Miss
Kew finished with the job, she seemed to have a better hold on herself.
She was breathing hard and her mouth was even tighter. She held out the
baby to Miriam.

“Take this poor thing,” she said, “and put him—”

But Miriam backed away. “I’m sorry, Miss Kew, but I am leaving here and
I don’t care.”

Miss Kew got her honk out. “You can’t leave me in a predicament like
this! These children need help. Can’t you see that for yourself?”

Miriam looked me and Janie over. She was trembling. “You ain’t safe,
Miss Kew. They ain’t just dirty. They’re crazy!”

“They’re victims of neglect, and probably no worse than you or I would
be if we’d been neglected. And don’t say ‘ain’t.’ Gerard!”

“What?”

“Don’t say—oh, dear, we have so much to do. Gerard, if you and
your—these other children are going to live here, you shall have to make
a great many changes. You cannot live under this roof and behave as you
have so far. Do you understand that?”

“Oh, sure. Lone said we was to do whatever you say and keep you happy.”

“Will you do whatever I say?”

“That’s what I just said, isn’t it?”

“Gerard, you shall have to learn not to speak to me in that tone. Now,
young man, if I told you to do what Miriam says, too, would you do it?”

I said to Jane, “What about that?”

“I’ll ask Baby.” Janie looked at Baby and Baby wobbled his hands and
drooled some. She said, “It’s okay.”

Miss Kew said, “Gerard, I asked you a question.”

“Keep your pants on,” I said. “I got find out, don’t I? Yes, if that’s
what you want, we’ll listen to Miriam, too.”

Miss Kew turned to Miriam. “You hear that, Miriam?”

Miriam looked at Miss Kew and at us and shook her head. Then she held
out her hands a bit to Bonnie and Beanie.

They went right to her. Each one took hold of a hand. They looked up at
her and grinned. They were probably planning some sort of hellishness,
but I guess they looked sort of cute. Miriam’s mouth twitched and I
thought for a second she was going to look human. She said, “All right,
Miss Kew.”

Miss Kew walked over and handed her the baby and she started upstairs
with him. Miss Kew herded us along after Miriam. We all went upstairs.

They went to work on us then and for three years they never stopped.

“That was hell,” I said to Stern.

“They had their work cut out.”

“Yeah, I s’pose they did. So did we. Look, we were going to do exactly
what Lone said. Nothing on earth could of stopped us from doing it. We
were tied and bound to doing every last little thing Miss Kew said to
do. But she and Miriam never seemed to understand that. I guess they
felt they had to push every inch of the way. All they had to do was make
us understand what they wanted, and we’d of done it. That’s okay when
it’s something like telling me not to climb into bed with Janie.

“Miss Kew raised holy hell over that. You’d of thought I’d robbed the
Crown Jewels, the way she acted. But when it’s something like, ‘You must
behave like little ladies and gentlemen,’ it just doesn’t mean a thing.
And two out of three orders she gave us were like that. ‘Ah-ah!’ she’d
say. ‘Language, language!’ For the longest time I didn’t dig that at
all. I finally asked her what the hell she meant, and then she finally
come out with it. But you see what I mean.”

“I certainly do,” Stern said. “Did it get easier as time went on?”

“We only had real trouble twice, once about the twins and once about
Baby. That one was real bad.”

“What happened?”

“About the twins? Well, when we’d been there about a week or so we began
to notice something that sort of stunk. Janie and me, I mean. We began
to notice that we almost never got to see Bonnie and Beanie. It was like
that house was two houses, one part for Miss Kew and Janie and me, and
the other part for Miriam and the twins. I guess we’d have noticed it
sooner if things hadn’t been such a hassle at first, getting into new
clothes and making us sleep all the time at night, and all that. But
here was the thing: We’d all get turned out in the side yard to play,
and then along comes lunch, and the twins got herded off to eat with
Miriam while we ate with Miss Kew. So Janie said, ‘Why don’t the twins
eat with us?’

“ ‘Miriam’s taking care of them, dear,’ Miss Kew says.

“Janie looked at her with those eyes. ‘I know that. Let ’em eat here and
I’ll take of ’em.’

“Miss Kew’s mouth got all tight again and she said, ‘They’re little
colored girls, Jane. Now eat your lunch.’

“But that didn’t explain anything to Jane or me, either. I said, ‘I want
’em to eat with us. Lone said we should stay together.’

“ ‘But you _are_ together,’ she says. ‘We all live in the same house. We
all eat the same food. Now let us not discuss the matter.’

“I looked at Janie and she looked at me, and she said, ‘So why can’t we
all do this livin’ and eatin’ right here?’

“Miss Kew put her fork down and looked hard. ‘I have explained it to you
and I have said that there will be no further discussion.’

“Well, I thought that was real nowhere. So I just rocked back my head
and bellowed, ‘Bonnie! Beanie!’ And _bing_, there they were.

“So all hell broke loose. Miss Kew ordered them out and they wouldn’t
go, and Miriam come steaming in with their clothes, and she couldn’t
catch them, and Miss Kew got to honking at them and finally at me. She
said this was too much. Well, maybe she had had a hard week, but so had
we. So Miss Kew ordered us to leave.

“I went and got Baby and started out, and along came Janie and the
twins. Miss Kew waited till we were out the door and next thing you know
she ran out after us. She passed us and got in front of me and made me
stop. So we all stopped.

“ ‘Is this how you follow Lone’s wishes?’ she asked.

“I told her yes. She said she understood Lone wanted us to stay with
her. And I said, ‘Yeah, but he wanted us to stay together more.’

“She said come back in, we’d have a talk. Jane asked Baby and Baby said
okay, so we went back. We had a compromise. We didn’t eat in the dining
room no more. There was a side porch, a sort of verandah thing with
glass windows, with a door to the dining room and a door to the kitchen,
and we all ate out there after that. Miss Kew ate by herself.

“But something funny happened because of that whole cockeyed hassle.”

“What was that?” Stern asked me.

I laughed. “Miriam. She looked and sounded like always, but she started
slipping us cookies between meals. You know, it took me years to figure
out what all that was about. I mean it. From what I’ve learned about
people, there seems to be two armies fightin’ about race. One’s fightin’
to keep ’em apart, and one’s fightin’ to get ’em together. But I don’t
see why both sides are so _worried_ about it! Why don’t they just forget
it?”

“They can’t. You see, Gerry, it’s necessary for people to believe they
are superior in some fashion. You and Lone and the kids—you were a
pretty tight unit. Didn’t you feel you were a little better than all of
the rest of the world?”

“Better? How could we be better?”

“Different, then.”

“Well, I suppose so, but we didn’t think about it. Different, yes.
Better, no.”

“You’re a unique case,” Stern said. “Now go on and tell me about the
other trouble you had. About Baby.”

“Baby. Yeah. Well, that was a couple of months after we moved to Miss
Kew’s. Things were already getting real smooth, even then. We’d learned
all the ‘yes, ma’am, no, ma’am’ routines by then and she’d got us
catching up with school—regular periods morning and afternoon, five days
a week. Jane had long ago quit taking care of Baby, and the twins walked
to wherever they went. That was funny. They could pop from one place to
another right in front of Miss Kew’s eyes and she wouldn’t believe what
she saw. She was too upset about them suddenly showing up bare. They
quit doing it and she was happy about it. She was happy about a lot of
things. It had been years since she’d seen anybody—years. She’d even had
the meters put outside the house so no one would ever have to come in.
But with us there, she began to liven up. She quit wearing those
old-lady dresses and began to look halfway human. She ate with us
sometimes, even.

“But one fine day I woke up feeling real weird. It was like somebody had
stolen something from me when I was asleep, only I didn’t know what. I
crawled out of my window and along the ledge into Janie’s room, which I
wasn’t supposed to do. She was in bed. I went and woke her up. I can
still see her eyes, the way they opened a little slit, still asleep, and
then popped up wide. I didn’t have to tell her something was wrong. She
knew, and she knew what it was.

”‘Baby’s gone!’ she said.

“We didn’t care then who woke up. We pounded out of her room and down
the hall and into the little room at the end where Baby slept. You
wouldn’t believe it. The fancy crib he had, and the white chest of
drawers, and all that mess of rattles and so on, they were gone, and
there was just a writing desk there. I mean it was as if Baby had never
been there at all.

“We didn’t say anything. We just spun around and busted into Miss Kew’s
bedroom. I’d never been in there but once and Jane only a few times. But
forbidden or not, this was different. Miss Kew was in bed, with her hair
braided. She was wide awake before we could get across the room. She
pushed herself back and up until she was sitting against the headboard.
She gave the two of us the cold eye.

“ ‘What is the meaning of this?’ she wanted to know.

“ ‘Where’s Baby?’ I yelled at her.

“ ‘Gerard,’ she says, ‘there is no need to shout.’

“Jane was a real quiet kid, but she said, ‘You better tell us where he
is, Miss Kew,’ and it would of scared you to look at her when she said
it.

“So all of a sudden Miss Kew took off the stone face and held out her
hands to us. ‘Children,’ she said, ‘I’m sorry. I really am sorry. But
I’ve just done what is best. I’ve sent Baby away. He’s gone to live with
some children like him. We could never make him really happy here. You
know that.

“Jane said, ‘He never told us he wasn’t happy.’

“Miss Kew brought out a hollow kind of laugh. ‘As if he could talk, the
poor little thing!’

“ ‘You better get him back here,’ I said. ‘You don’t know what you’re
fooling with. I told you we wasn’t ever to break up.’

“She was getting mad, but she held on to herself. ‘I’ll try explain it
to you, dear,’ she said. ‘You and Jane here and even the twins are all
normal, healthy children and you’ll grow up to be fine men and women.
But poor Baby’s—different. He’s not going to grow very much more, and
he’ll never walk and play like other children.’

“ ‘That doesn’t matter,’ Jane said. ‘You had no call to send him away.’

“And I said, ‘Yeah. You better bring him back, but quick.’

“Then she started to jump salty. ‘Among the many things I have taught
you is, I am sure, not to dictate to your elders. Now, then, you run
along and get dressed for breakfast, and we’ll say no more about this.’

“I told her, nice as I could, ‘Miss Kew, you’re going to wish you
brought him back right now. But you’re going to bring him back soon. Or
else.’

“So then she got up out of her bed and ran us out of the room.”

I was quiet a while, and Stern asked, “What happened?”

“Oh,” I said, “she brought him back.” I laughed suddenly. “I guess it’s
funny now, when you come to think of it. Nearly three months of us
getting bossed around, and her ruling the roost, and then all of a
sudden we lay down the law. We’d tried our best to be good according to
her ideas, but, by God, that time she went too far. She got the
treatment from the second she slammed her door on us. She had a big
china pot under her bed, and it rose up in the air and smashed through
her dresser mirror. Then one of the drawers in the dresser slid open and
a glove come out of it and smacked her face.

“She went to jump back on the bed and a whole section of plaster fell
off the ceiling onto the bed. The water turned on in her little bathroom
and the plug went in, and just about the time it began to overflow, all
her clothes fell of their hooks. She went to run out of the room, but
the door was stuck, and when she yanked on the handle it opened real
quick and she spread out on the floor. The door slammed shut again and
more plaster come down on her. Then we went back in and stood looking at
her. She was crying. I hadn’t known till then that she could.

“ ‘You going to get Baby back here?’ I asked her.

“She just lay there and cried. After a while she looked up at us. It was
real pathetic. We helped her up and got her to a chair. She just looked
at us for a while, and at the mirror, and at the busted ceiling, and
then she whispered, ‘What happened? What happened?’

“ ‘You took Baby away,’ I said. ‘That’s what.’

“So she jumped up and said real low, real scared, but real strong:
‘Something struck the house. An airplane. Perhaps there was an
earthquake. We’ll talk about Baby after breakfast.’

“I said, ‘Give her more, Janie.’

“A big gob of water hit her on the face and chest and made her nightgown
stick to her, which was the kind of thing that upset her most. Her
braids stood straight up in the air, more and more, till they dragged
her standing straight up. She opened her mouth to yell and the powder
puff off the dresser rammed into it. She clawed it out.

“ ‘What are you doing? What are you doing?’ she says, crying again.

“Janie just looked at her, and put her hands behind her, real smug. ‘We
haven’t done anything,’ she said.

“And I said, ‘Not yet we haven’t. You going to get Baby back?’

“And she screamed at us, ‘Stop it! Stop it! Stop talking about that
mongoloid idiot! It’s no good to anyone, not even itself! How could I
ever make believe it’s mine?’

“I said, ‘Get rats, Janie.’

“There was a scuttling sound along the baseboard. Miss Kew covered her
face with her hands and sank down on the chair. ‘Not rats,’ she said.
‘There are no rats here.’ Then something squeaked and she went all to
pieces. Did you ever see anyone really go to pieces?”

“Yes,” Stern said.

“I was about as mad as I could get,” I said, “but that was almost too
much for me. Still, she shouldn’t have sent Baby away. It took a couple
of hours for her to get straightened out enough so she could use the
phone, but we had Baby back before lunch time.” I laughed.

“What’s funny?”

“She never seemed able to rightly remember what had happened to her.
About three weeks later I heard her talking to Miriam about it. She said
it was the house settling suddenly. She said it was a good thing she’d
sent Baby out for that medical checkup—the poor little thing might have
been hurt. She really believed it, I think.”

“She probably did. That’s fairly common. We don’t believe anything we
don’t want to believe.”

“How much of this do you believe?” I asked him suddenly.

“I told you before—it doesn’t matter. I don’t want to believe or
disbelieve it.”

“You haven’t asked me how much of it I believe.”

“I don’t have to. You’ll make up your own mind about that.”

“Are you a _good_ psychotherapist?”

“I think so,” he said. “Whom did you kill?”

The question caught me absolutely off guard. “Miss Kew,” I said. Then I
started to cuss and swear. “I didn’t mean to tell you that.”

“Don’t worry about it,” he said. “What did you do it for?”

“That’s what I came here to find out.”

“You must have really hated her.”

I started to cry. Fifteen years old and crying like that!

He gave me time to get it all out. The first part of it came out in
noises, grunts and squeaks that hurt my throat. Much more than you’d
think came out when my nose started to run. And finally—words.

“Do you know where I came from? The earliest thing I can remember is a
punch in the mouth. I can still see it coming, a fist as big as my head.
Because I was crying. I been afraid to cry ever since. I was crying
because I was hungry. Cold, maybe. Both. After that, big dormitories,
and whoever could steal the most got the most. Get the hell kicked out
of you if you’re bad, get a big reward if you’re good. Big reward: they
let you alone. Try to live like that. Try to live so the biggest, most
wonderful thing in the whole damn world is just to have ’em let you
alone!

“So a spell with Lone and kids. Something wonderful: you belong. It
never happened before. Two yellow bulbs and a fireplace and they light
up the world. It’s all there is and all there ever has to be.

“Then the big change: clean clothes, cooked food, five hours a day
school; Columbus and King Arthur and a 1925 book on Civics that explains
about septic tanks. Over it all a great big square-cut lump of ice, and
you watch it melting and the corners curve, and you know it’s because of
you, Miss Kew … hell, she had too much control over herself ever to
slobber over us, but it was there, that feeling. Lone took care of us
because it was part of the way he lived. Miss Kew took care of us, and
none of it was the way she lived. It was something she wanted to do.

“She had a weird idea of ‘right’ and a wrong idea of ‘wrong,’ but she
stuck to them, tried to make her ideas do us good. When she couldn’t
understand, she figured it was her own failure … and there was an
almighty lot she didn’t understand and never could. What went right was
our success. What went wrong was her mistake. That last year, that
was … oh, good.”

“So?”

“So I killed her. Listen,” I said. I felt like I had to talk fast. I
wasn’t short of time, but I had to get rid of it. “I’ll tell you all I
know about it. The one day before I killed her. I woke up in the morning
and the sheets crackly clean under me, the sunlight coming in through
white curtains and bright red-and-blue drapes. There’s a closet full of
my clothes—mine, you see; I never had anything that was really mine
before—and downstairs Miriam clinking around with breakfast and the
twins laughing. Laughing with _her_, mind you, not just with each other
like they always did before.

“In the next room, Janie moving around, singing, and when I see her, I
know her face will shine inside and out. I get up. There’s _hot_ hot
water and the toothpaste bites my tongue. The clothes fit me and I go
downstairs and they’re all there and I’m glad to see them and they’re
glad to see me, and we no sooner get set around the table when Miss Kew
comes down and everyone calls out to her at once.

“And the morning goes by like that, school with a recess, there in the
big long living room. The twins with the ends of their tongues stuck
out, drawing the alphabet instead of writing it, and then Janie, when
it’s time, painting a picture, a real picture of a cow with trees and a
yellow fence that goes off into the distance. Here I am lost between the
two parts of a quadratic equation, and Miss Kew bending close to help
me, and I smell the sachet she has on her clothes. I hold up my head to
smell it better, and far away I hear the shuffle and klunk of filled
pots going on the stove back in the kitchen.

“And the afternoon goes by like that, more school and some study and
boiling out into the yard, laughing. The twins chasing each other,
running on their two feet to get where they want to go; Jane dappling
the leaves in her picture, trying to get it just the way Miss Kew says
it ought to be. And Baby, he’s got a big play-pen. He don’t move around
much any more, he just watches and dribbles some, and gets packed full
of food and kept as clean as a new sheet of tinfoil.

“And supper, and the evening, and Miss Kew reading to us, changing her
voice every time someone else talks in the story, reading fast and
whispery when it embarrasses her, but reading every word all the same.

“And I had to go and kill her. And that’s all.”

“You haven’t said why,” Stern said.

“What are you—stupid?” I yelled.

Stern didn’t say anything. I turned on my belly on the couch and propped
up my chin in my hands and looked at him. You never could tell what was
going on with him, but I got the idea that he was puzzled.

“I said why,” I told him.

“Not to me.”

I suddenly understood that I was asking too much of him. I said slowly,
“We all woke up at the same time. We all did what somebody else wanted.
We lived through a day someone else’s way, thinking someone else’s
thoughts, saying other people’s words. Jane painted someone else’s
pictures. Baby didn’t talk to anyone, and we were all happy with it. Now
do you see?”

“Not yet.”

“God!” I said. I thought for a while. “We didn’t blesh.”

“Blesh? Oh. But you didn’t after Lone died, either.”

“That was different. That was like a car running out of gas, but the
car’s there—there’s nothing wrong with it. It’s just waiting. But after
Miss Kew got done with us, the car was taken all to pieces, see?”

It was his turn to think a while. Finally he said, “The mind makes us do
funny things. Some of them seem completely reasonless, wrong, insane.
But the cornerstone of the work we’re doing is this: there’s a chain of
solid, unassailable logic in the things we do. Dig deep enough and you
find cause and effect as clearly in this field as you do in any other. I
said _logic_, mind; I didn’t say ‘correctness’ or ‘rightness’ or
‘justice’ or anything of the sort. Logic and truth are two very
different things, but they often look the same to the mind that’s
performing the logic.

“When that mind is submerged, working at cross-purposes with the surface
mind, then you’re all confused. Now in your case, I can see the thing
you’re pointing at—that in order to preserve or to rebuild that peculiar
bond between you kids, you had to get rid of Miss Kew. But I don’t see
the logic. I don’t see that regaining that ‘bleshing’ was worth
destroying this new-found security which you admit was enjoyable.”

I said, desperately, “Maybe it wasn’t worth destroying it.”

Stern leaned forward and pointed his pipe at me. “It _was_ because it
made you do what you did. After the fact, maybe things look different.
But when you were moved to do it, the important thing was to destroy
Miss Kew and regain this thing you’d had before. I don’t see why and
neither do you.”

“How are we going to find out?”

“Well, let’s get right to the most unpleasant part, if you’re up to it.”

I lay down. “I’m ready.”

“All right. Tell me everything that happened just before you killed
her.”

I fumbled through that last day, trying to taste the food, hear the
voices. A thing came and went and came again: it was the crisp feeling
of the sheets. I thrust it away because it was at the beginning of that
day, but it came back again, and I realized it was at the end, instead.

I said, “What I just told you, all that about the children doing things
other people’s way instead of their own, and Baby not talking, and
everyone happy about it, and finally that I had to kill Miss Kew. It
took a long time to get to that, and a long time to start doing it. I
guess I lay in bed and thought for four hours before I got up again. It
was dark and quiet. I went out of the room and down the hall and into
Miss Kew’s bedroom and killed her.”

“How?”

“That’s all there is!” I shouted, as loud as I could. Then I quieted
down. “It was awful dark … it still is. I don’t know. I don’t want to
know. She did love us. I know she did. But I had to kill her.”

“All right, all right,” Stern said. “I guess there’s no need to get too
gruesome about this. You’re—”

“What?”

“You’re quite strong for your age, aren’t you, Gerard?”

“I guess so. Strong enough, anyway.”

“Yes,” he said.

“I still don’t see that logic you were talking about.” I began to hammer
on the couch with my fist, hard, once for each word:
“Why—did—I—have—to—go—and—do—that?”

“Cut that out,” he said. “You’ll hurt yourself.”

“I ought to get hurt,” I said.

“Ah?” said Stern.

I got up and went to the desk and got some water. “What am I going to
do?”

“Tell me what you did after you killed her, right up until the time you
came here.”

“Not much,” I said. “It was only last night. I went back to my room,
sort of numb. I put all my clothes on except my shoes. I carried them. I
went out. Walked a long time, trying to think, went to the post office
when it opened. Miss Kew used to let me go for the mail sometimes. Found
this check waiting for me for the contest. Cashed it at the bank, opened
an account, took eleven hundred bucks. Got the idea of getting some help
from a psychiatrist, spent most of the day looking for one, came here.
That’s all.”

“Didn’t you have any trouble cashing the check?”

“I never have any trouble making people do what I want them to do.”

He gave a surprised grunt.

“I know what you’re thinking—I couldn’t make Miss Kew do what I wanted.”

“That’s part of it,” he admitted.

“If I had of done that,” I told him, “she wouldn’t of been Miss Kew any
more. Now the banker—all I made him do was be a banker.”

I looked at him and suddenly realized why he fooled with that pipe all
the time. It was so he could look down at it and you wouldn’t be able to
see his eyes.

“You killed her,” he said—and I knew he was changing the subject—“and
destroyed something that was valuable to you. It must have been less
valuable to you than the chance to rebuild this thing you used to have
with the other kids. And you’re not sure of the value of that.” He
looked up. “Does that describe your main trouble?”

“Just about.”

“You know the single thing that makes people kill?” When I didn’t
answer, he said, “Survival. To save the self or something which
identifies with the self. And in this case that doesn’t apply, because
your setup with Miss Kew had far more survival value for you, singly and
as a group, than the other.

“So maybe I just didn’t have a good enough reason to kill her.”

“You had, because you did it. We just haven’t located it yet. I mean we
have the reason, but we don’t know why it was important enough. The
answer is somewhere in you.”

“Where?”

He got up and walked some. “We have a pretty consecutive lifestory here.
There’s fantasy mixed with the fact, of course, and there are areas in
which we have no detailed information, but we have a beginning and a
middle and an end. Now, I can’t say for sure, but the answer may be in
that bridge you refused to cross a while back. Remember?”

I remembered, all right. I said, “Why that? Why can’t we try something
else?”

He quietly pointed out, “Because you just said it. Why are you shying
away from it?”

“Don’t go making big ones out of little ones,” I said. Sometimes the guy
annoyed me. “That bothers me. I don’t know why, but it does.”

“Something’s lying hidden in there, and you’re bothering _it_ so it’s
fighting back. Anything that fights to stay concealed is very possibly
the thing we’re after. Your trouble is concealed, isn’t it?”

“Well, yes,” I said, and I felt that sickness and faintness again, and
again I pushed it away. Suddenly I wasn’t going to be stopped any more.
“Let’s go get it.” I lay down.

He let me watch the ceiling and listen to silence for a while, and then
he said, “You’re in the library. You’ve just met Miss Kew. She’s talking
to you; you’re telling her about the children.”

I lay very still. Nothing happened. Yes, it did; I got tense inside, all
over, from the bones out, more and more. When it got as bad as it could,
still nothing happened.

I heard him get up and cross the room to the desk. He fumbled there for
a while; things clicked and hummed. Suddenly I heard my own voice:

_“Well, there’s Jane, she’s eleven like me. And Bonnie and Beanie are
eight, they’re twins, and Baby. Baby is three.”_

And the sound of my own scream—

And nothingness.

Sputtering up out of the darkness, I came flailing out with my fists.
Strong hands caught my wrists. They didn’t check my arms; they just
grabbed and rode. I opened my eyes. I was soaking wet. The thermos lay
on its side on the rug. Stern was crouched beside me, holding my wrists.
I quit struggling.

“What happened?”

He let me go and stood back watchfully. “Lord,” he said, “what a
charge!”

I held my head and moaned. He threw me a hand-towel and I used it. “What
hit me?”

“I’ve had you on tape the whole time,” he explained. “When you wouldn’t
get into that recollection, I tried to nudge you into it by using your
own voice as you recounted it before. It works wonders sometimes.”

“It worked wonders this time,” I growled. “I think I blew a fuse.”

“In effect, you did. You were on the trembling verge of going into the
thing you don’t want to remember, and you let yourself go unconscious
rather than do it.”

“What are you so pleased about?”

“Last-ditch defense,” he said tersely. “We’ve got it now. Just one more
try.”

“Now hold on. The last-ditch defense is that I drop dead.”

“You won’t. You’ve contained this episode in your subconscious mind for
a long time and it hasn’t hurt you.”

“Hasn’t it?”

“Not in terms of killing you.”

“How do you know it won’t when we drag it out?”

“You’ll see.”

I looked up at him sideways. Somehow he struck me as knowing what he was
doing.

“You know a lot more about yourself now than you did at the time,” he
explained softly. “You can apply insight. You can evaluate it as it
comes up. Maybe not completely, but enough to protect yourself. Don’t
worry. Trust me. I can stop it if it gets too bad. Now just relax. Look
at the ceiling. Be aware of your toes. Don’t look at your toes. Look
straight up. Your toes, your big toes. Don’t move your toes, but feel
them. Count outward from your big toes, one count for each toe. One,
two, three. Feel that third toe. Feel the toe, feel it, feel it go limp,
go limp, go limp. The toe next to it on both sides gets limp. So limp
because your toes are limp, all of your toes are limp—”

“What are you doing?” I shouted at him.

He said in the same silky voice, “You trust me and so do your toes trust
me. They’re all limp because you trust me. You—”

“You’re trying to hypnotize me. I’m not going to let you do that.”

“You’re going to hypnotize yourself. You do everything yourself. I just
point the way. I point your toes to the path. Just point your toes. No
one can make you go anywhere you don’t want to go, but you want to go
where your toes are pointed where your toes are limp where your …”

On and on and on. And where was the dangling gold ornament, the light in
the eyes, the mystic passes? He wasn’t even sitting where I could see
him. Where was the talk about how sleepy I was supposed to be? Well, he
knew I wasn’t sleepy and didn’t want to be sleepy. I just wanted to be
toes. I just wanted to be limp, just a limp toe. No brains in a toe, a
toe to go, go, go eleven times, eleven, I’m eleven …

I split in two, and it was all right, the part that watched the part
that went back to the library, and Miss Kew leaning toward me, but not
too near, me with the newspaper crackling under me on the library chair,
me with one shoe off and my limp toes dangling … and I felt a mild
surprise at this. For this was hypnosis, but I was quite conscious,
quite altogether there on the couch with Stern droning away at me, quite
able to roll over and sit up and talk to him and walk out if I wanted
to, but I just didn’t want to. Oh, if this was what hypnosis was like, I
was all for it. I’d work at this. This was all right.

There on the table I’m able to see that the gold will unfold on the
leather, and whether I’m able to stay by the table with you, with Miss
Kew, with Miss Kew …

“… and Bonnie and Beanie are eight, they’re twins, and Baby. Baby is
three.”

“Baby is three,” she said,

There was a pressure, a stretching apart, and a … a breakage. And with a
tearing agony and a burst of triumph that drowned the pain, it was done.

And this is what was inside. All in one flash, but all this.

Baby is three? My baby would be three if there were a baby, which there
never was …

Lone, I’m open to you. Open, is this open enough?

His irises like wheels. I’m sure they spin, but I never catch them at
it. The probe that passes invisibly from his brain, through his eyes,
into mine. Does he know what it means to me? Does he care? He doesn’t
care, he doesn’t know; he empties me and I fill as he directs me to; he
drinks and waits and drinks again and never looks at the cup.

When I saw him first, I was dancing in the wind, in the wood, in the
wild, and I spun about and he stood there in the leafy shadows, watching
me. I hated him for it. It was not my wood, not my gold-spangled
fern-tangled glen. But it was my dancing that he took, freezing it
forever by being there. I hated him for it, hated the way he looked, the
way he stood, ankle-deep in the kind wet ferns, looking like a tree with
roots for feet and clothes the color of earth. As I stopped he moved,
and then he was just a man, a great ape-shouldered, dirty animal of a
man, and all my hate was fear suddenly and I was just as frozen.

He knew what he had done and he didn’t care. Dancing … never to dance
again, because never would I know the woods were free of eyes, free of
tall, uncaring, dirty animal men. Summer days with the clothes choking
me, winter nights with the precious decencies round and about me like a
shroud, and never to dance again, never to remember dancing without
remembering the shock of knowing he had seen me. How I hated him! Oh,
how I hated him!

To dance alone where no one knew, that was the single thing I hid to
myself when I was known as Miss Kew, that Victorian, older than her
years, later than her time; correct and starched, lace and linen and
lonely. Now indeed I would be all they said, through and through,
forever and ever, because he had robbed me of the one thing I dared to
keep secret.

He came out into the sun and walked to me, holding his great head a
little on one side. I stood where I was, frozen inwardly and outwardly
and altogether by the core of anger and the layer of fear. My arm was
still out, my waist still bent from my dance, and when he stopped, I
breathed again because by then I had to.

He said, “You read books?”

I couldn’t bear to have him near me, but I couldn’t move. He put out his
hard hand and touched my jaw, turned my head up until I had to look into
his face. I cringed away from him, but my face would not leave his hand,
though he was not holding it, just lifting it. “You got to read some
books for me. I got no time to find them.”

I asked him, “Who are you?”

“Lone,” he said. “You going to read books for me?”

“No. Let me go, let me go!”

He laughed at me. He wasn’t holding me.

“What books?” I cried.

He thumped my face, not very hard. It made me look up a bit more. He
dropped his hand away. His eyes, the irises were going to spin …

“Open up in there,” he said. “Open way up and let me see.”

There were books in my head, and he was looking at the titles … he was
not looking at the titles, for he couldn’t read. He was looking at what
I knew of the books. I suddenly felt terribly useless, because I had
only a fraction of what he wanted.

“What’s that?” he barked.

I knew what he meant. He’d gotten it from inside my head. I didn’t know
it was in there, even, but he found it.

“Telekinesis,” I said.

“How is it done?”

“Nobody knows if it can be done. Moving physical objects with the mind!”

“It can be done,” he said. “This one?”

“Teleportation. That’s the same thing—well, almost. Moving your own body
with mind power.”

“Yeah, yeah, I see it,” he said gruffly.

“Molecular interpenetration. Telepathy and clairvoyance. I don’t know
anything about them. I think they’re silly.”

“Read about ’em. It don’t matter if you understand or not. What’s this?”

It was there in my brain, on my lips. _“Gestalt.”_

“What’s that?”

“Group. Like a cure for a lot of diseases with one kind of treatment.
Like a lot of thoughts expressed in one phrase. The whole is greater
than the sum of the parts.”

“Read about that, too. Read a whole lot about that. That’s the _most_
you got to read about. That’s important.”

He turned away, and when his eyes came away from mine it was like
something breaking, so that I staggered and fell to one knee. He went
off into the woods without looking back. I got my things and ran home.
There was anger, and it struck me like a storm. There was fear, and it
struck me like a wind. I knew I would read the books, I knew I would
come back, I knew I would never dance again.

So I read the books and I came back. Sometimes it was every day for
three or four days, and sometimes, because I couldn’t find a certain
book, I might not come back for ten. He was always there in the little
glen, waiting, standing in the shadows, and he took what he wanted of
the books and nothing of me. He never mentioned the next meeting. If he
came there every day to wait for me, or if he only came when I did, I
have no way of knowing.

He made me read books that contained nothing for me, books on evolution,
on social and cultural organization, on mythology, and ever so much on
symbiosis. What I had with him were not conversations; sometimes nothing
audible would pass between us but his grunt of surprise or small, short
hum of interest.

He tore the books out of me the way he would tear berries from a bush,
all at once; he smelled of sweat and earth and the green juices his
heavy body crushed when he moved through the wood.

If he learned anything from the books, it made no difference in him.

There came a day when he sat by me and puzzled something out.

He said, “What book has something like this?” Then he waited for a long
time, thinking. “The way a termite can’t digest wood, you know, and
microbes in the termite’s belly can, and what the termite eats is what
the microbe leaves behind. What’s that?”

“Symbiosis,” I remembered. I remembered the words. Lone tore the content
from the words and threw the words away. “Two kinds of life depending
upon one another for existence.”

“Yeah. Well, is there a book about four-five kinds doing that?”

“I don’t know.”

Then he asked, “What about this? You got a radio station, you got
four-five receivers, each receiver is fixed up to make something
different happen, like one digs and one flies and one makes noise, but
each one takes orders from the one place. And each one has its own power
and its own thing to do, but they are all apart. Now: is there life like
that, instead of radio?”

“Where each organism is a part of the whole, but separated? I don’t
think so … unless you mean social organizations, like a team, or perhaps
a gang of men working, all taking orders from the same boss.”

“No,” he said immediately, “not like that. Like one single animal.” He
made a gesture with his cupped hand which I understood.

I asked, “You mean a _gestalt_ life-form? It’s fantastic.”

“No book has about that, huh?”

“None I ever heard of.”

“I got to know about that,” he said heavily. “There is such a thing. I
want to know if it ever happened before.”

“I can’t see how anything of the sort could exist.”

“It does. A part that fetches, a part that figures, a part that finds
out, and a part that talks.”

“Talks? Only humans talk.”

“I know,” he said, and got up and went away.

I looked and looked for such a book, but found nothing remotely like it.
I came back and told him so. He was still a very long time, looking off
to the blue-on-blue line of the hilly horizon. Then he drove those
about-to-spin irises at me and searched.

“You learn, but you don’t think,” he said, and looked again at the
hills.

“This all happens with humans,” he said eventually. “It happens piece by
piece right under folks’ noses, and they don’t see it. You got
mind-readers. You got people can move things with their mind. You got
people can move themselves with their mind. You got people can figure
anything out if you just think to ask them. What you ain’t got is the
one kind of person who can pull ’em all together, like a brain pulls
together the parts that press and pull and feel heat and walk and think
and all the other things.

“I’m one,” he finished suddenly. Then he sat still for so long, I
thought he had forgotten me.

“Lone,” I said, “what do you do here in the woods?”

“I wait,” he said. “I ain’t finished yet.” He looked at my eyes and
snorted in irritation. “I don’t mean ‘finished’ like you’re thinking. I
mean I ain’t—completed yet. You know about a worm when it’s cut, growin’
whole again? Well, forget about the cut. Suppose it just grew that way,
for the first time, see? I’m getting parts. I ain’t finished. I want a
book about that kind of animal that is me when I’m finished.”

“I don’t know of such a book. Can you tell me more? Maybe if you could,
I’d think of the right book or a place to find it.”

He broke a stick between his huge hands, put the two pieces side by side
and broke them together with one strong twist.

“All I know is I got to do what I’m doing like a bird’s got to nest when
it’s time. And I know that when I’m done I won’t be anything to brag
about. I’ll be like a body stronger and faster than anything there ever
was, without the right kind of head on it. But maybe that’s because I’m
one of the first. That picture you had, the caveman …”

“Neanderthal.”

“Yeah. Come to think of it, he was no great shakes. An early try at
something new. That’s what I’m going to be. But maybe the right kind of
head’ll come along after I’m all organized. Then it’ll be something.”

He grunted with satisfaction and went away.

I tried, for days I tried, but I couldn’t find what he wanted. I found a
magazine which stated that the next important evolutionary step in man
would be a psychic rather than a physical direction, but it said nothing
about a—shall I call it a _gestalt_ organism? There was something about
slime molds, but they seem to be more a hive activity of amoebae than
even a symbiosis.

To my own unscientific, personally uninterested mind, there was nothing
like what he wanted except possibly a band marching together, everyone
playing different kinds of instruments with different techniques and
different notes, to make a single thing move along together. But he
hadn’t meant anything like that.

So I went back to him in the cool of an early fall evening, and he took
what little I had in my eyes, and turned from me angrily with a gross
word I shall not permit myself to remember.

“You can’t find it,” he told me. “Don’t come back.”

He got up and went to a tattered birch and leaned against it, looking
out and down into the wind-tossed crackling shadows. I think he had
forgotten me already. I know he leaped like a frightened animal when I
spoke to him from so near. He must have been completely immersed in
whatever strange thoughts he was having, for I’m sure he didn’t hear me
coming.

I said, “Lone, don’t blame me for not finding it. I tried.”

He controlled his startlement and brought those eyes down to me. “Blame?
Who’s blamin’ anybody?”

“I failed you,” I told him, “and you’re angry.”

He looked at me so long I became uncomfortable.

“I don’t know what you’re talkin’ about,” he said.

I wouldn’t let him turn away from me. He would have. He would have left
me forever with not another thought; he didn’t _care!_ It wasn’t cruelty
or thoughtlessness as I have been taught to know those things. He was as
uncaring as a cat is of the bursting of a tulip bud.

I took him by the upper arms and shook him, it was like trying to shake
the front of my house. “You _can_ know!” I screamed at him. “You know
what I read. You must know what I think.”

He shook his head.

“I’m a person, a woman,” I raved at him. “You’ve used me and used me and
you’ve given me nothing. You’ve made me break a lifetime of
habits—reading until all hours, coming to you in the rain and on
Sunday—you don’t talk to me, you don’t look at me, you don’t know
anything about me and you don’t care. You put some sort of a spell on me
that I couldn’t break. And when you’re finished, you say, ‘Don’t come
back.’ ”

“Do I have to give something back because I took something?”

“People do.”

He gave that short, interested hum. “What do you want me to give you? I
ain’t got anything.”

I moved away from him. I felt … I don’t know what I felt. After a time I
said, “I don’t know.”

He shrugged and turned. I fairly leaped at him, dragging him back. “I
want you to—”

“Well, damn it, what?”

I couldn’t look at him; I could hardly speak. “I don’t know. There’s
something, but I don’t know what it is. It’s something that—I couldn’t
say if I knew it.” When he began to shake his head, I took his arms
again. “You’ve read the books out of me; can’t you read the … the _me_
out of me?”

“I ain’t never tried.” He held my face up, and stepped close. “Here,” he
said.

His eyes projected their strange probe at me and I screamed. I tried to
twist away. I hadn’t wanted this, I was sure I hadn’t. I struggled
terribly. I think he lifted me right off the ground with his big hands.
He held me until he was finished, and then let me drop. I huddled to the
ground, sobbing. He sat down beside me. He didn’t try to touch me. He
didn’t try to go away. I quieted at last and crouched there, waiting.

He said, “I ain’t going to do much of that no more.”

I sat up and tucked my skirt close around me and laid my cheek on my
updrawn knees so I could see his face. “What happened?”

He cursed. “Damn mishmash inside you. Thirty-three years old—what you
want to live like that for?”

“I live very comfortably,” I said with some pique.

“Yeah,” he said. “All by yourself for ten years now ’cept for someone to
do your work. Nobody else.”

“Men are animals, and women …”

“You really hate women. They all know something you don’t.”

“I don’t want to know. I’m quite happy the way I am.”

“Hell you are.”

I said nothing to that. I despise that kind of language.

“Two things you want from me. Neither makes no sense.” He looked at me
with the first real expression I have ever seen in his face: a profound
wonderment. “You want to know all about me, where I came from, how I got
to be what I am.”

“Yes, I do want that. What’s the other thing I want that you know and I
don’t?”

“I was born some place and growed like a weed somehow,” he said,
ignoring me. “Folks who didn’t give even enough of a damn to try the
orphanage routine. I lived with some other folks for a while, tried
school, didn’t like it. Too small a town for them special schools for my
kind, retarded, y’know. So I just ran loose, sort of in training to be
the village idiot. I’da made it if I’d stayed there, but I took to the
woods instead.”

“Why?”

He wondered why, and finally said, “I guess because the way people lived
didn’t make no sense to me. I saw enough up and down, back and forth, to
know that they live a lot of different ways, but none of ’em was for me.
Out here I can grow like I want.”

“How is that?” I asked over one of those vast differences that built and
receded between him and me so constantly.

“What I wanted to get from your books.”

“You never told me.”

For the second time he said, “You learn, but you don’t think. There’s a
kind of—well, _person_. It’s all made of separate parts, but it’s all
one person. It has like hands, it has like legs, it has like a talking
mouth, and it has like a brain. That’s me, a brain for that person. Damn
feeble, too, but the best I know of.”

“You’re mad.”

“No, I ain’t,” he said, unoffended and completely certain. “I already
got the part that’s like hands. I can move ’em anywhere and they do what
I want, though they’re too young yet to do much good. I got the part
that talks. That one’s real good.”

“I don’t think you talk very well at all,” I said. I cannot stand
incorrect English.

He was surprised. “I’m not talking about me! She’s back yonder with the
others.”

“She?”

“The one that talks. Now I need one that thinks, one that can take
anything and add it to anything else and come up with a right answer.
And once they’re all together, and all the parts get used together often
enough, I’ll be that new kind of thing I told you about. See? Only—I
wish it had a better head on it than me.”

My own head was swimming. “What made you start doing this?”

He considered me gravely. “What made you start growing hair in your
armpits?” he asked me. “You don’t figure a thing like that. It just
happens.”

“What is that … that thing you do when you look in my eyes?”

“You want a name for it? I ain’t got one. I don’t know how I do it. I
know I can get anyone I want to do anything. Like you’re going to forget
about me.”

I said in a choked voice, “I don’t want to forget about you.”

“You will.” I didn’t know then whether he meant I’d forget, or I’d
_want_ to forget. “You’ll hate me, and then after a long time you’ll be
grateful. Maybe you’ll be able to do something for me some time. You’ll
be that grateful that you’ll be glad to do it. But you’ll forget, all
right, everything but a sort of … feeling. And my name, maybe.”

I don’t know what moved me to ask him, but I did, forlornly. “And no one
will ever know about you and me?”

“Can’t,” he said. “Unless … well, unless it was the head of the animal,
like me, or a better one.” He heaved himself up.

“Oh, wait, wait!” I cried. He mustn’t go yet, he mustn’t. He was a tall,
dirty beast of a man, yet he had enthralled me in some dreadful way.
“You haven’t given me the other … whatever it was.”

“Oh,” he said, “Yeah, that.”

He moved like a flash. There was a pressure, a stretching apart, and
a … a breakage. And with a tearing agony and a burst of triumph that
drowned the pain, it was done.

I came up out of it, through two distinct levels:

I am eleven, breathless from shock from a transferred agony of that
incredible entrance into the ego of another. And:

I am fifteen, lying on the couch while Stern drones on, “… quietly,
quietly limp, your ankles and legs as limp as your toes, your belly goes
soft, the back of your neck is as limp as your belly, it’s quiet and
easy and all gone soft and limper than limp …”

I sat up and swung my legs to the floor. “Okay,” I said.

Stern looked a little annoyed. “This is going to work,” he said, “but it
can only work if you cooperate. Just lie—”

“It did work,” I said.

“What?”

“The whole thing. A to Z.” I snapped my fingers. “Like that.”

He looked at me piercingly. “What do you mean?”

“It was right there, where you said. In the library. When I was eleven.
When she said, ‘Baby is three.’ It knocked loose something that had been
boiling around in her for three years, and it all came blasting out. I
got it, full force; just a kid, no warning, no defenses. It had such a—a
pain in it, like I never knew could be.”

“Go on,” said Stern.

“That’s really all. I mean that’s not what was in it; it’s what it did
to me. What it was, a sort of hunk of her own self. A whole lot of
things that happened over about four months, every bit of it. She knew
Lone.”

“You mean a whole _series_ of episodes?”

“That’s it.”

“You got a series all at once? In a split second?”

“That’s right. Look, for that split second I _was_ her, don’t you see? I
was her, everything she’d ever done, everything she’d ever thought and
heard and felt. Everything, everything, all in the right order if I
wanted to bring it out like that. Any part of it if I wanted it by
itself. If I’m going to tell you about what I had for lunch, to I have
to tell you everything else I’ve ever done since I was born? No. I tell
you I _was_ her, and then and forever after I can remember anything she
could remember up to that point. In just that one flash.”

“A _gestalt,”_ he murmured.

“Aha!” I said, and thought about that. I thought about a whole lot of
things. I put them aside for a moment and said, “Why didn’t I know all
this before?”

“You had a powerful block against recalling it.”

I got up excitedly. “I don’t see why. I don’t see that at all.”

“Just natural revulsion,” he guessed. “How about this? You had a
distaste for assuming a female ego, even for a second.”

“You told me yourself, right at the beginning, that I didn’t have that
kind of a problem.”

“Well, how does this sound to you? You say you felt pain in that
episode. So—you wouldn’t go back into it for fear of re-experiencing the
pain.”

“Let me think, let me think. Yeah, yeah, that’s part of it—that thing of
going into someone’s mind. She opened up to me because I reminded her of
Lone. I went in. I wasn’t ready; I’d never done it before, except maybe
a little, against resistance. I went all the way in and it was too much;
it frightened me away from trying it for years. And there it lay,
wrapped up, locked away. But as I grew older, the power to do that with
my mind got stronger and stronger, and still I was afraid to use it. And
the more I grew, the more I felt, down deep, that Miss Kew had to killed
before she killed the … what I am. My God!” I shouted. “Do you know what
I am?”

“No,” he said. “Like to tell me about it?”

“I’d like to,” I said. “Oh, yes, I’d like that.”

He had that professional open-minded expression on his face, not
believing or disbelieving, just taking it all in. I had to tell him, and
I suddenly realized that I didn’t have enough words. I knew the things,
but not the names for them.

_Lone took the meanings and threw the words away_.

Further back: _“You read books. Read books for me.”_

The look of his eyes. That—“opening up” thing.

I went over to Stern. He looked up at me. I bent close. First he was
startled, then he controlled it, then he came even closer to me.

“My God,” he murmured. “I didn’t look at those eyes before. I could have
sworn those irises spun like wheels …”

Stern read books. He’d read more books than I ever imagined had been
written. I slipped in there, looking for what I wanted.

I can’t say exactly what it was like. It was like walking in a tunnel,
and in this tunnel, all over the roof and walls, wooden arms stuck out
at you, like the thing at the carnival, the merry-go-round, the thing
you snatch brass rings from. There’s a brass ring on the end of each of
these arms, and you can take any one of them you want to.

Now imagine you make up your mind which rings you want, and the arms
hold only those. Now picture yourself with a thousand hands to grab the
rings off with. Now just suppose the tunnel is a zillion miles long, and
you can go from one end of it to the other, grabbing rings, in just the
time it takes you to blink once. Well, it was like that, only easier.

It was easier for me to do than it had been for Lone.

Straightening up, I got away from Stern. He looked sick and frightened.

“It’s all right,” I said.

“What did you do to me?”

“I needed some words. Come on, come on. Get professional.”

I had to admire him. He put his pipe in his pocket and gouged the tips
of his fingers hard against his forehead and cheeks. Then he sat up and
he was okay again.

“I know,” I said. “That’s how Miss Kew felt when Lone did it to her.”

“What _are_ you?”

“I’ll tell you. I’m the central ganglion of a complex organism which is
composed of Baby, a computer; Bonnie and Beanie, teleports; Jane,
telekineticist; and myself, telepath and central control. There isn’t a
single thing about any of us that hasn’t been documented: the
teleportation of the Yogi, the telekinetics of some gamblers, the idiot
savant mathematicians, and most of all, the so-called poltergeist, the
moving about of household goods through the instrumentation of a young
girl. Only in this case every one of my parts delivers at peak
performance.

“Lone organized it, or it formed around him; it doesn’t matter which. I
replaced Lone, but I was too underdeveloped when he died, and on top of
that I got an occlusion from that blast from Miss Kew. To that extent
you were right when you said the blast made me subconsciously afraid to
discover what was in it. But there was another good reason for my not
being able to get in under that ‘Baby is three’ barrier.

“We ran into the problem of what it was I valued more than the security
Miss Kew gave us. Can’t you see now what it was? My _gestalt_ organism
was at the point of death from that security. I figured she had to be
killed or it—_I_—would be. Oh, the parts would live on: two little
colored girls with a speech impediment, one introspective girl with an
artistic bent, one mongoloid idiot, and me—ninety per cent
short-circuited potentials and ten per cent juvenile delinquent.” I
laughed. “Sure, she had to be killed. It was self-preservation for the
_gestalt.”_

Stern bobbled around with his mouth and finally got out: “I don’t—”

“You don’t need to,” I laughed. “This is wonderful. You’re fine, hey,
fine. Now I want to tell you this, because you can appreciate a fine
point in your specialty. You talk about occlusions! I couldn’t get past
the ‘Baby is three’ thing because in it lay the clues to what I really
am. I couldn’t find that out because I was afraid to remember that I had
failed in the thing I had to do to save the _gestalt_. Ain’t that
purty?”

“Failed? Failed how?”

“Look. I came to love Miss Kew, and I’d never loved anything before. Yet
I had reason to kill her. She _had_ to be killed; I _couldn’t_ kill her.
What does a human mind do when presented with imperative, mutually
exclusive alternatives?”

“It—it might simply quit. As you phrased it earlier, it might blow a
fuse, retreat, refuse to function in that area.”

“Well, I didn’t do that. What else?”

“It might slip into a delusion that it had already taken one of the
courses of action.”

I nodded happily. “I didn’t kill her. I decided I must; I got up, got
dressed—and the next thing I knew I was outside, wandering, very
confused. I got my money—and I understand now, with super-empathy, how I
can win _anyone’s_ prize contest—and I went looking for a head-shrinker.
I found a good one.”

“Thanks,” he said dazedly. He looked at me with a strangeness in his
eyes. “And now that you know, what’s solved? What are you going to do?”

“Go back home,” I said happily. “Reactivate the superorganism, exercise
it secretly in ways that won’t make Miss Kew unhappy, and we’ll stay
with her as long as we know it pleases her. And we’ll please her. She’ll
be happy in ways she’s never dreamed about until now. She rates it,
bless her strait-laced, hungry heart.”

“And she can’t kill your—_gestalt_ organism?”

“Not a chance. Not now.”

“How do you know it isn’t dead already?”

“How?” I echoed. “How does your head know your arm works?”

He wet his lips. “You’re going home to make a spinster happy. And after
that?”

I shrugged. “After that?” I mocked. “Did the Peking man look at Homo Sap
walking erect and say, ‘What will he do after that?’ We’ll live, that’s
all, like a man, like a tree, like anything else that lives. We’ll feed
and grow and experiment and breed. We’ll defend ourselves.” I spread my
hands. “We’ll just do what comes naturally.”

“But what can you do?”

“What can an electric motor do? It depends on where we apply ourselves.”

Stern was very pale. “But you’re the only such organism …”

“Are we? I don’t know. I don’t think so. I’ve told you parts have been
around for ages—the telepaths, the _poltergeists_. What was lacking was
the ones to organize, to be heads to the scattered bodies. Lone was one,
I’m one; there must be more. We’ll find out as we mature.”

“You—aren’t mature yet?”

“Lord, no!” I laughed. “We’re an infant. We’re the equivalent of about a
three-year-old-child. So you see, there it is again, and this time I’m
not afraid of it; Baby is three.” I looked at my hands. “Baby is three,”
I said again, because the realization tasted good. “And when this
particular group-baby is five, it might want to be a fireman. At eight,
maybe a cowboy or maybe an FBI man. And when it grows up, maybe it’ll
build a city, or perhaps it’ll be President.”

“Oh, God!” he said. “God!”

I looked down at him. “You’re afraid,” I said. “You’re afraid of _Homo
Gestalt_.”

He made a wonderful effort and smiled. “That’s bastard terminology.”

“We’re a bastard breed,” I said. I pointed. “Sit over there.”

He crossed the quiet room and sat at the desk. I leaned close to him and
he went to sleep with his eyes open. I straightened up and looked around
the room. Then I got the thermos flask and filled it and put it on the
desk. I fixed the corner of the rug and put a clean towel at the head of
the couch. I went to the side of the desk and opened it and looked at
the tape recorder.

Like reaching out a hand, I got Beanie. She stood by the desk,
wide-eyed.

“Look here,” I told her. “Look good, now. What I want to do is erase all
this tape. Go ask Baby how.”

She blinked at me and sort of shook herself, and then leaned over the
recorder. She was there—and gone—and back, just like that. She pushed
past me and turned two knobs, moved a pointer until it clicked twice.
The tape raced backward past the head swiftly, whining.

“All right,” I said, “beat it.”

She vanished.

I got my jacket and went to the door. Stern was still sitting at the
desk, staring.

“A _good_ head-shrinker,” I murmured. I felt fine.

Outside I waited, then turned and went back in again.

Stern looked up at me. “Sit over there, Sonny.”

“Gee,” I said. “Sorry, sir. I got in the wrong office.”

“That’s all right,” he said.

I went out and closed the door. All the way down to the store to buy
Miss Kew some flowers, I was grinning about he’d account for the loss of
an afternoon and the gain of a thousand bucks.



STORY NOTES


by Paul Williams

“SHADOW, SHADOW ON THE WALL”: first published in _Imagination_, February
1951. Apparently written April or May 1950. There is little information
available regarding the exact dates of composition of many of the
stories in this volume or the sequence in which they were written. In a
letter to his mother dated March 21, 1950, Sturgeon fretted: _Aside from
my TV show and a short I wrote last weekend, I haven’t written an
original line since last May_. “Last May” was when Theodore Sturgeon
began working at Time Inc., writing direct mail copy for _Fortune_
magazine. The Time Inc. job lasted until late in 1951. Sturgeon wrote
“The Hurkle Is a Happy Beast” for _The Magazine of Fantasy & Science
Fiction_ in late April 1949. (The “TV show” he refers to was a
speculative project that never came to fruition).

On June 19, 1950 TS wrote to J. Francis McComas, one of the editors
who’d bought “The Hurkle”: _Here’s IT STAYED, the fantasy of which I
spoke to you_. This story—presumably rejected by F&SF, who didn’t
publish their second Sturgeon story until November 1953—is clearly
“Shadow, Shadow on the Wall” _(“He stayed, he did,” said Bobby. “He
stayed!”)_. “Shadow” could not have been the “short I wrote last
weekend,” since TS says he wrote it in 28 days (see below), so if we
believe Sturgeon wrote no stories between May 1949 and March 1950,
“Shadow” must have been written in April or May 1950.

Theodore Sturgeon told interviewer Paul Sammon in 1977 [in response to a
question about his writing habits]: _Another time when I wrote a story I
had a bad writer’s block. I was working for Time Inc., and felt I really
wanted to write something. But I’d come home from work and try to write
and find that I couldn’t. So I finally_ _decided to turn the coin over,
and create a situation where I would not be trying hard to write, but
trying hard not to write. This is what I did: I decided I would
double-space the typewriter and write to the bottom of the page. One
page every day. And if I stopped in the middle of the word, with a
hyphen, I would not write another word on another page. This created a
situation where I’d get to the bottom of my page and say, “This is
crazy! At least let me finish this sentence!” But I wouldn’t let myself
do it. So in twenty-eight days I wrote a story that ran twenty-eight
pages, and it came out beautifully. I’ve become one of the world’s great
experts at breaking writer’s blocks. In almost any case, I can break
anyone’s block_. In another 1977 interview, with D. Scott Apel, TS
described the same incident and specifically identifies the 28-day story
as “Shadow, Shadow on the Wall.” He added, jokingly: _That technique was
so successful that I never used it again_.

Sturgeon’s introduction to “Shadow, Shadow on the Wall” in his 1984
collection _Alien Cargo: Good old wicked stepmother; this isn’t the
first, and certainly not the last of them to supply us with
entertainment. Somebody once made a short film of this; the little boy
was just great, the rest misunderstood, so it was never seen. There’s
one line in here I’m really proud of: the fury of the woman who, having
banished the child to the bedroom, finds him happy as a little clam_.
“Don’t you know you’re being punished?” _she shouts. Very heavy, that.
Nobody can punish you if you can achieve the mindset that says whatever
they’re doing to you isn’t punishment_.

TS’s own childhood experiences with a seemingly sadistic stepparent are
recounted in his 1965 memoir _Argyll_ (published posthumously).

“THE STARS ARE THE STYX”: first published in the first issue of _Galaxy
Science Fiction_, October 1950. Probably written in summer 1950. It is
noteworthy that Theodore Sturgeon contributed stories to the debut
issues of both of the magazines that would transform the character of
science fiction in the 1950s and beyond: _The Magazine of Fantasy &
Science Fiction_ and _Galaxy_, monthly short story magazines that
immediately established themselves as the equals of John W. Campbell’s
_Astounding Science-Fiction_ in terms of reader popularity and of
editorial influence on how authors wrote and what they wrote about and
what they considered “science fiction” to be. In both cases, the editors
were eager to have a Sturgeon story in their debut issues not only
because of his popularity with the genre’s readers but because in
different ways the editors of both magazines saw the Sturgeon name as
symbolic of the type of science fiction they hoped and intended to offer
in their ambitious new publications. And indeed, this turned out to be
true. Theodore Sturgeon, already beloved by science fiction readers and
other sf writers for the stories he wrote for _Astounding_ and its
sister magazine _Unknown_ in 1939-1947, was in many ways the
prototypical science fiction (and fantasy) short story writer of the
1950s (the decade in which he would do his very best work).

“The Stars Are the Styx” was adapted (apparently with scripts by
Sturgeon) as a radio drama twice, for “Tales of Tomorrow” (aired Jan.
29, 1953) and for “X Minus One” (aired July 27, 1956). (Sturgeon, whose
Star Trek scripts are favorites among aficionados, did his first paying
television writing in September 1951 when he adapted Robert Heinlein’s
short story “Ordeal in Space” for CBS Stage 14.)

In 1979 Dell Books published a collection of stories by TS called _The
Stars Are the Styx_, with a cover by Rowena Morrell depicting Sturgeon
as Charon. In his introduction to the title story, TS wrote:

_I’ve written elsewhere about the strange way things that I write about
seem to happen about fifteen years later. It’s a small thing, but in
writing this in 1950 I had no idea in the world that in fifteen years
couples would be dancing separately, each more or less doing their own
thing. In ’65 they began doing just that. Nor did I dream that this, of
all the stories I was writing at the time, would one day be the title
story of a collection like this_.

When the narrator in “Stars” asks Judson for a _simple statement_
because complicated matters are not important, _he is echoing a
codification articulated by other Sturgeon characters in “Quietly” and
“What Dead Men Tell” (see Story Notes in Volume V.). And when he guesses
people are attracted to Jud because he gives them the feeling he_ can be
reached … touched … affected … We like feeling that we have an effect on
someone, _it seems likely that the author is examining the happy and
mysterious response of strangers when they meet Theodore Sturgeon_.

The line _“Modesty is not so simple a virtue as honesty,” one of the old
books says_ turns up in an essay by Sturgeon called “The Naked I” (the
manuscript is in the Sturgeon papers; date and place of publication
uncertain), which begins:

_Modesty is not so simple a virtue as honesty_.

_I wish I’d said that. Matter of fact, I did and I do and most probably
I will, because it’s one of those thoughts you can take home and chew
over and find the flavor increasing. The man I got it from, however, is
one Bernard Rudofsky, in a long out-of-print book called_ Are Clothes
Modern?—_which in itself is another such thought_.

_I am naked. I am naked now as I sit here writing this. I wear clothes
as seldom as possible because I am more comfortable that way. I wear
clothes a) when I must and b) when I want to, and at no other time_.

Amongst the Sturgeon papers are several notes in which TS attempts to
plot a sequel to “The Stars Are the Styx.” For example:

_Charon decides to go Out. When he gets there he finds that in the first
place none of the Outbounders are wanted; second, that the great synapse
is equally unwanted and useless to a really hidebound Earth. He goes
back to Curbstone and finds ancient papers which describe the whole
scheme as a riddance for neurotics and potential rebels_.

Lucy Menger in her 1981 book _Theodore Sturgeon_ points out that: “The
idea that misfits can contribute to society is central to ‘The Stars Are
the Styx.’ In this story, Sturgeon capsulizes his thoughts on misfits
when his narrator muses: ‘When you come right down to it, misfits are
that way either because they lack something or because they have
something _extra_.’ ”

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:
ON CURBSTONE, GOING OUT MEANT A 6,000 YEAR DATE!

“RULE OF THREE”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, January
1951. Written October 1950. Among the papers belonging to Sturgeon’s
estate is a letter on _Time_ letterhead dated Oct. 11. The year must be
1950 (because TS wasn’t writing for Horace Gold’s _Galaxy_ in Oct. ’49
and didn’t sell him a story in fall ’51). There is no salutation; the
person he’s writing to could be either his estranged wife Mary Mair or
the young woman who would become his third wife the following year,
Marion McGahan. The letter is signed and not a carbon, so presumably was
not delivered (anyway, it was still among Sturgeon’s papers when he died
three decades later). The letter is relevant here because I am certain
the story TS has just shown to Horace and is planning to rewrite all day
tomorrow is “Rule of Three.” (See notes on “Make Room for Me” for info
about “the other one.”) So here is the entire text of a note written by
TS in the midst of working on “Rule of Three” (which I regard as one of
his major works and arguably as important a
message-in-a-bottle-from-outer-space as we humans may ever receive):

_I haven’t seen you in so long …_ [ellipses in original] _I was half out
of my mind with exhaustion when I spoke to you the other night—about 4
hours sleep in 48. I can’t take too much of that, but I had to_.

_Horace liked the story but wants a rewrite. He’s right, damn him. He’s
also very impressed with the other one I told you about—the one I wrote
with someone else—particularly since it has a new year’s eve sequence
and is ideal for his December issue. So I’ve got to rewrite that one
too. The way I hope to handle it is this: Tomorrow I’ll stay home and
work all day, finishing the 9000-worder. (Tonight, by the way, I’m
lecturing at CCNY.) Friday evening I’ve got a dianetic emergency to
handle—his third session, which I think will straighten him out.
Saturday I’ll work on the 13,000-word one. After that I hope to be able
to see you, if I can’t snatch a couple of hours between times_.

_Hold tight, darling, and be careful of the door_.

(The letter is signed, _Love, Ted_.)

Sturgeon’s 1979 introduction to “Rule of Three”: _My preoccupation for
some time has been with the nature of marriage, and whether or not we
haven’t gotten ourselves off on the wrong foot. Divorce statistics would
seem to indicate that there is nothing more_ _destructive of marriage
than monogamy. “Let me not to the marriage of true minds admit
impediment,” wrote Elizabeth Barrett (a monogamist if there ever was
one), but she had a point there. Although the person who wrote “Rule of
Three” clearly regarded the desirability of monogamy as axiomatic, the
astute reader—another term for postgame quarterbacking—might find in it
the seeds of later ideation. One tends to work out one’s own convictions
in writing fiction—especially in science fiction—and to test them
against possibilities, however untimely or unformed or wishful or
improbable. Anyway, in this story (1951) one may find what is possibly
the first suggestion in science fiction that love may not after all be
confined to gender or to monogamy. Here are the seeds of later work
like_ More Than Human, _and the growing concept that perhaps, after all,
the greatest advance we can make is to accept what we are, and then to
grok, to blesh, to meld, to join. Real science fiction talk, that, ain’t
it?_

In his 1953 magazine article “Why So Much Syzygy?” TS wrote: _What I
have been trying to do all these years is investigate this matter of
love, sexual and asexual … To do this I’ve had to look at the individual
components … In “Rule of Three” and “Synthesis”_ [“Make Room for Me”] _I
had (in reverse order) a quasi-sexual relationship among three people,
and one among six so it could break down into three couples and be
normal. In “The Stars Are the Styx” I set up several (four, as I
remember) different kinds of love motivations for mutual comparisons_.

Magazine blurb: OF COURSE YOU’D BE HOST TO GUESTS FROM OUTER SPACE; IT’S
COMMON COURTESY. BUT BEING A HOST CAN HAVE A PARTICULARLY NASTY MEANING!

“MAKE ROOM FOR ME”: first published in _Fantastic Adventures_, May 1951.
Originally written in 1946 in collaboration with Rita Dragonette.
Apparently rewritten—see Oct. 11, 1950 letter quoted in “Rule of Three”
note—in October 1950. Regarding that letter, “Make Room for Me” does
indeed include a New Year’s Eve sequence and is therefore surely the
“other” story referred to. This letter is the only place I know of where
Sturgeon acknowledges that the story was co-written _(the one I wrote
with someone else)_. In 1976 I interviewed Rita Dragonette; she told me
that she and Ted wrote “Make Room for Me” together early in 1946 when
the two of them, who had been friends in high school in Philadelphia,
were living together in New York City. She said they completed a version
then, but… “I never saw it again until Phil Klass came to me and said,
‘Look at this,’ and there it was in print. Under Sturgeon’s name. And he
thought he could make it all right by giving me a check …” Dragonette’s
contribution to the story was not mentioned when the story was included
in the collection _Sturgeon in Orbit_ in 1964.

The three characters in the story—which must have been called
“Synthesis” at one time, judging from Sturgeon’s mention of it under
that name in his 1953 article—are caricatures of Rita (Vaughn), Ted
(Dran Hamilton) and their high school pal Manny Staub (Manuel). Rita (a
published poet under the name Ree Dragonette) told me that she and Manny
and Ted had “talked about these things in high school—the trinity, the
three of us, about the need to coalesce, to be re-embodied … Some of the
conversations [in the story] were verbatim.”

In a 1978 interview with Larry Duncan, TS said, _I think that the
greatest piece of music that I know of is Bach’s_ Passacaglia and Fugue
in C Minor. In 1975, he told Paul Williams: _I have one or two_ real
_long-term friends. A man called Manny Staub has been my close friend
ever since high school … he left high school to join the Marines, and
was decorated for bravery in action, in China, long before World War
Two. He was blown off his bicycle by a bomb one time_. [In high school]
_we went to movies together, we used to walk all over Philadelphia, we
made all the museums and we went to concerts … I think we had a rather
profound effect on one another_.

In his 1964 introduction to this story (chiefly about the magazine
editor who published it in 1951), Sturgeon said: _Howard Browne bought
this one, because, he said, he liked it. He must have found it a refuge
from what he was doing at the time, for it is a strange and filmy kind
of effort, whereas Howard was writing … a series of hard-heel detective
novels …_

“SPECIAL APTITUDE”: first published under the title “Last Laugh” in
_Other Worlds_, March 1951.

Theodore Sturgeon to Paul Williams, December 1975: _I became a cadet in
the Penn State Nautical School when I was seventeen … It was a terrible
experience. The fourth class, which is the youngest, were absolutely
brutalized and enslaved by the others.… The fourth class had to line up,
put on their dungarees upside down and backwards, stand at
attention … They would come along and they would fill your mouth with
rock salt; or they’d say, “take a seat.” “Take a seat” meant, go into a
half-squat, with your arms stretched out in front of you, and stay that
way till you collapse. It was absolutely brutal, the indignities, they’d
open your mail and read it aloud in the mess hall_. Sturgeon recalled
with horror that the officers _watched these shit sessions and did
nothing to stop it_.

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:
THERE WAS NOTHING SO TERRIBLE AS THE GABBLERS. HUMAN EARS COULD NOT
WITHSTAND THEIR HORRID UPROAR—AND DEATH TO ALL COMERS GLARED FROM THEIR
EYES.

“THE TRAVELING CRAG”: first published in _Fantastic Adventures_, July
1951.

Sturgeon’s introduction to this story in _Alien Cargo_ (1984): _For
years I have felt that this is one of the worst stories I ever wrote. A
lot of people have said they think otherwise, so here it is_.

TS had worked as a literary agent himself for other science fiction
writers, including William Tenn and A. Bertram Chandler, throughout
1946.

The line from Weiss’s second story that Naome reads to Cris—_Jets
blasting, Bat Durston came screeching down through the atmosphere of
Bbllzznaj—_is an inside joke. H. L. Gold used this line in an ad for
_Galaxy_ that ran in the first issue of that magazine, October 1950.
Under the heading “You’ll Never See It in _Galaxy!_” are parallel
columns, one a science fiction story that begins “Jets blasting, Bat
Durston came screeching down” etc. and the other a pulp western story
that begins, “Hoofs drumming, Bat Durston came galloping down through
the narrow pass …” Gold’s point was that _Galaxy_ (unlike some of its
competitors) was not going to publish routine genre fiction transplanted
to a science-fictional setting.

Lucy Menger (in _Theodore Sturgeon_, 1981): “In ‘The Traveling Crag’ and
‘Rule of Three’ Sturgeon seems to have been haunted by a vision of what
man could be and tormented by the difference between this vision and the
actuality around him. Aliens in ‘TTC’ express this anguish concisely:
‘There are few races in cosmic history with a higher potential than
yours or with a more miserable expression of it.’ ”

“EXCALIBUR AND THE ATOM”: first published in _Fantastic Adventures_,
August 1951.

Interesting that TS, in the course of this story, indicates his
awareness of T. H. White’s _The Sword in the Stone_ (1938) and C. S.
Lewis’s _That Hideous Strength_ (1945).

This story has never appeared in a Sturgeon collection or any other book
before.

Magazine blurb: THEY SAY A PRIVATE EYE CAN HANDLE ANYTHING FROM A BOTTLE
TO A BLONDE. BUT WHEN MERLIN CAME IN WITH A SWORD, THINGS BEGAN TO POP!

“THE INCUBI OF PARALLEL X”: first published in _Planet Stories_,
September 1951.

Sturgeon’s introduction to this story in _Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964):
_THE INCUBI OF PARALLEL X is the most horrible title to appear over my
byline, and I’m sure Malcolm Reiss, the editor, will forgive me for
saying so. It was a typical_ Planet Stories _title, and I’ve been
sitting here trying to remember some of the parody titles George O.
Smith used to dream up, I can, too, but I can’t share them with you, not
even in these liberated days …_

“NEVER UNDERESTIMATE”: first published in _Worlds of If_, March 1952.
Probably written autumn 1951, as Sturgeon’s pregnant wife Marion was
successfully persuading him to leave his Time Inc. job and move to the
country and devote more of his time to his writing.

This story has never appeared in a Sturgeon collection before.

The first page of this story may be considered a playful discussion of
the logic behind Sturgeon’s distinctive manner of hooking his readers
with the opening lines of his stories.

In 1972 TS told interviewer David Hartwell _I used to write a lot of
very funny stuff_ and cited “Never Underestimate” as an example.

There are notable thematic links between “Never Underestimate” and “The
Martian and the Moron” (1948) and Sturgeon’s 1960 novel _Venus Plus X_.

“THE SEX OPPOSITE”: Another thematic precursor to _Venus Plus X_. First
published in _Fantastic Stories_, Fall 1952. In the Sturgeon papers is a
letter from Howard Browne dated Jan. 21, 1952, addressed to TS at 862
Union Street in Brooklyn: “Enclosed is our check No. 11492 in the amount
of $170.00. This represents payment in full of all magazine rights to
your story “The Sex Opposite,” which will appear in a forthcoming issue
of our new FANTASTIC.” This tells us the story was written before Ted
and Marion moved out of New York City, possibly as late as December
1951.

In 1976 Marion Sturgeon told me she first met Ted at a party and again
on his birthday in 1950: “He was working for Time Inc. then. Then we
began to get together; his marriage was already breaking up. Then we
moved to Brooklyn, to Union Street. I worked in the Brooklyn Public
Library. And that’s when we used to go to Rudy’s Restaurant, which is in
one of his stories [“The Sex Opposite”], a Mexican restaurant in midtown
Manhattan.”

About the move to Congers in Rockland County, Marion said, “I’d had the
idea of living in the country with a writer, that was one of my little
dreams. And so I wanted Ted very much to stop working at Time Inc. It
didn’t fit in at all with what I’d imagined.”

In a chapter on Sturgeon in his 1956 book of criticism _In Search of
Wonder_, Damon Knight wrote: “He writes about people first and other
marvels second. More and more, the plots of his short stories are mere
contrivances to let his characters expound themselves. ‘It Wasn’t
Syzygy,’ ‘The Sex Opposite’ and ‘A Way of Thinking’ are such stories:
the people stand out from their background like Rubens figures that have
strayed onto a Mondrian canvas: graphic evidence that Sturgeon, like
Bradbury, long ago went as far as he could within the limitations of
this field without breaking them.”

_I think what I have been trying to do all these years is to investigate
this matter of love, sexual and asexual. I investigate it by writing
about it because I don’t know what the hell I think until I tell
somebody about it. And I work so assiduously at it because of a
conviction that if one could understand it completely, one would have
the key to cooperation itself: to creative inspiration: to
self-sacrifice and that rare but real anomaly, altruism: in short, to
the marvelous orchestration which enables us to keep ahead of our own
destructiveness_.

_ … Why so much syzygy?_ [in TS’s stories]_—well, it’s pretty obvious
why a clear-cut method of non-reproductive exchange should be so useful
in such an overall investigation. It’s beautifully open to comparison
and analog. It handles all sorts of attachments felt by any sensitive
person which could not conceivably be sexually based_.

—TS, in “Why So Much Syzygy?” (1953)

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:

SOMEONE ONCE SAID THAT THEODORE STURGEON HAS ONLY ONE REAL STORY TO
TELL, BUT THAT HE TELLS IT SO WELL EDITORS WILL GO ON BUYING IT FOREVER.
DON’T YOU BELIEVE IT! THE BASIS FOR SUCH A REMARK COMES FROM THE
AUTHOR’S VARIATIONS ON A SINGLE THEME: SOMEWHERE IN THE UNIVERSE ARE
ALIEN BEINGS THAT CAN HELP MAN TO GAIN HIS RIGHTFUL HERITAGE.

IF ALL THIS SOUNDS TOO ESOTERIC, DON’T LET US MISLEAD YOU. THE SEX
OPPOSITE OPENS WITH THE MURDER OF TWO LOVERS IN A NIGHT-SHROUDED PARK
AND ENDS WITH A TRIPLE SLAYING ON A STREET CORNER. AND OUT OF IT COMES
THE TENDER STORY OF A YOUNG COUPLE WHO MIGHT NEVER HAVE FOUND LOVE HAD
NOT DEATH POINTED OUT THE WAY …

“BABY IS THREE”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, October
1952. Written circa May 1952 in the author’s new home in Congers, New
York with his wife Marion and their new baby Robin. The appearance of
this story in Galaxy created a stir of enthusiasm in the science fiction
community, and a book editor asked Sturgeon to expand “Baby Is Three”
into a novel. This he did by writing two long stories about the events
preceding and following those described in “Baby Is Three.” This novel,
_More Than Human_, is Sturgeon’s best-known work. It was published in
autumn 1953, and won the International Fantasy Award in 1954. SF critic
and novelist James Blish described _More Than Human_ as “one of the very
few authentic masterpieces science fiction can boast.”

The text of “Baby Is Three” in this volume is that of the original
_Galaxy_ story, not the revised version that makes up the middle section
of _More Than Human_. The magazine story and novel section differ
significantly in their last pages; in the novel, Miss Kew is in fact
dead.

On June 25, 1952, TS sent the following note to his friend Judith Merril
on a postcard: _It’s okay I wrote one and migod it’s fine. Sold it +
everything and I think maybe if I do more and like doing it as much I
won’t have to worry about who I’m: I’ll find out_.

From Sturgeon’s 1978 introduction to _Theodore Sturgeon’s More Than
Human, The Graphic Story Version_ (Byron Preiss Visual Publications):
_Some time in the spring of 1952, living in a little stone house in the
woods in Rockland County, New York, I sat down and knocked out yet
another story because by that time I knew how to knock out stories. As I
recall, I hadn’t a clear idea in my head as to what it was going to be
about, except that I had recently read a novel by Pearl Buck called_
Pavilion of Women, _in which there was a minor character, a Chinese
monk, who took care of a ragged passel of kids in a cave somewhere in
the wilderness. The image would not scrape off, and I knew I was going
into something similar somehow. It took about eight days and I sent it
off to Horace Gold at_ Galaxy _magazine. He bought it and I paid some
rent and bought some furnace oil and hamburger and paper towels and the
like for my wives and children, and got to work on something else_.

_Next thing you know it was October, and the story, called “Baby Is
Three,” was in print, and to my immense and total astonishment began
pulling rave mail from all over. Truly, I had an “I didn’t know it was
loaded” feeling about the whole thing—not that I felt it was a bad job,
but I really had no idea it would hit that hard. Anthology requests
began to come in almost immediately here and from England, France, and
Latin America. The mail was just lovely_.

_A year or so later, a book publisher asked me for a novel. The only
thing I wanted to write about at that length was something about where
the people in “Baby Is Three” came from, and something more about where
they went to. I went to New York and had lunch with some people and we
worked out a deal whereby if I wrote 30,000 words of events before
“Baby,” and thirty more after, but wrote them in such a way that each
could stand as a separate novelette, then they would undertake to sell
them to high-paying slick-paper magazines before book publication. (That
way, I suspect, they could salve their consciences about the miniscule
advance they were willing to pay.) I chuntered around with ideas for a
few months, then suddenly sat down and wrote the first part, “The
Fabulous Idiot,” and the third part, “Morality,” in about three weeks_.

_I lugged the two stories in to New York and found that, as is often the
practice with publishers, all the people I had dealt with had been
fired, transferred, or kicked upstairs, and their replacements didn’t
know anything about any handshake agreement to sell the stories to
magazines first. They just wrapped up the whole thing and published it
as a book_.

TS, in his liner notes to a 1977 Caedmon LP called “Baby Is Three
[abridged] from _More Than Human_ read by the author,” talks about
_Pavilion of Women_ as above and goes on: _That was the springboard;
there is no accounting for the myriad variables which went into the rest
of it; why, for example, I structured it from the appearance of young
Gerry in a psychiatrist’s office instead of any of the many other ways
in which it might have been done. It went very quickly—two weeks or so,
if I remember correctly, and all first draft_.

Also in the Caedmon notes he says: _The heart and soul of_ More Than
Human _is, clearly, the second part, “Baby Is Three.” It appeared_ _in_
Galaxy, _a science fiction magazine under the editorial guidance of
Horace L. Gold. Its explosive acceptance astonished and puzzled me
almost as much as did the later reception of the book, and its inclusion
in the_ [Science Fiction] _Hall of Fame, chosen by successive ballots by
my peers in the Science Fiction Writers of America, is a matter of great
gratification to me_. In his introduction to the 1973 book _The Science
Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume Two_, editor Ben Bova says that when the
members of SFWA were asked to select the ten best science fiction
stories of all time out of a list of 76 they had previously nominated,
“Baby Is Three” was fifth in total votes. Overall, Theodore Sturgeon was
the author receiving the second largest number of votes, after Robert
Heinlein.

Stern, the psychotherapist in “Baby Is Three,” _is the shrink that I
have always wanted, but have never been able to find_, Theodore Sturgeon
told Paul Williams in a taped interview February 29, 1976. _He’s the
same shrink as Dr. Outerbridge_ [In TS’s 1961 novel _Some of Your
Blood_], _same guy, operates the same way. His operative technique is
basically basic Dianetics; and the only reason I ever got away with that
is I never said so out loud, because it has such a violent image against
it, and we’ve got this appalling willingness to throw the baby out with
the bathwater. Dianetics worked—not “worked” but works—absolutely
magically. But because Hubbard turned into a megalomaniac, and a classic
kook, which he is (and I don’t care if Process comes and shoots me for
that, that’s the truth), you cannot, absolutely cannot put down the
value of basic Dianetics, as laid out in the first third of the original
book, which has been drastically rewritten since then…_ (L. Ron Hubbard,
the science fiction writer, synthesized—not invented, as TS points out
elsewhere in the interview—Dianetics, later known as Scientology, in
1950. John W. Campbell and Theodore Sturgeon were early practitioners.)

As that 1976 interview continued, TS talked about some of his
experiences as an auditor (Dianetics therapist) in the two years before
he wrote “Baby Is Three”: _There’s a funny little laugh and you just
know that someone’s discharged. By the end of 1951_, TS said, _I
departed from Dianetics. I had audited 102 hours and been audited myself
six hours, and I really began to feel the imbalance_.

In his introduction to the Graphic Story Version, Sturgeon mentions that
as of 1978 _More Than Human_ had been optioned by film companies eleven
separate times (and never filmed). He says, _The weirdest of these
involves one of the greatest directors of all time (I won’t tell you his
name) and me, who wrote a screenplay and two complete revisions in only
twenty-eight days, when all of a sudden the company blew apart_. (The
director/co-writer was Orson Welles.)

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:
GERARD’S PROBLEM WOULD DISMAY ANY PSYCHOTHERAPIST. HE KNEW HIS NAME
WITHOUT KNOWING HIS IDENTITY; WHAT HE DID, BUT NOT WHAT HE WAS. WORSE
YET, HE DIDN’T KNOW HOW MANY OF HIM THERE WERE!

CORRECTIONS AND ADDENDA:

Some intriguing comments by TS on “Hurricane Trio” (Vol. IV) have come
to light. In a letter to Anthony Boucher at the _Magazine of Fantasy &
Science Fiction_ in May 1956 accompanying a submission (“And Now the
News”), Sturgeon wrote:

_If you really feel this yarn is not close enough to conventional
science fiction, I can … put the story in the near future and therefore
in the s-f matrix. I did this kind of job only once before, adding a
space ship to “Hurricane Trio” to get it into_ Galaxy; _it was a slick
before that, rejected all over … Eleanor Stierham: “The woman doesn’t
exist who would take such a risk.” Bull’s balls! HT was a true story and
I was there!_



APPENDIX


Two Autobiographical Essays

“Author, Author”
by Theodore Sturgeon
from _Fanscient_, Spring 1950

THEY SAY I make puns, which I deny; it’s only that typos creep in and I
have an aural word sense. I’ll demonstrate that later; it means that
what I read and what I write, I hear.

I was born on Staten Island, which is populated mostly by the dead and
people from Brooklyn. This birth occurred 2/26/18, according to the
records. I went four years to a veddy social Staten Island private
school, two weeks to a public school, thence to Philadelphia where I was
two weeks in the fifth grade and got shoved into the sixth. This one I
completed, and then went to a boarding school in Pennsylvania where in a
year I learned how to smoke, drink, gamble, swear and swim. After six
weeks in the eighth grade in summer school, I was dumped into an
enormous education factory in Philadelphia at the age of twelve. I
weighed 95 pounds and was utterly bewildered, but anyway I was a high
school student. I was a high school student for six solid years. I never
took a subject I didn’t flunk at one time or another. Like someone named
Robin English, I was released. That was in ’36.

I don’t seem to be able to recall the process of living my life in a
particularly consecutive order. Things happened at various times. I put
in six months as a cadet on a training ship. She had been with Dewey at
Manila. She was 135 feet at the waterline and had 160’ masts. She had
steel sides and a wooden bottom, and a loosefooted rig because her sails
were so near the deck that booms would have swept off the deck housing.
We tacked her by taking in all sail and dragging it across the deck by
hand while we turned her with the engines. She was painted all white and
burned coal. I didn’t like her much. There were 173 people aboard. After
that I cut loose and went to sea on my own account—coastwise freighters,
then tankers.

I worked in a glass factory once, taking silver off mirrors with fuming
acid. Drove a tractor-trailer truck between Philadelphia and Albany.
Worked in an oil refinery, hoeing grass between tanks in a storage farm.
Had a job once with a crew who came north by train and brought Model A
Fords all the way back to Greensboro. Pulled rope with a circus—the Al
G. Barnes show in Canada. Ran a luxury resort in Jamaica. It was
wonderful. We had 17 servants, and except for weekends we had them
mostly to ourselves. During the war I operated 17 quarters and barracks,
three messhalls and a food warehouse for the Army, which qualified me to
run the specialized lubrication disbursement, from which I naturally
began to operate heavy equipment. For that I got flown to Puerto Rico to
run bulldozer and power shovel for the Navy. I loved it, though ten
hours a day, seven days a week for nearly three years makes you sort of
lose track of things. But if you know anyone with an inferiority complex
you can cure him by perching him in the saddle of a Caterpillar D-8 for
a few months. When the day arrives that behind all that Diesel and
racket, you suddenly are aware that your nerve-endings are up there on
the blind side of your blade, you gain something that you’ll never lose.
It does to you what marriage does, in that respect. It doesn’t matter
whether you ever pull another steering clutch. It’s a thing that’s
built.

Meant to mention that I had a rugged bout with acute rheumatic fever
when I was 15. It left me with a 16% enlargement. My heart used to push
out between my ribs when it beat, which for a while it did reluctantly.
It got better year after year until now only a specialist can detect
that slight squish in the beat if I lie in a certain position after
heavy exercise. But it kept me out of the Army during the war. Cardiac
cripple. They wouldn’t let me man a typewriter, let alone an armchair.
But 70 hours a week under that sun was fine. Yours not to reason why.…

I played guitar with a square-dance orchestra once, in the Poconos. They
had a 35-foot diving platform at that resort. I used to do 2½
somersaults off it. Once someone put an overflow board in the dam during
the night and the lake rose 18 inches and I didn’t know it. I hit the
water face first and flattened my eyeballs. Couldn’t see a thing for a
whole day.

I lived in Brooklyn for a while with an Englishman who was writing
confessions. He prided himself on being a word-rate writer who didn’t
give a damn for art. I did, at the time. But I meant no insult at all
when I said casually that he was a hack. He got no end insulted. So to
settle the argument we looked it up in his dictionary, which was an
English publication. In it I found one of the most pathetic lines I have
ever read. It said, “HACK, n. A literary drudge; as one who compiles
dictionaries.”

I shipped out one time with a guy named Kelley. He’s around in some of
my copy. He was one of the most amazing people I have ever met. He’s in
Atlanta now, I think, but he was like one of those creatures JWC’s
always trying to goad us into writing about, which thinks as well as a
man, but not like a man. I was sitting in a honky-tonk in Port Arthur,
Texas, one night. There was a girl called Bernice who had taken quite a
shine to Kelley and they’d been pretty thick at the south end of our
trips. Bernice had just gotten wind of the fact that Kelley was sporting
a girl down the street at Pete’s Place, and she didn’t like it at all.
So when Kelley walked in, Bernice reached behind her and pulled an
electric fan off the shelf and threw it at his head with the same
motion. It was a big electric fan and it didn’t have any guard on it.
Kelley ducked it, seeming to move much more slowly than he actually did.
He didn’t move his feet, but sort of bent his head aside and turned his
shoulders and let the fan go by. It hit the wall and chewed up the
partition. Nobody said anything. Now anyone else in the world who
believed in do-as-you-would-be-done-by would have thrown the fan back at
the girl. Not Kelley. He walked over and picked her up over his head and
threw her at the fan. She slid on out the door and down the stairs.
Kelley went out after her, taking his time, stepped around her where she
lay halfway down the flight, and went on back to Pete’s Place.

I was profoundly impressed—not by what he’d done, but by the way he
thought. I’ve used that kind of reversal in plot treatments many times.
It’s one thing to turn front to back. It’s something else again, just as
logical but much more rare, to make a mirror image.

I’d rather be writer than a human being. Wrote a story for WEIRD once
and put a lot into it. It was real good catharsis and it did me good. A
few days after it was published I got a letter from South Africa. There
was a girl in the story who died, and this letter contained a poem which
was an epitaph for her. As poetry it was so-so. But I had to reread it a
half-dozen times to find out why it struck me as vaguely familiar. Then
I got it. It was composed entirely of lines picked up here and there
through the story, with only an occasional slight alteration to fit the
form.

Thoughts are cloud-shapes, formless, without size or any particular hue.
But code them—make words of them—and they take on some fraction of what
they mean to you. Recode those words into typescript; they’re read,
printed, proofed, distributed. Suppose, then, another mind half a world
away decodes that type into words and those words into thoughts and from
that multiple fractionation finds it in him not only to create, but to
re-create some of the particular pulse-pound and gland-squirt that went
into it … that makes me humble. I’m ashamed of that story. I wish I’d
polished it until it was worth having that effect on someone. You can
kid around about the writing racket from now till then, but you can’t
get away from the fact that if writing can do a thing like that, a
writer undertakes a truly awesome responsibility.

I said at the start that my puns and perhaps a suspicion of what’s
called a style have their source in the fact that I hear what I read. I
hear what I write, and I don’t think it hurts what comes out. There are
times when the mood of narration dictates a more conscious approach to
the words that you use and their order. It’s easy to prove that the
treatment’s unseen, but it yields an incredible smoothness of flow to
your work.

There probably wouldn’t be one reader in a hundred thousand who would
realize that the above paragraph is written most laboriously in
anapestic feet; that is, there are two unaccented syllables followed by
a strong accent, but with most of the sentences beginning and ending in
the middle of the foot so that the thing doesn’t get sing-song. This
happens to be my prime kick in writing. It’s a thing you don’t dare do
very often; but when you apply it lightly and briefly, you find yourself
woven into your copy with a completeness that can’t be approached in any
other way that I know of. But be careful; the trick’s more dangerous
than opium. There are a zillion different kinds of feet you can use. The
largest charge of it I ever put into a story was in one of my WEIRD
TALES, or proving grounds, yarns, when I used a monster that changed its
meter every time it changed its mood. That went on for three thousand
words. Have fun, chillun.

Men behind _Fantastic Adventures_
Theodore Sturgeon
from _Fantastic Adventures_, August 1951

I don’t know who’s going to find out more about Ted Sturgeon by what
follows—you or I. In any case, I appreciate this opportunity to sound
off. There is no one who doesn’t dote on capital “I”—if not as a
subject, then at least as a theme.

I was born overseas, on February 26, 1918, which makes me older than I
ought to be according to the way I act. Place: Staten Island, which is
Richmond County and the forgotten borough of New York City, on which, to
this very day, you can milk a cow and get lost in the woods. My mother
is the end-product of years and years of high-church Anglican
functionaries; my great grandfather was Bishop of Quebec, my maternal
uncle, the Archbishop of the West Indies, and there are a baker’s dozen
of ministers in my immediate family. My father is a businessman from a
clan which settled in this country in 1640.

I went to school for my first four years in a veddy social private
school on Staten Island, then went to Philadelphia where I was advanced
half a year in a public school there. I finished the last half of the
fifth grade and the first half of the sixth fairly honestly, and then
went to a boarding school in Gettysburg, where in a year I learned how
to smoke, swim, gamble, and cuss. Then I finished the last half of the
eighth grade in summer school and was deposited, trembling, bewildered,
underweight and aged twelve, in an enormous education factory called
Overbrook High School. Its 4700 students were processed on three shifts,
and the organization of classes and subjects was a direct carry-over
from the grade schools which I had not attended. Everybody knew what to
do about everything, except for me, and I was no end astonished. I
remained astonished for six years.

I managed to flunk every single subject I ever took at one time or
another, without exception. I had a sole interest—apparatus gymnastics.
I was going to finish school and get an athletic scholarship to Temple,
and would do p.g. work in physical education at Springfield, and then I
would go down to Sarasota and work out with Barnum and Bailey until I
got to be a high-horizontal performer. It made like a blueprint. I went
out for the gym team and gained sixty pounds in the first year. I became
captain and manager and got my Temple scholarship and an honorary
membership in the Philadelphia Turngemeinde and fourth place in the East
Coast Championships in the AAU for horizontal bar. They all said I was a
natural for the City Championship.

Then along came acute rheumatic fever, a 16 per cent heart enlargement,
and the information from a specialist that there wouldn’t be any more
gymnastics for Sturgeon—not in the last season or ever.

I suppose I took it as hard as anyone might who had spent a third of his
lifetime with a single aim which was suddenly to be denied. I went into
a major flat spin. I finished school and won a scholarship in the
Pennsylvania State Nautical School and lied to the medical examiners and
spent six months being a cay-det on a ship which had been with Dewey at
Manila. She had steel sides and a wooden bottom. We tacked her by taking
in all sail and turning her with the engines and putting the sails out
on the other side. She was painted white and burned coal, and most of
the seamanship we learned was with holystone and soojy-rag. I quit after
six months and got a job as a bonafide sailor on a coastwise freighter
for fifty-five bucks a month.

I went to sea for almost three years. One day I worked out a way to
cheat the express company out of a few thousand clams but, lacking the
moral character to pull the job, I wrote it into a story instead. It
sold on sight, and I was so delighted to have my name in print that I
quit my job, went ashore, and became a professional. They paid me five
dollars for it. I sold the same outfit—a newspaper syndicate—one and
sometimes two stories a week at the same price for about four months.
That was my sole income, but I made it. Ever make a vegetable stew out
of six cents worth of soup greens?

Then somebody brought me Vol. I No. I of _Unknown_, and I realized that
this magazine and I had places to go. I sold my first magazine story
there, and when I had about filled its inventory, branched out to its
sister magazine _Astounding Science Fiction_. Since then I have sold to
practically every magazine in the field. My current effort is neither my
first nor my last for _Fantastic Adventures_.

In 1940, after a half dozen sales, I figured I was ready to be a pillar
of society, and I got married. In mid-’41 I went to Jamaica in the West
Indies to run a luxury resort hotel. In December, this country found
itself at war, and in February I was working as Assistant Chief Steward
at the U.S. Army air base there. Late that year I was flown to Puerto
Rico to run bulldozers and power shovels in a rock quarry at a Naval
base. In ’43 the bases all closed down and, having been rejected for the
third time by the service, I settled down to write again. Nothing
happened.

I have two daughters; one was born in the first year of my marriage, and
the second in ’43, in Puerto Rico. Came the end of current resources,
and I made a quick ten-day trip to the States to fire my agent, see some
editors, and get a much-needed slant on markets. My ten-day trip
extended to eight months and wound up in a divorce—and Flat Spin Number
Two, which went on for about three years.

Now, I’m employed by Time Inc., and I’m the entire advertising-promotion
department of all four editions of _Time_ International. Where to from
here, I can’t say. Wherever it is, I’m sure it’ll be interesting.

So much for the highlights. Now a word about what this has meant to me
and my work.

I’m a blond blue-eyed Aryan Protestant with a profound distaste for the
privileges extended to anyone for these accidents. I have experienced a
sense of worship—lying under the stars in the Yucatan Channel—watching a
rainbow by moonlight—watching a certain sunset in the Gulf of Mexico—in
many diverse places, but never in a church, and I have seen some
beauties.

I think that no one can achieve the stature of a man unless he has been
unjustly hurt.

I think that the only important things are basic things; that basic
things are always simple things; and that therefore complicated things
may be exciting, or frightening, or amusing, or instructive; but if
they’re complex, by definition they’re not important.

I believe in marriage, and see it as a sharing of everything capable of
being shared, the stature of the marriage depending upon the number of
things shared. But I also believe that where sharing is not possible,
privacy is imperative.

I believe that the most constructive force in human thought is laughter
_with_, and that the most destructive one is laughter _at_.

And I most sincerely believe that I am a member of humanity; that
humanity’s mistakes and stupidities are mine and have their weight on my
conscience, and that by the same token humanity’s achievements are mine;
that therefore I deserve the privileges and am bound by the duties of
this extraordinary species.

[]
