 

[img1.png]

 

This edition is published by PICKLE PARTNERS
PUBLISHING—www.pp-publishing.com

 

To join our mailing list for new titles or for issues with our
books—picklepublishing@gmail.com

 

Or on Facebook

 

Text originally published in 1955 under the same title.

© Pickle Partners Publishing 2016, all rights reserved. No part of this
publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted by any means, electrical, mechanical or otherwise without
the written permission of the copyright holder.

Publisher’s Note

Although in most cases we have retained the Author’s original spelling
and grammar to authentically reproduce the work of the Author and the
original intent of such material, some additional notes and
clarifications have been added for the modern reader’s benefit.

We have also made every effort to include all maps and illustrations of
the original edition the limitations of formatting do not allow of
including larger maps, we will upload as many of these maps as possible.

 

A WAY HOME:

STORIES OF SCIENCE FICTION AND FANTASY

 

BY

 

THEODORE STURGEON

 

Selected and with and Introduction by Groff Conklin

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS


Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS 4

THE BEST STORIES OF A TOP WRITER OF SCIENCE FICTION 5

ABOUT THE AUTHOR 6

INTRODUCTION 7

UNITE AND CONQUER 10

SPECIAL APTITUDE 43

MEWHU’S JET 56

HURRICANE TRIO 87

THE HURKLE IS A HAPPY BEAST 109

THUNDER AND ROSES 116

BULKHEAD 136

TINY AND THE MONSTER 160

A WAY HOME 187

REQUEST FROM THE PUBLISHER 193

 

 



THE BEST STORIES OF A TOP WRITER OF SCIENCE FICTION


UNITE AND CONQUER—Was he Saint or Devil—this man who forced our world
into peace?

SPECIAL APTITUDE—He was the fall guy on the third expedition to Venus,
but he brought back the planet’s secrets.

MEWHU’S JET—A friendly little guy from Mars shows up on earth and breaks
up a marital quarrel.

THE HURKLE IS A HAPPY BEAST—He enjoys his visit to earth greatly and
innocently manages to shape the destiny of the world...

These and other gripping and compelling stories will keep you enthralled
from beginning to end....

 



ABOUT THE AUTHOR


THEODORE STURGEON’S novels and short stories have been startling,
moving, and entertaining readers since 1939. They fit into no
hard-and-fast category, and have in common only the power to give the
reader the feeling of seeing something for the first time—whether the
something is man, monster, or the Universe.

 



INTRODUCTION


OF RECENT YEARS, science fiction has been flowing in two main channels.
The first, which is the one people who are unfamiliar with the genre
associate most frequently with it, is the story based on super-science.
It has been called “space opera,” and its essential structure is that of
melodrama. In stories of this sort, the central aspect is adventure,
whether the adventure be the exploration of a remote planet with almost
inconceivably alien life-forms, or time-travel for the sake of
excitement, or a great catastrophe such as the conquest of Earth by the
inhabitants of a mad planet, or an outburst of fearful vulcanism, or any
one of hundreds of other imaginative suppositions, frequently of an
all-too-mechanical and arbitrary kind.

The other, second channel is substantially different. The stories which
flow down it are based on problems, and generally problems of a
sociological or economic sort. The oldest stories of this kind are of
utopias, but many of the modern ones employ the impact of alien cultures
and races to make their points. Visitors from outer space arrive to
improve humanity, or to wipe it out as a dangerous cosmic infection. An
administrator confronts the necessity for forestalling a violent social
collapse. Or hardening of the human social arteries has set in from too
much mechanical perfection, and the central character must discover a
way to restore the creative sense of life. These themes and many similar
ones are more mature than the melodrama and gadgetry of the first
channel, but they contain an inherent pitfall: their authors are
frequently convinced that they have an answer, or even the answer, to
the problems they pose. Much of the writing in this channel is somewhat
oversupplied with Message.

One of the stories included in this collection contains a merciless
comment on this situation, framed in a pun of such oppositeness that the
reader will never be able wholly to forget it. A science-fiction writer
is described as having “sold his birthright for a pot of message.” A bad
bargain. It is a sad but observable fact that few people read fiction,
whether science or western or any other kind, for the purpose of having
themselves improved. What they stubbornly insist upon is to be
entertained rather than preached at.

For a long time those of us who delight in science fiction and believe
in it as a valid and living form of fiction have watched with pleasure
Theodore Sturgeon’s development as a writer. Increasingly as he has
matured he has learned to handle the dramatic sense of adventure derived
from the first channel, and the sense of human importance from the
second, without falling into the pits which lie in wait for the unwary
or superficial storyteller. The kind of story he has been writing of
late is, indeed, almost unique in the genre; he has always told a
magnificent story, and recently—in the past five or six years—he has
been telling it with more and more of what might be called “exterior
impact,” an impact which often has a powerful meaning for the society of
today and tomorrow.

This is not all. Indeed, it is not even the major quality which has
drawn more and more readers to follow Mr. Sturgeon’s work. That quality
is the one which makes every form of fiction live, and the absence of
which makes any fiction sterile. It is the sense of human character, the
sense of people as people. For fiction is people—people in three
dimensions, living, breathing, laughing, crying, thinking, and growing.

With ever-increasing assurance, Mr. Sturgeon is becoming a master of the
art of creating people instead of stick figures. His stories more and
more flow out of the people in them, and in this development of his
craft he is moving steadily closer to the living heart of all fiction,
which is the depiction of individual man and his goals, of character and
its development, of all the multitude of facets which make up any single
human being. More than anyone else in recent years, he has worked at the
problem and the art of making science fiction and fantasy a human
experience. No matter how melodramatic his stories may appear on the
surface, no matter how arbitrary the machinery which he may choose to
use, his newer stories are all essentially concerned with people and
their growth, or their dissolution if that happens to be the theme of
the particular tale.

It has not always been so. One of the earlier stories which established
his reputation with the devotees of science fiction was his now
famous—and superb—“Killdozer.” There are only a few human characters in
it, and for the most part they are shadowy and almost unrealized as
people. The center of the stage is occupied by the story’s plot gadget,
a bulldozer that proves to be both sentient and malevolent. The author
does a magnificent job of suggesting this malevolence, and the reader is
totally convinced that the machine can think and hate and lust to kill.
To the extent that all this seems real, the machine has become human,
but by the very nature of the plot, the possibility of growth in
character, of interaction between person and person, is excluded.

By way of contrast, the reader will do well to look at the story in this
collection called “Hurricane Trio.” The author has said that in its
original form this story contained no element of science fiction, and
perhaps some will consider that it should finally have been written that
way. Mr. Sturgeon’s point, however, is not that he used an alien deus
ex—or rather, in—machina to resolve his plot, but rather to heighten the
basic reality of the terrible human dilemma with which the story is
concerned and its slow solution by the three people involved.

Furthermore, there is one tale in this book that is not science fiction
at all. The title story, “A Way Home,” originally appeared in a
science-fiction magazine, but it is in reality a poignant study of boy
psychology. Since boys and girls are by nature spinners of fantasy,
dreamers by day as well as~ by night, the story carries with it an
atmosphere of fantasy, but closer examination will reveal that it is a
thoroughly real incident in a child’s development.

Not that fantasy is something which Theodore Sturgeon avoids. He can
turn out wonderful straight spoofs and flights of fantasy; “The Hurkle,”
in this collection, is an example of this aspect of his talent. He has
previously published two science-fiction collections. Without Sorcery
and E Pluribus Unicorn, both of which contain many of his eerie,
supernatural inventions. The intention of this present volume is to
complement the earlier ones, and to display Mr. Sturgeon’s major gift as
a writer of more orthodox science fiction. The nine stories included
have been winnowed from a list of over fifty; a number of them have
appeared in other anthologies. Mr. Sturgeon is one of the most widely
anthologized of living writers in English, and it would be impossible to
present a sound group of his best stories without using some which have
appeared in other collections.

None of the author’s early stories have been included. His first science
fiction appeared in 1939, and the oldest tale in this book was published
less than ten years ago, in 1946. The reader who wants to go on to the
best of those earlier years will find Sturgeon stories in anthology
after anthology. Meanwhile, within the limits of publishing space, here
is a thoroughly representative collection of the author’s science
fiction of more recent vintage. It bears eloquent witness to Theodore
Sturgeon’s rank in his own field and in the wider field of contemporary
fiction.

GROFF CONKLIN

New York City

February 1, 1955

 



UNITE AND CONQUER


THEY WERE DIGGING THIS DRAINAGE CANAL, and the time-keeper drove out to
the end where the big crane-dragline was working, and Called the
operator down to ask a lot of questions about a half-hour of overtime.
Next thing you know, they were going round and round on the fill. The
young superintendent saw the fight and yelled for them to cut it out.
They ignored him. Not wanting to dirty his new breeches, the super swung
up into the machine, loaded three yards of sand into the bucket, hoisted
it high, swung, and dumped it on the scrambling pair. The operator and
the timekeeper floundered out from under, palmed sand out of their eyes
and mouths, and with a concerted roar converged on the cab of the
machine. They had the super out on the ground and were happily taking
turns at punching his head when a labor foreman happened by, and he and
his men stopped the fuss.

 

The red-headed youngster put down the book. “It’s true here, too,” he
told his brother. “I mean, what I was saying about almost all of Well’s
best science fiction. In each case there’s a miracle—a Martian invasion
in ‘War of the Worlds,’ a biochemical in ‘Food of the Gods,’ and a new
gaseous isotope in ‘In the Days of the Comet.’ And it ultimately makes
all of mankind work together.”

The brother was in college—had been for seven months—and was very wise.
“That’s right. He knew it would take a miracle. I think he forgot that
when he began to write sociological stuff. As Dr. Pierce remarked, he
sold his birthright for a pot of message.”

“Excuse me,” said the dark man called Rod. He rose and went to the back
of the café and the line of phone booths, while the girl with the tilted
nose and the red sandals stared fondly after him. The Blonde arrived.

“Ah,” she mewed, “alone, I see. But of course.” She sat down.

“I’m with Rod,” said the girl with the sandals, adding primly, “He’s
phoning.”

“Needed someone to talk to, no doubt,” said the Blonde.

“Probably,” said the other, smiling at her long fingers, “he needed to
come back to earth.”

The Blonde barely winced. “Oh well. I suppose he must amuse himself
between his serious, moments. He’ll have one tomorrow night, you know.
At the dance. Pity I won’t see you there. Unless, of course, you come
with someone else—”

“He’s working tomorrow night!” blurted the girl with the sandals, off
guard.

“You could call it that,” said the Blonde placidly.

“Look, sunshine,” said the other girl evenly, “why don’t you stop
kidding yourself? Rod isn’t interested in you and your purely local
color. He isn’t even what you want. If you’re looking for a soulmate, go
find yourself a wolfhound.”

“Darling,” said the Blonde appreciatively, and with murder in her
mascara. “You know, you might get him, at that. If you brush up on your
cooking, and if he can keep his appetite by going blind—” She leaned
forward suddenly. “Look there. Who is that floozy?”

They turned to the back of the cafe. The dark young man was holding both
hands of a slender but curve some girl with deep auburn hair. She was
laughing coyly up at him.

“Fancy Pants,” breathed the girl with the red sandals. She turned to the
Blonde. “I know whereof I speak. Her clothesline’ is right under my
window, and—”

“The little stinker,” said the Blonde. She watched another pretty
convulsion of merriment. “Clothesline, hm-m-m? Listen—I had a friend
once who had a feud on with a biddy in the neighborhood. There was
something about a squirt gun and some ink—”

“Well, well,” said the girl in the sandals. She thought a moment,
watching Rod and the redhead. “Where could I get a squirt gun?”

“My kid brother has a water pistol. I got it for him for his birthday.
Can you meet me here at seven o’clock?”

“I certainly can. I’ll get the ink. Black ink. India ink!”

The Blonde rose. “Be sweet to him,” she said swiftly, “so he won’t guess
who fixed Fancy Pants.”

“I will. But not too sweet. The heel. Darling, you’re wonderful—”

The Blonde winked and walked away. And at a nearby table, a gentleman
who had been eavesdropping shamelessly stuffed a soft roll into an
incipient roar of laughter, and then began to choke.

 

“Colonel Simmons,” said the annunciator.

“Well, for pete’s sake!” said Dr. Simmons. “Send him in. Send him right
in! And—cancel that demonstration. No...don’t cancel it. Postpone it.”

“Until when, Doctor?”

“Until I get there.”

“But—it’s for the Army—”

“My brother’s the Army, too!” snapped the physicist and switched off.

A knock. “Come in. Leroy, you dog!”

“Well, Muscles.” The colonel half ran into the room, gripped the
scientist by the upper arm, scanned his face up, back, and across. Their
eyes were gray, the colonel’s gray and narrow, the doctor’s gray and
wide. “It must’ve been—” they said in unison, and then laughed together.

“Eight years, anyway,” said the colonel.

“All of that. Gosh, gosh.” He shook his head. “You and your shiny
buttons.”

There was a silence. “Hardly know where to begin, what to say, h-m-m?”
grinned the colonel. “What’ve you been doing lately?”

“Oh...you know. Applied physics.”

“Hah!” snorted the colonel. “Question: Mr. Michelangelo, what are you
doing? Answer: Mixing pigments. Come on, now; what since you invented
magnefilm?”

“Nothing much. Couple of things too unimportant to talk about, couple
more too important to mention.”

“Your old garrulous self, I see. Come on, Muscles. Security regulations
don’t apply here, and between us especially.”

That’s what you think, thought Dr. Simmons. “Of course not,” he said.
“What branch are you with now?”

“Publicly, the Air Corps,” said the colonel, indicating his wings.
“Actually, I’m on the Board of Strategy. This won’t be the kind of war
which can be fought with semi-public conferences and decisions after
advisement in the General Staff. The Board operates practically
underground, without any publicity, and without any delay.”

“Board of Strategy, eh? I’d heard only vaguely...and I’m in a position
to hear plenty. Well now. When you say no delay, what do you mean?”

“I mean this,” said the colonel. He put his hands behind him on a high
lab table and lifted himself up on it. He crossed his bright boots and
swung them. “We have plans...look; you know how M-Day plans work, don’t
you?”

“Certainly. The personnel of draft boards is all chosen, the
questionnaires are printed and almost entirely distributed, the leases
and domains of examination centers are arranged for, and so on and on.
When mobilization is called, everything starts operating without a
hitch. You hope,” he added with a grin. “Why?”

“The Board operates the same way,” said his brother. “But where
Selective Service has only one big problem to arrange for in detail we
have—” he shrugged. “Name your figure. We have planned what to do if,
for example, Russia attacks us, if we attack Russia, if France attacks
Brazil, or if Finland takes a swing at Iraq. What’s funny?”

“I was thinking of the legend about the emperor who tried to grant the
reward asked for by a certain hero, who had stipulated simply that he be
given some wheat, the amount to be determined by a hypothetical
chessboard, putting one grain on the first square, two on the second,
four on the third, eight on the fourth, and so on...anyway, it wound up
with an amount equal to a couple of years’ world supply, and with the
empire and all its resources in the hands of our hero. Your plans are
like that. I mean, if one of the possibilities you mention should occur,
but if you should lose the third battle instead of winning it as
scheduled, why, you’ll have a whole new set of plans to make. And this
applies to every one of your original master plans.”

“Oh, don’t misunderstand me. I don’t mean that each plan is as detailed
as the M-Day deal. Lord, no. The plans are policies of action, rather
than blueprints. They stay within the bounds of statistical probability,
though we push those bounds outward as far as possible. I’ve mentioned
possible enemies, and possible combatants aside from enemies. There are
also plans covering combinations and permutations of alliance. Anything
is possible after such precedent, for example, as the situation in the
Second War, when our close ally Russia was at peace with our worst
enemy.” He laughed. “If that happened in human instead of in
international terms, with my closest friend lunching daily with a man
who was openly trying to kill me, we’d call it fantastic. Maybe it is,”
he said cheerfully, “but it’s most engrossing.”

“You rather enjoy it, don’t you?”

“I have never had such fascinating work in all my life.”

“I didn’t mean strategy, soldier-boy. I meant war.”

“War? I s’pose it is. Now, another thing the Board is doing...wait a
minute. Muscles! You’re not still the dewy-eyed idealist you used to
be—brotherhood of mankind, and all that, are you?”

“I invented the sonic disruptor, didn’t I?” You probably think that
answers your question, he thought bitterly.

“So you did. A very healthy development in you and in the noble art of
warfare. Nicest little side arm in history. Busts a man all up inside
without breaking the skin. So little mess.”

Healthy! Dr. Simmons stared at his brother, who was looking into his
cigarette case. Healthy! And I developed the disruptor to focus
ultrasonic vibrations under the skin, to homogenize cancerous tissue. I
never dreamed they’d...ah, neither did Nobel. “Go on about the Board,”
he said.

“What was I...oh yes. Not only have we planned the obvious
things—political situations, international crises, campaigns and
alliances, but we are keeping a very close watch on technology. The War
Department has, at long last, abandoned the policy of fighting this war
with the last war’s weapons. Remember how Hitler astonished the world
with the elementary stunt of organizing liaison between his tanks and
his dive bombers? Remember the difficulties they had in promoting the
bozooka to replace the mortar in jungle warfare? And how the War
Department refused to back the Wright Brothers? There’ll be no more of
that.”

“You mean we’re preparing to use the latest in everything? Really use
it?”

“That’s right. Atomic energy and jet propulsion we know about. Then
there’s biological warfare, both disease and crop-hormone techniques.
But it doesn’t stop there. As a matter of fact, those things, and other
proven developments, account for only a small part of our plans. We have
the go-ahead on supplies, weapons, equipment, and techniques which
haven’t even been developed yet. Some haven’t even been invented yet!”

Dr. Simmons whistled. “Like what?”

The colonel smiled, rolled his eyes up thoughtfully. “Like impenetrable
force-fields, mass-multipliers—that’s a cute hypothesis, Muscles.
Increase the effective mass of a substance, and the results could be
interesting. Particularly if it were radioactive. Antigravity. Telepath
scrambles, which throw interrupting frequencies in and around thought
waves, if thoughts are waves...we’ve considered practically every gadget
and gimmick in every story and article in every science-fiction magazine
published in the last thirty years, and have planned what to do in case
it suddenly pops up.”

Ignoring all the utopian, philosophical, sociological stories, of
course, thought Dr. Simmons. He said, “So your visit here isn’t purely
social?”

“Gosh no. I’m with the observation group which came here to see your
Spy-Eye in action. What is it, anyhow? And how did it get the cute
soapsuds name?”

Dr. Simmons smiled. “One of the armchair boys in the front office used
to work in an advertising agency. The device is a ‘Self-Propelled
Information Interceptor’—SPII—which, once it touched that huckster
brain, became ‘Spy-Eye.’ As to just what it is, you’ll see that for
yourself if you attend the demonstration, which starts as soon as we’ve
finished talking.”

“You mean you postponed it until I was through with you?”

“That’s right.” I thought you’d like that, he thought, watching the
pleased grin on his brother’s face. “Tell me something, Leroy. All these
plans...are we at war?”

“Are we...well, no. You know that.”

“But these preparations. All they lack is a timetable.” He squinted
quizzically. “By golly, I believe you have that, too.”

“We have plenty,” the colonel sidestepped, winking.

“Choose sides yet? What’s the line-up?”

“I won’t tell you that. No, I’m not worried about security, it’s just
that I might be wrong. Things move so fast these days. I’ll tell you one
thing, though. We already have our neutral ground.”

“Oh yes, of course—like Switzerland and Sweden. I’ve always wondered
what exact powers kept them neutral.”

“Well, if you’re going to fight a war, you’ve got to have some way to
exchange prisoners and have meetings with various interested parties,
and so on—”

“Yep. And it used to come in pretty handy for certain manufacturers.”

The colonel eyed him. “Are you sure you’re off that lion-and-lamb kick?”

Dr. Simmons grimaced. “I think the Spy-Eye can answer that adequately.”

The colonel slipped off his perch. “Yes, let’s get to it,” he said
eagerly.

They went to the door. “By the way,” said Dr. Simmons, “just what have
you picked out for your neutral ground?”

“Japan,” said the colonel.

“Nice of ’em to agree to anything so close to home.”

“Nice of ’em? Don’t be silly! It’s the only way they can be sure it
won’t be fortified.”

“Oh,” said his brother. They went out.

 

The demonstration went off without a hitch, and afterward the six Army
observers and the plant technicians repaired to the projection room for
Dr. Simmons’ summation.

He talked steadily and tiredly, and his thoughts talked on at the same
time. As he reeled off specifications and characteristics, his mind
rambled along, sometimes following the spoken thought, sometimes
paralleling it, sometimes commenting acidly or humorously, always
tiredly. It was a trapped thing, that talking mind, but it was
articulate.

“...five-point-eight feet long overall, an aerodynamic streamline, with
its largest diameter only two-point-three-seven feet. Slide One, please.
As you have seen, it has one propelling and three supporting jets. These
three are coupled directly to the same outlet valve, which is controlled
by an absolute altimeter. The whole is, of course, gyro-stabilized. It
is capable of trans-sonic speeds, but it can very nearly hover, subject
only to a small nutation which can probably be designed out.”

It was going to be a mail rocket, commented his thought.

“Its equipment includes the usual self-guiding devices, a coding
flight-recorder, and radio receivers tuned to various preselected FM,
AM, and radar channels. In regard to radar, should it pick up any radar
pulses close enough or strong enough to suggest detection, it changes
course and speed radically. Should they persist, the Spy-Eye releases
‘window’—aluminum-foil strips of various lengths—and returns to its
starting point by preset and devious course.

“The spy device itself is relatively simple. It uses magnefilm, taking
pictures of the source of any desired radio signal. When the signal is
received, it locates the beam, aims the camera, and records the audio
signal magnetically. Of course, the synchronization between the picture
and the audio recording is perfect, because of the magnefilm.”

“Will you explain magnefilm, please, Doctor?”

“Certainly, Captain. It was developed through research into the rather
wide variation in dielectric characteristics of the early plastics—the
styrenes, ureas, and so on. Molecular arrangement was altered in various
plastics until a transparent conductor was developed. It was not very
far from that to the production of a plastic with a remarkably high
magnetic density. Once this was made in a transparent, strong, pliable
form, it was simple to make photographic film of it. The audio impulses
are impressed directly upon the film, as in any magnetic tape system.”
And it was invented for 8-mm. movie addicts, so that they could have
sound film, added his thought. Now it’s a secret weapon.

“The purpose of the Spy-Eye, of course, is to pick up short-range
transmissions—vertically beamed walkie-talkies, line-of-sight FM
messages, and the like. Since these are usually well beyond the range of
the enemy’s listening posts, they are seldom coded. Therefore, with this
device, we have access to a wealth of intelligence that has so far been
regarded as unreachable.”

He signaled the projection room. The screen came to life. During the
test, the various officers had spoken into the microphones of several AM
and FM, transmitters spotted within a quarter-mile. Unerringly, after a
few spoken words, the screen showed the sources and their identification
numerals, painted on large white signboards.

“In enemy territory,” remarked the doctor dryly, “we shall probably have
to do without the boards.” There was polite laughter. “If you will
remember, gentleman, the selector was next set to pick up something on
the broadcast band.”

The screen, blank, gave an agonized groan. Then a child’s voice said
clearly, “What’s the matter, Daddy? Has that old acid indigestion got
you down again?” “Owoo,” said the man’s voice. The screen suddenly
showed, far below, the tall towers of a transmitting antenna. “Honey
child, you’d better go for the doctor. Your old Daddy’s real poorly.”
“No need to be,” rejoined the angelic little voice. “I took my ice-cream
money and bought you a package of Bubble-Up, the fastest relief known to
the mind of a man. It is only ten cents at the nearest drugstore. Here.
Take one and drink this glass of water I brought you.” Glug-glug. Clink!
“Ah-h! I’m a new man!” “Now Daddy, here’s my report card. I’m sorry.
It’s all D’s.” “Ha ha ha! Think nothing of it, honey child. Here—take
this dollar. Take five dollars! Take all the other kids down for a
treat!”

“Cut!” said Dr. Simmons. “I would consider this conclusive evidence,
gentlemen, that the Spy-Eye can spot a target for bombing.”

Amid laughter and applause, the lights came on. The observers pressed
forward to shake the physicist’s hand. Colonel Simmons stood by until
the rest went to a table, where a technician was explaining the
flight-record tapes and the course and radio-band preselector
mechanisms.

“Muscles, it’s fine. Just fine! How about duplication? I know there can
be no leaks out of here, but do you think they will be able to figure it
out quickly enough to get something like it into production?”

Dr. Simmons rubbed his chin. “That’s hard to say. Aside from the fuel
and the magnefilm, there’s’ nothing new about the device except for the
fact that old components are packed into a new box. The fuel can be
duplicated, and magnefilm—well, that’s a logical development.”

“Well,” said the colonel, “it can’t matter too much. I mean, even if
they have it already. We can blanket the earth with those things. There
needn’t be a single spot on the globe unobserved. The Spy-Eye doesn’t
have to detect radio alone, does it?”

“Lord, no! It could be built to seek infrared, or radioactivity, or even
sound, though we’d have to tune the jets acoustically for that. The
magnefilm’s audio could pick up our own directional beams and get a
radio fix on anything we wanted it to take picture of. The camera could
be triggered to a time mechanism, or to anything that radiated or
vibrated. So could the hunting mechanism.”

“Oh, fine,” said the colonel again. “There’ll be no power on earth that
can’t be spotted and smashed within hours, once we get enough of these
things out.”

“No power on earth,” nodded his brother. “You have every reason to be
confident.” And no reason to be right, his silent voice added.

 

The first signs of the war to come were in all the papers. But hardly
anyone read them. They were inside, with small headings. The front pages
were more exciting that day. They screamed of new international
incidents. The tabloids were full of a photo-series of the mobbing of a
bearded man called Kronsky. (He was English—Somerset—and spoke the
buzzing brogue of his shire. His name had been Polish, three generations
before. He was wearing a beard because of scars caused by a severe
attack of barber’s itch. These facts were not touched upon.) An Estonian
student was wrapped in a U.N. banner and stoned for having sung “OF Man
River” at a folk-song recital. An astonishing number of tea-leaf readers
were hired overnight by restaurants in which beef Stroganoff suddenly
became gypsy goulash.

The small notices in the papers dealt with the startling discovery by
three experimenters, one in France and two in Canada, of a new noise in
Jansky radiation, that faint hiss of jumbled radio frequencies which
originates from somewhere in interstellar space. It was a triple blast
of sound, each one two and two-fifth seconds in length, with two and
two-fifths seconds of silence between the signals. They came in groups,
three blasts each, a few fractions of a second under ten minutes apart.
The phenomenon continued for seven months, during which time careful
measurements showed an appreciable increase in amplitude. Either the
signal source was getting stronger, or it was getting nearer, said the
pundits.

 

During these seven months, and for longer, the Simmons brothers lapsed
into their usual “got to write to him sometime” pattern in regard to
each other. Both were busy. The colonel’s life was a continuous round of
conferences, research reports, and demonstrations, and the load on the
physicist became heavier daily, as the demands of the Board of Strategy,
stimulated by its research, its intelligence section, and the perilous
political situation, reached his laboratories.

The world was arming feverishly. A few historians and philosophers, in
their very few objective moments, found time to wonder what the
political analysis of the future would have to say about the coming war.
The First War was a war of economic attrition; the Second was too, but
it was even more an ideological war. This incipient unpleasantness had
its source in ideology, but, at the eve of hostilities, the battle of
philosophies had been relegated to the plane of philosophy. In practice,
each side—or rather, all sides—had streamlined themselves into fighting
machines, with each part milled to its function, and alt control
centralized. The necessary process of kindling fire to fight fire had
resulted in soviets where the proletariat did not dictate, and in
democracies where the people did not rule. Indeed, since the increase of
governmental efficiency everywhere had resulted in a new high in
production of every kind, the economic and political aspects of the war
had been all but negated, and it began to appear as though the war would
be fought purely for the sake of fighting a war, and simply because the
world was prepared for it.

 

On December 7, as if to perpetuate the memory of infamy, the first bomb
was dropped.

It was dropped. It wasn’t a self-guided missile. It wasn’t a planted
mine. It wasn’t dust or bio, either; it was a blast-bomb, and it was a
honey.

They got the ship that dropped it, too. A proximity-fused rocket with an
atomic warhead struck it a glancing blow. That happened, spectacularly,
over Lake Michigan. The ship, or what was left of it, crashed near
Minsk.

It was Dr. Simmons’ urgent suggestion which accounted for the ship. It
had not been seen, but it had been spotted on radar on December 6. when
it circled the earth twice. It was far inside Roche’s Limit; the
conclusion was obvious that it was self-powered. Simmons calculated its
orbit, knowing that at that velocity it could not alter its course
appreciably in the few hours it took to pass and re-pass any given
point. The proximity rocket was launched on schedule, not on detection.
Unfortunately, on its way to its rendezvous with fission, the ship
dropped its bomb.

And when that happened, the world drew itself together like—like—Ever
see a cat lying sleeping, spread out, relaxed, and then some sound, some
movement will put that cat on guard? It may not move a muscle, but it
isn’t relaxed any more; it isn’t asleep any more. It has changed its
pose from a slumber to a crouch, and you know that only because of the
new shape of its eyes. The world did that.

But nobody started throwing bombs.

 

“Cool down, soldier-boy.”

“Cool down, he says,” fumed the colonel. “This is...this...” His words
died into a splutter.

“I know, I know,” said Dr. Simmons, trying not to grin. “You figured,
and you figured, and you read all sorts of fantastic things and
swallowed your incredulity and planned as if these things actually could
happen. You worked all practicable statistical possibilities, and a lot
more besides. And it has to start like this.”

“Everybody knows Japan is neutral ground, and will stay that way.
There’s no point in it!” the colonel all but wailed. “The bomb didn’t
even land on a city, or even a depot! Just knocked the top off a
mountain in the Makabe country on Honshu. There isn’t a blasted thing
there.”

“I’d say there isn’t an unblasted thing there at the moment,” chuckled
his brother. “Stop telling me how you feel and let’s have what you know.
Was the bomb traced?”

“Of course it was traced! We have recording radar all over. It came from
that ship, all right. Muscles, it was a dinky little thing, that bomb.
About like a two-hundred-fifty-pounder. But what a blossom!”

“I heard the news report on it. Also seismographics. They had trouble
picking up the Hiroshima bomb. They didn’t have any with this one. It
ran about seven hundred and forty-odd times as powerful.”

“Officially,” said the colonel, “it was well over nine hundred at the
source.”

“Well, well,” said Dr. Simmons, in the tone of an orchid fancier noting
red spots on a new hybrid. “Disruption, hm-m-m?”

“Disruption, and how,” rejoined the colonel. “Look, Muscles. We’ve got
disruption bombs too—you know that. But just as a fission bomb blows
away most of its fissionable material before it can be effective, so a
disruption bomb blasts off that much more. We have bombs that make the
old Baker-Day bomb look like a wet firecracker, sure; but the best we
can do is about four hundred per cent. I thought that was plenty; but
this thing—Anyhow, Muscles, I just don’t get it. Who dropped it? Why?
Great day in the morning, man! An egg like that would’ve thrown us into
a ground-loop if it had landed on any one of our centers. No power on
earth would be that careless. To miss, I mean. On the other hand, we
can’t even be sure it wasn’t a wild throw by one of our allies.
Nowadays, you know everything, and you know nothing; you know it ahead
of time, or you know it too late.”

“My, my,” said Dr. Simmons mildly. “What about the ship?”

“The ship,” repeated the colonel, and his face reddened again. “I just
can’t believe that ship. Who built it? Where? We have everything on
earth spotted that’s worth spotting. Muscles, that thing w-as fifteen
hundred feet long according to the radar.”

“Anybody photograph it?”

“Apparently not. I mean, lots of radar-directed cameras shot where it
was, but it didn’t show, except as a blur.”

“How do you know it was that big, then? You know what ‘window’ does to
radar, for example. I don’t know just how, but that could be camouflage
of some sort.”

“That’s what we thought at first. Until we saw the hole in the ground
where it hit. That thing was big!”

“Saw it? I understand the Russians cordoned off the area and threatened
mass bombing if anyone came smelling around.”

“A thing called a Spy-Eye,” said the colonel, “with a telescopic lens—”

“Oh,” said the physicist. “Well—how much of the ship was left?”

“Not much. It exploded when it hit, of course. Apparently most of it was
vaporized over Michigan. The Spy-Eye pix show something being dug up,
though.”

“Wish I had a piece of it,” said Dr. Simmons longingly. “A thorough
qualitative analysis would very soon show where it came from.”

“We won’t get it,” said the colonel positively. “Not without the
Russkis’ cooperation anyway.”

“Could that happen?”

“Certainly not! They’re not stupid! They’ll play this thing for all it’s
worth. If they can figure out where it came from, they’ll know, and we
won’t—one up for them in the war of nerves. If they can’t, and the
sample’s worthless to them, we can’t know it until we try, and we want
to try. So they’ll hold out for some concession or other. Whatever it is
will cost us plenty.”

“Leroy,” said the physicist slowly, “have you heard about the so-called
signals in the Jansky bands?”

“I know what you’re driving at,” snorted the colonel. “The answer is no.
But really, no. That’s no ship from outer space. We fixed on these
signals months ago, and had even the 200-incher and a whole battery of
image orthicons on the indicated, direction. The signal strength
increased, but nothing could be seen.”

“Uh-huh. And when it arrived, it couldn’t be photographed.”

“It—Oh. Oh-oh!”

“Well, you said yourself that if it had been built anywhere on Earth
you’d have known it.”

“Your phone,” gasped the colonel. “I’ve got to find out about those
Jansky signals.” He rushed to the corner of the room.

“They stopped,” said the doctor. “Yes. Leroy. I’ve been following them
all along. They cut out when we shelled the ship.”

“Th-they did?”

“Yup.”

“Well—that takes care of that, doesn’t it? Even if it was something from
outside—”

“Now,” said Dr. Simmons relentlessly, “with that racket off the Jansky
bands, it’s possible to hear the new noises.”

“New—”

“Three sets of ’em. By their amplitude, I’d judge that they’re scheduled
to be here in two, three, and five months respectively.” The colonel
gasped. “I think,” added Dr. Simmons calmly, “that they’re approaching
faster than the first one.”

“That can’t be!” bellowed the colonel. “Haven’t we enough to watch
without fighting a Buck Rogers war as well? We just can’t fight our own
war and these invaders, too!”

“Come on,” said Dr. Simmons gently. “Why not take it up with the Board,
Leroy? They’re ready for everything. You told me so yourself.”

The colonel glared at him. “This is no time to needle me, Muscles,” he
growled. “What do you think’s going to happen?”

The scientist considered. “Well, what do you think would happen if you
sent out, say, a plane to investigate an island? The plane circles it a
couple of times, and then without warning gets shot down. What would you
do?”

“Send a squadron and bomb the—” He fell silent.

“Yes, Leroy.”

“But—they dropped the bomb first!”

“How do you know what they were doing? Put it on other terms; you are
walking in the woods and you come to a mound of dry earth. You wonder
what it is. You stick a piece of wood into it.” He shrugged. “Maybe it’s
an ant hill. It would seem to me that an atomic bomb would be an
excellent method to get a quick idea of the elemental composition of a
strange planet. There’re all kinds of light from the disruption, you
know. Screen off what radiation you can expect from your own bomb, and
what’s left will give you a pretty fair spectral analysis of the
target.”

“But they must have known the planet was inhabited. What right had they
to bomb it?”

“Did the bomb do any damage?”

The colonel was silent.

“And yet we shot the ship down. Leroy, you can’t expect them to like
it.”

The soldier looked up suddenly, narrowly at his brother. “It was your
idea to shoot it down.”

“It was not!” Dr. Simmons snapped. “I was asked how it could be done,
and I said how it could be done. That was all. The order was given by
some eager lad in your Board, if anyone.” He made an impatient gesture.
“That’s beside the point, Leroy. We can come out of our caves in the
brave new post-war world and fix the blame to our hearts’ content. Our
problem at the moment is what to do when the next contingent arrives. I
rather think they’ll be loaded for bear. That was, you say, a big ship,
and what it dropped was a small bomb. You can guess what will happen if
three ships drop a few whole sticks of bombs like that—say a thousand of
them.”

“Three hundred would be enough to make this planet look like the moon,”
said the colonel whitely.

“I remember a lecture, long ago.” said Dr. Simmons reminiscently, “by a
man named Dr. Szilard. Someone asked him if there was any conceivable
defense against the atomic bomb. He laughed and said, ‘Certainly. The
Japanese discovered it in eight days.’”

“A defense? Oh. They surrendered.”

“That’s right. That stopped the bombs from coming over.”

“How do you surrender to a force you can’t communicate with?”

“Perhaps we can. We can try. But from their point of view we attacked
first, and in all probability they’ll hit first and talk later. You
would.”

“Yes,” admitted the colonel. “I would. The thing to do, Muscles, is to
try to organize some defense.”

“With the world in the state it’s in now? Don’t be silly. There might be
a chance if everyone believed, if every nation would cooperate. But if
nobody trusts anybody—”

The colonel bolted to the door. “We’ll have to do what we can. So long,
Muscles. I’ll keep you posted—What in blazes are you grinning for?”

“Don’t mind me, please,” said Dr. Simmons, half laughing. “It’s
nothing.”

“Tell me what your nothing is so I can get to work with a clear mind,”
said the colonel irritably.

“Well, it’s just that I’ve been expecting the well-known atomic doom for
so very long, that I’ve covered every emotion but one over it. I’ve been
afraid, even terrified. I’ve been angry. I’ve been disgusted. And
now—it’s funny. It’s funny because of what you’re going through. Of all
the-things you’ve guessed at, trained for, planned for—it has to come
like this. Sitting ducks. An enemy you can’t outthink, outweigh,
outsmart, or terrorize. It was always inevitable; now even a soldier can
see it.”

“Very funny,” growled the colonel, jamming his hat down. “Out of this
world.”

“Hey!” called the physicist. “That was good!”

Laughing, he went to his inner laboratory, the one where no one else
ever went.

 

Their next contact was by telephone. Too much time had passed; at least,
Dr. Simmons thought it was too much time. After he had determined to
call his brother, it occurred to him that he did not know exactly how to
go about it, so he called the War Department in Washington. It took two
minutes and forty seconds to make the contact; but the doctor heard the
Washington operator, the Chicago operator, the Denver operator, the
Gunnison operator, the Gunnison mobile operator, and an operations
lieutenant passing along something called a crash pri. Dr. Simmons
raised his eyebrows at this, and never forgot it.

“Hi, Muscles.”

“Hello, Leroy. Listen. What’s with the salvage situation? I want to do
that analysis.”

“The stinkers!” the colonel said heatedly. “They made a proposition. I
turned ’em down. The Board backed me up.”

“What was the proposition?”

“They wouldn’t send a sample. They said if we had someone who could
perform a definitive analysis, to send him to Russia.”

“Aha! Mountain to Mahomet, eh? Why did you refuse?”

“Don’t be silly! There are maybe a half-dozen men in this country who
might be able to make a really exhaustive analysis, and come up with a
reliable conclusion. And about five of ’em we can’t be sure.”

“Send the other one, then.”

“That’s you, egghead. We’re not going to run a risk like that.”

“Why not?”

“They could use you, Muscles.”

“I couldn’t use anything they could give me.”

“That isn’t the point,” the colonel assured him. “But they have ways—”

“Knock off the dramatics, Leroy. This isn’t a grade-B movie. And there
isn’t time for fooling around. We have maybe six weeks.”

There was a silence. Then, “only six weeks?”

“That’s right,” said the doctor positively. “Tell you what. Make
arrangements to get me to Minsk right away, and let me get on that
analysis. At worst we can find out what the ship was made of, and get an
idea of how advanced those people are. At the very best, we might find a
defense. Tell the Russians that my work will be open and aboveboard.
They can put on as many observers as they want to, and I will share my
findings completely with them.”

“You can’t do that! That’s just what we want to avoid!”

It was the physicist’s turn to fall silent. How do you like that! He
thought. The Board is clinging to some faint hope that the invaders will
do their dirty work for them. They think that we’ll find a defense and
no one else will. He said finally, speaking slowly and carefully as if
to a child, “Leroy, listen. I’m just as anxious as you are to do
something about this matter. I think I can do something. But either I do
it my way, or I don’t do it at all. Is that quite dear? Perhaps I’m more
resigned than you are. Perhaps I think we deserve this...are you there?”

“Yes.” The doctor knew his brother had paused to lick his lips
nervously. “You really think you can get something of value out of the
analysis?”

“Almost certainly.”

“I’ll check with the Board. Muscles—”

“Yes, Leroy.”

“Don’t go mystic on us, hah?”

“Go see the Board,” said Dr. Simmons, and hung up.

He went to Russia.

 

The colonel met him on his return, two weeks later, at a West Coast
field. The unarmed long-range jet fighter and its bristling escort,
which had accompanied it from Eniwetok, skimmed to the landing strip.
The colonel had a two-place coupe sport plane waiting. Dr. Simmons,
inordinately cheerful, refused a meal and said he wanted to take off
right away for his laboratories. The colonel wanted him to appear before
the Board for a report, but he smiled and shook his head, and the
colonel knew that smile better than to argue.

When they reached traveling altitude, and the colonel had throttled down
to stay under the sonic barrier, and they had the susurrus of driving
jets to accompany them rather than the roar of climbing jets to compete,
they talked.

“How was it, Muscles?”

“I had a ball. It was fine.”

The colonel shot a look at him. He disapproves, thought the doctor. War
is grim and business-like, and for anyone to enjoy the business of war
seems to him a sacrilege.

“It looked pretty touchy at first. They all acted as if I had an A-bomb
in my watch pocket. Then I ran into Iggy.”

“Iggy?”

“Yup. I could recite his whole name if I tried hard, but it’s a
jaw-breaker. We used to drink forbidden sherry together in the dorm at
the University of Virginia when I was a kid in school. We thrashed out
all the truths of the cosmos together. He was a swell guy. I remember
once when Iggy decided that the rule forbidding women in the dorm was
unreasonable. He rigged up a—”

“What happened in Minsk?” asked the colonel coldly.

“Oh. Minsk. Well, Iggy’s come a long way since college. He specialized
in aerodynamics, and then got tired of it. For years he’d been fooling
around with nuclear physics as a hobby, and during the Second War he got
real high up in the field. Naturally he was called in when this ship
nosed in at Minsk.”

“Why naturally?”

“Well, the fragment retained much of its shape. That’s aerodynamics. And
it was hot—really hot. That’s nuclear physics. He was a big help.
According to his extrapolations, by the way, your radar was right. If
that was a part of the hull, as it probably was, and if it was a more or
less continuous curve, then the ship must’ve been all of fifteen hundred
feet long, with a four-hundred-foot cross-section at max. Quite a piece
of business.”

“I can’t say I’m happy to hear about it. Go on.”

“Well, the high brass there apparently expected me to smell the
fragment, taste it, and come up with a trade name. There was a lot of
pressure to keep me away from testing equipment, if any. That’s where
Iggy came in. He apologized for my carelessness in not bringing my
betatron and some distillation apparatus. They saw the point, and got me
to a laboratory. They have some nice stuff.” He shook his head
appreciatively.

Eagerly the colonel asked: “Anything we haven’t got? Can we duplicate
any of it? Where is this place? Did you see any defenses?”

“They have lots of stuff,” said the doctor shortly. “Do you want me to
finish? You do? All right. Well, we volatilized pieces of it, and we
distilled it. We subjected it to reagents and reducers and stress
analyses and crystallographic tests. We put it in magnetic fields and we
tested its resistance and conductivity. We got plenty of figures on it.”
He laughed. Again the colonel looked impatiently at him.

“Well, what is the stuff?”

“There is no name for it, yet. Iggy wants to call it nichevite—in other
words, ‘never mind.’ Leroy, it looks like dural, only it’s harder and
it’s tougher. But it oxidizes very easily. It’s metallic, but it has
such a low conductivity that it makes like porcelain. It has
heavy-isotope aluminum in it, and light copper, and it isn’t an alloy.
It’s a compound. It’s a blasted chemical compound, very stable, made of
nothing but elements with a positive valence. It’s stronger than any
steel, and can withstand temperatures so high that you can forget about
them. The atomic blast broke it; it didn’t fuse it. We volatilized it
only by powdering it and oxidizing it in an electric furnace, and then
subtracting the oxygen from our calculations. That got us near enough to
where we wanted to go. One thing is certain: no place on Earth you ever
heard about was the source of that stuff. Iggy has sworn to his bunch
that the material is of extra-solar origin. They’re propagandizing it in
Russia now. A good thing, too. The Russians were all ready to call the
whole thing a Yankee trick.”

“I’ve heard some of those broadcasts,” said the colonel. “I was hoping
we could keep that information to ourselves.”

“Don’t be childish,” said the physicist, in as abrupt a tone as he ever
used. “We’re not out on maneuvers, sonny. Time and time again one person
or another has told the world to wake up to reality. This once the world
will wake up or else. You won’t be able to keep it asleep any more. It’s
gone too far.”

 

The threat from outside finally broke in the papers, but only after long
and worried conferences in governmental and military headquarters all
over the world. The simple fact that the world would work together or
face extinction made, at first, as much impression as it ever had—very
little. It was not enough to overcome man’s distrust of himself. Not at
first.

But the diehards yielded, gradually and with misgivings, and acquainted
the people with the menace that faced them. There was little dangerous
panic—controls were too tight to allow for it—but after the first thrill
of excitement there came a unanimous demand for a plan of action which
was too powerful to ignore.

Bulletins were posted hourly on the amplitude of the Jansky signals. As
Dr. Simmons had pointed out, there were three sets of them, and it
became increasingly evident that the three sources were in V formation,
and coming fast—much faster than the first one had.

“They’ll box us,” said Colonel Simmons. “There won’t be any circling
this time. They’ll take up equidistant positions around the planet, out
of our range, and they’ll fire at will.”

“I think you’re right,” said his brother. “Well, that gives us two kinds
of defense. They’re both puny, but it’ll be the best we can do. One’s
technological, of course. I don’t know exactly which direction would be
the best to take. We can build ships ourselves, and attack them in
space. We can try to develop some kind of shield against their bombs, or
whatever else they use against us. And we can try to build seeking
torpedoes of some sort that’ll go out and get ’em—bearing in mind that
we might be out there ourselves sometime soon, and we don’t want to fall
prey to our own weapons.”

“What’s the other defense?”

“Sociological. In the first place, we must decentralize to a degree
heretofore impossible. In the second place, we must pool our brains and
our physical resources. No nation can afford to foot the bill of this
kind of production; no nation can afford to take the chance of by
passing some foreign brain which might help the whole world. Leroy, stop
puckering up like that! You look as if you’re going to cry. I know
what’s bothering you. This looks like the end of professional
militarism. Well, it is, in the national sense. But you have a bigger
enemy than ever before, and one more worthy of the best efforts of
humanity. You and your Board have been doing what seemed to be really
large thinking. It wasn’t, because its field was too small and too
detailed. But now you have something worth fighting. Now your plans can
be planetary—galactic—cosmic, if you like. Don’t hanker after the past,
soldier-boy. That attitude’s about the only way there is to stay small.”

“That’s quite a speech,” said the colonel. “I...wish I could argue with
it. If I admit you’re right, I can only admit that there is no solution
at all. I don’t believe the world will ever realize the necessity for
cooperation until it’s too late.”

“Maybe it will. Maybe. I remember once talking to an old soldier who had
been in the First War. In his toolshed he had a little trench shovel
about eighteen inches long—a very flimsy piece of equipment it was. I
remarked on it, and asked him what earthly good it was to a soldier. He
laughed and said that when a green squad was deployed near no man’s land
and ordered to dig in, they gabbled and griped and scratched and stewed
over the job. And when the first enemy bullets came whining over, they
took their little shovels and they just melted into the ground.” He
chuckled. “Maybe it’ll be like that. Who knows? Anyway, do what you can,
Leroy.”

“You have the strangest sense of humor,” growled the colonel, and left.

 

They came.

The first was just a shape against the stars. It could be heard like a
monster’s breath in a dark place: wsh-h-h-t wsh-h-h-t wsh-h-ht on the
sixty-megacycle band, where before nothing had been heard but the
meaningless hiss of the Jansky noise. But it could not be seen. Not
really. It was just a shape. A blur. It did not reflect radar impulses
very well; the response was indeterminate, but indicated that it was
about the size and shape of the mysterious bomber which had dealt the
first terrifying, harmless blow.

The world went crazy, but it was a directive madness. With the
appearance of the Outsider, all talk of the advisability of defense
ceased. There could be no discussion of priorities.

A Curie Institute scientist announced light-metal fission. A Hungarian
broke his own security regulations with the announcement of an
artificial element of heretofore unthinkable density which could be cast
into fission chambers, making possible the long-awaited pint-sized
atomic engine. A Russian scientist got what seemed to be a toehold on
antigravity and set up a yell which resulted in a conclave of big brains
in Denver—men from all over the world. He was wrong, but a valuable
precedent was set. A World Trade Organization was established, with
control of raw materials and manufactured goods and their routes and
schedules. Its control was so complete that tariffs were suspended in
toto—the regulation read “for the duration”—and, since it is efficient
to give a square deal, a square deal was given in such a clear-cut
fashion that objectors were profiteers by definition. Russian ores began
appearing in British smelters, and Saar coal was loaded into the
Bessemers of Birmingham. Most important of all, a true International
Police Force came into being with hardly a labor pain. Its members were
free to go everywhere, and their duty was to stop anything which got in
the way of planetary production. Individual injustice, faulty diet, poor
housing, underpaying, and such items fell immediately into this
category, and were dealt with quickly and with great authority.

Propaganda unified itself and came to a focus in the hourly bulletins
about the Outsiders. Every radio station on Earth included that dread
triple hiss in its station breaks.

And the Outsider just stayed where it was, just lay there breathing,
waiting for its two cohorts.

“It’s makeshift,” said Dr. Simmons, “but it might do. It just might do.”

The colonel stepped past him and looked at the cradle, on which rested a
tubby, forty-foot object like a miniature submarine.

“A satellite, you said?”

“Uh-huh. Loaded to the gills with direction-finders and small atomic
rockets. It’ll keep a continuous fix on the Outsider during its transit,
and relay the information to monitor stations on Earth. If one of the
ships fires a torpedo, it will be detected and reported immediately and
the satellite will launch an interceptor rocket. If the bomb or torpedo
dodges, the interceptor will follow it. In the meantime, big
interceptors can be on their way from Earth. If a torpedo comes close to
the satellite, the satellite will dodge. If it comes too close, the
satellite will explode violently enough to take the torp with it. We
plan to set out three layers of these things, nine in each stratum,
twenty-seven in all, so spaced as to keep a constant scanning in every
direction.”

“Satellites, hm-m-m? Muscles, if we can do this, why can’t we go right
out there and get the ships themselves?”

The physicist ticked the reasons off on his fingers. “First, because if
they bracket us, as in every likelihood they will, they’d be foolish to
come any closer than the one that’s already here, and he’s out of any
range we can handle just now. We can assume that his ships, if not his
bombs, will be prepared against our proximity devices. We’ll try, of
course, but I wouldn’t be too hopeful. Second, we still haven’t a fuel
efficient enough to allow for escape velocity maneuvers without a deadly
acceleration, so our chances of sending manned rockets up for combat are
nil at the moment.”

The colonel looked admiringly at the satellite and the crowd of
technicians which swarmed around it. “I knew we’d come up with
something.”

His brother gave him a quizzical glance. “I don’t know if you fully
realize just how big a ‘we’ that is you just used. The casing of that
satellite is Swedish steel. The drive is a German scientist’s adaptation
of the Hungarian baby fission engine. The radio circuits are American,
except for the scanning relay, which is Russian. And those
technicians—I’ve never seen such a bunch. Davis, Li San, Abdallah,
Schechter, O’Shaugnessy—he comes from Bolivia, by the way, and speaks
only Spanish—Yokamatsu, Willet. Van Cleve. All of these men, all these
designs and materials, and all the money that make up these satellites,
have been found and assembled from all over the earth in only the last
few weeks. There were miracles of production during the Second War,
Leroy, but nothing to match this.”

The colonel shook his head dazedly. “I never thought I’d see it happen.”

“You’ll see more surprising things than this before we’re done,” said
the scientist happily. “Now I’ve got to get back to work.”

That was the week the second Outsider arrived. It took up a position in
the celestial south, not quite opposing its fellow, and it lay quiet,
breathing. If there was converse between them, it was not detectable by
any known receiver. It was the same apparent size and had the same
puzzling effect on radar and photographic plates as its predecessors.

 

In Pakistan, an unfueled airplane took off from a back-country airstrip,
flew to twenty thousand feet, and came in for a landing. The projector
which was trained on it had no effect on the approaching aircraft in the
moment it took the plane to disappear behind a hillock and reappear on
the other Side. There was a consequent momentary power loss, and the
plane lost too much altitude and had to make another pass. The wind
direction dictated a climbing turn to the north, and the beam from the
projector briefly touched the antenna of an amateur radio operator
called Ben Ali Ra. Ben Ali Ra’s rig exploded with great enthusiasm,
filling the inside of his shack with spots and specks of fused metal,
ceramic, and glass. Fortunately for him—and for the world—he was in the
adjoining room at the time, and suffered only a deep burn in his thigh,
which was struck by a flying fragment of a coil-form.

This was the first practical emergence of broadcast power.

Ben Ali was aware of the nature of the experiments at the nearby field,
having eavesdropped by radio on some field conversations. He was also
aware of certain aims and attitudes held by the local authority. Defying
these, he left the area that night, on foot, knowing that he would be
killed if captured, knowing that in any event his personal property
would be confiscated, and in great pain because of his wound. His story
is told elsewhere; however, he reached Benares and retained
consciousness long enough to warn the International Police.

The issue was not that broadcast power was a menace; it had a long way
to go before it could be used without shouting its presence through
every loudspeaker within miles. The thing that brought the I. P. down in
force on this isolated, all but autonomous speck on the map was the
charge that the inventors intended to keep their development to
themselves. The attachment of the device and all related papers by the
Planetary Defense Organization was a milestone of legal precedent, and
brought a new definition of “eminent domain.” Thereafter no delays were
caused by the necessity of application to local governments for the
release of defense information; the I. P. investigated, confiscated, and
turned the devices in question over to the Planetary Defense
Organization, acting directly and paying fairly all parties involved. So
another important step was taken toward the erasure of national lines.

 

Two weeks before the arrival of the third Outsider—excluding the one
which had been shot down—the last of the twenty-seven satellites took up
its orbit, and the world enjoyed its first easy breath since the
beginning of the Attack, as it was called.

Because of high-efficiency circuits and components, the fuel consumption
of the electronic set-up in the satellites was very small. They held
their orbits without power, except for an occasional automatic
correction-kick. They could operate without servicing for years. It was
assumed that by the time they needed servicing, astrogation would have
developed to the point where they could be refueled—and recharged—by
man-carrying ships. If technology did not solve that problem, little
harm could be done by the silent, circling machines; when, at long Last,
they slipped from their arbitrary orbits and spiraled in to crash, so
many years would have passed that the question was, momently, academic.

And even before the twenty-seventh satellite was launched, factories
were retooling for a long dreamed of project, a space station which
would circle Earth in an orbit close enough to be reached by
man-carrying rockets, which would rest and refuel there and take off
again for deep space without the crushing drag of Earth’s gravity.

The third Outsider took up its positions, as Dr. Simmons had prophesied,
equidistant from the others with Earth in the center, rolling nakedly
under them. As in the case of the arrivals of the other two, there was
no sign of its presence but the increasing sound on the sixty-megacycle
band. Radar failed utterly to locate it until, suddenly, it was in its
position—a third blur against the distant stars, a third indeterminate,
fifteen-hundred-foot shape on the radarscopes.

The Board of Strategy was happily, almost gleefully, busy again. Their
earlier work within the field of the probability of human works faded to
insignificance against the probabilities inherent in the Attack. There
was another major difference, too: they came out in the open. They
plastered the world with warnings, cautions, and notices, many of them
with no more backing than vivid imaginings of some early science-fiction
writer—plus probability! Although logic indicated that the first blows
would be in the form of self-guided missiles, thousands of other
possibilities were considered. Spy rays, for example; radio hams the
world over were asked to keep winding coils, keep searching the spectrum
for any unusual frequencies. Telepathic amplifiers, for another example;
asylums were circularized for any radical changes in the quality and
quantity of insanity and even abnormal conduct. The literary critics
were called in to watch for any trends in creative writing which seemed
to have an inhuman content. Music was watched the same way, as were the
graphic arts. Farmers and fire wardens were urgently counseled to watch
for any plant life, particularly predatory or prehensile or drug-bearing
plant life, which might develop. Sociologists were dragged from their
almost drunken surveys of this remarkable turn of social evolution, and
were ordered right back into it again, to try to extrapolate something
harmful to come from this functional, logical, unified planet. But only
the nationalists found harm, and they were—well, unfashionable.

The bombs came about a month after the third Outsider took up his post.

 

The whole world watched. Everything stopped. Every television screen
pictured radarscopes and the whip-voiced announcer at Planetary Defense
Central in Geneva, which had at long last regained its place as a world
center.

The images showed Outsiders A, B, and C in rapid succession. So well
synchronized was the action that the three images could have been
superimposed, and would have seemed like one picture. Each ship launched
two bombs; of each two, one turned lazily toward Earth and the other
hovered.

“Out of range of the satellites,” said the announcer. “We shall have to
wait. The satellites will detect the bombs when they are within two
hundred miles, and will then launch their interceptors. Our Earth-based
rockets are aiming now.”

There was a forty-minute wait. Neighbor called neighbor; illuminated
news banners on the sides of buildings gave the dreaded news. Buses and
trains stopped while their passengers and crews flocked to televisors.
There was a hushed tension, worldwide.

“Flash! Satellite 24 has released an interceptor. Stand by; perhaps we
can get a recording of the scanner...one moment please...Anything from
Monitor 24b yet, Jim? On the air now? Check...Ladies and gentlemen, if
you can be patient a moment—we are recording pictures of the radarscope
at Monitod 24b in Lhasa. It will be only a few...here it is now.”

Flickering at first, then clearing, came the Lhasa picture. The monitor
station there kept a fix on Satellite 24 from horizon to horizon, as did
the satellite’s other two stations in San Francisco and Madrid. The
picture showed the familiar lines of the satellite. Abruptly a short,
thick tube began to protrude from the hull. When extended about eight
feet, it swung over about forty degrees on its ball-and-socket base.
From its tip shot a small cylinder; there was a brief flicker of jets.
“The interceptor.” said the loudspeakers unnecessarily.

The scene flashed to the Earth-based interceptor station at White Sands.
A huge rocket mounted with deceptive slowness, balanced on a towering
column of flame, and disappeared into the sky.

Then, bewilderingly, the scene was repeated for Monitor Stations 22c and
25a, as their satellites sensed the bombs coming from Outsiders B and C.
White Sands sent two more giant rockets up as fast as they could set the
seeking gear.

Then, after an interminable four hours, came the picture which was to
stand forever as the high point in newsreel coverage. It was the image
picked up from the relaying television camera in the nose of Satellite
24’s little interceptor.

It fixed the image of the Outsider’s bomb, and it would not let go. The
bomb, at first only a speck, increased in size alarmingly. It was a,
perfect cylinder, seen in perspective. There was nothing streamlined
about it. It was quite featureless except for a strange indistinction
around one end, as if it were not in focus. It was like a small patch of
the substance of the Outsiders themselves.

The image grew. It filled the screen—

And then there was nothing.

But cameras all over Europe picked up and relayed the image of that
awe-inspiring explosion. Silently a ball of light appeared in the sky,
expanding, flickering through the entire spectrum, sending out a wheel
of blue and silver rays. It lasted for a full fifteen seconds, growing
in size and in brilliance, before it began to fade, and it left a pastel
ghost of itself for a minute afterward. Speckles of random radiation
cluttered the screens then, and there were no more actual pictures of
the action.

The entire world gave a concerted shout of joy. In dozens of languages
and dialects, the fierce, triumphant sound roared skyward. Got one! And
the bells and the whistles picked up the cry, frightening sleeping
birds, sending crocodiles scuttling off river banks, waking children all
over the world. It was like a thousand New Year’s Eves, simultaneously.

What happened next happened quickly.

A White Sands rocket got the second bomb. For some reason there was no
atomic explosion. Perhaps the proximity gear failed. Perhaps it was
neutralized, though that would seem impossible, since the seeking gear
obviously did not fail. It was not as spectacular as the first
interception, but it was quite as effective. The purely physical impact
as the huge interceptor struck the tiny bomb all but pulverized them
both.

The third bomb breezed past its satellite interceptor, its White Sands
interceptor, and a second-stratum satellite. It was observed that on
getting within range of the seeking radar of each of these it became
enveloped in the misty, coruscating field which characterized the
Outsider ships. Apparently this field completely confused the radar; it
was as if the radar detected it but didn’t know what to do with it—“same
spot we were in a year ago.” as Dr. Simmons remarked tersely.

The bomb entered the atmosphere—and burned up like a meteor.

Then it was that the most incredible thing of all happened. The three
hovering bombs—one beside each Outsider—slowly retreated toward the
parents vessels, as if being reeled in.

They recalled their bombs.

Thereafter they lay quietly, the three Outsiders. They did not move,
they made no move. They gasped their triple pantings, and they filled
thousands of photographic plates with their indeterminate muzziness, and
that was all.

Four giant rockets out of the five sent after the invaders missed their
mark completely. The fifth, which was equipped with an ingenious seeking
device based on correlation of its target with an actual photographic
transparency of the target, apparently struck Outsider B. There was a
splendid atomic display, and again the world went mad with joy.

But when the area could be observed again, Outsider B was still there.
And there it stayed. There they all stayed.

A cyclic, stiffly controlled panic afflicted the world; as a sense of
impending doom was covered by humanity’s classic inability to fix its
attention for very long to any one thing, the panic alternated to
reactive terror, swung away from terror again because life must go on,
because you must eat and he must love and they must make a bet on the
World Series....

Seven months passed.

 

Dr. Simmons plodded into his private office and shut the door. He was
tired—much more tired than in the days earlier that year, when he was
working an eighteen-hour day. The more a man does, the more he can do,
he reflected wearily, until the optimum is reached; and the optimum is
way up yonder, if he cares about what he’s doing. He sat down at his
desk and leaned back. And if he cares just as much as ever, but there
just isn’t as much to do, he gets tired. He gets very, very tired...

He palmed his face, blinked his eyes, sighed, and leaning forward
flipped the annunciator switch. His night secretary said brightly: “Yes.
Doctor?”

“Don’t let anything or anybody in here for two hours. And take care of
that cold.”

“Yes, sir. Thank you, Doctor, I will.”

A good kid....He rose and went to the washroom which adjoined his
office. Stepping into the shower stall, he lifted up the soap dish,
which had a concealed hinge, and pressed a stud under it. He counted off
four seconds, released the stud, and pulled on the hot water faucet. The
back wall of the shower swung toward him. He stepped through into his
own private laboratory—the one where no one else ever went.

He kicked the door closed behind him and looked around. I almost wish I
could do it all over again. The things that have happened here, the
dreams...

His thought cut out in a sudden, numbing shock.

“What are you doing here?”

The intruder accepted the question, turned it over, altered it, and gave
it back. “What have you been doing here?” rasped the colonel.

The physicist sank into an easy-chair and gaped at his brother. His
pulse was pounding, and for a moment his cheek twitched. “Just give me a
second,” he said wryly. “This, is a little like finding someone in your
bed.” He took out a handkerchief and touched his dry lips with it. “How
did you get in here?”

Leroy Simmons was sitting behind a worktable. He had his hat, with its
polished visor, in the crook of his arm, and his buttons were brilliant.
He looked as if he were sitting for a particular kind of portrait. The
doctor jumped up. “You’ve got to have a drink!” he said emphatically.

The colonel put his hat on the table and leaned forward. The act
wrinkled his tunic and showed up his bald spot. “What’s the matter with
you, Muscles?”

The doctor shook his head. He doesn’t look like a man of distinction any
more, he thought, regretfully. “I feel a little better now,” he said.
“What brings you here, Leroy?”

“I’ve been watching you for months,” said the colonel. “I’ve had to do
it all myself. This is...it’s too big.” He looked completely miserable.
“I followed you and watched you and checked up on you. I took
measurements all around these offices, and located this room. I was in
here a dozen times, looking for the gimmick on the door.”

“Oh, yes. Always dropping around to see me when I wasn’t around, and
saying you’d wait. My secretary told me.”

“Her!” The syllable was eloquent. “She’s no help. I never saw anyone
harder to get information from.”

“It’s an unbeatable combination in a secretary,” he grinned. “Infinite
tact, and no facts. She’s not in it, Leroy. No one is.”

“No one but you. I notice you’re not denying anything.”

The doctor sighed. “You haven’t charged me with anything yet. Suppose
you tell me what you know, or what you think you know.”

The colonel took a somber-backed little notebook out of his pocket. “I
have no associates,” he said grimly, “either. It’s all in here. Some of
it is Greek to me, but some I understand—worse luck. I wish I didn’t.
You have something to do with the Outsiders, don’t you?”

His brother looked at him for a long moment, and then nodded, as if he
had asked and answered a question.

“Yes.”

“You know where they come from, what they’re going to do, how they
operate—everything about them?”

“That’s right.”

“They have given you—information. They have given you a way to”—he
referred to the book, his lips moving as he read; they always
had—“expand and concentrate binding energy into a self-sustaining
field.”

“No.”

“No? You have all the formulas. You wrote thousands of pages of notes on
the subject. Your diary mentions it repeatedly—and as if it was an
accomplished fact.”

“It is. I didn’t get it from the Outsiders. They got it from me.”

There was a jolting silence. The colonel turned quite white.
“That...does...it,” he whispered. “I knew you were in contact with the
enemy, Muscles. I tried my best to believe that you were simply working
them for information, so that we could use it against them. A risky
game, and you were playing it alone. After I went through your papers
here, I just couldn’t believe it any more. You seemed to be working
along with-them. And now you tell me that you are actually supplying
them with devices we haven’t got!”

The scientist nodded gravely.

The colonel’s hand, under the table, moved to his wrist. He touched a
button on the small transmitter there, and pulled a slide over.

Dr. Simmons said thickly, “Leroy. Would you mind telling me how you got
on to this?”

“I’ll tell you, all right. It started with a routine check-up of
supplies and equipment into these laboratories, for auditing purposes.
No production is run without cost accounting, even by the government.
Even by a planetary one. It was brought to my attention that certain
things came in here that apparently never went out. When I went over the
reports and saw they were correct, I wrote a memo which cleared you
completely, on my authority, and I killed the investigation. I—picked it
up myself.”

“Good heavens, why?”

“If I found anything,” the colonel said with difficulty, “I wanted to
take care of it myself.”

“Sort of keep the family name sweet and clean?”

“Not that. You’re too clever. You always were. I...I’ll tell you
something. I was appointed to the Board because of you. I never could
have made it otherwise. The Board figured I’d be an intimate link with
you; that I could see you any time, when no one else could.”

Of course I knew that, thought the doctor. “I didn’t know that,” he
said. “I don’t believe you.”

“Oh, cut it out,” said the colonel. “You played me for a sucker all
along, and through me, the Board.”

Correct again, the physicist thought. He said: “Nonsense, Leroy. I just
withheld information from time to time.”

“You gave us tips,” said the colonel bitterly. “You sent us off on goose
chase after goose chase. And we pushed the whole world around the way
you wanted us to.”

The boy’s real sharp tonight, thought Dr. Simmons, and added to himself,
He’s such a swell, sincere character. I hate to see him go through all
this. “And why does all this make you squelch the Board’s investigation
and pick it up yourself?”

“I know how slick you are,” said the colonel doggedly. “You just might
talk a jury or a court-martial out of shooting you. I don’t see how you
could, but I don’t see how you could have done any of this either.” He
waved a hand around the secret lab. “You won’t talk your way out of it
with me.”

“You’re my judge, then, my jury. My executioner, too?”

“I’m...your brother,” said the colonel in a low voice, “and, like
always, I want you to get what you deserve.”

“I could puddle up and bawl like a baby,” said Dr. Simmons suddenly,
warmly. “Let’s stop playing around, Leroy, and I’ll tell you the whole
story.”

“Is it true you’ve been working with the Outsiders?”

“Yes, you idiot!”

The colonel slumped back and said glumly: “Then that settles it. Go
ahead and talk if you want to. It can’t make any difference now.” He
looked at his watch.

The scientist rose and went to a wall panel, which he pulled out,
revealing a compact tape-recording outfit. From a rack above it he
selected a reel, set it on the peg, and drew the end of the tape into
the self-threader. Without switching on, he returned to his chair.

“Just a couple of preliminaries, Leroy, and then you can have the whole
story. I have done what I have done because of what you used to call my
‘dewy-eyed idealism.’ It has worked. We live now in a unified world. It
must remain unified until the threat of the Outsiders is done with; it
has no alternative. I don’t think that the Outsiders will be removed for
a while yet, and the longer the world lives this way, the harder it will
be for it to go back to the old cut-up, mixed-up way of life it has
followed for the last fifteen thousand years or so.

“I’ll tell you what will happen from now on. The space station will be
completed and put into action. When the point of boredom is reached with
that, new fuel will be developed. Shortly afterward, the three Outsiders
will put out their hovering bombs again. It’ll throw the world into a
panic, but with the station and the new fuel and the whole world working
at it, a fighting ship will leave the station—outbound.

“It will sling some torps at the Outsiders, and they won’t go off, or
they’ll miss, or they’ll explode prematurely. The Outsiders won’t hit
back. The warship will move in close, and when it gets close enough to
do real damage, it will get a message.

“This message will be broadcast on the three most likely frequencies,
and signals will go out all over the other bands advertising those three
frequencies. The message will start like this: ‘Stop and listen. This is
the Outsider.’ This will be repeated in English, French, Spanish,
German, Arabic, and, for good measure, Esperanto. This is the message.”

He rose again, put his hand on the switch, smiled, and turned to face
the colonel. “Funny...this was designed only to speak to the future. And
you’re the first to hear it.”

“Why is that funny?”

“You’re the past.” He flipped the switch. “You’ll pardon the tone of it
“he said gently. “I had a chance to make a deep purple oration, and I
find I ramble on like an old lady over her knitting.”

“You?”

“Me. The Outsider. Listen.”

This is the message, as it came from the tape in Dr. Simmons’ leisurely
mellow voice.

I am the Outsider. Do not fear me. There will be no battle. I am your
friend. Hear me out.

I am four ships and a noise in the Jansky radiations. The ships are not
ships, and they came from Earth, not from outside. The Jansky signals do
not come from the stars. Listen.

I am one man, one man only, without helpers, without any collaborators,
except possibly thinkers—a little Thoreau, a little Henry George, maybe
a smattering of H. G. Wells...you can believe me. Archimedes once said,
“Give me a lever long enough, and a place for a fulcrum, and I shall
move the earth!” Given the tools, one man can do anything. There’s
plenty of precedent for this. Aside from the things which produce a man,
aside from the multitude of factors which make his environment, if the
man is capable, and if the environment provides tools and a time ripe
for action, that man can use his tools to their utmost extent. Hitler
did it. John D. Rockefeller and Jay Gould did it. Kathleen Winsor did
it. Given the tools, mankind can do anything.

I was given the greatest single tool in history. I stumbled on it. I’ll
tell you the truth: I worked like a hound dog to find it, once I
suspected that it was there.

It’s a theory and a device. The theory has to do with binding energy;
the device releases and controls it. It is all completely and clearly
explained elsewhere; I’ll come to that in time. Roughly speaking,
however, it is a controlled diffusion of matter. Any gas can be rarefied
and diffused. So, I have discovered, can any matter. Further, it can be
diffused analytically. Binding energy is actually a component of matter.
If a close-orbit situation can be induced between the electrons and the
nucleus of an atom, its binding energy can be withdrawn, if equally
diffused, to form a field around the atom. The field is toroidal, and
has peculiar qualities.

For one thing, it does crazy things to the apparent center of gravity of
the mechanism producing the field. Any seeking device which tends to
locate mass directs itself at the e.g. But on approaching a field of
this sort, the closer it gets, the harder it becomes for it to find the
e.g., since the apparent center of mass is out at the edges. When
directed at the actual center of the device, your seeker veers violently
to the edge—hard enough, generally, to make it pass the mechanism
altogether.

The field distorts and reflects radio and light waves in an extremely
complex fashion. These waves are led powerfully to follow the outlines
of the toroid; but since the field is a closed one—closed as tightly as
only binding energy can close anything—light and radio cannot penetrate,
no matter how strong the temptation. And so they are thrown back, rather
than reflected in reflection’s ordinary sense, and return to their
detectors—receivers, photographic plates, or what have you—in a rather
distorted pattern.

The field also has a strange effect on valence, making it possible to
build chemical compounds out of elements of similar valence. The atomic
situation within the toroid—in the hole of the doughnut, as it were—is
weird, and is the place where such compounding can be done. Exact data
on this will also be given you.

Now, here is exactly what was done. Having found the way to generate
this field, I debated the wisdom of giving it to a world on the verge of
war. I contemplated destroying all my evidence, but could not; the thing
was too big; humanity needed it too much. But it was too big for even a
unified humanity on one planet. It’s big enough for all of space, and
needs a humanity big enough to control it. I felt that if humanity were
big enough to unify, it would be big enough for this device. It is, now,
or you spacemen would not be listening to me.

After having developed the binding-energy field, I invented another
device—the Spy-Eye. I knew that the little eavesdroppers would be
produced by the thousands, so that a few would not be missed. A
half-dozen were launched with their selector circuits altered and some
of their equipment replaced. Their fueling was different, too; there is
a reaction-formula using the b.-e. field which will be found with the
rest of these things.

My half-dozen Spy-Eyes, powered vastly beyond any of their little
brothers and sisters, went outside and took up their positions in space.

They are the Outsiders.

The noise in the Jansky radiation was pure propaganda, and its execution
was simple—practically primitive. It was a trick once used by illegal
radio stations during one of the wars, I forget which. Three of them,
widely separated and synchronized, sent out the same signal, beamed to
an Earth diameter. Direction-finders on Earth obediently pointed out
their resultant—a direction in which they did not exist! The Spy-Eyes
themselves were too small and too far away to be detectable, unless one
knew exactly what to look for and where to look. The amplitude of the
signals was raised gradually until it reached a preselected volume. Then
one of the Spy-Eyes set up a b.-e. field and dropped toward Earth. It
looked strange and huge. It came in close and circled Earth twice at a
high velocity. I think I had more trouble there than at any other point,
but I managed, finally, to wangle the Board of Strategy into firing on
it. Their shell hit nothing; the b.-e. field disrupted its atomic
warhead, for in the presence of a hard-radiation source, the field
increases the effective critical mass. The Spy-Eye itself is what fell
on Japan; it was armed, of course, and was mistaken for a little bomb.
What made the explosion so intense was the fact that the field held the
disrupting matter together for a fraction of a millisecond longer than
it had ever been done before. The object which fell near Minsk was a,
piece of stage-proppery I had made earlier. It, too, had a b.-e. field
generator on its back. Again it exhibited its exclusiveness and its
penetrating power; it acted like a thing of great mass when it hit the
ground. The generator was, of course, blown to dust on impact, leaving
only the supposed specimen.

The other three Outsider ships were Spy-Eyes, b.-e. field-equipped. The
bombs were real bombs, however. They were supplied by Satellite 18,
which, if examined, will be found inexplicably empty of its
interceptors. I put guiding heads on them, and sent one to each of my
“Outsider” Spy-Eyes.

I think that explains everything. If you question my motives, regard
Earth as you deep-spacemen see it today—unified, powerful, secure within
and without. Humanity is ready, now, to take the first steps toward
greatness. Therefore:

Send my name—Simmons—in the old International Morse Code on 28.275
meters, from a distance of ten statute miles from any of the three
Outsider ships, at one thousand watts power. Repeat the name four times.
The field will break down; you may then locate the Spy-Eyes and pull
them in. Dismantle them; inside you will find this recording and certain
papers, which contain everything I know about the binding-energy field.
Use it well.

 

Colonel Simmons leaned back in his chair. His face was gray. “Muscles—is
this all true?”

“You know it is. You’ve seen it in action.”

“Now what have I done?” muttered the colonel.

“Jumped to conclusions,” said the doctor easily.

The colonel’s mouth opened and closed spasmodically. Then in violent
reaction, he swore. “You couldn’t ’ve done it! he roared. “You set the
timetable for this whole thing and built it into those Spy-Eyes. Well,
what about all that was done here—the interceptors from White Sands, and
the development of the satellites, and all that?”

“Leroy, old horse, take it easy, will you? Who had charge of all that
development? Who had the final say on design? Who outlined the exact use
of each piece of equipment—by way, of course, of using it to its
greatest efficiency?”

“You did. You did.” The colonel covered his face. “All that power. All
that control. You could have had the whole world for the taking, if
you’d wanted it. Instead—”

“Instead, everyone on Earth has a job, enough food, good quarters, and
an equal chance at education. I have it on good authority that the next
session of Congress will unify divorce laws and traffic laws in this
country. Russia has not only a second party, but a third one. Social
legislation is beginning to follow the lines of the Postal Union, and
already a movement has started to have the governments pay the people
their full wages during a six-week vacation. No communism, no fascism;
function is the law, and social security—lower-case—is function.”

“Shut up!” mouthed the colonel in a peculiar tone, half moan, half roar.
He held his head and he rocked.

The doctor clasped his shoulder and laughed. “Listen to me, Leroy,” he
said, “and I’ll tell you something funny. You know how little, stupid
anecdotes will stick with you, like the limerick about the young lady
from Wheeling, and the time you took the ball of tar to bed with you and
we had to shave your head? Well, believe it or not, I honestly think
that this job I have just done had its source in a couple—no,
three—things that happened to me when I was young. When I think of them,
and look at the world today—my!”

He took a turn around the floor. His brother sat still.

“Wells had something to do with it. Wells pointed out, mostly
indirectly, that only a miracle could make humans work together. And
sometimes his miracle was entertaining but untenable, because it
constituted a common aim for mankind. That never did work. World peace
is the finest aim a race could have, but it never tempted us much.
Wells’ other miracle was a common enemy—the Martian invasion, for
example. Now, that makes sense. It did then and it does now.

“And here are the silly little things that have stuck with me. Remember
that summer when I got a job as a dirt-moving foreman on a canal job?
Two of the muckers got into a fight out by one of the machines. I got up
into the dragline and dumped a load of sand on the two of them. They
stopped fighting, ganged up on me, and punched the daylights out of me.”
He laughed.

“Then there was the other one. It was even sillier. It was in a
restaurant, right after I started to teach at Drexel Tech. There were
two bubble-headed little chicks sitting at a nearby table, verbally
clawing each other’s eyes out over a young man. Just as I was about to
get up and move back out of the combat area, they spotted the young man
in question submitting to the wiles of a very cute redhead. Whereupon
the combatants were suddenly allies, and on the spot”—he laughed
again—“concocted a devilish scheme to squirt ink on the contents of the
redhead’s clothesline!”

The colonel was looking at him dully.

“The common denominator,” continued the doctor, “in the analysis of
Wells, the fight on the canal job, and the feline fiddle-faddle in the
café, was surprisingly valid, considering the wide difference in the
nature of the fields of combat. It boils down to this: that human
conflicts cease to be of importance in the face of a common enemy.
‘Divide and rule’ has its obverse; ‘unite and conquer.’ That’s what the
world has done during the Attack; except that instead of conquering the
Outsider, it has conquered itself—still its common enemy.”

“Wells,” murmured the colonel. “I remember that. I was reading him and
told you the miracle idea. I was in military prep, and you were a
freshman in college.”

“Gosh yes,” said the doctor. “I remember, Leroy.”

 

The colonel seemed to be thinking hard, and slowly. He spoke slowly.
“Muscles,” he said, “remember how I wore your freshman dinky when you
came home for a weekend?”

“Do I!” chuckled the doctor. “You wouldn’t give it back, and I spent the
next six weeks sweeping out seniors’ rooms because I showed up at school
without it. Heh! Remember me strutting around in your gray cape when you
were at the Point?”

“Yeh. We were always doing that. Your tie, my tie, our tie. Those were
the days. You wouldn’t fit my clothes now, Fatso.”

“Is that so!” laughed the doctor, delighted to see his brother making
some effort to come up out of his doldrum. “Listen, son, you rate too
much to be in shape. Too many flunkies to bend over for you when you
want your shoes tied.”

The colonel whipped off the coat with all those shiny buttons. “You
couldn’t button that around your fallen chest.”

In answer the grinning doctor shucked out of his laboratory smock and
put his arms into the uniform jacket. With some difficulty and a certain
amount of sucking in and holding back, he got it buttoned. “The hat,” he
demanded. He put it on. It was too small.

Meanwhile the colonel slipped into the smock, with its solder-flux
stains and its worn elbows. He flapped it in front of him. “What do you
do with all this yardage? Smuggle stuff? Hey, Muscles; let’s have a look
in the cheval glass in the office. I want to see what I’d look like as a
Great Brain.”

They went into the office, through the door in the shower stall. The
doctor, all aglitter in his brother’s jacket, went first. There was a
man standing just by the outside door. He had a black cloth over his
nose and mouth and a silenced automatic in his hand.

The colonel, his smock flapping, pushed past his brother and walked out
into the room. The man shot him twice and disappeared through the door.

“Leroy! Who did it, kid?”

“I did,” said the colonel. “No! No doctor. Too late. Stay—” “You...oh.
Oh! That bullet was meant for me. The jacket switch! But why? Who was
it?”

“Never mind...him,” said the colonel. “Hired. Psychoed. Whole thing
planned. Foolproof escape. All witnesses called away. He doesn’t know
you. Or me. My idea. Was very...careful.”

“Why? Why?”

“Found out you...work with...enemy—” His voice trailed off. He closed
his eyes sleepily and lay still for a moment. Then, his face twisted
with effort, he sat suddenly upright. His voice returned—his normal,
heavy, crackling tone. “I had proof—proof enough that you were a
traitor, Muscles. I was afraid you’d get clear if you got a chance to
work on a court. But I couldn’t bring myself to kill you with my own
hands. I figured it out this way.”

“So he’d be there, and shoot me when we came out of the office. But why
didn’t you call him off?”

“Couldn’t. He had orders to shoot the civilian. You were an officer for
the moment. He didn’t know us, I tell you. I radioed to a third party,
who knows nothing. He gave this hood the starting gun.” He raised his
left hand. On the wrist was the miniature transmitter. “I called him
when you admitted you worked with the Outsiders...then you
explained...and I couldn’t call back; he was on his way here.”

“Leroy, you fool! Why didn’t you let him go ahead? Why did you make that
silly switch? My work’s done. Nothing can change it now.”

“Muscles...I’m...old-line Army. Can’t help it...don’t like this...brave
new...never could. You’re fit for it. You made it; you live in it.
Besides, you’ll...appreciate the joke better than...I would.”

“What do you mean, kid?”

“You underestimated...you thought you’d be dead when the...spacemen
heard your recording.” He laughed weakly. “You won’t be, you know.
Things’re  moving too fast.”

There was a sudden, horrible spell of coughing.

And then Dr. Simmons was alone, holding his dead brother’s head in his
arms, rocking back and forth, buffeted and drowning in an acid flood of
grief.

And behind it—far, far behind it, his articulate mind said dazedly,
Great day in the morning, he’s right! What’ll they make of me—a saint,
or a blood-red Satan?

 



SPECIAL APTITUDE


AS WE APPROACH THE YEAR 2300, the most popular parlor game seems to be
picking the Man of the Century. Some favor Bael benGerson because he
rewrote the World Constitution, and some hark back to Ikihara and his
work on radiation sickness. More often than not, you’ll hear Captain
Riley Riggs nominated, and that comes pretty close to the mark.

But it misses—it misses. I’m just an old space-hound, but I know what
I’m talking about. I was communications officer with Riggs, remember,
and even if it was all of sixty years ago I remember it as if it was
last month. The Third Venus Expedition, it was, and the trip that
changed the face of the earth. That was the space voyage that brought
back the Venus crystals, and made you and you into the soft and happy
butterflies you are today. Things were different in the old days. We
knew what it was to put in a solid five-hour workday, and we had no
personal robots the way everyone has now—we had to put our clothes on by
ourselves in the morning. Well, it was a tougher breed then, I guess.

Anyway, my bid for the Man of the Century was on that ship, the old
Starlure—but it wasn’t Riggs.

They were a. grand crew. You couldn’t want a better skipper than Riggs
nor a better mate than Blackie Farrel. There was Zipperlein, the
engineer, a big quiet man with little eyes, and his tube techs, Greaves
and Purci—a wilder pair of fire-eaters never hit black space. And there
was Lorna Bernhard, the best navigator before or since. She was my girl,
too, and she was gorgeous. There were two other women aboard—a ray
analyst by the name of Betty Ordway and Honey Lundquist, the damage
control officer.-But they were strictly from blueprints and homely to
boot.

And for comic relief we had this character Slopes. He was shipped
because of some special training in the Venus crystals. I don’t know why
they bothered to put him aboard. Any development work on the crystals
would have to be done on Earth when—if—we got back. I guess they figured
there was room for him, and maybe he’d be needed to locate the crystals
or something. Meanwhile, he was useless. We all thought he was and we
told him about it often enough to keep him reminded.

Not that he was a nuisance to anybody. It was just that he was funny. A
natural comic. I don’t mean the kind who slips an antigravity plaque
under the tablecloth and switches it on when somebody sets down the
soup, and I don’t mean the life-of-the-party who sticks a brace of
fluorescent tubes under his collar and pretends he’s a Martian. This
Slopes was just automatically funny to have around. He wasn’t quite big
enough, see, and though he wasn’t homely, he also wasn’t good-looking
enough to do himself any good. His voice wasn’t quite deep enough or
loud enough to be completely heard....I guess the best way to say it is
to call him an Almost; a thorough-going Almost. And the difference
between Almost and Altogether—at least in Slopes—was very funny to ship
out with, and he had it in every department.

None of us knew him before he came aboard, which he Hid two hours before
blast-off in civilian clothes. That was his first mistake, though why I
should call it a mistake...after all, ne was a civilian technician. Even
so, all the rest of us were from one or another of the Services, and we
just naturally had something on him from the start. Purci, the Number
Two Tube Man, was lounging in the alleyway when Slopes stepped off the
cargo-lift with his gear, and he sized the man up right now. Purci was
tall, loose-jointed, relaxed, deadpan. He took Slopes aft (down, that
is, since the Starlure stood upright on her tail-vanes when she was
aground) and showed him where to stow his gear. The locker Purci gave
him happened to be the garbage port, which scavenged out automatically
when we hit the ionosphere. There was no real harm in that—there was
plenty of gear in the slop-chest which almost fit him, and at least he
looked halfway “regulation.” But he sure was funny. The look on his face
when he went to that garbage port six hours out was indescribable. I
have to laugh now thinking about it. And for the rest of the trip all he
had to do was ask where anything was, and someone’d say, “Look in the
garbage!” and the whole crew would lay back and roar.

Probably the most fun we had was at “turnover,” when we stopped
accelerating and went into free fall. For Slope’s benefit the artificial
gravity was left off, and all hands but Zipperlein, who was at the drive
controls, gathered in the wardroom to watch. Word had been passed to
everyone but Slopes as to just when the gravity would cut out, and
believe me, it was a tough job to keep from busting out laughing and
spoiling the whole deal. We all sprawled around hard by a stanchion or a
bolted-down table so we’d have something solid to grab when the time
came. Slopes came in and sat by himself near the chow-chutes, innocent
as a babe. Greaves sat with one hand cupping his wrist watch and his
eyes on the sweep second hand. About three seconds short of turnover, he
barked, “Slopes! Come over here, huh?”

Slopes blinked at him. “Me?” He uncrossed his legs and got to his feet,
timidly. He had taken about two steps when the drive cut off.

I guess nobody ever gets really used to turnover. Your stomach gives a
delicate little heave and the semi-circular canals in your inner ear
rebel violently. You tense yourself, all over, to the cramping point,
and get no end confused because, though you know you’re falling, you
don’t know which way—and anyhow, your reflexes expect a swift and sudden
impact (because you’re falling) and there just isn’t any impact, so your
reflexes feel foolish. Your hair drifts out every which way, and through
and through, completely separated from your intense panic, is the
damnedest feeling of exhilaration and well-being. They call it
Welsbach’s Euphoria. Psychological stuff. Anxiety relief with the
gravityless state.

But I was talking about Slopes.

When Zipperlein cut the drive, Slopes just went adrift. His advancing
foot touched and lightly scraped the floor instead of making a good
solid pace. He flung his arms backward, I guess because he thought he
was falling that way, and as his shoulders checked the arm motion, they
were carried down while his feet went up. He did a slow-motion
half-somersault and would have gone all the way around if his feet
hadn’t touched the overhead and stopped his rotation. He hung in mid-air
with his head down and his feet up, with nothing to hang on to, and with
the powerful feeling that, though the blood ought to be rushing to his
face, it wasn’t. All of a sudden, everything around him acted like up,
and there wasn’t any down left anywhere. He grabbed wildly toward the
bulkhead, the overhead, the door—things he knew he couldn’t reach. After
that he subsided, trembling, and by that time the rest of us had
recovered from the weird impact of turnover—after all, we’d all felt it
before—and we could enjoy the fun.

“I said, ‘Come here’!” Greaves snapped.

Slopes sort of flailed at the air and jigged with his feet. It made no
never mind—he just stayed where he was, head down and helpless. We
roared. He flapped his lips a couple of times, and then said, real
strained, “Mmmph. Mmmph.” I thought I’d die.

“Don’t be so standoffish,” said the Lundquist chick, the damage control
officer. “Come on down and give us a kiss.”

Slopes whispered, “Please...please.”

Betty Ordway said, “Make him say ‘pretty please.’” We laughed.

“Reckon maybe he don’t like us,” I piped up. “Come on down and join the
crowd, Slopesy.”

Somebody said, “Hold out some garbage,” and everybody laughed again.

Zipperlein came in, hand over hand. “Looky there,” he said in his big,
fat, flatulent voice. “Man can fly.”

“Got his head in the clouds,” said the skipper. Everybody laughed
again—not because it was funny—because it was the skipper.

“Please,” said Slopes, “get me down. Somebody get me down.”

Greaves said, “I like a shipmate that can stand on his own feet. Slopes,
I asked you real polite-like to come on over and be sociable.”

Zipperlein laughed. “Oh—you want him?” He went from the door to the
scuttlebutt, from the wardroom table to a lighting fixture, one hairy
hand after another, until he could reach Slopes’s foot. “Greaves wants
you,” he said, and shoved.

Slopes spun end over end. He began to wail, “Ow-oo! Ow-oo!” as he
turned. Spinning, he went from one end of the wardroom to the other
toward Greaves. Greaves was ready for him, his hands firm to a
banister-bar, his feet doubled up. When Slopes reached him, he planted
his feet in Slopes’s back and booted him, spinning no longer, upship
toward the Captain. Riggs gave him a shoulder and shunted him over to
me. I butted him back to Greaves. Greaves reached but missed him, and he
hit the bulkhead with a crunch. Weight is one thing—you can get rid of
that. Mass is something else again. Slopes’s hundred and fifty-odd
pounds were all with him, at high velocity, when he hit the wall. He
hovered near it, whimpering.

“Zip,” said the Captain, “Turn on the grav plates. This could go on all
day.”

“Aye,” said the engineer, and swarmed out.

I’d been hanging on to Loma, partly because I knew she’d have hold of
something solid, and partly because I just liked to hang on to her.
“Ace,” she said to me, “whose idea was this?”

“Guess.”

“Ace,” she told me, “you know what? You’re a skunk.”

“Ah, climb off,” I grinned. “You should see what they did to me when I
was a cadet.”

She turned to look at me, and there was an expression I’d seen in her
eyes only twice before. Both times she and I had been strangers. She
said, “I guess you learn something new every day. Even about people you
know pretty well.”

“Yep,” I said, “and it’s a blessing. You can look at the stars just so
long on these trips, and then you can watch just so many visitape
recordings. After that you need something to relieve the monotony. I
think we all owe Slopes a rousing vote of thanks. He’s a very funny
man.”

She said something then but I didn’t get it. Everyone was laughing too
hard. Zipperlein had cut in the artificial gravity and Slopes had
thumped to the floor, where he writhed, hugging it to him as if he loved
it, which of course he did. Everyone does coming out of free fall.

Oh, we had a time that evening. I’ll never forget it.

 

There was a lot of chit-chat aboard about our mission. Now that we have
Venus crystals by the hundreds of millions, it’s not easy to tell you
just how valuable they were sixty years ago. The Second Venus Expedition
had picked up two of them, and both were destroyed in the tests that
determined their characteristics. The first was shattered
purposely—nobody knew at that time that it was different from any other
crystal—so it could be chemically analyzed, a solution prepared, and new
crystals grown. But Venus crystals just don’t grow. The second crystal
was subjected to some high-frequency resonance tests. Someone got a
little too experimental with the frequencies and the crystal blew up.
Data on the explosion showed that what we had just had in our hands, but
didn’t have any more, was the key to broadcast power—power so plentiful
that everyone could have it practically for free. The power we already
had, since the techniques for fissioning copper atoms had been
developed. But broadcasting it was something else again, unless a tight
beam could be aimed from power plant to receiver and kept that way, even
if the receiver was on an automobile or a ‘copter and dodging. The Venus
crystal could do that job—vibrating to power frequencies and sending
back radiations that would guide in the power beam. Get enough of those
crystals and we could do away with millions of miles of transmission
wire, and convert it to enough fuel to power Earth for a couple of
centuries. Don’t forget, mankind has been laying a network of copper
over the world for going on four hundred years, and there’s lots of it.

So for a fuel-hungry Earth, these crystals were top priority. And the
only thing that stood in our way—aside from getting to Venus—was the
Gabblers.

The First Venus Expedition discovered the Gabblers, and left them
respectfully alone. The Second Expedition discovered that the Gabblers
had a stock of the precious crystals—and got chased the hell out after
picking up two. It was our job to bring back a whole slew of the
crystals, Gabblers or no Gabblers. Although our orders ran to a
bucketful of fine detail, the essence of them was: “Treat with the
Gabblers and get crystals. If the Gabblers won’t play—get the crystals
anyway.”

“I hope we can get them peacefully,” Loma would say. “Humans have
destroyed and killed enough.”

And I’d tell her, “It don’t matter one way or the other, kid. Gabblers
aren’t people.”

“They’re civilized, aren’t they? Almost?”

“They’re savages,” I’d snort. “And monsters as well. Keep your
sympathies for nice smooth hungry human beings like me.”

Then she’d slap my hands away and go back to her computers.

Once Slopes asked me about the Gabblers. “Are they really humans?”

“Humanoids,” I told him shortly. He made me a little uncomfortable to
talk to. somehow. I mostly enjoyed his comedy. “They walk on two legs,
and they have hands with an opposed thumb, and they wear ornaments.
That’s all they use the crystals for. But they breathe ammonia instead
of oxygen and have Lord knows what kind of metabolism. Why, Slopesy?
Figuring on rootin’ in their garbage?”

“I was just asking,” he replied gently. He put on his timid almost-smile
and went aft. I remember laughing at the thought of him up against a
couple of Gabblers—the most terrifying object in history since some
ancient tale-teller dreamed up the Gryphon. All but two of the crew of
the Starbound, the Expedition Two ship, had thrown down their packs and
run for their lives at the very sight of a Gabbler. The other two had
faced them out until the Gabblers started to scream. The psychologists
had a lot to say about that noise. It was too much for any normal human
being. One of the two men broke and ran, and no shame attaches to him
for that. The other was cut off from the ship, and stood paralyzed with
fear while the Gabblers screamed and trumpeted and pounded the earth
with their scaly fists until it shook. He fired one shot in the air—he
had sense enough not to risk wounding one of the enraged creatures—to
frighten them off. Perhaps it did. All he remembers is a redoubled
bedlam—such a gush of furious animal noise that he passed out cold on
the spot. When he came to they’d gone. The two crystals were lying near
him; he picked them up and ran blindly for the ship. It took eight
months of the world’s most advanced psychotherapy to straighten him out,
and they say he’s not quite normal yet, though he’s lived to be an old
man. What fantastic psychic emanations the Gabblers used as weapons was
not known, but the idea of Slopes up against them really tickled me.

The watches passed quickly enough with him aboard to keep us amused.
I’ll never forget the night Greaves slipped a spoonful of head-mastic,
the damnedest adhesive that has ever been developed, into one of his
sandwiches. Slopes bit into it and right then his upper teeth were
welded to his lower teeth. He ran around in circles, whimpering, with
half a sandwich sticking out of his face, flapping his hands uselessly.
It was a riot. The stuff was quite harmless—it’s chemically inert, and
it yields readily to a little low-grade beta radiation, which breaks
down the molecular cohesion. But we didn’t radiate him until we were
good and ready. I wish you could have seen the fun.

 

We forgot about Slopes when we broke atmosphere on Venus, though I
rigged the infrared view-screens for Lorna—they’re a little cleaner than
radar in ammonia fog—and she took us in as neat as you please. We
located the spot where the Star-bound had landed by feeding a photo-map
of the scene into the automatic pilot and matching it to the view
screen.

Lorna threw the nose up and flipped the controls to the gyros.
Tail-first we drifted down, sitting on a diminishing pillar of fire,
while Loma’s eyes were glued to the echo-gauge which indicated the
solidity of the footing under the ship. Once let one of these
space-hoppers fall on its side and you could call yourself marooned. We
didn’t have antigravity drive in those days. It was real primitive
stuff. All the dash and daring’s gone from you young ‘uns.

There’s not much to tell about Venus. It was as unappetizing and useless
then as it is now—except that somewhere out there were the crystals we
had come for. Through the ports we could see nothing but fog. Through
the radar and infrared screens we saw rolling country, crags, pale blue
vegetation, and an occasional treelike growth far larger than such
things ought to be.

We had to sit tight for twelve hours or so white the ground under us
cooled and the chemical mish-mash of fixed and unfixed nitrogen, nitric
acid, ammonium nitrate, ozone, and water stirred up by our landing
worked itself out. Most of us slept. I don’t think Slopes did, though.
He traveled from the infrared to the radar apparatus, fore, aft, right,
left, above, and below screens. He even haunted the blank, fog-frosted
portholes, peering into that swirl of heat and chemical reaction,
straining his eyes and his heartbeat for little glimpses of that
meaningless Venusian landscape. And it was Slopes who roused us.

“Gabblers!” he jittered. “Come look! Captain Riggs! Captain Riggs!”

He was as excited as a ten-year-old, and I’ve got to admit it was
catching. We crowded around the screens.

Out among the rocks and pale blue bushes two hundred meters from the
ship were moving things which, in spite of our careful indoctrination,
made us gasp and turn away. They were bigger than men—I hadn’t figured
on that, for some reason. They were much bigger. As for the rest...I
have a vision of yellow fangs, angry red eyes, and gray-green scales
that is vivid enough—I’d as soon not talk much about it.

“Let’s have some sound,” said the skipper. I went into the
communications shack and cranked up an amplifier. I switched in an
exterior microphone and plugged the output into the intercom. The ship
filled with the background noises of an alien planet—a hollow
wind-sound, startling because the fog seemed so still; bird-like squeaks
and screams, distant and different; and over it all, the repulsive
chatter and back-chatter of the Gabblers—the sound that had given them
their name. It was an insane sound, hoarse and seemingly uncontrolled.
It ranged harshly up and down the scale, and it differed rather horribly
from the yammering of apes in that it seemed to carry consistent
intelligence.

“Tubes!” barked the Captain. “Break out the suit stores and walkie gear.
Sparks, stand by your shack. I want separate recordings of each suit
transmitted. Navigator, tend the screens.’ Four volunteers here by the
exit port. Jump.”

Now, I don’t want to run down the courage of the Space Service. It might
be nice to say that everyone aboard clicked his heels and said “At your
command, sire!” On the other hand, when I was telling you about the
Starlure men who broke and ran when they saw the Gabblers, I think I
made it clear that under the circumstances they carried no shame with
them. Riggs asked for four volunteers; he got two: Purci, who, without
dramatics, genuinely did not give a damn, and Honey Lundquist, who I
suppose wanted to be noteworthy for something besides being as homely as
a blue mud fence. Me, I was glad I’d been assigned to my communications
equipment and had no decision to make. As for the rest who didn’t
volunteer, I don’t blame them. Not even Slopes, though I still thought
it a fine idea for him to face up a couple of hungry Gabblers, just for
the comedy of contrast.

Riggs made no comment. He just stripped and got into space harness, the
other two following. The rest of us helped them pull on the skin-tight
rig and clamp down the globular transparent helmets. They tested their
air and their communications, and then went to the inside gate of the
airlock. I opened it for them.

“We’re going to make contact,” said Riggs stonily. His voice came from
the intercom speakers rather than directly from him. It was eerie.
“We’ll try to make it peaceful first. So no side arms. I’m taking a
pencil gun, just in case. You two stay close together and behind me.
We’ll stay hard by the ship, and under no circumstances let ourselves
get cut off. Check communications.”

“Check!” yelped Purci.

“Check!” whispered Honey Lundquist.

The skipper marched into the lock with the other two close behind him. I
rumbled the gate shut behind them, and opened the outer lock with the
remote control. All hands left aboard dived for the view-screens.

The Gabblers, twenty or thirty of them, stuck close to the bush.
Although we could not see the skipper and his volunteers yet, it was
immediately evident that they had been seen. The Gabblers came out with
a rush, and a more terrifying spectacle these old eyes have not seen. In
the intercom, I heard Purci say, “Ugh!,” and Honey say, “Eeek!” The
Captain said, “Steady in an unsteady voice. Behind me, there was a faint
thunk as Betty Ordway passed out. I let her lie and went back to my
screen.

As if by common agreement, the bulk of Gabblers halted at the crest of
the gentle slope between us and the brush, and three of them came
forward together, one ahead and two behind. The rest set up such
a-roaring that the giant trees visibly quivered. It was just about then
that the skipper moved far enough out to be visible, with Honey and
Purci close behind him. They stopped, and the three advancing Gabblers
stopped, and, incredibly, the crowd at the top of the hill doubled its
noise. I couldn’t help it—I turned down the gain control on the outside
mike. I couldn’t stand it. Lorna thanked me. Slopes wiped his face,
working the handkerchief around his eyes so he wouldn’t miss anything.

There was a moment’s tension—I don’t mean silence; the gabbling kept up
at that astounding volume, but nothing moved. When movement started, it
was awfully fast.

The Captain raised both arms in what he obviously felt was a gesture of
peace. Judging by what happened the Gabblers took it as a deadly insult.
They went straight up in the air, all three of them, and hit the ground
running. They traveled in great bounds, yowling and roaring as they
came, and behind them the mass of their followers started down the
slope. Over the racket I heard Honey Lundquist scream. The three
space-suited figures looked very tiny down there at the approach of that
wave of bellowing giants. I saw one of the three go down in a faint.
Riggs yelled a futile, “Halt or I fire!” and aimed the pencil gun. One
volunteer scooped up the limp form of the’ other, draped it across the
shoulders of the space suit, and began lumbering toward the ship. Riggs
aimed, fired, turned, and ran without waiting to see what his shot had
accomplished.

It was Slopes who leaped to the lock control and pressed his nose to the
vision port to make sure all three were safely inside, and then slammed
the outer door. He switched on the air-replacement pump that would get
rid of the ammonia gas in the lock, and dived back to the screens.

There was a cluster of Gabblers around the one Riggs had shot. The noise
was fiendish. I went to the shack and turned down the volume again, but
you could actually hear that racket through your feet on the deck
plates.

The inner-lock gate slid open, and a very pale-faced skipper stepped
out. Behind him were his volunteers—Honey Lundquist looking winded, and
Purci draped over her shoulders. “He fainted,” she said unnecessarily
and dumped him in our arms.

We rolled him into a corner and kept our eyes on the screens. “Anyway, I
got one of them,” breathed Riggs.

“No, you didn’t, Captain,” said Slopes. Sure enough, the prostrate
Gabbler was sitting up, weaving his massive tusked head from side to
side and shrieking.

“Are they bullet-proof?” Greaves mouthed.

“No,” Slopes said devastatingly. “The skipper shot him smack on that
crystal he had around his neck.”

Captain Riggs groaned: “And that’s about as close as we’ll get to those
crystals this trip,” he predicted morosely. “They never told me it was
going to be like this. Why in time didn’t they send a battle cruiser?”

“To kill off these creatures and loot their bodies for their ornaments?”
asked Lorna scornfully. “We’ve come a long way in the last thousand
years, haven’t we?”

“Now that’s not the way to look at it,” I began, but Riggs cut in,
“You’re right, you’re right, Lorna. Unless we get them to cooperate,
we’ll spend years in finding out how they make the crystals. Or where
they mine them. And we haven’t got years. We’ve got about four more
days.”

See, sixty years ago a ship could fuel for just so much blasting. A trip
was timed for the closest transit of the planets. To leave Venus and
chase after Earth as the planets drew apart again in space was out of
the question. Now, of course, with power to throw away, it happens every
day.

We got Purci out of his suit and revived him. We were all ready to swear
that he’d had some secret weapon used on him. He didn’t scare easily. It
was probably just his particular response to that particular level of
noise—a completely individual thing. But at the moment we were ready to
believe anything of the Gabblers.

The ship began to tremble.

“They’re attacking us!” yelped Greaves.

But they weren’t. There were more than ever of them. The entire slope
was covered with bulky, scaly, horribly manlike monsters. They were all
gabbling away insanely, and in great numbers they’d squat down and pound
on the ground with their mallet-like fists.

“Working theirselves up into a frenzy,” Zipperlein diagnosed. “Skipper,
let’s blast off. We’re what you might call underequipped for this sort
of stuff.”

Riggs thought. “We’ll stick it out for a while,” he said finally. “I’d
like to feel I’d done everything I could—even if it’s just sitting here
until we have to leave.”

I had my doubts, and from the looks of them, so had the others. But no
one said anything. The ship trembled. We went and had chow.

 

About thirteen hours before blast-off time I was staring glumly into a
screen at the swarm of Gabblers when I sensed someone beside me. It was
Slopes. He’d been left pretty much alone in the past three days. I guess
everyone was too depressed and nervous to want fun.

“Look at ’em,” I growled, waving at the screen. “I don’t know whether
it’s the same ones or whether they’ve been working in relays to keep the
hassle going all this time. You’d have to be a Venusian to tell one from
another. I can’t tell ’em apart.”

He looked at me as if I’d just told him where the crown jewels were hid,
and walked off without a word. He began pulling off his clothes. None of
us paid any attention. If we thought anything at all, I guess we figured
he was going to take a shower. Before any of us knew what was happening,
he’d skinned into a space suit and was clamping on the helmet.

“Hey! Slopes! Where do you think you’re going?”

He said something but I couldn’t hear. I reached back and flipped on the
intercom, which would pick up his suit radio. He repeated his remark,
which was simply, “Out.” He stepped into the airlock and slid the door
shut.

Riggs came pounding out of the control room. “Where’s that crazy fool
go—” He went for the airlock, but the red light over it blazed,
indicating that the chamber was now open to the outside, and Slopes was
gone.

“Get on his beam,” Riggs snapped, and grabbed a mike from my bench.
“Slopes!” he roared.

I punched buttons. Slopes’s voice came in, far more calm and clear than
I had ever heard it before.

“Yes, Captain.”

“Get back in here!”

“I’m going to try for those crystals.”

“You’re trying for some suicide. Get back here. That’s an order!”

“Sorry, Captain,” said Slopes laconically. Riggs and I stared at each
other, amazed. Slopes said, before the Captain could splutter out
another word, “I have an idea about these Gabblers, and I’m the only one
qualified to carry it out.”

“You’ll get killed!” Riggs bellowed.

“I will if I’m wrong,” said Slopes’s quiet voice. “Now, if it’s all the
same to you. I’ll switch off. I have to think.”

Riggs was filling his lungs when he saw Slopes’s radio-response
indicator wink out on the board. The breath came out in a single obscene
syllable.

All hands went to the screens, in which Slopes was just visible walking
away from the ship. “Qualified!” I snorted. “What the hell is he
qualified for?”

“Humanity,” said Lorna. I didn’t know what she meant by that. Her face
was white and strained as she watched the screen.

The Gabblers went into a flurry of activity when they saw him. They
crowded forward, practically stepping on one another to get at him.
Three or four of the fastest raced out to him, screaming and clashing
their tusks. As if to gloat over his helplessness, they circled him,
leaping and yammering, occasionally dropping to drum powerfully on the
ground with their fists. Then suddenly one of them picked him up, held
him high over its head, and raced up the slope with him. The mob parted
and closed again behind the creature, and the whole scaly crowd followed
as Slopes was borne up out of sight in the blue under-brush.

“Of all the ways in the world to commit suicide,” breathed Purci. Honey
Lundquist began to sob.

“It isn’t suicide,” said Lorna. “It’s murder. And you murdered him.”

“Who?” I demanded. “Me?”

“Yes, you,” she flared, “you and all the rest of you. That poor little
tyke never hurt anyone. You did the rottenest thing that can be done to
a human being—you persecuted him for what he was, and not for anything
he’d done. And now he proves himself man enough—human enough—to give his
life for the mission we’ve all failed on.”

“If he went out there to get killed,” said Betty Ordway with icy logic,
“it’s suicide, not murder. And if his going out there had anything to do
with getting the crystals, I don’t see it.”

“I didn’t see you giving him a tumble,” said Honey smugly. Loma didn’t
try to fight back. “I didn’t really know what he was until just now,”
she said ashamedly, and went to her quarters.

“We ought to go out after him,” said Greaves. Everyone just let that
remark lie there. Riggs said, “We blast off in eleven-point-three hours,
whatever,” and went Into the chart room. The rest of us stood around
trying not to look at one another, feeling, Maybe we were a little hard
on the guy, and damn it, we never did him any harm, did we?

It hit all of us at the same second, I think, that after three days of
incessant babbling and ground-thumping, it was deadly quiet outside.
Everybody started to talk, and shut up after two syllables. And I think
we all began to understand then what Loma had been driving at.

It was Purci who said it for us, softly, “He didn’t want to come back
into this ship. He didn’t want to go back to Earth. He didn’t belong
anywhere, because no one ever bothered to take him in. And I guess he
just naturally got tired of that.”

I don’t think fifty words were spoken—outside the line of duty—in the
next ten hours.

 

It couldn’t have been more than ninety minutes before blast-off when we
heard the Gabblers coming back. Heads came up one by one.

“They want another bite to eat,” someone said. Someone else—one of the
girls—swore abruptly.

I threw power into the screens. The underbrush was alive with Gabblers,
swarming toward the ship. “Skipper!” I called “blast off, huh? And singe
the scales off’n them.”

“You keep your big stupid fat mouth shut,” said Loma. It was barely a
whisper, but I’ll swear you could hear it all over the ship. “They’re
bringing back Slopes!”

She was right. She was so right. With his legs wrapped around the neck
of a capering Gabbler, his face slightly blue because of a dwindling
oxygen supply in his suit, and a wide grin, Slopes rode up to the ship,
followed and surrounded by hundreds of the scaly horrors. The Gabbler he
rode knelt, and Slopes climbed stiffly off. He waved his hand, and a
full fifty of the creatures dropped to their haunches and began pounding
the dirt with their fists. Slopes walked wearily toward the ship, and
four Gabblers followed him, each carrying a bulky bundle on its head.

“Port open?” someone managed to say. I checked it. It was. There were
heavy thumps in the port, and a nerve-rackingly close blast of Gobbler
chatter. Then the red light went out and we heard the whine of the
air-transfer pump.

At last the door slid open. We fell all over each other to get his
helmet and suit off. “I’m hungry,” he said. “And I’m awful tired. And I
swear I’ll be deaf for life.”

We rubbed him down and wrapped him up and fed him hot soup. He fell
asleep before he was half finished. About then it was blast-off time. We
secured him in his bunk and lashed his four big bundles down and, after
a couple of short puffs to warn the Gabblers back, we reached for the
stars.

In the four bundles were eight hundred and ninety-two perfect Venus
crystals. And on the return trip we tried so hard to make up to Slopes
for what he’d been through all his life that we actually began to be
jealous of each other. And Slopes—he was no longer an Almost. He was
very definitely an Altogether, with a ring to his voice with a spring to
his step.

He worked like a slave on those crystals. “They’ve got to be
synthesized,” was all he’d say at first. “Humanity and the Gabblers must
be kept apart.” So—we helped him. And bit by bit the story came out. The
nearer he got to analyzing the complex lattice of those crystals, the
more he’d say. So before we reached Luna we found out what he’d done.

“Those Gabblers,” he said. “You had them figured wrong. That’s the damn
thing about a human being—anything he doesn’t understand, he fears.
That’s natural enough—but why does he have to assume that every emotion
he causes in a strange animal means the animal is going to attack?

“Just suppose you’re a small animal—say a chipmunk. You’re hiding under
a table eating cake crumbs and minding your own business. There’s a
half-dozen humans in the room and one of them is droning on about a
traveling farmer and a salesman’s daughter. He reaches the punch line
and everybody laughs. But what about Mr. Chipmunk? All he knows is that
there’s a great, explosive roar of animal sound. He all but turns
himself inside out with fright.

“That’s exactly what happened with human beings and the Gabblers. Only
the humans were the chipmunks, for a change.”

Someone exploded, “You mean those lizard-apes was laughing at us?”

“Listen to him,” said the New Slopes. “How indignant can you get? Yes, I
mean exactly that. Human beings are the funniest things the Gabblers
have ever seen in their lives. When I went out to them they carried me
off to their village, called in neighbors for miles around, and had
themselves a ball. I couldn’t do anything wrong. Wave my arm—they
roared. Sit on the ground—they doubled up. Run and jump—they lay down
and died.”

Suddenly he shoved aside his work and spoke from down deep inside
himself. “That hurts, somehow, doesn’t it? Humans shouldn’t be
laughable. They’ve got to be the kings of creation, all full of dignity
and power. It’s inexcusable for a human being to be funny unless he
tries to be. Well, let me tell you something—the Gabblers gave me
something that no human being ever was able to give me—a sense of
belonging to humanity. Because what you people went through when the
Gabblers first rushed up to you, laughing, is what I’ve been going
through all my life. And it’s never going to happen again. Not to me;
for thanks to the Gabblers I know that all you superior joes are just as
funny as I am.

“The Gabblers are gentle, grateful people. They enjoyed the show and
they showered gifts on me. When I indicated that I liked crystals, they
went out and got more crystals than I could carry.

“And I’m just as grateful, and that’s why these crystals are going to be
manufactured so cheaply on earth that there will never be another Venus
Expedition for them. Don’t you see? If mankind ever makes dose contact
with a race that laughs at them on sight—mankind will exterminate that
race.”

On second thought, maybe they shouldn’t nominate Slopes as Man of the
Century. Maybe he wouldn’t like for the Gabblers to get that much
publicity. And besides, he’s a stinker. He married my girl.

 



MEWHU’S JET


“We INTERRUPT THIS PROGRAM TO ANNOUNCE—”

“Jack, don’t jump like that! And you’ve dropped ashes all over your—”

“Aw, Iris, honey, let me listen to—”

“—at first identified as a comet, the object is pursuing an erratic
course through the stratosphere, occasionally dipping as low as—”

“You make me nervous, Jack. You’re an absolute slave to the radio. I
wish you paid that much attention to me.”

“Darling, I’ll argue the point, or pay attention to you, or anything in
the wide world you like when I’ve heard this announcement; but please,
please let me listen!”

“—dents of the East Coast are warned to watch for the approach of this
ob—”

“Iris, don’t—”

Click!

“Well, of all the selfish, inconsiderate, discourteous—”

“That will do, Jack Garry. It’s my radio as much as yours, and I have a
right to turn it off when I want to.”

“Might I ask why you find it necessary to turn it off at this moment?”

“Because I know the announcement will be repeated any number of times if
it’s important, and you’ll shush me every time. Because I’m not
interested in that kind of thing and don’t see why I should have it
rammed down my throat. Because the only thing you ever want to listen to
is something which couldn’t possibly affect us. But mostly because you
yelled at me!”

“I did not yell at you!”

“You did! And you’re yelling now!”

“Mom! Daddy!”

“Oh, Molly, darling, we woke you up!”

“Poor bratlet. Hey, what about your slippers?”

“It isn’t cold tonight, Daddy. What was that on the radio?”

“Something buzzing around in the sky, darling. I didn’t hear it all.”

“A space ship, I betcha.”

“You see? You and your so-called science fiction!”

At which point, something like a giant’s fist clouted off the two-room
top story of the seaside cottage and scattered it down the beach. The
lights winked out, and outside the whole waterfront lit up with a brief,
shattering blue glare.

“Jacky darling, are you hurt?”

“Mom, he’s bleedin’!”

“Jack, honey, say something. Please say something.”

“Urrrrgh,” said Jack Garry obediently, sitting up with a soft clatter of
pieces of falling lath and plaster. He put his hands gently on the sides
of his head and whistled. “Something hit the house.”

His red-headed wife laughed half-hysterically. “Not really, darling.”
She put her arms around him, whisked some dust out of his hair, and
began stroking his neck. “I’m...frightened Jack.”

“You’re frightened!” He looked around shakily in the dim moonlight that
filtered in. Radiance from an unfamiliar place caught his bleary gaze,
and he clutched Iris’ arm. “Upstairs...it’s gone!” he said hoarsely,
struggling to his feet. “Molly’s room...Molly—”

“I’m here, Daddy. Hey, you’re squeezin’!”

“Happy little family,” said Iris, her voice trembling. “Vacationing in a
quiet little cottage by the sea, so Daddy can write technical articles
while Mummy regains her good disposition—without a phone, without movies
within miles, and living in a place where the roof flies away. Jack—what
hit us?”

“One of those things you were talking about,” said Jack sardonically.
“One of the things you refuse to be interested in that couldn’t possibly
affect us. Remember?”

“The thing the radio was talking about?”

“I ‘wouldn’t be surprised. We’d better get out of here. This place may
fall in on us, or burn, or something.”

“An’ we’ll all be kilt,” crooned Molly.

“Shut up, Molly. Iris, I’m going to poke around. Better go on out and
pick us a place to pitch the tent—if I can find the tent.”

“Tent?” Iris gasped.

“Boy oh boy,” said Molly.

“Jack Garry, I’m not going to go to bed in a tent. Do you realize that
this place will be swarming with people in no time flat?”

“O.K., O.K. Only get out from under what’s left of the house. Go for a
swim. Take a walk. Or g’wan to bed in Molly’s room.”

I’m not going out there by myself.”

Jack sighed. “I should’ve asked you to stay in here,” he muttered. “If
you’re not the contrariest woman ever to—Be quiet Molly.”

“I didn’t say anything.”

Meeew-w-w!

“Aren’t you doing that caterwauling?”

“No, Daddy, truly.”

Iris said, “I’d say a cat was caught in the wreckage except that cats
are smart and no cat would ever come near this place.”

W un-wuh-wuh-meeee-ew-w-w!

“What a dismal sound!”

“Jack, that isn’t a cat.”

Mmmmmew. Mmm—m-m-m.

“Whatever it is,” Jack said, “it can’t be big enough to be afraid of and
make a funny little noise like that. He squeezed Iris’ arm and, stepping
carefully over the rubble, began peering in and around it. Molly
scrambled beside him. He was about to caution her against making so much
noise, and then thought better of it. What difference would a little
racket make?

The noise was not repeated, and five minutes’ searching elicited
nothing. Garry went back to his wife, who was fumbling around the
shambles of a living room, pointlessly setting chairs and coffee tables
back on their legs.

“I didn’t find anyth—”

“Yipe!”

“Molly! What is it?”

Molly was just outside, in the shrubbery. “Daddy, you better come
quick!”

Spurred by the urgency of her tone, he went crashing outside. He found
Molly standing rigid, trying to cram both her fists in her mouth at the
same time. And at her feet was a man with silver-gray skin and a broken
arm, who mewed at him.

“—Guard and Navy Department have withdrawn their warnings. The pilot of
a Pan-American transport has reported that the object disappeared into
the zenith. It was last seen eighteen miles east of Normandy Beach, New
Jersey. Reports from the vicinity describe it as traveling very slowly,
with a hissing noise. Although it reached within a few feet of the
ground several times, no damage has been reported. Inves—”

“Think of that,” said Iris, switching off the little three-way portable.
“No damage.”

“Yeah. And if no one saw the thing hit, no one will be out here to
investigate. So you can retire to your downy couch in the tent without
fear of being interviewed.”

“Go to sleep? Are you mad? Sleep in that flimsy tent with that mewing
monster lying there?”

“Oh, heck, Mom, he’s sick! He wouldn’t hurt anybody.”

They sat around a cheerful fire, fed by roof shingles. Jack had set up
the tent without much trouble. The silver-gray man was stretched out in
the shadows, sleeping lightly and emitting an occasional moan.

Jack smiled at Iris. “Y’know, I love your silly chatter, darling. The
way you turned to and set his arm was a pleasure to watch. You didn’t
think of him as a monster while you were tending to him.”

“Didn’t I, though? Maybe monster was the wrong word to use. Jack, he has
only one bone in his forearm!”

“He-has what? Oh, nonsense, honey! ‘Tain’t scientific. He’d have to have
a ball-and-socket joint in his wrist.”

“He has a ball-and-socket joint in his wrist.”

“This I have to see,” Jack muttered. He picked up a flash lantern and
went over to the long prone figure.

Silver eyes blinked up at the light. There was something queer about
them. He turned the beam closer. The pupils were not black in that
light, but dark green. They all but closed—from the sides, like a cat’s.
Jack’s breath wheezed out. He ran the light over the man’s body. It was
clad in a bright-blue roomy bathrobe effect, with a yellow sash. The
sash had a buckle which apparently consisted of two pieces of yellow
metal; there seemed to be nothing to keep them together. They just
stayed. When the man had fainted, just as they found him, it had taken
almost all Jack’s strength to pull them apart.

“Iris.”

She got up and came over to him. “Let the poor devil sleep.” “Iris, what
color was his robe?”

“Red, with a...but it’s blue!”

“Is now. Iris, what on earth have we got here?”

“I don’t know. I don’t know. Some poor thing that escaped from an
institution for—for—”

“For what?”

“How should I know?” she snapped. “There must be some place where they
send creatures that get born like that.”

“Creatures don’t get born like that, he isn’t deformed. He’s just
different.”

“I see what you mean. I don’t know why I see what you mean, but I’ll
tell you something.” She stopped, and was quiet for so long that he
turned to her, surprised. She said slowly, “I ought to be afraid of him,
because he’s strange, and ugly, but—I’m not.”

“Me too.”

“Molly, go back to bed.”

“He’s a leprechaun.”

“Maybe you’re right. Go on to bed. chicken, and in the morning you can
ask him where he keeps his crock of gold.”

“Gee.” She went off a little way and stood on one foot, drawing a small
circle in the sand with the other. “Daddy?”

“Yes, Molly-m’love.”

“Can I sleep in the tent tomorrow, too?”

“If you’re good.”

“Daddy obviously means,” said Iris acidly, “that if you’re not good
he’ll have a roof on the house by tomorrow night.”

“I’ll be good.” She disappeared into the tent.

The gray man mewed.

“Well, old guy, what is it?”

The man reached over and fumbled at his splinted arm.

“It hurts him,” said Iris. She knelt beside him and, taking the wrist of
his good arm, lifted it away from the splint, where he was clawing. The
man did not resist, but lay and looked at her with pain-filled, slitted
eyes.

“He has six fingers,” Jack said. “See?” He knelt beside his wife and
gently took the man’s wrist. He whistled. “It is a ball-and-socket.”

“Give him some aspirin.”

“That’s a good...wait.” Jack stood pulling his lip in puzzlement. “Do
you think we should?”

“Why not?”

“We don’t know where he comes from. We know nothing of his body
chemistry, or what any of our medicines might do to him.”

“He...what do you mean, where he comes from?”

“Iris, will you open up your mind just a little? In the face of evidence
like this, are you going to even attempt to cling to the idea that this
man comes from anywhere on this earth?” Jack said with annoyance. “You
know your anatomy. Don’t tell me you ever saw a human freak with skin
and bones like that! That belt buckle, that material in his
clothes...come on, now. Drop your prejudices and give your brains a
chance.

“You’re suggesting things that simply don’t happen!”

“That’s what the man in the street said—in Hiroshima. That’s what the
old-time aeronaut said from the basket of his balloon when they told him
about heavier-than-air craft. That’s what—”

“All right, all right, Jack. I know the rest of the speech. If you want
dialectics instead of what’s left of a night’s sleep, I might point out
that the things you have mentioned have all concerned human endeavors.
Show me any new plastic, a new metal, a new kind of engine, and though I
may not begin to understand it, I can accept it because it is of human
origin. But this, this man, or whatever he is—”

“I know,” said Jack, more gently. “It’s frightening because it’s
strange, and away down underneath we feel that anything strange is
necessarily dangerous. That’s why we wear our best manners for strangers
and not for our friends. But I still don’t think we should give this
character any aspirin.”

“He seems to breathe the same air we do. He perspires, he talks...I
think he talks.”

“You have a point. Well, if it’ll ease his pain at all, it may be worth
trying. Give him just one.”

Iris went to the pump with a collapsible cup from her first-aid kit, and
filled it. Kneeling by the silver-skinned man, she propped up his head,
gently put the aspirin between his lips, and brought the cup to his
mouth. He sucked the water in greedily, and then went completely limp.

“Oh-oh. I was afraid of that.”

Iris put her hand over the man’s heart. “Jack!”

“Is he...what is it, Iris?”

“Not dead,-if that’s what you mean. Will you feel this?” Jack put his
hand beside Iris’. The heart was beating with massive, slow blows, about
eight to the minute. Under it, out of phase completely with the main
beat, was another, an extremely fast, sharp beat, which felt as if it
were going about three hundred.

“He’s having some sort of palpitation,” Jack said.

“And in two hearts at once!”

Suddenly the man raised his head and uttered a series of ululating
shrieks and howls. His eyes opened wide, and across them fluttered a
translucent nicitating membrane. He lay perfectly still with his mouth
open, shrieking and gargling. Then with a lightning movement he snatched
Jack’s hand to his mouth. A pointed tongue, light-orange and four inches
longer than it had any right to be, flicked out and licked Jack’s hand.
Then the strange eyes closed, the shrieks died to a whimper and faded
out, and the man relaxed.

“Sleeping now,” said Iris. “Oh, I hope we haven’t done anything to him!”

“We’ve done something. I just hope it isn’t serious. Anyhow, his arm
isn’t bothering him any. That’s all we were worried about in the first
place.”

Iris put a cushion under the man’s oddly planed head and touched the
beach mattress he was lying on. “He has a beautiful mustache,” she said.
“Like silver. He looks very old and wise.”

“So does an owl. Let’s go to bed.”

Jack woke early, from a dream in which he had bailed out of a flying
motorcycle with an umbrella that turned into a candy cane as he fell. He
landed in the middle of some sharp-toothed crags which gave like sponge
rubber. He was immediately surrounded by mermaids who looked like Iris
and who had hands shaped like spur gears. But nothing frightened him. He
awoke smiling, inordinately happy.

Iris was still asleep. Outside somewhere he heard the tinkle of Molly’s
laugh. He sat up and looked at Molly’s camp cot. It was empty. Moving
quietly, so as not to disturb his wife, he slid his feet into moccasins
and went out.

Molly was on her knees beside their strange visitor, who was squatting
on his haunches and—

They were playing patty-cake.

“Molly!”

“Yes, Daddy.”

“What are you trying to do? Don’t you realize that that man has a broken
arm?”

“Oh, gosh, I’m sorry. Do you s’pose I hurt him?”

“I don’t know. It’s very possible,” said Jack Garry testily. He went to
the alien, took his good hand.

The man looked up at him and smiled. His smile was peculiarly engaging.
All of his teeth were pointed, and they were very widely spaced.
“Eeee-yu mow madibu Mewhu,” he said.

“That’s his name,” Molly said excitedly. She leaned forward and tugged
at the man’s sleeve. “Mewhu. Hey, Mewhu!” And she pointed at her chest.

“Mooly,” said Mewhu. “Mooly—Geery.”

“See, Daddy?” Molly said ecstatically. “See?” She pointed at her father.
“Daddy. Dah—dee.”

“Deedy,” said Mewhu.

“No, silly. Daddy.”

“Dewdy.”

“Dah-dy!”

Jack, quite entranced, pointed at himself and said, “Jack.”

“Jeek.”

“Good enough. Molly, the man can’t say ‘ah.’ He can say ‘oo’ or ‘ee’ but
not ‘ah.’ That’s good enough.”

Jack examined the splints. Iris had done a very competent job. When she
realized that instead of the radius-ulna development of a true human,
Mewhu had only one bone in his forearm, she had set the arm and laid on
two splints instead of one. Jack grinned. Intellectually, Iris would not
accept Mewhu’s existence even as a possibility; but as a nurse, she not
only accepted his body structure but skillfully compensated for its
differences.

“I guess he wants to be polite,” said Jack to his repentant daughter,
“and if you want to play patty-cake he’ll go along with you, even if it
hurts. Don’t take advantage of him, chicken.”

“I won’t, Daddy.”

Jack started up the fire and had a stick crane built and hot water
bubbling by the time Iris emerged. “Takes a cataclysm to get you to
start breakfast,” she grumbled through a pleased smile. “When were you a
Boy Scout?”

“Matter of fact,” said Garry, “I was once. Will modom now take over?”

“Modom will. How’s the patient?”

“Thriving. He and Molly had a patty-cake tournament this morning. His
clothes, by the way, are red again.”

“Jack, where does he come from?”

“I haven’t asked him yet. When I learn to caterwaul, or he learns to
talk, perhaps we’ll find out. Molly has already elicited the information
that his name’s Mewhu.” Garry grinned. “And he calls me ‘Jeek.’”

“Can’t pronounce an ‘r,’ hm?”

“That’ll do, woman. Get on with the breakfast.”

While Iris busied herself over the fire, Jack went to look at the house.
It wasn’t as bad as he had thought—a credit to poor construction.
Apparently the upper two rooms were a late addition and had just been
perched onto the older, comparatively flat-topped lower section. The
frame of Molly’s bed was bent beyond repair, but the box spring and
mattress were intact. The old roof seemed fairly sound, where the
removal of the jerry-built little top story had exposed it. The living
room would be big enough for him and Iris, and Molly’s bed could be set
up in the study. There were tools and lumber in the garage, the weather
was warm and clear, and Jack Garry was very much attracted by the
prospect of hard work for which he would not get paid, as long as it
wasn’t writing. By the time Iris called him for breakfast, he had most
of the debris cleared from the roof and a plan of action mapped out. All
he would have to do would be to cover the hole where the stairway
landing had been and go over the roof for potential leaks. A good rain,
he reflected, would search those out for him quickly enough.

“What about Mewhu?” Iris asked as she handed him an aromatic plate of
eggs and bacon. “If we feed him any of this, do you think he’ll throw
another fit?”

Jack looked at their visitor, who sat on the other side of the fire,
very close to Molly, gazing big-eyed at their breakfasts.

“I don’t know. We could give him a little, I suppose.”

Mewhu inhaled his sample and wailed for more. He ate a second helping,
and when Iris refused to fry more eggs, he gobbled toast and jam. Each
new thing he tasted he would nibble at, then he would blink twice and
bolt it down. The only exception was the coffee. One taste was
sufficient. He put it down on the ground and very carefully, very
delicately overturned it.

“Can you talk to him?” Iris asked suddenly.

“He can talk to me,” declared Molly.

“I’ve heard him,” Jack said.

“Oh, no. I don’t mean that,” Molly denied vehemently. “I can’t make any
sense out of that stuff.”

“What do you mean, then?”

“I...I dunno, Mommy. He just—talks to me, that’s all.” Jack and Iris
looked at each other. “Oh,” said Iris. Jack shook his head, looking at
his daughter carefully, as if he had not really seen her before. He
could think of nothing to say, and rose.

“Think the house can be patched up?”

“Oh, sure.” He laughed. “You never did like the color of the upstairs
rooms, anyway.”

“I don’t know what’s got into me,” Iris said thoughtfully. “I’d have
kicked like a mule at any part of this. I’d have packed up and gone home
if, say, just a wall was gone upstairs, or if there were just a hole in
the roof, or if this...this android phenomenon arrived suddenly. But
when it all happens at once—I can take it all.”

“Question of perspective. Show me a nagging woman and I’ll show you one
who hasn’t enough to worry about.”

“You’ll get out of my sight or you’ll have this frying pan bounced off
your skull,” said Iris steadily. Jack got.

Molly and Mewhu trailed after him as he returned to the house—and stood
side by side goggling at him as he mounted the ladder.

“Whatsha doing, Daddy?”

“Marking off the edges of this hole where the stairway hits the place
where the roof isn’t, so I can clean up the edges with a saw.”

“Oh.”

Jack roughed out the area with a piece of charcoal, lopped off the more
manageable rough edges with a hatchet, cast about for his saw. It was
still in the garage. He climbed down, got it, climbed up again, and
began to saw. Twenty minutes of this, and sweat was streaming down his
face. He knocked off, climbed down, doused his head at the pump, lit a
cigarette, climbed back up on the roof.

“Why don’t you jump off and back?”

The roofing job was looking larger and the day seemed warmer than it
had. Jack’s enthusiasm was in inverse proportion to these factors.
“Don’t be funny, Molly.”

“Yes, but Mewhu wants to know.”

“Oh, he does. Ask him to try it.”

He went back to work. A few minutes later, when he paused for a breath,
Mewhu and Molly were nowhere to be seen. Probably over by the tent, in
Iris’ hair, he thought, and went on sawing.

“Daddy!”

Daddy’s unaccustomed arm and shoulder were, by this time, yelling for
help. The dry softwood alternately cheesed the saw out of line and bound
it. He answered impatiently, “Well, what?”

“Mewhu says to come. He wants to show you something.”

“Show me what? I haven’t time to play now, Molly. I’ll attend to Mewhu
when we get a roof over our heads again.”

“But it’s for you.”

“What is it?”

“The thing in the tree.”

“Oh, all right.” Prompted more by laziness than by curiosity, Jack
climbed back down the ladder. Molly was waiting. Mewhu was not in sight.

“Where is he?”

“By the tree,” she said with exaggerated patience, taking his hand.
“Come on. It’s not far.”

She led him around the house and across the bumpy track that was
euphemistically known as a road. There was a tree down on the other
side. He looked from it to the house, saw that in line with the felled
tree and his damaged roof were more broken trees, where something had
come down out of the sky, skimmed the tops of the trees, angling closer
to the ground until it wiped the top off his house, and had then risen
up and up—to where?

They went deeper into the woods for ten minutes, skirting an occasional
branch or fallen tree top, until they came to Mewhu, who was leaning
against a young maple. He smiled, pointed up into a tree, pointed to his
arm, to the ground. Jack looked at him in puzzlement.

“He fell out of the tree and broke his arm,” said Molly.

“How do you know?”

“Well, he just did. Daddy.”

“Nice to know. Now can I get back to work?”

“He wants you to get the thing in the tree.”

Jack looked upward. Hung on a fork two thirds of the way up the tree was
a gleaming object, a stick about five feet long with a streamlined shape
on each end. rather like the wingtip tanks of a P-80. “What on earth is
that?”

“I dunno. I Can’t—He tol’ me, but I dunno. Anyway, it’s for you, so you
don’t...so you don’t…” She looked at Mewhu for a moment. The alien’s
silver mustache seemed to swell a little. “—so you don’t have to climb
the ladder so much.”

“Molly, how did you know that?”

“He told me, that’s all. Gosh, Daddy, don’t be mad. I don’t know how,
honest; he just did, that’s all.”

“I don’t get it,” muttered Jack. “Anyhow, what’s this about that thing
in the tree? I’m supposed to break my arm too?”

“It isn’t dark.”

“What do you mean by that?”

Molly shrugged. “Ask him.”

“Oh, I think I catch that. He fell out of the tree because it was dark.
He thinks I can get up there and get the whatzit without hurting myself
because I can see what I am doing. He also flatters me. Or is it
flattery? How close to the apes does he think we are?”

“What are you talking about, Daddy?”

“Never mind. Why am I supposed to get that thing, anyway?”

“Uh—so’s you can jump off the roof.”

“That is just silly. However, I do want a look at that thing. Since his
ship is gone, that object up there seems to be the only artifact he
brought with him except his clothes.”

“What’s an artifact?”

“Second cousin to an artichoke. Here goes nothin’,” and he swung up into
the tree. He had not climbed a tree for years, and as he carefully chose
his way, it occurred to him that there were probably more efficient ways
of gaining altitude.

The tree began to shiver and sway with his weight. He looked down once
and decided instantly not to do it again. He looked up and was gratified
to see how close he was to the object he was after. He pulled himself up
another three feet and was horrified at how far away it was, for the
branches were very small up here. He squirmed upward, reached, and his
fingers just brushed against the shank of the thing. It had two rings
fastened to it, he noticed, each about a foot from the center, large
enough to get an arm through. It was one of these which was hung up on a
branch. He chinned himself, then, with his unpracticed muscles cracking,
took one hand off and reached.

The one-hand chinning didn’t come off so well. His arm began to sag. The
ring broke off its branch as his weight came on it. He was immediately
surrounded by the enthusiastic crackling of breaking shrubbery. He
folded his tongue over and got his teeth on it. Since he had a grip on
Mewhu’s artifact, he held on—even when it came free. He began to fall,
tensing himself for the bone-breaking jolt he would get at the bottom.

He fell quite fast at first, and then the stick he was holding began to
bear him up. He thought it must have caught on a branch, by some
miracle—but it hadn’t! He was drifting down like a thistle seed, hanging
from the rod, which in some impossible fashion was supporting itself in
mid-air. There was a shrill, faint whooshing sound from the two
streamlined fixtures at the ends of the rod. He looked down, blinked
sweat out of his eyes, and looked again. Mewhu was grinning a broad and
happy grin; Molly was slack-jawed with astonishment.

The closer he came to the ground the slower he went. When, after what
seemed an eternity, he felt the blessed pressure of earth under his
feet, he had to stand and pull the rod down. It yielded slowly, like an
eddy-current brake. Dry leaves danced and whirled under the end pieces.

“Gee, Daddy, that was wonderful!”

He swallowed twice to wet down his dry esophagus, and pulled his eyes
back in. “Yeah. Fun,” he said weakly.

Mewhu came and took the rod out of his hand, and dropped it. It stayed
perfectly horizontal, and sank slowly down to the ground, where it lay.
Mewhu pointed at it, at the tree, and grinned.

“Just like a parachute. Oh, gee, Daddy!”

“You keep away from it,” said Jack, familiar with youthful intonation.
“Heaven knows what it is. It might go off, or something.”

He looked fearfully at the object. It lay quietly,’ the hissing of the
end pieces stilled. Mewhu bent suddenly and picked it up, held it over
his head with one hand. Then he calmly lifted his feet and hung from it.
It lowered him gently, butt first, until he sat on the ground, in a
welter of dead leaves; as soon as he picked it up, the streamlined end
pieces had begun to blast again.

“That’s the silliest thing I ever saw. Here—let me see it.” It was
floating about waist-high. He leaned over one of the ends. It had a fine
round grille over it. He put out a hand. Mewhu reached out and caught
his wrist, shaking his head. Apparently it was dangerous to go too near
those ends. Garry suddenly saw why. They were tiny, powerful jet motors
of some kind. If the jet was powerful enough to support a man’s weight,
the intake must be drawing like mad—probably enough to snap a hole
through a man’s hand like a giant ticket-puncher.

But what controlled it? How was the jet strength adjusted to the weight
borne by the device, and to the altitude? He remembered without pleasure
that when he had fallen with it from the treetop, he had dropped quite
fast, and that he went slower and slower as he approached the ground.
And yet when Mewhu had held it over his head, it had borne his weight
instantly and lowered him very slowly. And besides, how was it so
stable? Why didn’t it turn upside down and blast itself and passenger
down to earth?

He looked at Mewhu with some increase of awe. Obviously he came from a
place where the science was really advanced. He wondered if he would
ever be able to get any technical information from his visitor—and if he
would be able to understand it. Of course, Molly seemed to be able to—

“He wants you to take it back and try it on the roof,” said Molly.

“How can that refugee from a Kuttner opus help me?”

Immediately Mewhu took the rod, lifted it, ducked under it, and slipped
his arms through the two rings, so that it crossed his back like a
water-bucket yoke. Peering around, he turned to face a clearing in the
trees, and before their startled eyes he leaped thirty feet in the air,
drifted away in a great arc, and came gently to rest twenty yards away.

Molly jumped up and down and clapped her hands, speechless with delight.
The only words Garry could find were a reiterated, “Ah, no!”

Mewhu stood where he was, smiling his engaging smile, waiting for them.
They walked toward him, and when they were close he leaped again and
soared out toward the road.

“What do you do with a thing like this?” breathed Jack. “Who do you go
to, and what do you say to him?”

“Le’s just keep him for a pet, Daddy.”

Jack took her hand, and they followed the bounding, soaring silver man.
A pet! A member of some alien race, from some unthinkable
civilization—and obviously highly trained, too, for no ordinary
individual would be the first to make such a trip. What was his story?
Was he an advance guard? Or was he the sole survivor of his people? How
far had he come? From Mars? Venus?

They caught up with, him at the house. He was standing by the ladder.
His strange rod was lying quiet on the ground. He was fascinatedly
operating Molly’s yo-yo. When he saw them, he threw down the yo-yo,
picked up his device, and, slipping it across his shoulders, sprang high
in the air and drifted down to the roof. “Eee-yu!” he said, with
emphasis, and jumped off backward. So stable was the rod that as he sank
through the air his long body swung to and fro.

“Very nice,” said Jack. “Also spectacular. And I have to go back to
work.” He went to the ladder.

Mewhu bounded over to him and caught his arm, whimpering and whistling
in his peculiar speech. He took the rod and extended it toward Jack.

“He wants you to use it,” said Molly.

“No, thanks,” said Jack, a trace of his tree-climbing vertigo returning
to him. “I’d just as soon use the ladder.” And he put his hand out to
it.

Mewhu, hopping with frustration, reached past him and toppled the
ladder. It levered over a box as it fell and struck Jack painfully on
the shin.

“I guess you better use the flyin’ belt, Daddy.”

Jack looked at Mewhu. The silver man was looking as pleasant as he could
with that kind of a face; on the other hand, it might just possibly be
wise to humor him a little. Being safely on the ground to begin with,
Jack felt that it might not matter if the fantastic thing wouldn’t work
for him. And if it failed him over the roof—well, the house wasn’t very
tall.

He shrugged his arms through the two rings. Mewhu pointed to the roof,
to Jack, made a jumping motion. Jack took a deep breath, aimed
carefully, and hoping the gadget wouldn’t work, jumped.

He shot up close to the house—too close. The eave caught him a
resounding thwack on precisely the spot where the ladder had just hit
him. The impact barely checked him. He went sailing up over the roof,
hovered for a breathless second, and then began to come down. For a
moment he thought his flailing legs would find purchase on the far edge
of the roof. He just missed it. All he managed to do was to crack the
same shin, in the same place, mightily on the other eave. Trailing
clouds of profanity, he landed standing—in Iris’ wash basket. Iris, just
turning from the clothesline, confronted him.

“Jack! What on earth are you...get out of that! You’re standing right on
my wash with your dirty...oh!”

“Oh-oh!” said Jack, and stepped backward out of the wash basket. His
foot went into Molly’s express wagon, which Iris used to carry the heavy
basket. To get his balance, he leaped—and immediately rose high in the
air. This time his luck was better. He soared completely over the
kitchen wing of the house and came to earth near Molly and Mewhu.

“Daddy, you were just like a bird! Me next, huh, Daddy?”

“I’m going to be just like a corpse if your mother’s expression means
what I think it does. Don’t you touch that!” He shucked off the
“flyin’-belt” and dived into the house just as Iris rounded the corner.
He heard Molly’s delighted “He went that way” as he plowed through the
shambles of the living room and out the front door. As the kitchen door
slammed he was rounding the house. He charged up to Mewhu, snatched the
gadget from him, slipped it on, and jumped. This time his judgment was
faultless. He cleared the house easily although he came very near
landing astride the clothesline. When Iris, panting and furious, stormed
out of the house, he was busily hanging sheets.

“Just what,” said Iris, her voice crackling at the seams, “do you think
you’re doing?”

“Just giving you a hand with the laundry, m’love,” said Jack.

“What is that...that object on your back?”

“Another evidence of the ubiquity of the devices of science fiction,”
said Jack blandly. “This is a multilateral, three-dimensional mass
adjuster, or pogo-chute. With it I can fly like a gull, evading the
cares of the world and the advances of beautiful redheads, at such times
as their passions are distasteful to me.”

“Sometime in the very near future, you gangling hatrack, I am going to
pull the tongue out of your juke box of a head and tie a bowknot in it.”
Then she laughed.

He heaved a sigh of relief, went and kissed her. “Darling, I am sorry. I
was scared silly, dangling from this thing. I didn’t see your clothes
basket, and if I had I don’t know how I’d have steered clear.”

“What is it, Jack? How does it work?”

“I dunno. Jets on the ends. They blast hard when there’s a lot of weight
pushing them toward the earth. They blast harder near the earth than up
high. When the weight on them slacks off a bit, they throttle down. What
makes them do it, what they use for power—I just wouldn’t know. As far
as I can see, they suck in air at the top and blow it out through the
jets. And, oh yes—they point directly downward no matter which way the
rod is turned.”

“Where did you get it?”

“Off a tree. It’s Mewhu’s. Apparently he used it for a parachute. On the
way down, a tree branch speared through one of these rings and he
slipped out of it and fell and broke his arm.”

“What are we going to do with him, Jack?”

“I’ve been worrying about that myself. We can’t sell him to a sideshow.”
He paused thoughtfully. “There’s no doubt that he has a lot that would
be of value to humanity. Why, this thing alone would change the face of
the earth! Listen—I weigh a hundred and seventy. I fell on this thing
suddenly, when I lost my grip on a tree, and it bore my weight
immediately. Mewhu weighs more than I do, judging from his build. It
took his weight when he lifted his feet off the ground while he was
holding it over his head. If it can do that, it or a larger version
should be able, not only to drive, but to support an aircraft. If for
some reason that isn’t possible, the power of those little jets
certainly could turn a turbine.”

“Will it wash clothes?” Iris was glum.

“That’s exactly what I mean. Light, portable, and more power than it has
any right to have—of course it’ll wash clothes. And drive generators,
and cars, and...Iris, what do you do when you have something as big as
this?”

“Call a newspaper, I guess.”

“And have a hundred thousand people peeking and prying all over the
place, and Congressional investigations, and what all? Uh-uh!”

“Why not ask Harry Zinsser?”

“Harry? I thought you didn’t like him.”

“I never said that. It’s just that you and he go off in the corner and
chatter about mulpitude amputation and debilities of reactance and
things like that, and I have to sit, knit—and spit when I want someone’s
attention. Harry’s all right.”

“Gosh, honey, you’ve got it. Harry’ll know what to do. I’ll go right
away.”

“You’ll do nothing of the kind. With that hole in the roof? I thought
you said you could have it patched up for the night at least. By the
time you get back here it’ll be dark.”

The prospect of sawing out the ragged hole in the roof was suddenly the
least appealing thing in the world. But there was logic and an “or else”
tone to what she said. He sighed and went off, mumbling something about
the greatest single advance in history awaiting the whim of a woman. He
forgot that he was wearing Mewhu’s armpit altitudinizer. Only his first
two paces were on the ground, and Iris hooted with laughter at his
clumsy walking on air. When he reached the ground he set his jaw and
leaped lightly up to the roof. “Catch me now, you and your piano legs,”
he taunted cheerfully, ducked the lancelike clothes prop she hurled at
him, and went back to work.

As he sawed, he was conscious of a hubbub down below.

“Dah-dee!” “Mr-r-roo ellue—”

He sighed and put down the saw. “What is it?”

“Mewhu wants his flyin’ belt!”

Jack looked at the roof, at the lower shed, and decided that his old
bones could stand it if he had to get down without a ladder. He took the
jet-tipped rod and dropped it. It stayed perfectly horizontal, falling
no slower and no faster than it had when he had ridden it down. Mewhu
caught it, deftly slipped his splinted arm through it—it was astonishing
how careful he was of the arm, and yet how little it inconvenienced
him—then the other arm, and sprang up to join Jack on the roof.

“What do you say, fella?”

“Woopen yew weep.”

“I know how you feel.” He knew the silver man wanted to tell him
something, but he couldn’t help him out. He grinned and picked up the
saw. Mewhu took it out of his hand and tossed it off the roof, being
careful to miss Molly, who was dancing back to get a point of vantage.

“What’s the big idea?”

“Dellihew hidden,” said Mewhu. “Pento deh numinew heh,” and he pointed
at the flying belt and at the hole in the roof.

“You mean I’d rather fly off in that thing than work? Brother, you got
it. But I’m afraid I have to—”

Mewhu circled his arm, pointing all around the hole in the roof, and
pointed again to the pogo-chute, indicating one of the jet motors.

“I don’t get it,” said Jack.

Mewhu apparently understood, and an expression of amazement crossed his
mobile face. Kneeling, he placed his good hand around one of the little
jet motors, pressed two tiny studs, and the casing popped open. Inside
was a compact, sealed, and simple-looking device, the core of the motor
itself, apparently. There seemed to be no other fastening. Mewhu lifted
it out and handed it to Jack. It was about the size and shape of an
electric razor. There was a button on the side. Mewhu pointed at it,
pressed the back, and then moved Jack’s hand so that the device was
pointed away from them both. Jack, expecting anything, from nothing at
all to the “blinding bolt of searing, raw energy” so dear to the
science-fiction world, pressed the button.

The gadget hissed, and snuggled back into his palm in an easy recoil.

“That’s fine,” said Jack, “but what do I do with it?”

Mewhu pointed at Jack’s cut, then at the device.

“Oh,” said Jack. He bent close, aimed the thing at the end of the saw
cut, and pressed the button. Again the hiss and the slight, steady
recoil, and a fine line appeared in the wood. It was a cut, about half
as thick as the saw cut, clean and even and, as long as he kept his hand
steady, very straight. A fine cloud of pulverized wood rose out of the
hole in the roof, carried on a swirl of air.

Jack experimented, holding the jet close to the wood and away from it.
He found that it cut finer the closer he got to it. As he drew it away
from the wood, the slot got wider and the device cut slower until at
about eighteen inches it would not cut at all. Delighted, Jack quickly
cut and trimmed the hole. Mewhu watched, grinning. Jack grinned back,
knowing how he would feel if he introduced a saw to some primitive who
was trying to work wood with a machete.

When he was finished, he handed the jet back to the silver man and
slapped his shoulder. “Thanks a million, Mewhu.”

“Jeek,” said Mewhu, and reached for Jack’s neck. One of his thumbs lay
on Jack’s collarbone, the other on his back, over the scapula. Mewhu
squeezed twice, firmly.

“That the way you shake hands back home?” smiled Jack. He thought it
likely. Any civilized race was likely to have a manual greeting. The
handshake had evolved from a raised palm, indicating that the saluter
was unarmed. It was quite possible that this was an extension, in a
slightly different direction, of the same sign. It would indeed be an
indication of friendliness to have two individuals present their throats
to each other.

With three deft motions, Mewhu slipped the tiny jet back into its casing
and, holding the rod with one hand, stepped off the roof, letting
himself be lowered in that amazing thistledown fashion to the ground.
Once there, he tossed the rod back. Jack was startled to see it hurtle
upward like any earthly object. He grabbed it and missed. It reached the
top of its arc, and as soon as it started down again the jets cut in,
and it sank easily to him. He put it on and floated down to join Mewhu.

The silver man followed Jack to the garage, where he kept a few pieces
of milled lumber. He selected some one inch pine boards and dragged them
out into the middle of the floor, to measure them and mark them off to
the size he wanted to knock together a simple trap-door covering for the
useless stair well, a process which Mewhu watched with great interest.

Jack took up the flying belt and tried to open the streamlined shell to
remove the cutter. It absolutely defied him. He pressed, twisted,
wrenched, and pulled. All it did was to hiss gently when he moved it
toward the floor.

“Eek, Jeek,” said Mewhu. He took the jet from Jack and pressed it. Jack
watched closely, then he grinned and took the cutter.

He swiftly cut the lumber up with it, sneering gayly at the ripsaw which
hung on the wall. Then he put the whole trap together with a Z-brace,
trimmed off the few rough corners, and stood back to admire it. He
realized instantly that it was too heavy to carry by himself, let alone
lift it to the roof. If Mewhu had two good hands, now—He scratched his
head.

“Carry it on the flyin’ belt, Daddy.”

“Molly! What made you think of that?”

“Mewhu tol’...I mean, I sort of—”

“Let’s get this straight once and for all. How does Mewhu talk to you?”

“I dunno, Daddy. It’s sort of like I remembered something he said, but
not the...the words he said. I jus’...jus’ …she faltered, and then said
vehemently, “I don’t know, Daddy. Truly I don’t.”

“What’d he say this time?”

She looked at Mewhu. Again Jack noticed the peculiar swelling of Mewhu’s
silver mustache. She said, “Put the door you jus’ made on the flyin’
belt and lift it. The flyin’ belt’ll make it fall slow, and you can push
it along while...it’s...failin’.”

Jack looked at the door, at the jet device, and got the idea. When he
had slipped the jet rod under the door, Mewhu gave him a lift. Up it
came; and then Mewhu, steadying it, towed it well outside the garage
before it finally sank to the ground. Another lift, another easy tow,
and they covered thirty more feet. In this manner they covered the
distance to the house, with Molly skipping and laughing behind, pleading
for a ride and praising the grinning Mewhu.

At the house, Jack said, “Well, Einstein Junior, how do we get it up on
the roof?”

Mewhu picked up Molly’s yo-yo and began to operate it deftly. Doing so,
he walked around the corner of the house.

“Hey!”

“He don’t know, Daddy. You’ll have to figger it out.”

“You mean he could dream up that slick trick for carrying it out here
and now his brains give out?”

“I guess so, Daddy.”

Jack Garry looked after the retreating form of the silver man and shook
his head. He was already prepared to expect better than human reasoning
from Mewhu, even if it was a little different. He couldn’t quite phase
this with Mewhu’s shrugging off a problem in basic logic. Certainly a
man with his capabilities would not have reasoned out such an ingenious
method of bringing the door out here without realizing that that was
only half the problem. He wondered if the solution was so obvious to
Mewhu that he couldn’t be bothered explaining it.

Shrugging,’ Jack went back to the garage and got a small block and
tackle. He had to put up a big screw hook on the eave, and another on
the new trap door; and once he had laboriously hauled the door up until
the tackle was two-locked, it was a little more than arduous to work it
over the edge and drag it into position. Mewhu had apparently quite lost
interest. It was two hours later, just as he put the last screw in the
tower bolt on the trap door and was calling the job finished, that he
heard Mewhu begin to shriek again. He dropped his tools, shrugged into
the jet stick, and sailed off the roof.

“Iris! Iris! What’s the matter?”

“I don’t know, Jack. He’s...”

Jack pounded around to the front of the house. Mewhu was lying on the
ground in the midst of some violent, tearing convulsion. He lay on his
back, arching it high, digging his heels into the turf; and his head was
bent back at an impossible angle, so that his weight was on his heels
and his forehead. His good arm pounded the ground though the splinted
one lay limp. His lips writhed and he uttered an edgy, gasping series of
ululations quite horrible to listen to. He seemed to be able to scream
as loudly when inhaling as when exhaling.

Molly stood beside him, watching him hypnotically. She was smiling. Jack
knelt beside the writhing form and tried to steady it. “Molly, stop
grinning at the poor fellow.”

“But—he’s happy, Daddy.”

“He’s what?”

“Can’t you see, silly? He feels good, that’s all. He’s laughing!”

“Iris, what’s the matter with him? Do you know?”

“He took some aspirin again, that’s all I can tell you.”

“He ate four,” said Molly. “He loves ’em.”

“What can we do, Jack?”

“I don’t know, honey,” said Jack worriedly. “Better just let him work it
out. Any emetic or sedative we give him might be harmful.”

The attack slackened and ceased suddenly, and Mewhu went quite limp.
Again, with his hand over the man’s chest, Jack felt the strange double
pulsing.

“Out cold,” he said.

Molly said in a strange, quiet voice, “No, Daddy. He’s lookin’ at
dreams.”

“Dreams?”

“A place with a or’nge sky,” said Molly. He looked up sharply. Her eyes
were closed. “Lots of Mewhus. Hundreds an’ hundreds—big ones. As big as
Mr. Thorndyke.” (Thorndyke was an editor whom they knew in the city. He
was six feet seven.) “Round houses, an’ big airplanes with...sticks fer
wings.”

“Molly, you’re talking nonsense,” her mother said worriedly. Jack
shushed her. “Go on, baby.”

“A place, a room. It’s a...Mewhu is there and a bunch more. They’re
in...in lines. Rows. There’s a big one with a yella hat. He keeps them
in rows. Here’s Mewhu. He’s outa the line. He’s jumpin’ out th’ window
with a flyin’ belt.” There was a long silence. Mewhu moaned.

“Well?”

“Nothin’, Daddy...wait! It’s...all...fuzzy. Now there’s a thing, a kinda
summarine. Only on the ground, not in the water. The door’s open. Mewhu
is...is inside. Knobs, and clocks. Pull on the knobs. Push a—Oh. Oh! It
hurts!” She put her fists to her temples.

“Molly!”

Molly opened her eyes and said quite calmly, “Oh, I’m all right, Mommy.
It was a thing in the dream that hurt, but it didn’t hurt me. It was all
a bunch of fire an’...an’ a sleepy feeling, only bigger. An’ it hurt.”

“Jack, he’ll harm the child!”

“I doubt it,” said Jack.

“So do I,” said Iris wonderingly, and then, almost inaudibly, “Now, why
did I say that?”

“Mewhu’s asleep,” said Molly suddenly.

“No more dreams?”

“No more dreams. Gee. That was—funny.”

“Come and have some lunch,” said Iris. Her voice shook a little. They
went into the house. Jack looked down at Mewhu, who was smiling
peacefully in his sleep. He thought of putting the strange creature to
bed, but the day was warm and the grass was thick and soft where he lay.
He shook his head and went into the house.

“Sit down and feed,” Iris said.

He looked around. “You’ve done wonders in here,” he said. The litter of
lath and plaster was gone, and Iris’ triumphant antimacassars blossomed
from the upholstery. She curtsied. “Thank you, m’lord.”

They sat around the card table and began to do damage to tongue
sandwiches. “Jack.”

“Mm-m?”

“What was that—telepathy?”

“Think so. Something like that. Oh, wait’ll I tell Zinsser! He’ll never
believe it.”

“Are you going down to the airfield this afternoon?”

“You bet. Maybe I’ll take Mewhu with me.”

“That would be a little rough on the populace, wouldn’t it?

Mewhu isn’t the kind of fellow you can pass off as your cousin Julius.”

“Heck, he’d be all right. He could sit in the back seat with Molly while
I talked Zinsser into coming out to have a look at him.”

“Why not get Zinsser out here?”

“You know that’s silly. When we see him in town he’s got time off. Out
here he’s tied to that airport almost every minute.”

“Jack, do you think Molly’s quite safe with that creature?”

“Of course. Are you worried?”

“I...I am, Jack. But not about Mewhu. About me. I’m worried because I
think I should worry more, if you see what I mean.”

Jack leaned over and kissed her. “The good old maternal instinct at
work,” he chuckled. “Mewhu’s new and strange and might be dangerous. At
the same time Mewhu’s hurt, and he’s inoffensive, so something in you
wants to mother him, too.”

“There you really have something,” Iris said thoughtfully. “He’s as big
and ugly as you are, and unquestionably more intelligent. Yet I don’t
mother you.”

Jack grinned. “You’re not kiddin’.” He gulped his coffee and stood up.
“Eat it up, Molly, and go wash your hands and face. I’m going to have a
look at Mewhu.”

“You’re going into the airport, then?” asked Iris.

“If Mewhu’s up to it. There’s too much I want to know, too much I
haven’t the brains to figure out. I don’t think I’ll get all the answers
from Zinsser, by any means; but between us we’ll figure out what to do
about this thing. Iris, it’s big!”

Full of wild speculation, he stepped out on the lawn. Mewhu was sitting
up, happily contemplating a caterpillar.

“Mewhu.”

“Dew?”

“How’d you like to take a ride?”

“Hubilly grees. Jeek?”

“I guess you don’t get the idea. C’mon,” said Jack, motioning toward the
garage. Mewhu very, very carefully set the caterpillar down on a blade
of grass and rose to follow; and just then the most unearthly crash
issued from the garage. For a frozen moment no one moved, and then
Molly’s voice set up a hair-raising reiterated screech. Jack was
pounding toward the garage before he knew he had moved.

“Molly! What is it?”

At the sound of his voice the child shut up as if she were
switch-operated.

“Molly!”

“Here I am, Daddy,” she said in an extremely small voice. She was
standing by the car, her entire being concentrated in her protruding,
faintly quivering lower lip. The car was nose-foremost through the back
wall of the garage.

“Daddy, I didn’t mean to do it; I just wanted to help you get the car
out. Are you going to spank me? Please, Daddy, I didn’t—”

“Quiet!”

She was quiet immediately. “Molly, what on earth possessed you to do a
thing like that? You know you’re not supposed to touch the starter!”

“I was pretending, Daddy, like it was a summarine that could fly, the
way Mewhu did.”

Jack threaded his way through this extraordinary shambles of syntax.
“Come here,” he said sternly. She came, her paces half-size, her feet
dragging, her hands behind her where her imagination told her they would
do the most good. “I ought to whack you, you know.”

“Yeah,” she answered tremulously, “I guess you oughta. Not more’n a
couple of times, huh, Daddy?”

Jack bit the insides of his cheeks for control, but couldn’t make it. He
grinned. You little minx, he thought. “Tell you what,” he said gruffly,
looking at the car. The garage was fortunately flimsy, and the few new
dents on hood and fenders would blend well with the old ones. “You’ve
got three good whacks coming to you. I’m going to add those on to your
next spanking.”

“Yes, Daddy,” said Molly, her eyes big and chastened. She climbed into
the back seat and sat, very straight and small, away back out of sight.
Jack cleared away what wreckage he could, and then climbed in, started
the old puddle-vaulter, and carefully backed out of the damaged shed.

Mewhu was standing well clear, watching the groaning automobile with
startled silver eyes. “Come on in,” said Jack, beckoning. Mewhu backed
off.

“Mewhu!” cried Molly, putting her head out the rear door. Mewhu said,
“Yowk,” and came instantly. Molly opened the door and he climbed in, and
she shouted with laughter when he crouched down on the floor, and pulled
at him until he got up on the seat. Jack drove around the house,
stopped, picked up Mewhu’s jet rod, blew a kiss through the window to
Iris and they were off.

 

Forty minutes later they wheeled up to the airport after an ecstatic
ride during which Molly had kept up a running fire of descriptive
commentary on the wonders of a terrestrial countryside. Mewhu had
goggled and ogled in a most satisfactory fashion, listening spellbound
to the child—sometimes Jack would have sworn that the silver man
understood everything she said—and uttering shrieks, exclamatory
mewings, and interrogative peeps.

“Now,” said Jack, when he had parked at the field boundary, “you two
stay in the car for a while. I’m going to speak to Mr. Zinsser and see
if he’ll come out and meet Mewhu. Molly, do you think you can make Mewhu
understand that he’s to stay in the car, and out of sight? You see, if
other people see him, they’ll want to ask a lot of silly questions, and
we don’t want to embarrass him, do we?”

“No, Daddy. I’ll tell him. Mewhu,” she said, turning to the silver man.
She held his eyes with hers. His mustache swelled, rippled. “You’ll be
good, won’t you, and stay out of sight?” “Jeek,” said Mewhu. “Jeek
mereedy.”

“He says you’re the boss.”

Jack laughed, climbing out. “He does, eh?” Did the child really know, or
was it mostly a game? “Be good, then. See you soon, Mewhu.” Carrying the
jet rod, he walked into the building.

Zinsser, as usual, was busy. The field was not large, but it did a great
deal of private-plane business, and as traffic manager Zinsser had his
hands full. He wrapped one of his pudgy, flexible hands around the phone
he was using. “Hi, Garry! What’s new out of this world?” he grated
cheerfully. “Siddown. With you in a minute.” He bumbled cheerfully into
the telephone, grinning at Jack as he talked. Jack made himself as
comfortable as patience permitted and waited until Zinsser hung up.

“Well, now,” said Zinsser, and the phone rang again.

Jack closed his open mouth in annoyance. Zinsser hung up and another
bell rang. He picked up a field telephone from its hook on the side of
his desk. “Zinsser. Yes—”

“Now that’s enough,” said Jack to himself. He rose, went to the door,
and closed it softly, so that he was alone with the manager. He took the
jet rod and, to Zinsser’s vast astonishment, stood on his desk, raised
the rod high over his head, and stepped off. A hurricane screamed out of
the jets. Jack, hanging by his hands from the rod as it lowered him
gently through the air, looked over his shoulder. Zinsser’s face looked
like a red moon in a snow flurry, surrounded as it was by every
interoffice memo for the past two weeks.

Anyway, the first thing he did when he could draw a breath was to hang
up the phone.

“Thought that would do it,” said Jack, grinning.

“You...you...what is that thing?”

“It’s a dialectical polarizer,” said Jack, alighting. “That is, it makes
conversations possible with airport managers who won’t get off the
phone.”

Zinsser was out of his chair and around the desk, remarkably light on
his feet for a man his size. “Let me see that.”

Jack handed it over and began to talk.

 

“Look, Mewhu! Here comes a plane!”

Together they watched the Cub slide in for a landing, and squeaked at
the little puffs of dust that were thrown up by the tires and flicked
away by the slipstream.

“And there goes another one. It’s gonna take off!” The little blue
low-wing coupe taxied across the field, braked one wheel, swung in its
own length, and roared down toward them, lifting to howl away into the
sky far over their heads.

“Eeeeeyow,” droned Molly, imitating the sound of the motor as it passed
overhead.

“S-s-s-s-sweeeeee!” hissed Mewhu, exactly duplicating the whine of
control surfaces in the prop blast.

Molly clapped her hands and shrieked with delight. Another plane began
to circle the field. They watched it avidly.

 

“Come on out and have a look at him,” said Jack.

Zinsser looked at his watch. “I can’t. All kidding aside, I got to stick
by the phone for another half hour at the very least. Will he be all
right out there? There’s hardly anyone around.”

“I think so. Molly’s with him, and as I told you, they get along
beautifully together. That’s one of the things I want to have
investigated—that telepathy angle.” He laughed suddenly. “That
Molly...know what she did this afternoon?” He told Zinsser about Molly’s
driving the car through the wrong end of the garage.

“The little hellion,” chuckled Zinsser. “They’ll all do it, bless ’em.
My brother’s kid went to work on the front lawn with his mother’s vacuum
cleaner the other day.” He laughed. “To get back to
what’s-his-name—Mewhu—and this gadget of his. Jack, we’ve got to hang on
to it. Do you realize that he and his clothes and this thing are the
only clues we have as to what he is and where he came from?”

“I sure do. But listen, he’s very intelligent. I’m sure he’ll be able to
tell us plenty.”

“You can bet he’s intelligent,” said Zinsser. “He’s probably above
average on his planet. They wouldn’t send just anyone on a trip like
that. Jack, what a pity we don’t have his ship!”

“Maybe it’ll be back. What’s your guess as to where he comes from?”

“Mars, maybe.”

“Now, you know better than that. We know Mars has an atmosphere, but
it’s mighty tenuous. An organism the size of Mewhu would have to have
enormous lungs to keep him going. No; Mewhu’s used to an atmosphere
pretty much like ours.”

“That would rule Venus out.”

“He wears clothes quite comfortably here. His planet must have not only
pretty much the same atmosphere, but the same climate. He seems to be
able to take most of our foods, though he’s revolted by some of them—and
aspirin sends him high as a kite. He gets what looks like a laughing
drunk when he takes it.”

“You don’t say. Let’s see, it wouldn’t be Jupiter, because he isn’t
built to take a gravity like that. And the outer planets are too cold,
and Mercury is too hot.” Zinsser leaned back in his chair and absently
mopped his bald head. “Jack, this guy doesn’t even come from this solar
system!”

“Gosh. I guess you’re right. Harry, what do you make of this jet
gadget?”

“From the way you say it cuts wood...can I see that, by the way?”
Zinsser asked.

“Sure.” Garry went to work on the jet. He found the right studs to press
simultaneously. The casing opened smoothly. He lifted out the active
core of the device, and, handling it gingerly, sliced a small corner off
Zinsser’s desk top.

“That is the strangest thing I have ever seen,” said Zinsser. “May I see
it?”

He took it and turned it over in his hands. “There doesn’t seem to be
any fuel for it,” he said musingly.

“I think it uses air,” said Jack.

“But what pushes the air?”

“Air,” said Jack. “No, I’m not kidding. I think that in some way it
disintegrates part of the air, and uses the energy released to activate
a small jet. If you had a shell around this jet, with an intake at one
end and a blast tube at the other, it would operate like a high-vacuum
pump, dragging more air through.”

“Or like an athodyd,” said Zinsser. Garry’s blood went cold as the
manager sighted down into the jet orifice. “For heaven’s sake don’t push
that button.”

“I won’t. Say—you’re right. The tube’s concentric. Now, how on earth
could a disruption unit be as small and light as that?”

Jack Garry said, “I’ve been chewing on that all day. I have one answer.
Can you take something that sounds really fantastic, so long as it’s
logical?”

“You know me,” grinned Zinsser, waving at a long shelf of back-number
science-fiction magazines. “Go ahead.”

“Well,” said Jack carefully. “You know what binding energy is. The stuff
that holds the nucleus of an atom together. If I understand my
smattering of nuclear theory properly, it seems possible to me that a
sphere of binding energy could be produced that would be stable.”

“A sphere? With what inside it?”

“Binding energy—or maybe just nothing...space. Anyhow, if you surround
that sphere with another, this one a forcefield which is capable of
penetrating the inner one, or of allowing matter to penetrate it, it
seems to me that anything entering that balance of forces would be
disrupted. An explosive pressure would be bottled up inside the inner
sphere. Now if you bring your penetrating field in contact with the
binding-energy sphere, the pressures inside will come blasting out.
Incase the whole rig in a device which controls the amount of matter
going in one side of the sphere and the amount of orifice allowed for
the escape of energy, and incase that further in an outside shell which
will give you a stream of air induced violently through it—like the
vacuum pump you mentioned—and you have this,” and he rapped on the
little jet motor.

“Most ingenious,” said Zinsser, wagging his head. “Even if you’re wrong,
it’s an ingenious theory. What you’re saying, you know, is that all we
have to do to duplicate this device is to discover the nature of binding
energy and then find a way to make it stay stably in spherical form.
After which we figure out the nature of a field which can penetrate
binding energy and allow any matter to do likewise—one way.” He spread
his hands. “That’s all. Just learn to actually use the stuff that the
longhair boys haven’t thought of theorizing about yet, and we’re all
set.”

“Shucks,” said Garry. “Mewhu will give us all the dope.”

“I hope so, Jack. This can revolutionize the entire industrial world.”

“You’re understanding,” grinned Jack.

The phone rang. Zinsser looked at his watch again. “There’s my call.” He
sat down, answered the phone, and while he went on at great length to
some high-powered character at the other end of the line, about bills of
lading and charter service and interstate commerce restrictions, Jack
lounged against the cut-off corner of the desk and dreamed. Mewhu—a
superior member of a superior race, come to Earth to lead barbaric
humanity out of its struggling, wasteful ways. He wondered what Mewhu
was like at home among his strange people. Young, but very mature, he
decided, and gifted in many ways; the pick of the crop, fit to be
ambassador to a new and dynamic civilization like Earth’s. And what
about the ship? Having dropped Mewhu, had it and its pilot returned to
the mysterious corner of the universe from which they had come? Or was
it circling about somewhere in space, anxiously awaiting word from the
adventurous ambassador?

Zinsser cradled his instrument and stood up with a sigh. “A credit to my
will power,” he said. “The greatest thing that’s ever happened to me,
and I stuck by the day’s work in spite of it. I feel like a kid on
Christmas Eve. Let’s go have a look at him.”

 

“Wheeeeyouwow!” screamed Mewhu as another rising plane passed over their
heads. Molly bounced joyfully up and down on the cushions, for Mewhu was
an excellent mimic.

The silver man slipped over the back of the driver’s seat in a lithe
movement, to see a little better around the corner of a nearby hangar.
One of the Cubs had been wheeled into it, and was standing not far away,
its prop ticking over.

Molly leaned her elbows on the edge of the seat and stretched her little
neck so she could see, too. Mewhu brushed against her head and her hat
fell off. He bent to pick it up and bumped his own head on the
dashboard, and the glove compartment flew open. His strange pupils
narrowed, and the nicitating membranes flickered over his eyes as he
reached inside. The next thing Molly knew, he was out of the car and
running over the parking area, leaping high in the air, mouthing strange
noises, and stopping every few jumps to roll and beat with his good hand
on the ground.

Horrified, Molly Garry left the car and ran after him. “Mewhu!” she
cried. “Mewhu, come back!”

He cavorted toward her, his arms outspread. “W-r-r-row-w!” he shouted,
rushing past her. Lowering one arm a little and raising the other like
an airplane banking, he ran in a wide arc, leaped the little tarmac
retaining wall, and bounded out onto the hangar area.

Molly, panting and sobbing, stopped and stamped her foot. “Mewhu!” she
croaked helplessly. “Daddy said—”

Two mechanics standing near the idling Cub looked around at a sound like
a civet-cat imitating an Onondaga war whoop. What they saw was a
long-legged, silver-gray apparition, with a silver-white mustache and
slotted eyes, dressed in a scarlet robe that turned to indigo. Without a
sound, moving as one man, they cut and ran. And Mewhu, with one last
terrible shriek of joy. leaped to the plane and disappeared inside.

Molly put her hands to her mouth and her eyes bugged. “Oh, Mewhu,” she
breathed. “Now, you’ve done it.” She heard pounding feet, turned. Her
father was racing toward her, with Mr. Zinsser waddling behind. “Molly!
Where’s Mewhu?”

Wordlessly she pointed at the Cub, and as if it were a signal the little
ship throttled up and began to crawl away from the hangar.

“Hey! Wait! Wait!” screamed Jack Garry uselessly, sprinting after the
plane. He leaped the wall but misjudged it because of his speed. His toe
hooked it and he sprawled slitheringly, jarringly on the tarmac. Zinsser
and Molly ran to him and helped him up. Jack’s nose was bleeding. He
whipped out a handkerchief and looked out at the dwindling plane.
“Mewhu!”

The little plane waddled across the field, bellowed suddenly with power.
The tail came up, and it scooted away from them—cross-wind, across the
runway. Jack turned to speak to Zinsser and saw the fat man’s face
absolutely stricken. He followed Zinsser’s eyes and there was the other
plane, the big six-place cabin job, coming in.

He had never felt so helpless in all his life. Those planes were going
to collide. There was nothing anyone could do about it. He watched them,
unblinking, almost detachedly. They were hurtling but they seemed to
creep; the moment lasted forever. Then, with a twenty-foot altitude.
Mewhu cut his gun and dropped a wing. The Cub slowed, leaned into the
wind, and side-slipped so close under the cabin ship that another coat
of paint on either craft would have meant disaster.

Jack didn’t know how long he had been holding that breath, but it was
agony when he let it out.

“Anyway, he can fly,” breathed Zinsser.

“Of course he can fly,” snapped Jack. “A prehistoric thing like an
airplane would be child’s play for him.”

“Oh, Daddy, I’m scared.”

“I’m not,” said Jack hollowly.

“Me, too,” said Zinsser with an unconvincing laugh. “The plane’s
insured.”

The Cub arrowed upward. At a hundred feet it went into a skidding turn,
harrowing to watch, suddenly winged over, and came shouting down at
them. Mewhu buzzed them so close that Zinsser went flat on his face.
Jack and Molly simply stood there, wall-eyed. An enormous cloud of dust
obscured everything for ninety interminable seconds. When they next saw
the plane it was wobbling crazily at a hundred and fifty.

Suddenly Molly screamed piercingly and put her hands over her face

“Molly! Kiddo. what is it?”

She flung her arms around his neck and sobbed so violently that he knew
it was hurting her throat. “Stop it!” he yelled; and then, very gently,
he asked, “What’s the matter, darling?”

“He’s scared. Mewhu’s terrible, terrible scared,” she said brokenly.

Jack looked up at the plane. It yawed, fell away on one wing.

Zinsser shouted, his voice cracking. “Gun her! Gun her!

Throttle up, you idiot!”

Mewhu cut the gun.

Dead stick, the plane winged over and plunged to the ground. The impact
was crushing.

Molly said quite calmly, “All Mewhu’s pictures have gone out now,” and
slumped unconscious to the ground.

They got him to the hospital. It was messy, all of it, picking him up,
carrying him to the ambulance—

Jack wished fervently that Molly had not seen; but she had sat up and
cried as they carried him past. He thought worriedly as he and Zinsser
crossed and re-crossed in their pacing of the waiting-room that he would
have his hands full with the child when this thing was all over.

The resident physician came in, wiping his hands. He was a small man
with a nose like a walnut meat. “Who brought that plane-crash case in
here—you?”

“Both of us,” said Zinsser.

“What—who is he?”

“A friend of mine. Is he...will he live?”

“How should I know?” snapped the doctor impatiently. “I have never in my
Experience—” He exhaled through his nostrils. “The man has two
circulatory systems. Two closed circulatory systems, and a heart for
each. All his arterial blood looks veinous—it’s purple. How’d he happen
to get hurt?”

“He ate half a box of aspirin out of my car,” said Jack. “Aspirin makes
him drunk. He swiped a plane and piled it up.”

“Aspirin makes him—” The doctor looked at each of them in turn. “I won’t
ask if you’re kidding me. Just to see that...that thing in there is
enough to kid any doctor. How long has that splint been on his arm?”

Zinsser looked at Jack and Jack said “About eighteen hours.”

“Eighteen hours?” The doctor shook his head. “It’s so well knitted that
I’d say eighteen days.” Before Jack could say anything he added. “He
needs a transfusion.”

“But you can’t! I mean, his blood—”

“I know. Took a sample to type it. I have two technicians trying to
blend chemicals into plasma so we can approximate it. Both of ’em called
me a liar. But he’s got to have the transfusion. I’ll let you know.” He
strode out of the room.

“There goes one bewildered medico.”

“He’s O.K.” said Zinsser. “I know him well. Can you blame him?”

“For feeling that way? Gosh no. Harry, I don’t know what I’ll do if
Mewhu checks out.”

“That fond of him?”

“Oh, it isn’t only that. But to come so close to meeting a new culture,
and then have it slip from our fingers like this, it’s too much.”

“That jet—Jack, without Mewhu to explain it, I don’t think any scientist
will be able to build another. It would be like...like giving a Damascus
sword-smith some tungsten and asking’ him to draw it into filaments.
There the jet would be, hissing when you shove it toward the ground,
sneering at you.”

“And that telepathy—what J. B. Rhine wouldn’t give to be able to study
it!”

“Yeah, and what about his origin?” Zinsser asked excitedly. “He isn’t
from this system. It means that he used an interstellar drive of some
kind, or even that space-time warp the boys write about.”

“He’s got to live,” said Jack. “He’s got to, or there ain’t no justice.
There are too many things we’ve got to know, Harry! Look—he’s here. That
must mean that some more of his people will come some day.”

“Yeah. Why haven’t they come before now?”

“Maybe they have. Charles Fort—”

“Aw, look,” said Zinsser, “don’t let’s get this thing out of hand.”

The doctor came back. “I think he’ll make it.”

“Really?”

“Not really. Nothing real about that character. But from all
indications, he’ll be O.K. Responded very strongly. What does he eat?”

“Pretty much the same as we do, I think.”

“You think. You don’t seem to know much about him.”

“I don’t. He only just got here. No—don’t ask me where from,” said Jack.
“You’ll have to ask him.”

The doctor scratched his head. “He’s out of this world. I can tell you
that. Obviously adult, but every fracture but one is a green-stick
break; kind of thing you see on a three-year old. Transparent membranes
over his—What are you laughing at?” he asked suddenly.

Jack had started easily, with a chuckle, but it got out of control. He
roared.

Zinsser said, “Jack! Cut it out. This is a hosp—”

Jack shoved his hand away. “I got to,” he said helplessly and went off
on another peal.

“You’ve got to what?”

“Laugh,” said Jack, gasping. He sobered, he more than sobered. “It has
to be funny, Harry. I won’t let it be anything else.”

“What the devil do you—”

“Look, Harry. We assumed a lot about Mewhu, his culture, his technology,
his origin. We’ll never know anything about it!”

“Why? You mean he won’t tell us?”

“He won’t tell us. I’m wrong. He’ll tell us plenty. But it won’t do any
good. Here’s what I mean. Because he’s our size, because he obviously
arrived in a space ship, because he brought a gadget or two that’s
obviously the product of a highly advanced civilization, we believe that
he produced the civilization, that he’s a superior individual in his own
place.”

“Well, he must be.”

“He must be? Harry, did Molly invent the automobile?”

“No, but—”

“But she drove one through the back of the garage.”

Light began to dawn on Zinsser’s moon face. “You mean—”

“It all fits! Remember when Mewhu figured out how to carry that heavy
trap door of mine on the jet stick, and then left the problem
half-finished? Remember his fascination with Molly’s yo-yo? What about
that peculiar rapport he has with Molly? Doesn’t that begin to look
reasonable? Look at Iris’ reaction to him—almost maternal, though she
didn’t know why.”

“The poor little fellow,” breathed Zinsser. “I wonder if he thought he
was home when he landed?”

“Poor little fellow—sure,” said Jack, and began to laugh again. “Can
Molly tell you how an internal combustion engine works? Can she explain
laminar flow on an airfoil?” He shook his head. “You wait and see. Mewhu
will be able to tell us the equivalent of Molly’s ‘I rode in the car
with Daddy and we went sixty miles an hour.’”

“But how did he get here?”

“How did Molly get through the back of my garage?”

The doctor shrugged his shoulders helplessly. “His biological reactions
do look like those of a child—and if he is a child, then his rate of
tissue restoration will be high, and I’ll guarantee he’ll live.”

Zinsser groaned. “Much good will it do us—and him, poor kid. With a
kid’s faith in any intelligent adult, he’s probably been sure we’d get
him home somehow. Well, we haven’t got what it takes, and won’t have for
a long, long time. We don’t even know enough to start duplicating that
jet of his—and that was just a little kid’s toy on his world.”

 



HURRICANE TRIO


YANCEY, WHO HAD ONCE BEEN KILLED, lay very still with his arm flung
across the pillow, and watched the moonlight play with the color of
Beverly’s hair. Her hair was spilled over his shoulder and chest, and
her body pressed against him, warm. He wondered if she was asleep. He
wondered if she could sleep, with that moon-swept riot of surf and wind
going on outside the hotel. The waves blundered into the cliff below,
hooting through the sea-carved boulders, frightening great silver ghosts
of spray out and up into the torn and noisy air. He wondered if she
could sleep with her round, gentle face so near his thumping heart. He
wished the heart would quiet itself—subside at least to the level of the
storm outside, so that she might mistake it for the same storm. He
wished he could sleep. For two years he had been glad he did not sleep.
Now he wished he could; it might quiet his heart.

Beverly, Beverly, he cried silently, you don’t deserve this! He wished
the bed were larger, so that he might ease away from her and be but a
shriek among shrieks, melting into the hiss and smash and ugly grumble
of the sea’s insanity.

In the other bed, Lois shifted restlessly under the crisp sheet. Yancey
looked at her without turning his head. She was a thing of long lines
under the dim white, her face and hair two kinds of darkness on the
pillow. She was lean and somber. Beverly was happy and open and moved
about like the brightly colored bouncing ball which used to lead the
singing at theaters, leaping along the lyrics. Lois walked as if she did
not quite touch the floor, and the tones of her voice were like the
tones of her skin and the clothes she favored—dark and smooth. Her eyes
were long and secret and her face was a floe. Her nostrils, and the
corners of her mouth, and sometimes the slightest concerted movement of
a shoulder and an eyebrow, hinted at a heat submerged and a strength
relaxed and aware, not asleep, not a sleep. Lois...a synthesis of
subtleties, of mysteries, of delicate scents and soft puzzling laughter.

Lois moved again. He knew that she too was staring tensely up into the
mottled darkness. The spume-flecked moonlight was intolerant of detail,
but Yancey had memorized her face. He knew of the compression of her
lips, and that the corners of her mouth were softly turned despite the
tension. He was deeply troubled by the sound of the sheet as she moved,
for if he could hear that over the storm, how could Beverly miss the
throb of his heart?

Then he all but smiled: of course Beverly did not hear as he did, nor
see, nor feel, nor think with all her mind. Poor Beverly. Poor bright,
sweet, faithful bird, more wife than woman, how can you compete with one
who is more woman than...anyone?

Better, this was better than the fearful joy that was like rage. His
heart began to obey him, and he turned his cheek slightly to touch her
hair. Pity, he thought, is a sharing sort of thing—you can feel the
helplessness of the unarmed—whereas rage, like passion, stands apart
from its object and is a lonesome thing.

He settled himself now, and without moving he went limp in the
thundering night, giving himself up to the glimmer and shift of his
thoughts. More than anyone else on earth, he was sure, he enjoyed being
alive, and his perpetual delight was in being alive altogether, awake
and aware, conscious of his body and how it lay, and where, and at the
same time afloat like a gull on the wind of his thought, yielding,
controlled. Perhaps he enjoyed the dark part of his unending day the
most, camouflaged by a coverlet and the closing of eyes. In the day he
lived with that which, if he wished, he could command; at night he lived
with that which he did command. He could call a symphony to heel, and
make a syllogism stand and wait. He could cut a stack of places, fan a
hand of faces, choose his pleasure of them and discard the rest. His
recall was pinpoint perfect back and back to the point where he had been
dead; before that, only excellent. He used it now as a measure against
his heart’s rebellion, so that Beverly could sleep, and, sleeping, not
know.

And because the idea of Lois, here, was unbearable, he let his mind take
him back to Lois when she was only a secret. She had been an explosion
within him, a pressure and a kind of guilt; but all the things she had
been were things he could contain, and no one knew. So back he went, to
his renascence; back through the time he had been dead, and still
farther to Lois-first-seen, to a time when a man with a job and a wife
and a settled gray life found this special astonishment.

 

There was a lake, and small cheap cabins crouched in a row to sip its
shores. There was a “lodge” with its stilted forefeet in the water and
its rump on a hillside. There were boats and a float, a splintery dance
floor and a bar which purveyed beverages all the way up to beer.

Yancey, with little money and only two weeks’ time, had rented a cottage
here sight unseen. He expected little of it, being resigned to the
truism that a change of surroundings constitutes a vacation all by
itself. He expected little of anything in those days. His life had
reached a plateau—a long, narrow, slightly downgraded plateau where the
horizons were close and the going easy. His job was safe and, by the
chemistry of paternalism, would increase in value as it aged, for all a
large business requires of the bulk of its employees is that they stay
just as they are.

He had been married for seven years to the blithe and patient Beverly,
who was content with him. There had been a time when they interrupted
one another in the rush to share themselves, and a longer time when
there seemed very little to say, which made them both vaguely unhappy,
and they lived with a mild and inexpressible sense of loss. And at last
they had discovered that coded communication devised by most folk with
their unexciting familiars: small talk, half-finished sentences, faint
interrogative and exclamatory sounds, and present—as opposed to
absent—silences. Life for Yancey and his wife was not dull—it was too
unplanned for that—but its pulse beat between comfortable limits.

This unplanned quality (for why make plans when life is basically so
certain?) was responsible for their late arrival at the lake. Last
year’s map did not include the dozens of roads closed by the Thruway;
somehow Yancey had never gotten around to having the spare fixed, so of
course they had a flat; then they had to drive back for the checkbook
Yancey had forgotten; and naturally it rained. It had rained all the
previous night and all day, and when they turned into the lake road it
was past eleven at night and still raining. They pulled up beside the
lodge, where a glistening faded sign proclaimed OFFICE, and Yancey
turned up his jacket collar and plunged out into the rain and floundered
up the wooden steps. When there was no answer to his knock he noticed a
soggy pasteboard stuck between the doorframe and a loose pane. He tried
to read it and could not. He went to the head of the steps and called,
“Bev! Turn the spotlight up here!”

Beverly, between the loose-valved clacking of the motor and the drumming
of rain on the car roof, heard a voice but no words. She turned off the
ignition and rolled the window down. “What?”

“The light. Spotlight. Shine it up here.”

She did, whereupon Yancey went back to the door and crouched before the
card. In a moment he came back to the car and slid in, dripping.
“They’re all in bed,” he said, “in cabin 14.”

“Which one is our cabin?”

“I don’t know. They never said. Just confirmed the reservation. We’ll
have to wake them up.” He pressed the starter.

And pressed it, and pressed it.

When the starter would deliver nothing but a click and a grunt, Yancey
leaned back and blew sharply through his nostrils. “Wires wet, I guess.”

“What are we going to do?”

“Walk. Or sit here.”

She touched his sodden shoulder and shuddered. “It can’t be too
far...we’ll have to take a bag.”

“Okay. Which one?”

She considered. “I guess the brown one. It has my robe in it, I
remember...I think.”

He knelt on the seat and reached into the back, found and fumbled the
brown suitcase-out. “Better turn off the lights. Ignition, too.”

“The ignition is off,” Beverly said, trying it.

“What!”

“When you were on the porch. I couldn’t hear you. I turned it off.”

The advantage of that status between married folk which communicates by
grunts and silences is that scorn, as well as contentment, can be
expressed with little effort. Yancey was simply and completely silent,
and she said, “Oh dear.” Then, defensively, “How was I supposed to know
you didn’t turn it back on?”

Yancey merely snorted. Beverly huddled in the seat. “Now it’s all my
fault,” she muttered. This was more than a statement of fact; it meant
in addition that any discomfort from this point on would be laid to her,
and that the day’s previous delays and exasperations would also be
attached to her, making her culpable in every way for everything. Yancey
maintained his silence. Anything he might say would militate in her
favor—to say one thing would forgive her, another would give her some
ground for defense or counterattack. There was no real vindictiveness in
his silence. He did not care whether or not she accepted the guilt as
long as it was clear that guilt was not his. To put it another way,
married familiars in this stage, though not necessarily enemies, are
just not friends.

They left the car by their respective doors, and the rain immediately
increased as if it had been cued from the wings. The sporadic wind died
completely and suddenly and water seemed to displace air altogether. It
ran down Yancey’s spine, it bashed at his eyelids, it threw gouts of mud
up to his knees. He felt his way along the fender and around the front
of the car until he collided with Beverly. They clung together, gasping
and waiting for some kind of light to penetrate the hissing deluge. Some
did, at last, a sodden skyglow with a dimmer echo from the lake, and
they began to wade up the shore along the line of cabins.

Visitors to the lake have been known to complain that the cabins were
built too close together. It is clear that such plaintiffs never walked
the row in the seething black of a summer rain. Each cabin boasted a
wooden post with a number, cut from plywood with a jigsaw, perched on
it. These could be read by water-wrinkled fingertips as they progressed,
and they seemed to be fully half a mile apart. Yancey and Beverly did
not attempt to talk; the only speech between them was a muttered number
when occasionally they investigated one of the posts to check their
progress. It was enough to make exasperation itself turn numb, not to be
reawakened until they found cabin 12, bypassed the next, and turned in
at what should therefore be 14, only to find it called 15.

“Fifteen, fifteen!” Beverly wailed wetly. “Where’s fourteen? It’s gone!”

“Gone, hell,” growled Yancey, uselessly wiping at the water streaming
over his mouth. “That’ll be it there, that we just passed. Afraid to
number a cabin thirteen. Superstition. Well, you know a woman runs this
place,” he added.

Beverly inhaled, a sharp gasp at this injustice, but took in as much
water as air and could only cough weakly. They backtracked and fumbled
their way up to the dark bulk of cabin 14. Yancey dropped the suitcase
noisily on the small porch.

“Yance! You’ll wake everybody up!”

He looked at her and sighed. The sigh transmitted, “What did we come
here for?”

He pounded on the door and they pressed close to it, trying to get some
shelter from the decorative gable over the door. A light showed, the
doorknob moved, and they stepped back into the rain. And nothing,
nothing at all told Yancey that in this second a line fell across his
life, so that forever his biography would consist of the parts
life-before-Lois and life-since-Lois, with nothing between them but a
sheet of rain and the opening of a door.

It opened altogether, fearlessly. He said, “I’m Yance Bowman, this is my
wife, and we—” and then he saw her face, and his voice failed him.
Quickly, effortlessly, Lois spoke into his sudden silence and made it
unnoticeable. “Come in, come in!” With one swift balanced movement she
took the suitcase from his hand, whirled around them to reach out in the
rain for the doorknob, and, closing the door, swept them in.

They stood panting and dripping, looking at her. She wore a maroon
hostess robe with a collar that stood up like an Elizabethan ruff; the
material fell away and draped from her wide flat shoulders with the
static fluidity of a waterfall, all movement even while she was still.
Her slight turn and bend as she set down the suitcase told him that
those wide shoulders were indeed shoulders and not padding, and the
flash of a bare foot declared that here was a woman who would stand and
look straight into his eyes.

Beverly spoke, or began to; he turned to her and saw that she was, by
comparison, dumpy and wet and exceedingly familiar. “We didn’t know
which cabin to—”

“Never mind that,” said Lois, “we’ll have two weeks to explain ourselves
to each other. First of all you’ve just got to get out of those wet
things, both of you. I’ll heat some coffee.”

“But-but-but we can’t—”

“But you can,” said Lois. “Not another word. Go on,” she said, crowding
them into the hall which led away to the left. “There’s the bath. Take a
shower. A hot shower.” Without pausing she scooped thick towels from a
shelf and dropped them into Beverly’s astonished hands. She reached past
them and turned on the bathroom light. “I’ll get your bag.”

She was gone and back before Beverly could get her mouth around another
syllable. “Hurry now, before the muffins get cold.”

“Muffins?” Beverly squeaked. “Oh now, please don’t go to that tr—” but
she was in the bathroom with Yancey, with the door closed, and Lois’
swift light footsteps answering her like a laugh as they ran away down
the hall.

“Well I—” said Beverly. “Yancey, what can we do?”

“Like the lady says, I guess.” He gestured. “You first.”

“A shower? Oh, I couldn’t!”

He pulled her over in front of the basin and aimed her face at the
mirror. “Wouldn’t hurt.”

“Oh...oh dear, I’m a sight.” She had one more second of hesitation,
murmured, “Well …and then pulled her soaking dress off over her head.

Yancey undressed slowly while Beverly splashed under the shower. About
the time the mirror was thoroughly steamed up she began to hum, high and
happy. Yancey’s numbed brain kept recreating the vision of Lois as he
had first seen her, framed in lamplight which was in turn framed by a
hurtling silver halo of rain. His mind formed it and bounced away,
formed it again and again retreated. It would only look and look back;
it would not evaluate. His world contained nothing like this; he
doubted, at the moment, that it could. His only analytical thought came
as an academic question, not to be answered by any process he then knew:
how could a woman be so decisive, so swift, yet so extraordinarily
quiet? Her voice had come to him as through earphones, direct and with
fullest quality, yet seeming not to reach the walls. Anyone else in the
world, taking charge like that, would certainly have roared like a drill
sergeant. “Don’t turn it off,” he said to Beverly.

“All right.” She put a parboiled arm through the curtains and he dropped
a towel across it. “Mmm, good,” she said, rubbing briskly as she
emerged. “I feel as if we’d been kidnapped, but I’m glad.”

He stepped into the shower and soaped up. The scalding water was good on
his chilled skin; he felt muscles relax which he hadn’t known were taut.
It was far and away the best shower he had ever taken up to the point
when Beverly uttered a soft and tragic wail. He knew the sound, and
sighed. “What have you done now?” he inquired, his voice carrying a
labored patience. He turned off the shower and peered through the mists
at his wife. She had a towel round her head like a turban, and her pale
blue chenille beach robe hung from her shoulders. “The black one,” she
said.

“Give me a towel. What black what?”

“Suitcase. This is all the beach things. There isn’t a thing of yours
here but your bathing trunks.”

“This,” he said after a suitable silence, “is just your night.”

“Oh, Yance, I’m sorry.”

“I’m sorry too.” He stared fixedly at her until she wilted. “I’ll just
get back into those wet clothes.”

“You can’t!”

“Got a better idea? I’m going out there in bathing trunks.” There was a
knock on the door. “Soup’s on!”

Before he could stop her, Beverly called out with a distressed bleat,
“Know what I did, I brought the wrong suitcase, there’s nothing here for
my husband to wear but his bathing suit!”

“Good!” said the soft voice on the other side of the door. “Put it on
and come on out. The coffee’s poured.” When they did not respond, Lois
laughed gently. “Did you people come to the lake to be formal? Didn’t
you expect to be seen in bathing suits? Come on,” she added, with such
warmth that in spite of themselves they found some sheepish smiles and
put them on. “Coming,” said Yancey. He took the trunks out of the open
suitcase.

In the living-room a fire had been lit and was just beginning to gnaw on
the kindling and warm a log. A table was set, simply and most
attractively—gray place mats, black cups, wrought-iron candlesticks with
black candles. There was a steaming glass urn and an electric toaster
which clucked once and popped up two halves of an English muffin just as
they sat down. Lois came out of the kitchen carrying a black sugar bowl.
She glided up behind them as they sat at the table, leaning over them.
One long arm put the bowl down; her other hand touched Yancey’s bare
shoulder. Something—

Something happened.

 

In the other bed, Lois abruptly turned on her side, facing him. She
reached over to the night table between the beds, found a cigarette. The
wind died just then, taking a deep quiet breath for the next shriek; and
in the jolting silence a great sea smashed the cliff below. Lois struck
her match, and the light and the explosion of water together plucked
Yancey’s nerves in a single shattering chord. He steeled himself and did
not start. In the blinding flare of the match, Lois’ face seemed to leap
at him—a partial mask, centered on the arch of an eyebrow, the smooth
forehead over it, the forehead’s miniature counterpart in the smooth
lowered lid beneath. The arches were stable, flawless; things on which
could be built a strong and lovely structure if one could only...only...

He lost the thought in the ballooning glow of her cigarette as she lay
back and puffed quickly, too quickly for her to enjoy it, surely. She
drew the glow into a ruddy yellow sharp-tipped cone, and the smoke must
have been hot and harsh to taste. Hot and harsh. He moistened his lips.

A surge of anger began to rise within him, matching again the sea
outside. With an approaching breaker, the anger mounted and swelled and
exploded. But the breaker could turn to foam and mist, and disperse, and
he could do nothing but clench his teeth and press his head back into
the pillow, for he must not wake Beverly.

This thing was so...unjust! Beverly gave him everything he wanted. She
always had, especially since that time at the lake. Especially
since...Her capacity for giving amazed him, almost awed him. She gave
with everything she did. Her singing was an outpouring. She laughed with
all her heart. Her sympathy was quick and complete. She gave constantly,
to him more than to anyone or anything else on earth. They had—now—a
marriage that was as good as a marriage could be. How, then, could there
be room in him for this—this thing, this acute, compelling awareness of
Lois? Why must there be this terrible difference between “want” and
“need”? He didn’t need Lois!

The anger subsided. He bent his arm and touched Beverly’s hair. She
moved, turning her head from side to side, burrowing closer in to his
shoulder. This won’t do, he thought desperately. Aren’t I the boy with
the Brain? The man who can’t be pushed around, who is never puzzled by
anything?

Go back, Yancey. Go back again to where your world was full of Lois and
you could control it. If you could do it then, with a tenth of the mind
you have now, then why...why can’t you....why is your heart trying to
break your ribs?

He closed his eyes against the shouting silver of the night and the
bloom of Lois’ cigarette. Back, he demanded, go back again. Not to the
hand on the shoulder. Afterwards. The rain’s letting up, and scurrying
through the puddles and the sky-drip to their own cabin, the one next
door. Hold it. Hold it right there...ah. He had it again; he was back
two years, feeling again what it was like to be able to keep Lois to
himself, and his heartbeat normal.

 

Impossible! But he had done it for almost two whole weeks. Lois on the
diving platform, then painted on the sky, forever airborne—forever
because awareness such as his photographed and filed the vision; in his
memory she hung there still against a cloud. And the square dance, with
the fiddle scratching away into an overloaded p.a. system and feet
clumping against the boards, and the hoarse, happy shouter: “Alamen lef
an’ around we go, swing yore potner do-si-do...now swing somebody
else...an’ somebody else...an’ somebody else...” and ELSE had been Lois,
turning exactly with him, light and mobile in his arms, here and gone
before he knew completely that she was there, leaving him with a clot in
his throat and a strange feeling in his right hand, where it had taken
the small of her back; it seemed not to belong completely to him
anymore, as if her molecules and his had interpenetrated.

Oh, and Lois breaking up a fight between one of the summer people and a
town man, drifting close, ruffling the hair of one and laughing, being a
presence around whom no violence could take place; Lois backing the
station wagon skilfully among the twisting colonnades of a birch
grove...And Lois doing unremarkable things unforgettably—a way of
holding her fork, lifting her head, ceasing to breathe while she
listened for something. Lois glimpsed through the office window, smiling
to herself. Lois reading the announcements at lunch, her voice just loud
enough for someone else on, say, a porch swing, yet audible to eighty
people.

Lois walking, for that matter, standing, writing, making a phone
call...Lois alive, that was enough to remember.

Nearly two weeks of this, waking with Beverly, breakfasting, swimming,
boating, hiking with Beverly, and his preoccupation cloaked in the
phlegmatic communications of familiarity. What difference did it make if
his silence was a rereading of Lois’ face instead of a reconsideration
of the sports page? He would not have attempted to share either one with
Beverly; then what was the difference? Earlier in their marriage she
might have complained that it was useless to have a vacation if he acted
just the same during it as he did at home; at this stage, however, he
was completely—one might say invisibly—Yancey. Just Yancey, like always.

But there was a line between possible and not-possible in Yancey’s
ability to contain his feelings about Lois. He did not know just where
it was or what would make him cross it; but cross it he did. and there
was no mistaking it once it happened.

It was a Thursday (they were to leave on Sunday), and in the afternoon
Yancey had asked Lois to come to their cabin that evening. He blurted it
out; the words hung between them and he stared at them, amazed. Perhaps,
he thought, he was being facetious...and then Lois gravely accepted, and
he fled.

He had to tell Beverly, of course, and he didn’t know how, and he made
up, in advance, seven different ways to handle her in anticipation of
the seven ways in which she might react. Each, of course, would result
in Lois’ coming. Exactly what the evening would be like he could not
predict, which was strange in a man who was so ready with alternatives
when it came to making a hostess out of Beverly.

“Bev,” he said abruptly when he found her pitching horseshoes back of
the lodge, “Lois is coming for a drink after dinner.”

Beverly tossed a horseshoe, watched it land. skip, and fall, then turned
to him. Her eyes were wide—well, they always were—and their shining
surfaces reminded him at that moment of the reflecting side of a one-way
mirror. What would she say? And which of the seven ripostes must he use
to overcome her resistance? Or would he have to make up an eighth on the
spur of the moment?

She dropped her eyes and picked up another horseshoe, and said, “What
time?”

So Lois came; her light, firm knock might just as well have been on the
base of his tongue, so immediately did he feel it. If, later on, his
will failed him a little, it was because now he sat still using it up,
and let Beverly go to the door.

Beverly, he thought, for Beverly’s sake, should not permit herself in
the same room with Lois. Lois came in and filled the room, but without
crowding; Lois went back and down into an easy chair as if carried by
flying things; Lois’ body grew up out of the cushions supported by what
she breathed like an underwater plant. And Beverly bounced about with
glasses and ice and talked...talked. What Lois did was something
different; Lois conversed. He sat dully, contributing little, watching
and thinking his own thoughts. He was achingly aware of many things, but
foremost was the realization that Lois was making an effort—a completely
successful one, as far as he could judge—to put Beverly at her ease. She
made no such effort for him, and he told himself with pride that this
was because she had no need to; they understood one another, and must
make things easy for poor Beverly.

He lay back almost drowsily, soaking in Lois’ presence as if she were
the sun and from her he were gradually acquiring a sort of tan.

Then they were alone in the room, when Beverly went to the kitchen, and
then Beverly was wailing something about ice, oh dear, but the Johnsons
in nine will have some, no don’t bother I’ll be right back; the screen
door in the kitchen slammed and Beverly’s quick feet went bam bam bam
down the back steps, and ceased to exist as they encountered pine
needles; all this in a brace of moments, and he was alone with Lois.

He rose and went to the couch and sat where its corner touched the arm
of the easy chair. It seemed to take all the energy he had; he wanted a
cigarette, he wanted to speak. He could do nothing.

After a silent time he felt Lois’ gaze on him. He turned to her quickly
and she dropped her eyes. He was glad, because their heads were so
close, and he had never examined her this way, slowly. He wet his lips.
He said, “Only ten days.”

She made an interrogative syllable.

“Knowing you,” he said. He rose suddenly and crossed in front of her. He
put one knee on the broad arm of her chair so that his foot was by the
back. He sat back on his heel, his other foot steadying him on the
floor. She stayed just as she was, looking down at her long brown hands.
“I want to tell you something, Lois.”

A small frown appeared and disappeared on her smooth forehead. She did
not raise her eyes.

“It’s something I’ve never told even to...never told anyone.”

Lois moved a little. She did not raise her face, but now he had a
three-quarter view of her profile. She waited, still as a dewdrop.

“The night when we arrived. You made coffee and I sat at the table. You
came up behind me to put something down.

“You touched me.”

He closed his eyes, and put his arm across his chest and his hand high
on his own shoulder. “Something...happened,” he said, with an
unaccountable difficulty.

Yancey was, in a small way, an engineer. He began abruptly to explain,
in didactic tones, “It wasn’t static electricity. It couldn’t have been.
It was pouring rain outside and the air was humid, not dry. You were on
the bare floor in your bare feet; it wasn’t one of those deep-pile-rug
phenomena. So it wasn’t anything...” He opened his eyes, swallowed.
“Static, or anything like that,” he managed. Then he was quiet, watching
her.

Her face, the flexible mask, was breaking up like an ice floe in a
sudden warm strong current. Her brow was like a snow-bank with the marks
of a kitten’s claws on it. There was a tear drop on her left cheek, and
the streak of a tear on her right, and her teeth were driving into her
lower lip. The corners of her mouth were turned upward, precisely as
they would be in a smile, and there was a delicate pucker in the flesh
of her chin. She made not a sound. She rose, her eyes seizing his and
holding them as she backed to the door. There she turned and ran out
into the dark.

When Beverly came back he was still half-crouched, balancing on the arm
of the chair. “Why—where’s Lois?”

“She left,” he said heavily.

Beverly looked at him. She looked at his eyes, quickly at his hairline,
his mouth, and again at his eyes. Then she went into the kitchen and he
heard the ice she was carrying fall explosively into the sink. She
called out, “Is anything the matter, Yancey?”

“Nothing’s the matter,” he said, getting up.

She said, “Oh.” They cleared up the glasses and ashtrays and went to
bed. Lois was not mentioned. Nothing was mentioned. They went about the
ritual of retiring in silence. When the lights were out he said, “I’ve
had enough of this place. Let’s go home in the morning. Early.”

She was quiet for a long time. Then she said, “If you want to.”

He thought she slept badly. He did not sleep at all.

In the morning he drove furiously. For the first twenty miles he could
not understand what he felt; then he began to understand that it was
anger. For another fifty miles he could find no direction for the anger;
none of the people involved had, after all, done anything, so how could
there be anger?

Occasionally he glanced at Beverly. Ordinarily she sat back, looking
forward at the sky, sideways to scenery, or inward to whatever it was
she communed with during those silent times they spent together. This
morning, however, she sat straight and kept her eyes on the road ahead,
which made him aware that he was driving too fast and which annoyed him
beyond description. Childishly, he increased both his speed and his
anger.

And at last, with a feeling that approached relief, he found something
to be angry at.

Beverly.

Why wouldn’t she say, “Slow down!” Why had she agreed to let Lois come
to their cabin? Why had she gone on blandly being herself this whole
time, while he was tearing himself apart inside? Why hadn’t she even
questioned him when he decided so abruptly to leave? “If you want to,”
she’d said. “If you want to.” What kind of self-respect is that?

Or—maybe she just didn’t care.

If you want to...for the first time he realized that this was her code,
her basic philosophy of life. They had red curtains in the living-room.
They had always had red curtains in the living-room. Well, he liked red
curtains. He’d said so. She had put up red curtains.

He glanced at her. She was watching the road tautly. He squeezed down a
bit more on the accelerator.

The place they lived in, the job he kept; the food they ate and probably
the clothes she wore; were they really chosen because they were what he
wanted?

Were they what he wanted?

Should he have what he wanted?

Why not? Beverly had.

He laughed, making Beverly start violently. He shook his head at her,
which meant either “I won’t tell you” or “Mind your own business.” He
had disqualified himself from finding any flaw in this new and
breathtaking conclusion and it made him exultant. He enjoyed speed in
his exultation, and control. He sent the car howling through a deep cut
in the crest of a hill, and around the blind turn on the other side,
which is where he collided with the space ship and was killed.

 

As it will at times in the wake of a hurricane, the wind died. Less
tractable, the sea punished the cliff unabated. The night was as noisy,
but the noise was so different it was as shocking as sudden silence. In
it, Lois twisted and angrily rammed her cigarette into the ashtray on
the night table. With a crisp angry rustle of sheets, she turned her
back and then sighed. The sound was only half vocalized, but such a
voice propagates more like light than like sound. Beverly came hurtling
up out of slumber and flashed free like a leaping fish, only to fall
back and swirl near the under surfaces of sleep. She raised her head,
turning it as if seeking, but her eyes were closed. “Hm?” she said
sleepily. Then her face dropped to Yancey’s chest again and she was
still.

What I should do, thought Yancey wildly, is to sit her up and slap her
awake and say, “Look, Bev, you know what? I got killed that morning when
we had the accident, I was dead altogether, the late Yancey Bowman, r.
i. p., and when they put me back together I was different. For two years
now you’ve been living with a man with a mind that never sleeps and
never makes mistakes and does...can do...anything it wants. So you can’t
expect ordinary conduct from me, Bev, or rational behavior based on any
reason you can understand. So, if I do anything that...that hurts you,
you mustn’t be hurt. Can’t you understand that?”

Of course she wouldn’t understand.

Why, he thought desperately, when they put me back together, didn’t they
iron out that little human wrinkle which made it possible for Pascal to
make that remark about the heart having “reasons which reason does not
know”?

He snorted softly. Heart. Heck of a name for it.

He lay on his back and watched the motion of surf-scattered moon on the
ceiling. He let his mind float into the vague shadows, be one with them
away from, above, beyond his insupportable, insoluble problem. And
gradually he found himself back there again, two years ago—perhaps
because of the momentum of his previous thinking, perhaps because, in
reliving a time when there was Lois (and he could stand it) and a time
when there was Lois (and he could not), it was a welcome thing to go
into a time where Lois, and Beverly, and for that matter Yancey Bowman,
had little significance.

 

As the space ship lifted, it retracted its berthing feet; it was one of
these which Bowman’s sedan struck. The car continued under the ship, and
the edge of the flat berthing foot sliced it down to the belt line,
leaving a carmine horror holding the wheel. The ship hovered
momentarily, then drifted over to the side of the road where the mangled
automobile had come to rest. Directly above the car, it stopped. An
opening appeared in the bottom of the ship and dilated like a camera
iris. There was a slight swirl of dust and leaves, and then what was
left of the car rose from the ground and disappeared into the ship. The
ship then slid away to the clearing in the woods where it had lain
hidden during its stay on Earth. Here it settled. It camouflaged itself
and lay outwardly silent.

Exactly what was done to him, Yancey could not know. He was made aware
of the end results, of course. He knew that what had been injured had
been repaired, and that in addition certain changes had been made to
improve the original. For example, his jaw hinges had been redesigned to
eliminate a tendency to dislocation, and a process was started which
would, in time, eliminate the sebaceous cysts which had kept forming and
occasionally inflaming ever since he was an adolescent. His vermiform
appendix was gone—not excised, but removed in some way which would
indicate, in the event of an autopsy, that it had never formed in the
first place. His tonsils had been replaced for reasons which he could
not understand except that they were good ones. On the other hand such
anomalies as his left little toe, which since birth had been bent and
lay diagonally across its neighbor, and a right eye which wandered
slightly to the right when he was fatigued—these were left as they had
originally been. The eye was one of the most interesting items, he
thought later; the toe had simply not been improved, but the eye had
been restored with its flaw. His teeth, too, were as irregular as
before, and contained fillings in the same places, though he knew there
had been little enough left of them. In sum, he had been altered only in
ways which would not show.

He did know, however, why these things had been done. There was inside
that ship an aura of sympathy mixed with remorse unlike anything he had
ever felt. Another component was respect, an all-embracing respect for
living things. Somewhere near where he lay in the ship’s laboratory was
a small covered shelf containing a cicada, two grasshoppers, four summer
moths, and an earthworm, all casualties in his accident. Their cell
structure, organic functions, and digestive and reproductive processes
were under study as meticulous as that which was being lavished on him.
For them restitution was to be made also, and they would be released in
as good condition as this unthinkably advanced science could make them.
The improvements seemed to be in the nature of a bonus, an implemented
apology.

And, of course, there was no denying that as long as such repayment was
made the alien footsteps on Earth were fairly obliterated. Yet Yancey
was always certain that this was not a primary motive, and that the
aliens, whoever they were, wherever they came from, would have
sacrificed anything, themselves included, rather than interfere with
terrestrial life.

He was to find out later that they had done the same things with his car
as they had done with him. He had not the slightest doubt that if they
had wished they could have rebuilt the old sedan into a gleaming
miracle, capable of flight and operable forever on a teacup-full of
fuel. He found it looking as it had always looked, even to rust spots
and a crinkling around the windshield where moisture had penetrated the
laminations of the safety glass. Yet there was a little more pickup, a
little more economy; the brakes were no longer grabby in wet weather;
and the cigarette lighter heated up in fewer seconds than before.

Who were they? Where had they come from? What were they doing here and
what did they look like?

He was never to know. He knew precisely as much as they permitted. He
even knew why he knew as much as he did. They could restore his crushed
head and shoulder, and did. They could make slight improvements, and
did. But even they could not predict every situation in which he might
find himself in the future. It was deeply important to them, and it
would be to him, to conceal the changes which had been made, or the
reciprocal impacts between him and his society might greatly affect
both. The best concealment would be his full knowledge of what had been
done, and a solemn injunction to divulge nothing of it to anyone. That
way he could never innocently perform public miracles and then be at a
loss to explain.

What miracles?

Most miraculous, of course, was the lowered impulse-resistance of his
nervous system, including the total brain. He need no longer run over
and over a thought sequence, like a wheel making a rut, to establish a
synapse and therefore retain knowledge. He had superfast physical
reactions. He had total recall (from the time of his release from the
ship) and complete access to his previous memory banks.

Yet a prime directive among his “surgeons” seemed to have been a
safeguarding of what his world called Yancey Bowman. Nothing—nothing at
all—was done to change Yancey Bowman into something or someone else. He
functioned a little better now, but he functioned as Yancey Bowman, just
as the changes in his digestive system were basically improvements
rather than replacements. He could get more energy out of less food,
even as he could breathe higher concentrations of CO, than he could
before. He could be, and was, Yancey Bowman more efficiently than ever
before. Hence nothing was changed...even (or especially) the turmoil
which was uppermost in his mind when he died.

So it was that after death had struck one Friday morning, the same
morning hour on Sunday revealed a strange sight (but only to some birds
and a frightened chipmunk). Slipping out of earth itself, the ship
spread topsoil where it had lain, covered it with a little snow of
early-fallen leaves, and shouldered into the sky. It wheeled and for a
moment paralleled the deserted highway below. The opening on its belly
appeared, and down through the shining air swept an aging two-door
sedan, its wheels spinning and its motor humming. When it touched the
roadway there was not so much as a puff of dust, so perfectly were
wheels and forward motion synchronized.

The car hurtled through a cut in a hilltop and around the blind turn on
the other side, and continued on its way, with Yancey Bowman at the
wheel, seething inwardly at the unreachable stupidities of his wife.

And was there a moment of shock when he found himself alive and on his
way unharmed, in his undamaged automobile? Did he turn and crane to see
the dwindling speck in which his life had ended and begun again? Did he
pull over to the side, mop his brow, and in a cascade of words exult
over his new powers? Did Beverly demand to know what had happened, and
would she not go out of her mind when she found that Friday was Sunday
now, and that for her there had been no Saturday this week?

No, and no, and no. There was no shock, because he was certain to his
marrow that this was the way it would be; that he would say nothing and
that he must not look back. As for Beverly, her silence on the matter
was proof enough that her convictions would suit the situation as well.

So he drove too fast and was too quiet, and his anger bubbled away until
at length it concentrated into something quieter and rather uglier. As
it formed, he drove more sensibly, and Beverly relaxed and leaned back,
turning now and again to inspect the shutters or the curtains in a house
they passed, watching the sky up ahead while she thought her own
thoughts.

If you could call them thoughts, he reflected.

The product of his anger was a cold projection, and took the form of an
unspoken dictum to Beverly. He found that with his new reflexes he could
give the matter his full attention, since now his hands seemed quite
able to drive by themselves, and even, it appeared, to read route signs.

So, echoing noiselessly in his mind, this structure built: This is not
the end, Beverly, because the end must have been long since. You are not
a woman living her life; you are a half person living mine. Your
ambition could not push me ahead, your senses could not know when I was
in torture, your taste is not your own, and your abilities are limited
to a dull search for what might please me and a trial-and-error effort
to get it for me. But aside from me you are nothing. You do not and you
could not earn your own living. Cast out on your own resources you could
not so much as fill a receptionist’s chair, or even run a summer resort.
If nothing whatever had happened to me during these three days, what we
have could never be called “marriage” again, not by me. I have looked
into the sun, Beverly; I have flown; I can never crawl the mud with you
again. I was too much for you before; what then am I now?

So it ran, turning and elaborating itself but always returning to a
silent scornful chant, buoyed up by glimpses of freedom and far
horizons. After about an hour of this he sensed her gaze, and turned to
look at her. She met his eyes and smiled her old smile. “It’s going to
be a lovely day, Yance.”

He turned abruptly back to the road. Something in his throat demanded
attention, and he found that he could not swallow it. His eyes stung. He
sat, unwillingly examining his feelings, and slowly it came to him that
among his other traits, that characteristic called empathy—the slipping
on of other people’s shoes, the world seen through the eyes of
others—this quality too had suffered a sea-change and was heightened
more than was comfortable. What, to Beverly, had happened? Numbly,
perhaps, she had been aware that something was amiss at the lake. He
seriously doubted if she had identified the something. She’d known it
was important because she’d okayed their leaving so abruptly without
asking any questions. But what was this “lovely day” business? Did she
think that because their backs were turned to the unidentified threat,
it had ceased to exist? Why, that must be exactly what she thought!

Oh Beverly, Beverly, are you going to get a kick in the teeth!

But a day went by and no such thing happened. It didn’t happen the first
week, either, or in a month. Part of this was because of his work. He
went back to it with a new sense, an awareness. He became totally
sensitive to a condition called “integration,” himself with his job, his
job with his office, his office to the firm, and the firm itself in the
economic mosaic. He wasted no motion in his job, and found himself
spending his working day in pondering the structure of his surroundings.
His first new effort was expressed through the suggestion box. It was
perfect of its kind. It was an idea simple enough to have been thought
of by his pre-accident self, and unlikely to be advanced by anyone not
in this particular job. It eliminated the job and Yancey was advanced
two grades and given new work to do. So he was busy, immersed, engaged,
even at home. That in itself was enough to submerge his feelings about
Beverly.

But it was only a part of his procrastination. (He called it that at
first: sooner or later, he thought, there would be changes made.)
Largely, he delayed because of this accursed empathy. Beverly was so
happy. She was happy and proud. If he became unaccountably silent, she
tiptoed about the place, quite convinced that the great man was dreaming
up something else for the suggestion box. If he was short-tempered, she
forgave. If he bought her something, or approved something she had
bought, she was grateful. Home was harmonious; Beverly was so happy she
sang again. He realized that it had been a great while since she had
sung.

And all the while he knew how she felt. He knew it surely and painfully,
and was fully aware of the impact she would suffer if he broached to her
his inner thinking. He’d do it; oh yes, he’d do it, some day. Meanwhile,
it wouldn’t hurt anything if she got that new winter coat she had eyed
so wistfully in the Sunday paper....

So a year went by and he did nothing about the matter. Actually, he
thought less about it after a year, though there were moments...But work
was more engrossing than ever, and home was such a pleasure—though a
quiet one—and Beverly was fairly blooming. If a man has the virtue or
the curse of empathy, he has to be kind. He must, for the most selfish
of reasons: any time he kicks out at another human, he will find bruises
on his own shins.

Once, suddenly, he asked her, “Beverly, have I changed?”

She looked puzzled, so he enlarged it. “Since last year, I mean. Do I
seem different?”

She thought about it. “I don’t know. You’re—nice. But you were always
nice.” She laughed suddenly. “You can catch flies,” she teased. “Why,
Yance?”

“No reason. The new job, and all.” He passed the reference to flies. One
had been bothering her last fall and he had absently reached out and
caught it on the wing. It was the only time he had come near betraying
some of his new talents. She had been astonished; in eight years he had
never demonstrated coordination like that. She would have been more
astonished if she had noticed that he caught the fly between his thumb
and forefinger.

“The new job hasn’t gone to your head,” she said, “if that’s what you
mean.”

He maneuvered a situation in the office which required attention in an
out-of-town branch and arranged matters so that sending him out there
was only logical. He was gone two weeks. He had seen to it that it was
not the kind of task that required genius, just application and good
detail work. He met two girls while he was there, one brilliant and high
in the company, the other far better than anything the company would
ever be able to hire. He left them alone, disliking himself not a little
because he knew, in his heart of hearts, whom he was being faithful to.

And it was good, good to get home. Due to what he had done out of town,
he was raised another notch but had to reorganize his new office, so
there was no vacation that year. He could easily have analyzed this
development, and determined for himself whether he had purposely avoided
a vacation, but he did not. He’d rather not know.

There was a company picnic, and Beverly sang. People reacted so
enthusiastically—especially to Yancey, as if he had invented her—that he
coaxed and goaded her into auditioning for a television show. She won
the audition and appeared. She lost the audience vote to an
eight-year-old boy with an accordion, but she was incandescently happy
because Yancey had cared, Yancey had helped.

In the matter of Beverly, Yancey began to like himself.

That, in Yancey’s private code, was the Year of the Big Christmas. They
took a week off and went to a ski lodge in New Hampshire. They did a
number of things together, and nothing was wrong about any of it. And
one night they sat before a Christmas-card kind of fireplace with a
crowd of kindred souls, drinking glögg and roaring carols, until they
were too sleepy to move. After everyone else had gone to bed, they sat
holding hands silently and watching the fire go out. As it will at such
moments, when one is living, not dying, his life whisked across his
inner eye and stopped here at this hearth, and on it was superimposed
the uneasy question What am I doing here? Over him came a flood of
tenderness for Beverly, poor Beverly. For the first time it occurred to
him that the fantastic thing that had happened to him might have a grim
and horrible result. His metabolic efficiency, his apparent immunity to
everything from the common cold up, his outright inability to get too
little rest or too little food...suppose he should live—well, not
forever, but—

He glanced at his wife, and though she was young-looking for her age,
his quick mind vividly supplied a wrinkle here and there, a little sag.
He’d be able to conceal his feelings about it, of course, but would she?
Empathetically, he went through a brief torture with her future, seeing
her wither while he went on as he was.

He averted his face, and his eyes filled with tears.

Gently she disengaged her hand. He felt it stroking, stroking his wrist.
And she had the wit, or the luck, to say absolutely nothing as she did
it.

When he thought back on it, much later, he thought too that though there
were many women who could do many things Beverly couldn’t do, not one of
them would have done just that, just that way.

In the spring he turned, down a promotion, sensitive as he was to the
feelings of his co-workers; this would benefit him far more in the long
run. And again it was summer, and this time there would be a vacation.

Well—where? He would choose a place, and Beverly would say, “If that’s
what you want, darling,” and off they’d go. He thought, and he thought
about it. With his total recall, he recreated a great many scenes for
himself. He all but decided, and then he hesitated; and then, sitting at
his desk in the office, he said aloud, “No! No, not yet,” and startled
some people.

They went to New England, to a place new to them, craggy, rugged,
sparkling, where sailboats notched the skyline and the wind smelled
clean and new and quite unused by anyone else. For four days they fished
and swam, danced, and dug little-necks. On the fifth day they stayed
snugly indoors while the sky pressed down like a giant’s palm. At three
o’clock the small-craft warnings went up. At four the Coast Guard called
and warned them away from their rented shack; yes, it was a hurricane, a
real hurricane and not just a storm.

They loaded the car haphazardly and tumbled into it, and already there
was a blinding fog of spume blowing horizontally across the coast road.
They ground up the hill to the town and pulled into the hotel yard.

The hotel, of course, was full, with a bed laid in the linen room and a
cot set up behind the desk.

“What are we going to do?” Beverly wailed. It was not distress, not yet.
This was exciting.

“We’re going to have a drink. Then we’re going to have some hot chowder.
Then we’re going to think about what we’re going to do.”

With their lungs full of ozone and their eyes full of sparks, they went
to the dining-room.

There was a picture which, say, a year ago, Yancey used to call to mind
so often that it was as familiar as his safety razor. A slim back, wide
shoulders clad in rich brown moleskin; lamplight glancing from dark
obedient hair, and a long brown hand resting lightly against an ivory
cheek. When he saw it now, right before his eyes, he discounted it as an
unwelcome phantom, a trick of the charged air. But Beverly squeezed his
elbow and cried, “Yance—look!” and before he could draw a breath she
sprang away from him to the table.

“Lois! Lois, whatever in the world are you doing here?”

This, Yancey told himself heavily, just had to happen. He went forward.
“Hello, Lois.”

“Well...!” It was a single syllable, but it contained warmth and welcome
and...but how would you ever know, even when she smiled? A mask can
smile. “Sit down, please sit down, Beverly. Yancey.”

There was a rush of small talk. Oh, yes, she had sold the resort, last
spring. Worked for a while in town. Resigned, looking for something
better. Came up here to let the wind blow the smog out of her hair. “Now
I’m afraid it’ll take the hair too.” Oh yes, Beverly was saying, so
warmly, so proudly...two promotions...turned down another one too; he’ll
run the place in another year, just you watch...and a good deal more,
while Lois watched her hands and smiled a small smile. “What about you,
Lois, are you married or anything?”

“No,” said Lois huskily, “I’m not married”—and here Yancey dropped his
eyes; he couldn’t bear to meet hers while she said it—“or anything.”

They had a drink, and another, and then some superlative New England
chowder, and beer, and another drink. And then it was over, and Yancey,
paying the check, was telling himself glumly, “You did fine, boy; so if
you’re a little on the silent side for a day or two, what’s that? I’m
glad it’s over. But I wish...”

Rising, Beverly said, “You’re staying here?”

Lois smiled oddly. “There’s nothing they can do about it.”

Before he could stop himself Yancey said, “Now what exactly does that
mean?”

Lois laughed quietly. “I just got in an hour and a half ago. I never
dreamed I’d need a reservation—funny, isn’t it, after my experience?
Anyway, they’re full up. I shall just sit here until they want to close
the place. I will then be a problem, and it’ll be up to them to solve
it.” She laughed again. “I’ve solved worse ones in my time.”

“Oh, Lois, you can’t! They’ll make you sleep on the bar!”

She shrugged, really not caring.

“Yancey,” said Beverly. She was flushed and urgent. “Do you remember a
time when two wet strangers couldn’t find their beds, and what happened
to them?”

He did meet Lois’ eyes this time. This was when his heart began
hammering.

Beverly said, “It’s our turn. We’re going down the coast. We’ll find a
place. Come on. Come on, Lois!”

Yancey thought, listen to her, taking the bit in her teeth. Doesn’t she
usually find out first what I want? And he answered himself, no; most of
the time she just does what I want without asking. And he told himself
further, stop talking like a damn fool.

Ten miles south there was a town with a hotel. Full up. Four miles
further, a motel. Packed to the eaves. The next stretch was twenty
miles, and it was getting late. It was raining the kind of rain they had
slogged through to Lois’ cabin two years before, but this time they had
a howling gale along with it.

And by the time they reached the next town, the warnings were in; the
hurricane, true to its unpredictable breed, had swung east leaving rain
and a maddened sea, but no further danger. So they drove into the slick
shining streets of a city still quaking in its boots, but vastly
relieved.

Here and there a store was open. There were three hotels, two of them
full. They stopped at an all-night drugstore to ask directions to the
third and Lois bought cigarettes and Beverly found a book-club edition
of Anna Karenina and scooped it up with joy; she said she’d always
wanted to read it.

The third hotel had one double with bath.

“Twin beds?”

The clerk nodded. Yancey looked at Lois but her eyes were cloaked. He
looked at Beverly and she said, “Why not? We can fit in a twin bed. I’m
not very big.”

No, Bev, he thought, you’re not.

Lois said, “Beverly—”

“Shh,” said Beverly. “We’ll take it,” she said to the clerk.

 

Lois turned again. Now she was looking up at the ceiling with him. Think
of that! he thought acidly, here we are sharing some antiseptic
moonbeams.

His biting thought was protection for a very brief while. His heart
began again. It shook him with each beat. It shook the bed, the walls,
the building, the beaten cliff outside, making it hurl back the sea with
even greater violence.

There was the softest butterfly-wing touch on his chest. Beverly had
opened her eyes.

Yancey thought madly, it’s like one of those meaningless conjugations
they give you in first-year French. I stare up into the darkness, you
stare up into the darkness, she stares up into the darkness...

Beverly moved. She wriggled up closer. She put her hand behind his head,
pulling it toward her. She put her mouth on his ear. He felt her warm
breath. Barely audible, her breath said, “Darling. What is it? What do
you want?”

What did he want? Nothing, of course. Nothing he could have. Nothing,
certainly, that he should have. He shook his head.

Beverly crept back until her head was on his shoulder again. She lay
still. She slid one hand over his chest, to rest lightly on his
hammering heart.

Lois sighed quietly and turned over, away from them. The wind laughed
and laughed outside, and another breaker smashed and spouted. The room
grew black, then silver again.

Abruptly Beverly sat up. “I can’t sleep,” she said clearly.

Lois was silent. Yancey watched Beverly. The silver light made
everything in the room look like an overexposed photograph, but
Beverly’s flesh seemed pink—the only thing in the whole mad, pulsing
world that had any color but grey or black.

Beverly swung her legs out, stood up, and stretched in the moonlight.
She was small and firm and—pink? Was she really pink, or was that a
memory too?

What a beautiful complementation, he thought hotly; how balanced an
equation expresses this chaos! Beverly, small and fair; open, simple,
direct. Lois, tall, slender, dark, devious, complex. And each so clearly
lacking just what the other had.

Beverly said, “I have nineteen chapters of Anna Karenina to read. Take
me about an hour.” She knelt on Yancey’s bed briefly, reached across to
the night table, and scooped something up. Then she went to the highboy
and got the book. She went into the bathroom. Yellow light appeared
starkly under the closed door.

Yancey lay quite still, looking at the line of yellow light.

At last he rolled over and looked at her. He could see the sliver of
yellow again, across her eyes. She was half sitting, resting her weight
on one slender arm. She was looking at him.

“What was it she picked up from the night table, Yancey?”

“Her watch.”

Lois made a sound, perhaps “Oh.” She sank down slowly, until she rested
on her elbow. She was looking at him now.

He lay still, wondering if Lois could hear his heart. She probably
could. Beverly probably could, through the door. He wondered, with
shattering inconsequentiality, whether Beverly liked red curtains.

Lois made a slight motion with her chin toward the yellow gleam. She
whispered, “I couldn’t do that.”

A great hungry yearning came over him, but at the moment, incredibly, it
seemed to have no direction. It yawned somewhere beneath him, waiting to
engulf him. A puzzlement plucked at him, and then, seeing the polished
yellow lines in Lois’ eyes, it came to him which of these women was
simple and direct, and which was subtle and deep and complex.

“I couldn’t do that,” Lois had said. How many other things could Beverly
do that Lois could not?

What kind of a woman was Beverly?

For the very first time Yancey Bowman asked himself what had happened to
Beverly the day he was killed. He’d assumed she was simply in cold
storage while they put him back together. He’d assumed...how could he
assume such a thing? He had never even asked about her. That was
impossible! Unnatural!

But of course—he wasn’t to ask. He would not have thought of it, and the
chances were that he could not have asked her.

It must be time to think of it. Something had happened to him,
permitting him to. Qualifying him to. But he hadn’t changed; he couldn’t
change. He was built and rebuilt and designed and redesigned, to be
Yancey-Plus. What change could...

Supposing, he told himself, they had a very young thing to rebuild.
Wouldn’t they build it so that it could go on growing? Then he could
have grown. How? How?

Well, what would he have done in this same mad situation, two years ago,
even after he left the space ship? He wouldn’t have lain here these
swift seconds, speculating.

“I couldn’t do that.” Lois had whispered. Supposing Beverly had been
killed too, and changed as he had been changed. He had never told her
what he knew; why would she have told him? Wasn’t the prime purpose to
improve a little, but to change nothing? He was Yancey-Plus, who went
right ahead ruling the roost, accepting his wife’s quiet variety of
slave labor. Wouldn’t she go right on being Beverly, giving him always
what he wanted?

And suppose she hadn’t been killed, hadn’t been changed. What kind of a
woman was she, who could do what Lois could not do, what—it painfully
occurred to him—he himself, with all his powers, could never do? Was the
original Beverly a bigger person than Yancey-Plus?

Then it was, with a surge of relief that made his head spin, that his
heart eased and he smiled. He knew now how he had changed, how he had
grown. He knew, all at once, what to do now and what to do for the rest
of his life with Beverly. Up to now he had not been able to ask her if
she was the same Beverly he had married. Now, by choice, he never would
ask her. Their marriage would be spiced and underscored and made most
beautiful by that one mystery between them.

All this in seconds, and he became aware again of the yellow lights in
Lois’ long eyes. Quite changing the subject, he used her exact words. “I
couldn’t do that.” he whispered.

Lois nodded slowly. She sank back on the pillow and closed her eyes. He
thought she trembled. He didn’t know. He didn’t much care. He turned
over and filled his lungs, as he had not been able to do for more than
an hour because of his leaping heart. “Beverly!” he bellowed.

The book fell on the tiles. There was silence for a moment, and then the
door opened.

“Yes, Yance.”

“Get back to bed, idiot. You can read that some other time. You need
your sleep.”

“I just—all right, Yance, if you want.”

She switched off the light and came in. A moonbeam swept across her face
as she approached. She was looking across him at Lois, her lips
trembling. She got into bed. He put his arms around her, gently, humbly.
She turned to him and suddenly held him so tight that he almost cried
out.

 



THE HURKLE IS A HAPPY BEAST


THIS ALL HAPPENED QUITE A LONG TIME AGO....

Lirht is either in a different universal plane or in another island
galaxy. Perhaps these terms mean the same thing. The fact remains that
Lirht is a planet with three moons, one of which is unknown, and a sun,
which is as important in its universe as is ours.

Lirht is inhabited by gwik, its dominant race, and by several less
highly developed species which, for purposes of this narrative, can be
ignored. Except, of course, for the hurkle. The hurkle are highly
regarded by the gwik as pets, in spite of the fact that a hurkle is so
affectionate that it can have no loyalty.

The prettiest of the hurkle are blue.

Now, on Lirht, in its greatest city, there was trouble, the nature of
which does not matter to us, and a gwik named Hvov, whom you may
immediately forget, blew up a building which was important for reasons
we cannot understand. This event caused great excitement, and gwik left
their homes and factories and strubles and streamed toward the center of
town, which is how a certain laboratory door was left open.

In times of such huge confusion, the little things go on. During the
“Ten Days That Shook the World” the cafes and theaters of Moscow and
Petrograd remained open, people fell in love, sued each other, died,
shed sweat and tears; and some of these were tears of laughter. So on
Lirht, while the decisions on the fate of the miserable Hvov were being
formulated, gwik still fardled, funted, and fupped. The great central
hewton still beat out its mighty pulse, and in the anams the corsons
grew....

Into the above-mentioned laboratory, which had been left open through
the circumstances described, wandered a hurkle kitten. It was very happy
to find itself there; but then, the hurkle is a happy beast. It prowled
about fearlessly—it could become invisible if frightened—and it glowed
at the legs of the tables and at the glittering, racked walls. It moved
sinuously, humping its back and arching along on the floor. Its front
and rear legs were as stiff and straight as the legs of a chair; the
middle pair had two sets of knees, one bending forward, one back. It was
engineered as ingeniously as a scorpion, and it was exceedingly blue.

Occupying almost a quarter of the laboratory was a huge and intricate
machine, unhoused, showing the signs of development projects the
galaxies over—temporary hook-ups from one component to another, cables
terminating in spring clips, measuring devices standing about on small
tables near the main work. The kitten regarded the machine with
curiosity and friendly intent, sending a wave of radiations outward
which were its glow, or purr. It arched daintily around to the other
side, stepping delicately but firmly on a floor switch.

Immediately there was a rushing, humming sound, like small birds chasing
large mosquitoes, and parts of the machine began to get warm. The kitten
watched curiously, and saw, high up inside the clutter of coils and
wires, the most entrancing muzziness it had ever seen. It was like heat
flicker over a fallow field; it was like a smoke vortex; it was like red
neon lights on a wet pavement. To the hurkle kitten’s senses, that
red-orange flicker was also like the smell of catnip to a cat, or anise
to a terrestrial terrier.

It reared up toward the glow, hooked its forelegs over a bus
bar—fortunately there was no ground potential—and drew itself upward. It
climbed from transformer to power pack, skittered up a variable
condenser—the setting of which was changed thereby—disappeared
momentarily as it felt the bite of a hot tube, and finally teetered on
the edge of the glow.

The glow hovered in mid-air in a sort of cabinet, which was surrounded
by heavy coils embodying tens of thousands of turns of small wire and
great loops of bus. One side, the front, of the cabinet was open, and
the kitten hung there fascinated, rocking back and forth to the rhythm
of some unheard music it made to contrast this sourceless flame. Back
and forth, back and forth it rocked and wove, riding a wave of
delicious, compelling sensation. And once, just once, it moved its
center of gravity too far from its point of support. Too far—far enough.
It tumbled into the cabinet, into the flame.

 

One muggy mid-June day a teacher, whose name was Stott and whose duties
were to teach seven subjects to forty moppets in a very small town, was
writing on a blackboard. He was writing the word Madagascar, and the air
was so sticky and warm that he could feel his undershirt pasting and
unpasting itself on his shoulderblade with each round “a” he wrote.

Behind him there was a sudden rustle from the moist seventh-graders. His
schooled reflexes kept him from turning from the board until he had
finished what he was doing, by which time the room was in a young
uproar. Stott about-faced, opened his mouth, closed it again. A thing
like this would require more than a routine reprimand.

His forty-odd charges were writhing and squirming in an extraordinary
fashion, and the sound they made, a sort of whimpering giggle, was
unique. He looked at one pupil after another. Here a hand was busily
scratching a nape; there a boy was digging guiltily under his shirt;
yonder a scrubbed and shining damsel violently worried her scalp.

Knowing the value of individual attack, Stott intoned, “Hubert, what
seems to be the trouble?”

The room immediately quieted, though diminished scrabblings continued.
“Nothin’, Mister Stott,” quavered Hubert.

Stott flicked his gaze from side to side. Wherever it rested, the
scratching stopped and was replaced by agonized control. In its wake was
rubbing and twitching. Stott glared, and idly thumbed a lower left rib.
Someone snickered. Before he could identify the source, Stott was
suddenly aware of an intense itching. He checked the impulse to go after
it, knotted his jaw, and swore to himself that he wouldn’t scratch as
long as he was out there, front and center. “The class will—” he began
tautly, and then stopped.

There was a—a something on the sill of an open window. He blinked and
looked again. It was a translucent, bluish cloud which was almost
nothing at all. It was less than a something should be, but it was
indeed more than a nothing. If he stretched his imagination just a
little, he might make out the outlines of an arched creature with too
many legs; but of course that was ridiculous.

He looked away from it and scowled at his class. He had had two
unfortunate experiences with stink bombs, and in the back of his mind
was the thought of having seen once, in a trick-store window, a product
called “itching powder.” Could this be it, this terrible itch? He knew
better, however, than to accuse anyone yet; if he was wrong, there was
no point in giving the little geniuses any extracurricular notions.

He tried again. “The cl—” He swallowed. This itch was...”The class
will—” He noticed that one head, then another and another, was turning
toward the window. He realized that if the class got too interested in
what he thought he saw on the window sill, he’d have a panic on his
hands. He fumbled for his ruler and rapped twice on the desk. His
control was not what it should have been at the moment; he struck far
too hard, and the reports were like gunshots. The class turned to him as
one, and behind them the thing on the window sill appeared with great
distinctness.

It was blue—a truly beautiful blue. It had a small spherical head and an
almost identical knob at the other end. There were four stiff, straight
legs, a long, sinuous body, and two central limbs with a boneless look
about them. On the side of the head were four pairs of eyes, of
graduated sizes. It teetered there for perhaps ten seconds, and then,
without a sound, leaped through the window and was gone.

Mr. Stott, pale and shaking, closed his eyes. His knees trembled and
weakened, and a delicate, dewy mustache of perspiration appeared on his
upper lip. He clutched at the desk and forced his eyes open; and then,
flooding him with relief, pealing into his terror, swinging his control
back to him, the bell rang to end the class and the school day.

“Dismissed,” he mumbled, and sat down. The class picked up and left,
changing itself from a twittering pattern of rows to a rowdy
kaleidoscope around the bottleneck doorway. Mr. Stott slumped down in
his chair, noticing that the dreadful itch was gone, had been gone since
he had made that thunderclap with the ruler.

Now, Mr. Stott was a man of method. Mr. Stott prided himself on his
ability to teach his charges to. use their powers of observation and all
the machinery of logic at their command. Perhaps, then, he had more of
both at his command—after he recovered himself—than could be expected of
an ordinary man.

He sat and stared at the open window, not seeing the sun-swept lawns
outside. And after going over these events a halfdozen times, he fixed
on two important facts:

First, that the animal he had seen, or thought he had seen, had six
legs.

Second, that the animal was of such a nature as to make anyone who had
not seen it believe he was out of his mind.

These two thoughts had their corollaries:

First, that every animal he had ever seen which had six legs was an
insect.

Second, that if anything was to be done about this fantastic creature,
he had better do it by himself. And whatever action he took must be
taken immediately. He imagined the windows being kept shut to keep the
thing out—in this heat—and he cowered away from the thought. He imagined
the effect of such a monstrosity if it bounded into the midst of a
classroom full of children in their early teens, and he recoiled. No,
there could be no delay in this matter.

He went to the window and examined the sill. Nothing. There was nothing
to be seen outside, either. He stood thoughtfully for a moment, pulling
on his lower lip and thinking hard. Then he went downstairs to borrow
five pounds of DDT powder from the janitor for an “experiment.” He got a
wide, flat wooden box and an electric fan, and set them up on a table he
pushed close to the window. Then he sat down to wait, in case, just in
case the blue beast returned.

 

When the hurkle kitten fell into the flame, it braced itself for a fall
at least as far as the floor of the cabinet. Its shock was tremendous,
then, when it found itself so braced and already resting on a surface.
It looked around, panting with fright, its invisibility reflex in full
operation.

The cabinet was gone. The flame was gone. The laboratory with its
windows, lit by the orange Lirhtian sky, its ranks of shining equipment,
its hulking, complex machine—all were gone.

The hurkle kitten sprawled in an open area, a sort of lawn. No colors
were right; everything seemed half-lit, filmy, out of focus. There were
trees, but they were not low and flat and bushy like honest Lirhtian
trees; these had straight naked trunks and leaves like a portle’s tooth.
The different atmospheric gases had colors; clouds of fading, changing
faint colors obscured and revealed everything. The kitten twitched its
cafmors and ruddled its kump, right there where it stood, for no amount
of early training could overcome a shock like this.

It gathered itself together and tried to move, and then it got its
second shock. Instead of arching over inchworm-wise it floated into the
air and came down three times as far as it had ever jumped in its life.

It cowered on the dreamlike grass, darting glances all about, under and
up. It was lonely and terrified and felt very much put upon. It saw its
shadow through the shifting haze, and the sight terrified it even more,
for it had no shadow when it was frightened on Lirht. Everything here
was all backwards and wrong way up; it got more visible, instead of
less, when it was frightened; its legs didn’t work right, it couldn’t
see properly, and there wasn’t a single, solitary malapek to be throdded
anywhere. It thought some music; happily, that sounded all right inside
its round head, though somehow it didn’t resonate as well as it had.

It tried, with extreme caution, to move again. This time its trajectory
was shorter and more controlled. It tried a small, grounded pace, and
was quite successful. Then it bobbed for a moment, seesawing on its
flexing middle pair of legs, and, with utter abandon, flung itself
skyward. It went up perhaps fifteen feet, turning end over end, and
landed with its stiff forefeet in the turf.

It was completely delighted with this sensation. It gathered itself
together, gryting with joy, and leapt up again. This time it made more
distance than altitude, and bounced two long, happy bounces as it
landed.

Its fears were gone in the exploration of this delicious new freedom of
motion. The hurkle, as has been said before, is a happy beast. It
curveted and sailed, soared and somersaulted, and at last brought up
against a brick wall with stunning and unpleasant results. It was
learning, the hard way, a distinction between weight and mass. The
effect was slight but painful. It drew back and stared forlornly at the
bricks. Just when it was beginning to feel friendly again...

It looked upward, and saw what appeared to be an opening in the wall
some eight feet above the ground. Overcome by a spirit of high
adventure, it sprang upward and came to rest on a window sill—a feat of
which it was very proud. It crouched there, preening itself, and looked
inside.

It saw a most pleasing vista. More than forty amusingly ugly animals,
apparently imprisoned by their lower extremities in individual stalls,
bowed and nodded and mumbled. At the far end of the room stood a taller,
more slender monster with a naked head—naked compared with those of the
trapped ones, which were covered with hair like a mawson’s egg. A few
moments’ study showed the kitten that in reality only one side of the
heads was hairy; the tall one turned around and began making tracks in
the end wall, and its head proved to be hairy on the other side too.

The hurkle kitten found this vastly entertaining. It began to radiate
what was, on Lirht, a purr, or glow. In this fantastic place it was not
visible; instead, the trapped animals began to respond with most curious
writhings and squirmings and sussurant rubbings of their hides with
their claws. This pleased the kitten even more, for it loved to be
noticed, and it redoubled the glow. The receptive motions of the animals
became almost frantic.

Then the tall one turned around again. It made a curious sound or two.
Then it picked up a stick from the platform before it and brought it
down with a horrible crash.

The sudden noise frightened the hurkle kitten half out of its wits. It
went invisible; but its visibility system was reversed here, and it was
suddenly outstandingly evident. It turned and leaped outside, and before
it reached the ground, a loud metallic shrilling pursued it. There were
gabblings and shufflings from the room which added force to the kitten’s
consuming terror. It scrambled to a low growth of shrubbery and
concealed itself among the leaves.

Very soon, however, its irrepressible good nature returned. It lay
relaxed, watching the slight movement of the stems and leaves—some of
them may have been flowers—in a slight breeze. A winged creature came
humming and dancing about one of the blossoms. The kitten rested on one
of its middle legs, shot the other out, and caught the creature in
flight. The thing promptly jabbed the kitten’s foot with a sharp black
probe. This the kitten ignored. It ate the thing, and belched. It lay
still for a few minutes, savoring the sensation of the bee in its
clarfel. The experiment was suddenly not a success. It ate the bee twice
more and then gave it up as a bad job.

It turned its attention again to the window, wondering what those racks
of animals might be up to now. It seemed very quiet up there....Boldly
the kitten came from hiding and launched itself at the window again. It
was pleased with itself; it was getting quite proficient at precision
leaps in this mad place. Preening itself, it balanced on the window sill
and looked inside.

Surprisingly, all the smaller animals were gone. The larger one was
huddled behind the shelf at the end of the room. The kitten and the
animal watched each other for a long moment. The animal leaned down and
stuck something into the wall.

Immediately there was a mechanical humming sound and something on a
platform near the window began to revolve. The next thing the kitten
knew it was enveloped in a cloud of pungent dust.

It choked and became as visible as it was frightened, which was very.
For a long moment it was incapable of motion; gradually, however, it
became-conscious of a poignant, painfully penetrating sensation which
thrilled it to the core. It gave itself up to the feeling. Wave after
wave of agonized ecstasy rolled over it, and it began to dance to the
waves. It glowed brilliantly, though the emanation served only to make
the animal in the room scratch hysterically.

The hurkle felt strange, transported. It turned and leaped high into the
air, out from the building.

 

Mr. Stott stopped scratching. Disheveled indeed, he went to the window
and watched the odd sight of the blue beast, quite invisible now, but
coated with dust, so that it was like a bubble in a fog. It bounced
across the lawn in huge floating leaps, leaving behind it diminishing
patches of white powder in the grass. He smacked his hands one on the
other and, smirking, withdrew to straighten up. He had saved the earth
from battle, murder, and bloodshed forever, but he did not know that. No
one ever found out what he had done. So he lived a long and happy life.

And the hurkle kitten?

It bounded off through the long shadows, and vanished in a copse of
bushes. There it dug itself a shallow pit, working drowsily, more and
more slowly. And at last it sank down and lay motionless, thinking
strange thoughts, making strange music, and racked by strange
sensations. Soon even its slightest movements ceased, and it stretched
out stiffly, motionless....

For about two weeks. At the end of that time, the hurkle. no longer a
kitten, was possessed of a fine, healthy litter of just under two
hundred young. Perhaps it was the DDT, and perhaps it was the new
variety of radiation that the hurkle received from the terrestrial sky,
but they were all parthenogenetic females, even as you and I.

And the humans? Oh, we bred so! And how happy we were!

But the humans had the slidy itch, and the scratchy itch, and the
prickly or tingly or titillative paresthetic formication. And there
wasn’t a thing they could do about it.

So they left.

Isn’t this a lovely place?

 



THUNDER AND ROSES


WHEN PETE MAWSER LEARNED ABOUT THE SHOW, he turned away from the GHQ
bulletin board, touched his long chin, and determined to shave. This was
odd, because the show would be video, and he would see it in his
barracks.

He had an hour and a half. It felt good to have a purpose again—even
shaving before eight o’clock. Eight o’clock Tuesday, just the way it
used to be. Everyone used to catch that show on Tuesday. Everyone used
to say, Wednesday morning, “How about the way she sang ‘The Breeze and
I’ last night?” “Hey, did you hear Starr last night?”

That was a while ago, before all those people were dead, before the
country was dead. Starr Anthim, institution, like Crosby, like Duse,
like Jenny Lind, like the Statue of Liberty.

(Liberty had been one of the first to get it, her bronze beauty
volatilized, radioactive, and even now being carried about in vagrant
winds, spreading over the earth—)

Pete Mawser grunted and forced his thoughts away from the drifting,
poisonous fragments of a blasted Liberty. Hate was first. Hate was
ubiquitous, like the increasing blue glow in the air at night, like the
tension that hung over the base.

Gunfire crackled sporadically far to the right, swept nearer. Pete
stepped out of the street and made for a parked ten-wheeler. There’s a
lot of cover in and around a ten-wheeler.

There was a Wac sitting on the short running-board.

At the corner a stocky figure backed into the intersection. The man
carried a tommy gun in his arms, and he was swinging it to and fro with
the gentle, wavering motion of a weather-vane. He staggered toward them,
his gun muzzle hunting. Someone fired from a building and the man
swiveled and blasted wildly at the sound.

“He’s—blind,” said Pete Mawser, and added, “He ought to be,” looking at
the tattered face.

A siren keened. An armored jeep slewed into the street. The
full-throated roar of a brace of 50-caliber machine guns put a swift and
shocking end to the incident.

“Poor crazy kid,” Pete said softly. “That’s the fourth I’ve seen today.”
He looked down at the Wac. She was smiling.

“Hey!”

“Hello, Sarge.” She must have identified him before, because now she did
not raise her eyes or her voice. “What happened?”

“You know what happened. Some kid got tired of having nothing to fight
and nowhere to run to. What’s the matter with you?”

“No,” she said. “I don’t mean that.” At last she looked up at him. “I
mean all of this. I can’t seem to remember.”

“You...well, gee, it’s not easy to forget. We got hit. We got hit
everywhere at once. All the big cities are gone. We got it from both
sides. We got too much. The air is becoming radioactive. We’ll all—” He
checked himself. She didn’t know. She’d forgotten. There was nowhere to
escape to, and she’d escaped inside herself, right here. Why tell her
about it? Why tell her that everyone was going to die? Why tell her that
other, shameful thing: that we hadn’t struck back?

But she wasn’t listening. She was still looking at him. Her eyes were
not quite straight. One held his but the other was slightly shifted and
seemed to be looking at his temples. She was smiling again. When his
voice trailed off she didn’t prompt him. Slowly he moved away. She did
not turn her head, but kept looking up at where he had been, smiling a
little. He turned away, wanting to run, walking fast.

(How long can a guy hold out? When you’re in the Army they try to make
you be like everybody else. What do you do when everybody else is
cracking up?)

He blanked out the mental picture of himself as the last one left sane.
He’d followed that one through before. It always led to the conclusion
that it would be better to be one of the first. He wasn’t ready for that
yet.

Then he blanked that out, too. Every time he said to himself that he
wasn’t ready for that yet, something within him asked, “Why not?” and he
never seemed to have an answer ready.

(How long could a guy hold out?)

He climbed the steps of the QM Central and went inside. There was nobody
at the reception switchboard. It didn’t matter. Messages were carried by
guys in jeeps, or on motorcycles. The Base Command was not insisting
that anybody stick to a sitting job these days. Ten desk men would crack
up for every one on a jeep, or on the soul-sweat squads. Pete made up
his mind to put in a little stretch on a squad tomorrow. Do him good. He
just hoped that this time the adjutant wouldn’t burst into tears in the
middle of the parade ground. You could keep your mind on the manual of
arms just fine until something like that happened.

He bumped into Sonny Weisefreund in the barracks corridor. The tech’s
round young face was as cheerful as ever. He was naked and glowing, and
had a towel thrown over his shoulder.

“Hi. Sonny. Is there plenty of hot water?”

“Why not?” grinned Sonny. Pete grinned back, cursing inwardly. Could
anybody say anything about anything at all without one of these
reminders? Sure there was hot water. The QM barracks had hot water for
three hundred men. There were three dozen left. Men dead, men gone to
the hills, men locked up so they wouldn’t—

“Starr Anthim’s doing a show tonight.”

“Yeah. Tuesday night. Not funny, Pete. Don’t you know there’s a war—”

“No kidding,” Pete said swiftly. “She’s here—right here on the base.”

Sonny’s face was joyful. “Gee.” He pulled the towel off his shoulder and
tied it around his waist. “Starr Anthim here! Where are they going to
put on the show?”

“HQ, I imagine. Video only. You know about public gatherings.” And a
good thing, too, he thought. Put on an in-person show, and some torn-up
GI would crack during one of her numbers. He himself would get plenty
mad over a thing like that—mad enough to do something about it then and
there. And there would probably be a hundred and fifty or more like him,
going-raving mad because someone had spoiled a Starr Anthim show. That
would be a dandy little shambles for her to put in her memory book.

“How’d she happen to come here, Pete?”

“Drifted in on the last gasp of a busted-up Navy helicopter.”

“Yeah, but why?”

“Search me. Get your head out of that gift horse’s mouth.” He went into
the washroom, smiling and glad that he still could. He undressed and put
his neatly folded clothes down on a bench. There were a soap wrapper and
an empty toothpaste tube lying near the wall. He went and picked them up
and put them in the catch-all. He took the mop which leaned against the
partition and mopped the floor where Sonny had splashed after shaving.
Got to keep things squared away. He might say something if it were
anyone else but Sonny. But Sonny wasn’t cracking up. Sonny always had
been like that. Look there. Left his razor out again.

Pete started his shower, meticulously adjusting the valves until the
pressure and temperature exactly suited him. He didn’t do anything
slapdash these days. There was so much to feel, and taste, and see now.
The impact of water on his skin, the smell of soap, the consciousness of
light and heat, the very pressure of standing on the soles of his
feet—he wondered vaguely how the slow increase of radioactivity in the
air, as the nitrogen transmuted to Carbon Fourteen, would affect him if
he kept carefully healthy in every way. What happens first? Do you go
blind? Headaches, maybe? Perhaps you lose your appetite. Or maybe you
get tired all the time.

Why not go look it up?

On the other hand, why bother? Only a very small percentage of the men
would die of radioactive poisoning. There were too many other things
that killed more quickly, which was probably just as well. That razor,
for example. It lay gleaming in a sunbeam, curved and clean in the
yellow light. Sonny’s father and grandfather had used it, or so he said,
and it was his pride and joy.

Pete turned his back on it and soaped under his arms, concentrating on
the tiny kisses of bursting bubbles. In the midst of a recurrence of
disgust at himself for thinking so often of death, a staggering truth
struck him. He did not think of such things because he was morbid, after
all! It was the very familiarity of things that brought death-thoughts.
It was either “I shall never do this again” or “This is one of the last
times I shall do this.” You might devote yourself completely to doing
things in different ways, he thought madly. You might crawl across the
floor this time, and next time walk across on your hands. You might skip
dinner tonight, and have a snack at two in the morning instead, and eat
grass for breakfast.

But you had to breathe. Your heart had to beat. You’d sweat and you’d
shiver, the same as always. You couldn’t get away from that. When those
things happened, they would remind you. Your heart wouldn’t beat out its
wunklunk, wunklunk any more. It would go one-less, one-less, until it
yelled and yammered in your ears and you had to make it stop.

Terriffic polish on that razor.

And your breath would go on, same as before. You could sidle through
this door, back through the next one and the one after, and figure out a
totally new way to go through the one after that, but your breath would
keep on sliding in and out of your nostrils like a razor going through
whiskers, making a sound like a razor being stropped.

Sonny came in. Pete soaped his hair. Sonny picked up the razor and stood
looking at it. Pete watched him, soap ran into his eye, he swore, and
Sonny jumped.

“What are you looking at, Sonny? Didn’t you ever see it before?”

“Oh, sure. Sure. I was just—” He shut the razor, opened it, flashed
light from its blade, shut it again. “I’m tired of using this, Pete. I’m
going to get rid of it. Want it?”

Want it? In his foot locker, maybe. Under his pillow. “Thanks no, Sonny.
Couldn’t use it.”

“I like safety razors,” Sonny mumbled. “Electrics, even better. What are
we going to do with it?”

“Throw it in the...no.” Pete pictured the razor turning end over end in
the air, half open, gleaming in the maw of the catchall. “Throw it out
the—” No. Curving out into the long grass. You might want it. You might
crawl around in the moonlight looking for it. You might find it.

“I guess maybe I’ll break it up.”

“No,” Pete said. “The pieces—” Sharp little pieces. Hollow-ground
fragments. “I’ll think of something. Wait’ll I get dressed.”

He washed briskly, toweled, while Sonny stood looking at the razor. It
was a blade now, and if you broke it, there would be shards and
glittering splinters, still razor sharp. You could slap its edge into an
emery wheel and grind it away, and somebody could find it and put
another edge on it because it was so obviously a razor, a fine steel
razor, one that would slice so—“I know. The laboratory. We’ll get rid of
it,” Pete said confidently.

He stepped into his clothes, and together they went to the laboratory
wing. It was very quiet there. Their voices echoed.

“One of the ovens,” said Pete, reaching for the razor.

“Bake ovens? You’re crazy!”

Pete chuckled. “You don’t know this place, do you? Like everything else
on the base, there was a lot more went on here than most people knew
about. They kept calling it the bake shop. Well, it was research
headquarters for new high-nutrient flours. But there’s lots else here.
We tested utensils and designed beet peelers and all sorts of things
like that. There’s an electric furnace in here that—” He pushed open a
door.

They crossed a long, quiet, cluttered room to the thermal equipment. “We
can do everything here from annealing glass, through glazing ceramics,
to finding the melting point of frying pans.” He clicked a switch
tentatively. A pilot light glowed. He swung open a small, heavy door and
set the razor inside. “Kiss it good-by. In twenty minutes it’ll be a
puddle.”

“I want to see that,” said Sonny. “Can I look around until it’s cooked?”

“Why not?”

(Everybody around here always said “Why not?”)

They walked through the laboratories. Beautifully equipped, they were,
and too quiet. Once they passed a major who was bent over a complex
electronic hook-up on one of the benches. He was watching a little amber
light flicker, and he did not return their salute. They tiptoed past
him, feeling awed at his absorption, envying it. They saw the models of
the automatic kneaders, the vitaminizers, the remote-signal thermostats
and timers and controls.

“What’s in there?”

“I dunno. I’m over the edge of my territory. I don’t think there’s
anybody left for this section. They were mostly mechanical and
electronic theoreticians. The only thing I know about them is that if we
ever needed anything in the way of tools, meters, or equipment, they had
it or something better, and if we ever got real bright and figured out a
startling new idea, they’d already built it and junked it a month ago.
Hey!”

Sonny followed the pointing hand. “What?”

“That wall section. It’s loose, or...well, what do you know?”

He pushed at the section of wall, which was very slightly out of line.
There was a dark space beyond.

“What’s in there?”

“Nothing, or some semiprivate hush-hush job. These guys used to get away
with murder.”

Sonny said, with an uncharacteristic flash of irony, “Isn’t that the
Army theoretician’s business?”

Cautiously they peered in, then entered.

“Wh...hey! The door!”

It swung swiftly and quietly shut. The soft click of the latch was
accompanied by a blaze of light.

The room was small and windowless. It contained machinery—a “trickle”
charger, a bank of storage batteries, an electric-powered dynamo, two
small self-starting gas-driven light plants and a Diesel compete with
sealed compressed-air starting cylinders. In the corner was a relay rack
with its panel-bolts spot-welded. Protruding from it was a red-top
lever. Nothing was labeled.

They looked at the equipment wordlessly for a time and then Sonny said,
“Somebody wanted to make awful sure he had power for something.”

“Now, I wonder what—” Pete walked over to the relay rack. He looked at
the lever without touching it. It was wired up; behind the handle, on
the wire, was a folded tag. He opened it cautiously. “To be used only on
specific orders of the Commanding Officer.”

“Give it a yank and see what happens.”

Something clicked behind them. They whirled. “What was that?”

“Seemed to come from that rig by the door.”

They approached it cautiously. There was a spring-loaded solenoid
attached to a bar which was hinged to drop across the inside of the
secret door, where it would fit into steel gudgeons on the panel.

It clicked again. “A Geiger,” said Pete disgustedly.

“Now why,” mused Sonny, “would they design a door to stay locked unless
the general radioactivity went beyond a certain point? That’s what it
is. See the relays? And the overload switch there? And this?”

“It has a manual lock, too,” Pete pointed out. The counter clicked
again. “Let’s get out of here. I got one of those things built into my
head these days.”

The door opened easily. They went out, closing it behind them. The
keyhole was cleverly concealed in the crack between two boards.

They were silent as they made their way back to the QM labs. The small
thrill of violation was gone and, for Pete Mawser at least, the hate was
back, that and the shame. A few short weeks before, this base had been a
part of the finest country on earth. There was a lot of work here that
was secret, and a lot that was such purely progressive and unapplied
research that it would be in the way anywhere else but in this quiet
wilderness.

Sweat stood out on his forehead. They hadn’t struck back at their
murderers! It was quite well-known that there were launching sites all
over the country, in secret caches far from any base or murdered city.
Why must they sit here waiting to die, only to let the enemy—“enemies”
was more like it—take over the continent when it was safe again?

He smiled grimly. One small consolation. They’d hit too hard; that was a
certainty. Probably each of the attackers underestimated what the other
would throw. The result—a spreading transmutation of nitrogen into
deadly Carbon Fourteen. The effects would not be limited to the
continent. What ghastly long-range effect the muted radioactivity would
have on the overseas enemies was something that no one alive today could
know.

Back at the furnace, Pete glanced at the temperature dial, then kicked
the latch control. The pilot winked out and then the door swung open.
They blinked and started back from the raging heat within, then bent and
peered. The razor was gone. A pool of brilliance lay on the floor of the
compartment.

“Ain’t much left. Most of it oxidized away,” Pete grunted.

They stood together for a time with their faces lit by that small
shimmering ruin. Later, as they walked back to the barracks, Sonny broke
his long silence with a sigh. “I’m glad we did that, Pete. I’m awful
glad we did that.”

 

At a quarter to eight they were waiting before the combination console
in the barracks. All hands except Pete and Sonny and a wiry-haired,
thick-set corporal named Bonze had elected to see the show on the big
screen in the mess hall. The reception was better there, of course, but,
as Bonze put it, “you don’t get close enough in a big place like that.”

“I hope she’s the same,” said Sonny, half to himself.

Why should she be? thought Pete morosely as he turned on the set and
watched the screen begin to glow. There were many more of the golden
speckles that had killed reception for the past two weeks. Why should
anything be the same, ever again!

He fought a sudden temptation to kick the set to pieces. It, and Starr
Anthim, were part of something that was dead. The country was dead, a
real country—prosperous, sprawling, laughing, grabbing, growing and
changing, leprous in spots with poverty and injustice, but healthy
enough to overcome any ill. He wondered how the murderers would like it.
They were welcome to it, now. Nowhere to go. No one to fight. That was
true for every soul on earth now.

“You hope she’s the same,” he muttered.

“The show, I mean,” said Sonny mildly. “I’d like to just sit here and
have it like...like—”

Oh, thought Pete mistily. Oh—that. Somewhere to go, that’s what it is,
for a few minutes. “I know,” he said, all the harshness gone from his
voice.

Noise receded from the audio as the carrier swept in. The light on the
screen swirled and steadied into a diamond pattern. Pete adjusted the
focus, chromic balance, and intensity. “Turn out the lights, Bonze. I
don’t want to see anything but Starr Anthim.”

It was the same, at first. Starr Anthim had never used the usual
fanfares, fade-ins, color, and clamor of her contemporaries. A black
screen, then click, a blaze of gold. It was all there, in focus;
tremendously intense, it did not change. Rather, the eye changed to take
it in. She never moved for seconds after she came on; she was there, a
portrait, a still face and a white throat. Her eyes were open and
sleeping. Her face was alive and still.

Then, in the eyes which seemed green but were blue flecked with gold, an
awareness seemed to gather, and they came awake. Only then was it
noticeable that her lips were parted. Something in the eyes made the
lips be seen, though nothing moved yet. Not until she bent her head
slowly, so that some of the gold flecks seemed captured in the golden
brows. The eyes were not, then, looking out at an audience. They were
looking at me, and at me, and at ME.

“Hello—you,” she said. She was a dream, with a kid sister’s slightly
irregular teeth.

Bonze shuddered. The cot on which he lay began to squeak rapidly. Sonny
shifted in annoyance. Pete reached out in the dark and caught the leg of
the cot. The squeaking subsided.

“May I sing a song?” Starr asked. There was music, very faint. “It’s an
old one, and one of the best. It’s an easy song, a deep song, one that
comes from the part of men and women that is mankind—the part that has
in it no greed, no hate, no fear. This song is about joyousness and
strength. It’s—my favorite. Isn’t it yours?”

The music swelled. Pete recognized the first two notes of the
introduction and swore quietly. This was wrong. This song was not
for...this song was part of—

Sonny sat raptly. Bonze lay still.

Starr Anthim began to sing. Her voice was deep and powerful, but soft,
with the merest touch of vibrato at the ends of the phrases. The song
flowed from her without noticeable effort, seeming to come from her
face, her long hair, her wide-set eyes. Her voice, like her face, was
shadowed and clean, round, blue and green but mostly gold:

“When you gave me your heart, you gave me the world,

You gave me the night and the day,

And thunder, and roses, and sweet green grass,

The sea, and soft wet clay.

 

“I drank the dawn from a golden cup,

From a silver one, the dark,

The steed I rode was the wild west wind,

My song was the brook and the lark.”

The music spiraled, caroled, slid into a somber cry of muted, hungry
sixths and ninths; rose, blared, and cut, leaving her voice full and
alone:

“With thunder I smote the evil of earth,

With roses I won the right,

With the sea I washed, and with clay I built,

And the world was a place of light!”

The last note left a face perfectly composed again, and there was no
movement in it; it was sleeping and vital while the music curved off and
away to the places where music rests when it is not heard.

Starr smiled.

“It’s so easy,” she said. “So simple. All that is fresh and clean and
strong about mankind is in that song, and I think that’s all that need
concern us about mankind.” She leaned forward. “Don’t you see?”

The smile faded and was replaced with a gentle wonder. A tiny furrow
appeared between her brows; she drew back quickly. “I can’t seem to talk
to you tonight,” she said, her voice small. “You hate something.”

Hate was shaped like a monstrous mushroom. Hate was the random speckling
of a video plate.

“What has happened to us,” said Starr abruptly, impersonally, “is
simple, too. It doesn’t matter who did it—do you understand that? It
doesn’t matter. We were attacked. We were struck from the east and from
the west. Most of the bombs were atomic—there were blast bombs and there
were dust bombs. We were hit by about five hundred and thirty bombs
altogether, and it has killed us.”

She waited.

Sonny’s fist smacked into his palm. Bonze lay with his eyes open, quiet.
Pete’s jaws hurt.

“We have more bombs than both of them put together. We have them. We are
not going to use them. Wait!” She raised her hands suddenly, as if she
could see into each man’s face. They sank back, tense.

“So saturated is the atmosphere with Carbon Fourteen that all of us in
this hemisphere are going to die. Don’t be afraid to say it. Don’t be
afraid to think it. It-is a truth, and it must be faced. As the
transmutation effect spreads from the ruins of our cities, the air will
become increasingly radioactive, and then we must die. In months, in a
year or so, the effects will be strong overseas. Most of the people
there will die, too. None will escape completely. A worse thing will
come to them than anything they gave us, because there will be a wave of
horror and madness which is impossible to us. We are merely going to
die. They will live and burn and sicken, and the children that will be
born to them—” She shook her head, and her lower lip grew full. She
visibly pulled herself together.

“Five hundred and thirty bombs—I don’t think either of our attackers
knew just how strong the other was. There has been so much secrecy.” Her
voice was sad. She shrugged slightly. “They have killed us, and they
have ruined themselves. As for us—we are not blameless, either. Neither
are we helpless to do anything—yet. But what we must do is hard. We must
die—without striking back.”

She gazed briefly at each man in turn, from the screen. “We must not
strike back. Mankind is about to go through a hell of his own making. We
can be vengeful—or merciful, if you like—and let go with the hundreds of
bombs we have. That would sterilize the planet so that not a microbe,
not a blade of grass could escape, and nothing new could grow. We would
reduce the earth to a bald thing, dead and deadly.

“No, it just won’t do. We can’t do it.”

“Remember the song? That is humanity. That’s in all humans. A disease
made other humans our enemies for a time, but as the generations march
past, enemies become friends and friends enemies. The enmity of those
who have killed us is such a tiny, temporary thing in the long sweep of
history!”

Her voice deepened. “Let us die with the knowledge that we have done the
one noble thing left to us. The spark of humanity can still live and
grow on this planet. It will be blown and drenched, shaken and all but
extinguished, but it will live if that song is a true one. It will live
if we are human enough to discount the fact that the spark is in the
custody of our temporary enemy. Some—a few—of his children will live to
merge with the new humanity that will gradually emerge from the jungles
and the wilderness. Perhaps there will be ten thousand years of
beastliness; perhaps man will be able to rebuild while he still has his
ruins.”

She raised her head, her voice tolling. “And even if this is the end of
humankind, we dare not take away the chances some other life form might
have to succeed where we failed. If we retaliate, there will not be a
dog, a deer, an ape, a bird or fish or lizard to carry the evolutionary
torch. In the name of justice, if we must condemn and destroy ourselves,
let us not condemn all life along with us! We are heavy enough with
sins. If we must destroy, let us stop with destroying ourselves!”

There was a shimmering flicker of music. It seemed to stir her hair like
a breath of wind. She smiled.

“That’s all,” she whispered. And to each man there she said, “Good
night—”

The screen went black. As the carrier cut off—there was no
announcement—the ubiquitous speckles began to swarm across it.

Pete rose and switched on the lights. Bonze and Sonny were quite still.
It must have been minutes later when Sonny sat up straight, shaking
himself like a puppy. Something besides the silence seemed to tear with
the movement.

He said softly, “You’re not allowed to fight anything, or to run away,
or to live, and now you can’t even hate anymore, because Starr says
‘no.’”

There was bitterness in the sound of it, and a bitter smell to the air.

Pete Mawser sniffed once, which had nothing to do with the smell. He
froze, sniffed again. “What’s that smell, Son’?”

Sonny tested it. “I don’t—Something familiar. Vanilla—no...no.”

“Almonds. Bitter—Bonze!”

Bonze lay still with his eyes open, grinning. His jaw muscles were
knotted, and they could see almost all his teeth. He was soaking wet.

“Bonze!”

“It was just when she came on and said ‘Hello—you,’ remember?” whispered
Pete. “Oh, the poor kid. That’s why he wanted to catch the show here
instead of in the mess hall.”

“Went out looking at her,” said Sonny through pale lips. “I...can’t say
I blame him much. Wonder where he got the stuff.”

“Never mind that.” Pete’s voice was harsh. “Let’s get out of here.”

They left to call the meat wagon. Bonze lay watching the console with
his dead eyes and his smell of bitter almonds.

 

Pete did not realize where he was going, or exactly why, until he found
himself on the dark street near GHQ and the communications shack. It had
something to do with Bonze. Not that he wanted to do what Bonze had
done. But then he hadn’t thought of it. What would he have done if he’d
thought of it? Nothing, probably. But still—it might be nice to be able
to hear Starr, and see her, whenever he felt like it. Maybe there
weren’t any recordings, but her musical background was recorded, and the
Sig might have dubbed the show off.

He stood uncertainly outside the GHQ building. There was a cluster of
men outside the main entrance. Pete smiled briefly. Rain, nor snow, nor
sleet, nor gloom of night could stay the stage-door Johnny.

He went down the side street and up the delivery ramp in the back. Two
doors along the platform was the rear exit of the communications
section.

There was a light on in the communications shack. He had his hand out to
the screen door when he noticed someone standing in the shadows beside
it. The light played daintily on the golden margins of a head and face.

He stopped. “Starr Anthim!”

“Hello, soldier. Sergeant.”

He blushed like an adolescent. “I—” His voice left him. He swallowed,
reached up to whip off his hat. He had no hat. “I saw the show,” he
said. He felt clumsy. It was dark, and yet he was very conscious of the
fact that his dress shoes were indifferently shined.

She moved toward him into the light, and she was so beautiful that he
had to close his eyes. “What’s your name?”

“Mawser. Pete Mawser.”

“Like the show?”

Not looking at her, he said stubbornly, “No.”

“Oh?”

“I mean...I liked it some. The song.”

“I...think I see.”

“I wondered if I could maybe get a recording.”

“I think so,” she said. “What kind of a reproducer have you got?”

“Audiovid.”

“A disk. Yes; we dubbed off a few. Wait, I’ll get you one.” She went
inside, moving slowly. Pete watched her, spellbound. She was a
silhouette, crowned and haloed; and then she was a framed picture, vivid
and golden. He waited, watching the light hungrily. She returned with a
large envelope, called good night to someone inside, and came out on the
platform.

“Here you are, Pete Mawser.”

“Thanks very—” he mumbled. He wet his lips. “It was very good of you.”

“Not really. The more it circulates, the better.” She laughed suddenly.
“That isn’t meant quite as it sounds. I’m not exactly looking for new
publicity these days.”

The stubbornness came back. “I don’t know that you’d get it, if you put
on that show in normal times.”

Her eyebrows went up. “Well!” she smiled. “I seem to have made quite an
impression.”

“I’m sorry,” he said warmly. “I shouldn’t have taken that tack.
Everything you think and say these days is exaggerated.”

“I know what you mean.” She looked around. “How is it here?”

“It’s O.K. I used to be bothered by the secrecy, and being buried miles
away from civilization.” He chuckled bitterly.

“Turned out to be lucky after all.”

“You sound like the first chapter of One World or None.”

He looked up quickly. “What do you use for a reading list—the
Government’s own ‘Index Expurgatorious’?”

She laughed. “Come now—it isn’t as bad as all that. The book was never
banned. It was just—”

“—Unfashionable,” he filled in.

“Yes, more’s the pity. If people had paid more attention to it when it
was published, perhaps this wouldn’t have happened.”

He followed her gaze to the dimly pulsating sky. “How long are you going
to be here?”

“Until...as long as...I’m not leaving.”

“You’re not?”

“I’m finished,” she said simply. “I’ve covered all the ground I can.
I’ve been everywhere that...anyone knows about.”

“With this show?”

She nodded. “With this particular message.”

He was quiet, thinking. She turned to the door, and he put out his hand,
not touching her. “Please—”

“What is it?”

“I’d like to...I mean, if you don’t mind, I don’t often have a chance to
talk to—Maybe you’d like to walk around a little before you turn in.”

“Thanks, no, Sergeant. I’m tired.” She did sound tired. “I’ll see you
around.”

He stared at her, a sudden fierce light in his brain. “I know where it
is. It’s got a red-topped lever and a tag referring to orders of the
commanding officer. It’s really camouflaged.”

She was quiet so long that he thought she had not heard him. Then, “I’ll
take that walk.”

They went down the ramp together and turned toward the dark parade
ground.

“How did you know?” she asked quietly.

“Not too tough. This ‘message’ of yours; the fact that you’ve been all
over the country with it; most of all, the fact that somebody finds it
necessary to persuade us not to strike back. Who are you working for?”
he asked bluntly.

Surprisingly, she laughed.

“What’s that for?”

“A moment ago you were blushing and shuffling your feet.” His voice was
rough. “I wasn’t talking to a human being. I was talking to a thousand
songs I’ve heard, and a hundred thousand blond pictures I’ve seen pinned
up. You’d better tell me what this is all about.”

She stopped. “Let’s go up and see the colonel.”

He took her elbow. “No. I’m just a sergeant, and he’s high brass, and
that doesn’t make any difference at all now. You’re a human being, and
so am I, and I’m supposed to respect your rights as such. I don’t.
You’re a woman, and—”

She stiffened. He kept her walking, and finished, “—and that will make
as much difference as I let it. You’d better tell me about it.”

“All right,” she said, with a tired acquiescence that frightened
something inside him. “You seem to have guessed right, though. It’s
true. There are master firing keys for the launching sites. We have
located and dismantled all but two. It’s very likely that one of the two
was vaporized. The other one is—lost.”

“Lost?”

“I don’t have to tell you about the secrecy,” she said disgustedly. “You
know how it developed between nation and nation. You must know that it
existed between State and Union, between department and department,
office and office. There were only three or four men who knew where all
the keys were. Three of them were in the Pentagon when it went up. That
was the third blast bomb, you know. If there was another, it could only
have been Senator Vandercook, and he died three weeks ago without
talking.”

“An automatic radio key, hm-m-m?”

“That’s right. Sergeant, must we walk? I’m so tired—”

“I’m sorry,” he said impulsively. They crossed to the reviewing stand
and sat on the lonely benches. “Launching racks all over, all hidden,
and all armed?”

“Most of them are armed. Enough. Armed and aimed.”

“Aimed where?”

“It doesn’t matter.”

“I think I see. What’s the optimum number again?”

“About six hundred and forty; a few more or less. At least five hundred
and thirty have been thrown so far. We don’t know exactly.”

“Who are we?” he asked furiously.

“Who? Who?” She laughed weakly. “I could say, ‘The Government,’ perhaps.
If the president dies, the vice president takes over, and then the
speaker of the house, and so on and on. How far can you go? Pete Mawser,
don’t you realize yet what’s happened?”

“I don’t know what you mean.”

“How many people do you think are left in this country?”

“I don’t know. Just a few million, I guess.”

“How many are here?”

“About nine hundred.”

“Then as far as I know, this is the largest city left.”

He leaped to his feet. “NO!” The syllable roared away from him, hurled
itself against the dark, empty buildings, came back to him in a series
of lower-case echoes: nononono...no-no—n...

Starr began to speak rapidly, quietly. “They’re scattered all over the
fields and the roads. They sit in the sun and die in the afternoon. They
run in packs, they tear at each other. They pray and starve and kill
themselves and die in the fires. The fires—everywhere, if anything
stands, it’s burning. Summer, and the leaves all down in the Berkshires,
and the blue grass burnt brown; you can see the grass dying from the
air, the death going out wider and wider from the bald spots. Thunder
and roses...I saw roses, new ones, creeping from the smashed pots of a
greenhouse. Brown petals, alive and sick, and the thorns turned back on
themselves, growing into the stems, killing. Feldman died tonight.”

He let her be quiet for a time. “Who is Feldman?”

“My pilot.” She was talking hollowly into her hands. “He’s been dying
for weeks. He’s been on his nerve ends. I don’t think he had any blood
left. He buzzed your GHQ and made for the landing strip. He came in with
the motor dead, free rotors, giro. Smashed the landing gear. He was
dead, too. He killed a man in Chicago so he could steal gas. The man
didn’t want the gas. There was a dead girl by the pump. He didn’t want
us to go near. I’m not going anywhere. I’m going to stay here. I’m
tired.”

At last she cried.

Pete left her alone, and walked out to the center of the parade ground,
looking back at the faint huddled glimmer on the bleachers. His mind
flickering over the show that evening, and the way she had sung before
the merciless transmitter. “Hello—you.” “If we must destroy, let us stop
with destroying ourselves!”

The dimming spark of humankind—what could it mean to her? How could it
mean so much?

“Thunder and roses.” Twisted, sick, non-survival roses, killing
themselves with their own thorns.

“And the world was a place of light!” Blue light, flickering in the
contaminated air.

The enemy. The red-topped lever. Bonze. “They pray and starve and kill
themselves and die in the fires.”

What creatures were these, these corrupted, violent, murdering humans?
What right had they to another chance? What was in them that was good?

Starr was good. Starr was crying. Only a human being could cry like
that. Starr was a human being.

Had humanity anything of Starr Anthim in it?

Starr was a human being.

He looked down through the darkness for his hands. No planet, no
universe, is greater to a man than his own ego, his own observing self.
These hands were the hands of all history, and like the hands of all
men, they could by their small acts make human history or end it.
Whether this power of hands was that of a billion hands, or whether it
came to a focus in these two—this was suddenly unimportant to the
eternities which now infolded him.

He put humanity’s hands deep in his pockets and walked slowly back to
the bleachers.

“Starr.”

She responded with a sleepy-child, interrogative whimper.

“They’ll get their chance, Starr. I won’t touch the key.”

She sat straight. She rose, and came to him, smiling. He could see her
smile because, very faintly in this air, her teeth fluoresced. She put
her hands on his shoulders. “Pete.”

He held her very close for a moment. Her knees buckled then, and he had
to carry her.

 

There was no one in the Officers’ Club, which was the nearest building.
He stumbled in, moved clawing along the wall until he found a switch.
The light hurt him. He carried her to a settee and put her down gently.
She did not move. One side of her face was as pale as milk.

There was blood on his hands.

He stood looking stupidly at it, wiped it on the sides of his trousers,
looking dully at Starr. There was blood on her shirt.

The echo of no’s came back to him from the far walls of the big room
before he knew he had spoken. Starr wouldn’t do this. She couldn’t!

A doctor. But there was no doctor. Not since Anders had hung himself.
Get somebody. Do something.

He dropped to his knees and gently unbuttoned her shirt. Between the
sturdy, unfeminine GI bra and the top of her slacks, there was blood on
her side. He whipped out a clean handkerchief and began to wipe it away.
There was no wound, no puncture. But abruptly there was blood again. He
blotted it carefully. And again there was blood.

It was like trying to dry a piece of ice with a towel.

He ran to the water cooler, wrung out the bloody handkerchief and ran
back to her. He bathed her face carefully, the pale right side, the
flushed left side. The handkerchief reddened again, this time with
cosmetics, and then her face was pale all over, with great blue shadows
under the eyes. While he watched, blood appeared on her left cheek.

There must be somebody—He fled to the door.

“Pete!”

Running, turning at the sound of her voice, he hit the doorpost
stunningly, caromed off, flailed for his balance, and then was back at
her side. “Starr! Hang on, now! I’ll get a doctor as quick as—”

Her hand strayed over her left cheek. “You found out. Nobody else knew,
but Feldman. It got hard to cover properly.” Her hand went up to her
hair.

“Starr, I’ll get a—”

“Pete, darling, promise me something?”

“Why, sure; certainly, Starr.”

“Don’t disturb my hair. It isn’t—all mine, you see.” She sounded like a
seven-year-old, playing a game. “It all came out on this side, you see?
I don’t want you to see me that way.”

He was on his knees beside her again. “What is it? What happened to
you?” he asked hoarsely.

“Philadelphia,” she murmured. “Right at the beginning. The mushroom went
up a half mile away. The studio caved in. I came to the next day. I
didn’t know I was burned, then. It didn’t show. My left side. It doesn’t
matter, Pete. It doesn’t hurt at all, now.”

He sprang to his feet again. “I’m going for a doctor.”

“Don’t go away. Please don’t go away and leave me. Please don’t.” There
were tears in her eyes. “Wait just a little while. Not very long, Pete.”

He sank to his knees again. She gathered both his hands in hers and held
them tightly. She smiled happily. “You’re good, Pete. You’re so good.”

(She couldn’t hear the blood in his ears, the roar of the whirlpool of
hate and fear and anguish that spun inside him.)

She talked to him in a low voice, and then in whispers. Sometimes he
hated himself because he couldn’t quite follow her. She talked about
school, and her first audition. “I was so scared that I got a vibrato in
my voice. I’d never had one before. I always let myself get a little
scared when I sing now. It’s easy.” There was something about a
windowbox when she was four years old. “Two real live tulips and a
pitcherplant. I used to be sorry for the flies.”

There was a long period of silence after that, during which his muscles
throbbed with cramp and stiffness, and gradually became numb. He must
have dozed; he awoke with a violent start, feeling her fingers on his
face. She was propped up on one elbow. She said clearly, “I just wanted
to tell you, darling. Let me go first, and get everything ready for you.
It’s going to be wonderful. I’ll fix you a special tossed salad. I’ll
make you a steamed chocolate pudding and keep it hot for you.”

Too muddled to understand what she was saying, he smiled and pressed her
back on the settee. She took his hands again.

The next time he awoke it was broad daylight, and she was dead.

Sonny Weisefreund was sitting on his cot when he got back to the
barracks. He handed over the recording he had picked up from the parade
ground on the way back. “Dew on it. Dry it off. Good boy,” he croaked,
and fell face forward on the cot Bonze had used.

Sonny stared at him. “Pete! Where’ve you been? What happened? Are you
all right?”

Pete shifted a little and grunted. Sonny shrugged and took the audiovid
disk out of its wet envelope. Moisture would not harm it particularly,
though it could not be played while wet. It was made of a fine spiral of
plastic, insulated between laminations. Electrostatic pickups above and
below the turntable would fluctuate with changes in the dielectric
constant which had been impressed by the recording, and these changes
were amplified for the video. The audio was a conventional hill-and-dale
needle. Sonny began to wipe it down carefully.

Pete fought upward out of a vast, green-lit place full of flickering
cold fires. Starr was calling him. Something was punching him, too. He
fought it weakly, trying to hear what she was saying. But someone else
was jabbering too loud for him to hear.

He opened his eyes. Sonny was shaking him, his round face pink with
excitement. The audiovid was running. Starr was talking. Sonny got up
impatiently and turned down the audio again. “Pete! Pete! Wake up, will
you? I got to tell you something. Listen to me! Wake up, will yuh?”

“Huh?”

“That’s better. Now listen. I’ve just been listening to Starr Anthim—”

“She’s dead,” said Pete. Sonny didn’t hear. He went on explosively,
“I’ve figured it out. Starr was sent out here, and all over, to beg
someone not to fire any more atom bombs. If the government was sure they
wouldn’t strike back, they wouldn’t have taken the trouble. Somewhere,
Pete, there’s some way to launch bombs at those murdering cowards—and
I’ve got a pret-ty shrewd idea of how to do it.”

Pete strained groggily toward the faint sound of Starr’s voice. Sonny
talked on. “Now, s’posing there was a master radio key, an automatic
code device something like the alarm signal they have on ships, that
rings a bell on any ship within radio range when the operator sends four
long dashes. Suppose there’s an automatic code machine to launch bombs,
with repeaters, maybe, buried all over the country. What would it be?
Just a little lever to pull; thass all. How would the thing be hidden?
In the middle of a lot of other equipment, that’s where; in some place
where you’d expect to find crazy-looking secret stuff. Like an
experiment station. Like right here. You beginning to get the idea?”

“Shut up. I can’t hear her.”

“The hell with her! You can hear her some other time. You didn’t hear a
thing I said! “

“She’s dead”

“Yeah. Well, I figure I’ll pull that handle. What can I lose? It’ll give
those murderin’...what?”

“She’s dead.”

“Dead? Starr Anthim?” His young face twisted, Sonny sank down to the
cot. “You’re half asleep. You don’t know what you’re saying.”

“She’s dead,” Pete said hoarsely. “She got burned by one of the first
bombs. I was with her when she...she—Shut up, now, and get out of here
and let me listen!” he bellowed hoarsely.

Sonny stood up slowly. “They killed her, too. They killed her. That does
it. That just fixes it up.” His face was white. He went out.

Pete got up. His legs weren’t working right. He almost fell. He brought
up against the console with a crash, his outflung arm sending the pickup
skittering across the record. He put it on again and turned up the gain,
then lay down to listen.

His head was all mixed up. Sonny talked too much. Bomb launchers,
automatic code machines—

“You gave me your heart,” sang Starr. “You gave me your heart. You gave
me your heart. You—”

Pete heaved himself up again and moved the pickup arm. Anger, not at
himself, but at Sonny for causing him to cut the disk that way, welled
up.

Starr was talking, stupidly, her face going through the same expression
over and over again. “Struck from the east and from the Struck from the
east and from the—”

He got up again wearily and moved the pickup.

“You gave me your heart. You gave me—”

Pete made an agonized sound that was not a word at all, bent, lifted,
and sent the console crashing over. In the bludgeoning silence he said,
“I did, too.”

Then, “Sonny.” He waited.

“Sonny!”

His eyes went wide then, and he cursed and bolted for the corridor.

 

The panel was closed when he reached it. He kicked at it. It flew open,
discovering darkness.

“Hey!” bellowed Sonny. “Shut it! You turned off the lights!”

Pete shut it behind him. The lights blazed.

“Pete! What’s the matter?”

“Nothing’s the matter, Son’,” croaked Pete.

“What are you looking at?” said Sonny uneasily.

“I’m sorry,” said Pete as gently as he could. “I just wanted to find
something out, is all. Did you tell anyone else about this?” He pointed
to the lever.

“Why, no. I only just figured it out while you were sleeping, just now.”

Pete looked around carefully while Sonny shifted his weight. Pete moved
toward a tool rack. “Something you haven’t noticed yet, Sonny,” he said
softly, and pointed. “Up there, on the wall behind you. High up. See?”

Sonny turned. In one fluid movement Pete plucked off a fourteen-inch box
wrench and hit Sonny with it as hard as he could.

Afterward he went to work systematically on the power supplies. He
pulled the plugs on the gas engines and cracked their cylinders with a
maul. He knocked off the tubing of the Diesel starters—the tanks let go
explosively—and he cut all the cables with bolt cutters. Then he broke
up the relay rack and its lever. When he was quite finished, he put away
his tools and bent and stroked Sonny’s tousled hair.

He went out and closed the partition carefully. It certainly was a
wonderful piece of camouflage. He sat down heavily on a workbench
nearby.

“You’ll have your chance,” he said into the far future. “And by heaven,
you’d better make good.”

After that he just waited.

 



BULKHEAD


YOU JUST DON’T LOOK THROUGH VIEWPORTS VERY OFTEN.

It’s terrifying at first, of course—all that spangled blackness, and the
sense of disorientation. Your guts never get used to sustained free
fall, and you feel, when you look out, that every direction is up, which
is unnatural, or that every direction is down, which is sheer horror.
But you don’t stop looking out there because it’s terrifying. You stop
because nothing ever happens out there. You’ve no sensation of speed.
You’re not going anywhere. After the weeks, and the months, there’s some
change, sure; but day to day you can’t see the difference, so after a
while you stop looking for any.

Which, of course, eliminates the viewports as an amusement device, which
is too bad. There aren’t so many things for a man to do during a Long
Haul that he can afford to eliminate anything. Getting bored with the
infinities outside is only a reminder that the same could happen with
your writing materials, and the music, with the stereo and all the rest
of it. And it’s hard to gripe, to say, “Why don’t they install a
such-and-such on these barrels?” because you’ve already got what a
thousand space men griped about long since—many of them men with more
experience, more imagination, and fewer internal resources (that is to
say, more need) than you’ll ever have. Certainly more than you have now;
this is your first trip, and you’re just making the transition from
“inside looking out” to “inside looking on.” It’s a small world. It
better be a little complicated.

A lot that has happened in worlds like these would be simple, if you
knew about it. Not knowing is all right: it keeps you wondering. Some of
it you can figure out, knowing as you do that a lot of men have died in
these things, a lot have disappeared, ship and all, and some—but you
don’t know how many—have been taken out of the ships and straight to the
laughing academy. You find out fairly soon, for example, that the manual
controls are automatically relayed out, and stay out of temptation until
you need them to land. (Whether they’ll switch in if you need them for
evasive maneuvering some time, you don’t know yet.) Who died, how many
died, because they started playing with the manuals? And was it because
they decided to quit and go home? Or because they convinced themselves
that the autoastrogator had bugs in it? Or because they just couldn’t
stand all those stationary stars?

Then there’s this: You’re alone. You crouch in this little cell in the
nose of your ship, with the curving hull to your left and the flat wall
of the midship bulkhead to your right. You know that in previous models
that bulkhead wasn’t there. You can imagine what happened in some—how
many?—ships to make it necessary, at last, to seal you away from your
shipmate. Psychodynamics has come a long way, but it hasn’t begun to
alter the fact that human beings are the most feral, vicious,
destructive, and self-destructive creatures God ever made. You called
this a world; well, reduce a world to two separate nations and see what
happens. Between two confined entities there’s no mean and no median,
and no real way of determining a majority. How many battered pilots have
come home crazed, cooped up with the shredded bodies of their shipmates?
You can’t trust two human beings together, not for long enough. If you
don’t believe it look at the bulkhead; look again. It’s there because it
has to be there.

You’re a peaceable guy. Scares you a little, to know how dangerous you
are. Makes you a little proud, too, doesn’t it?

Be proud of this, too: that they trust you to be alone so much. Sure,
there is a shipmate; but by and large you’re alone, and that’s what’s
expected of you. What most people, especially earthside people, never
find out is that a man who can’t be by himself is a man who knows, away
down deep, that he’s not good company. You could probably make it by
yourself altogether...but you must admit you’re glad you don’t have to.
You have access to the other side of the bulkhead, when you need it. If
you need it. It didn’t take you too long to figure out you’d use it
sparingly. You “have books and you have games, you have pictures and
text tapes and nine different euphorics (with a watchdog dispenser, so
you can never become an addict), all of which help you, when you need
help, to explore yourself. But having another human mind to explore is a
wonderful idea. The wonder is tempered by the knowledge—oh, how smart
you were to figure it out in time!—that the other mind is a last resort;
if you ever use up the potentialities it holds for you, you’ve had it,
brother.

So you squeeze it out slowly; you have endurance contests with yourself
to see how long you can leave it alone. You do pretty well.

You go back over your life, the things you’ve done. People have written
whole novels about twenty-four hours in a man’s life. That’s the way you
think it all out, slowly, piece by piece; every feature of every face,
and the way they were used; what people did, and why. Especially why. It
doesn’t take any time to remember what a man did, but you can spend
hours thinking about why he did it.

You live it again and it’s like being a little god, knowing what’s going
to happen to everyone. When you reported to Base there was a busload of
guys with you. Now you know who would go all the way through the course
and wind up out here; reliving it, you still know that, so you can put
yourself back in the bus again and say, that stranger across the aisle
is Pegg, and he isn’t going to make it. He’ll go home on furlough three
months from now and he’ll try to kill himself rather than come back. The
freckled nape in the seat ahead of you belongs to the redhead Walkinok,
who will throw his weight around during the first week and pay
expensively for it afterward. But he’ll make it. And you make friends
with the shy dark guy next to you; his name is Steih and he looks like a
big-brain; he’s easy to talk to and smart, the kind of fellow who always
goes straight to the top. And he won’t last even until the first
furlough; two weeks is all he can take, and you never see him again. But
you remember his name. You remember everything, and you go back over it
and remember the memories in between the memories. Did somebody on that
bus have shoes that squeaked? Back you go and hunt for it; if it
happened, you’ll remember it.

They say anyone can recall this way; but for you, with what the
psycho-dynamicians have done to you—or is it for you?—you can do more of
this than anybody. There isn’t anything that ever happened in your whole
life that you can’t remember. You can start at the beginning and go all
the way through. You can start at the beginning and leap years in a
second, and go through an episode again...get mad again...fall in love
again. And when you get tired of the events themselves, you can run them
off again, to find out why. Why did Steih go through those years of
study and preparation, those months of competition, when all the time he
didn’t want to be in the Space Service? Why did Pegg conceal from
himself that he wasn’t’ fit for the Space Service?

So you cast back, comb, compare and ponder, keeping busy. If you’re
careful, just remembering lasts a long time, then wondering why lasts
even longer; and in between times there are the books and stereos,
autochess and the music...until you’re ready to cast and comb in your
memories again. But sooner or later—later, if you’re especially
careful—you’ll get restless, and your life as it was played out, and the
reasons why it was played just that way, all that gets old. You’ve been
there. You can think of no new approach to any of it, and learn nothing
more from it.

That’s where the center-line bulkhead comes in handy. Its very shape is
a friendly thing to you; the hull on your left is curved, as part of the
ship’s side, but the bulkhead is a flat wall. Its ubiquitous presence is
a reminder that it has a function, like everything else in your world;
that it is by nature a partition; that the existence of a partition
presupposes another compartment; and that the other compartment is the
size and shape of this one, and designed for a similar purpose—to be a
dwelling for someone. With no sound nor sign of occupancy, the bulkhead
still attests the life behind it, just by being there. It’s a friendly
flatness, a companionable feature of your world, and its company
pervades all your thinking. You know it’s your last resort, but you know
too that it’s a rich one. When at last you’re driven to use it, you’ll
enter another kind of world, more complex and more engrossing than your
own just because of the work it takes to get from place to place and the
mystery of the fog between the places. It’s a mind, another human mind,
sharing this prison with you when at last you need sharing more than
anything in all of space.

Who is it?

You think about that. You think a whole lot about that. Back at Base, in
your last year, you and the other cadets thought about that more than
anything. If they’d ever given you the shadow of a hint...but wondering
about it was apparently part of your training. You knew only that on
your Long Haul, you would not be alone. You had a pretty good idea that
the choice, of a shipmate for you would be a surprise. You looked around
you at mess, in class, in the dormitory; you lay awake at night dealing
out their faces in a sort of solitaire game; and sometimes you thought
about one and said, that’d be fine, we’d get along; and sometimes you
said, that stinker? Lock me up with him and that bulkhead won’t be tough
enough. I’ll kill him after the third day, so help me.

After they tapped you for your first Haul, this was the only thing you
were scared about. Everything else, you thought you could handle. You
knew your job inside out and backwards, and it wouldn’t whip you. You
were sharp-tuned, fine-honed, ready for anything that was under your
control. You were even confident about being alone; it wouldn’t get you.
Away down deep no man believes he can be driven out of his mind, just as
he cannot believe—really believe—he will ever be dead. That’s the kind
of thing that happens to someone else.

But this business of a shipmate wasn’t under your control. You didn’t
control who it would be and you wouldn’t control the guy after
blast-off. It was the only unknown, and therefore the only thing that
scared you. Leave it alone and you didn’t have to so much as know you
had a shipmate until you were good and ready. The only control you’d
have would be the intercom button on your side of that bulkhead.

Being able to shut off a voice isn’t control, though. You don’t know
what your shipmate will do. Or—be.

In those last tight days before blast-off there was one thing you became
overwhelmingly aware of. Esprit de corps they call it. You and the other
graduates were hammered into a mold, and hammered some more until the
resiliency was gone out of you. You were alike and you did like things
because you had grown to want to. You knew for certain that one of this
tight, trustworthy little group would be picked for you; their training
and yours, their whole lives and yours, pointed toward this ship, this
Haul. Your presence on this ship summed up your training; your training
culminated in your presence on the ship. Only a graduate cadet was fit
to man the ship; the ship existed solely for the graduate cadet. This
was something so self-evident that you never thought about it.

Not until now.

Because now, a few minutes ago, you were ready to push that button. You
weren’t sure if you’d broken all records for loneliness, for duration of
solitary confinement, but you’d tried. You’d looked through the viewport
until it ceased to mean anything; you’d read until you didn’t care
anymore; you’d lived the almost-life of the stereos until you couldn’t
make believe you believed them; you’d listened to music until it didn’t
matter; and you’d gone over and over your life from its very beginnings
until you’d completely lost perspective on it or anything or anyone in
it. You’d found that you could go back to the viewport and cycle through
the whole thing again, but you’d done that too, until the whole matrix
of personal involvement was milked and sere and intolerable. Then the
flatness of the bulkhead made itself felt. It seemed to bulge toward
you, crowd you against the ship’s side, and you knew it was getting to
be time you pushed that button and started involving yourself in someone
else.

Who? Pete or Krakow or that crazy redhead Walkinok? Or Wendover—you all
called him Bendover—with all those incomprehensible shaggy-dog stories?
Harris? Flacker? Beerbelly Blaustein or Cohen the Wire-haired Terror? Or
Shank—what you all called him was a shame? Or Gindes, whose inexplicable
nickname was Mickey Mouse. You’d rather hoped it would be Gindes, not
because you liked him but because he was the one classmate you’d never
known very well. He always looked on and ‘kept his mouth shut. He’d be
much more fun to explore than, say, old Shank, who was so predictable
you could practically talk in chorus with him.

So you tortured yourself, just for the sake of torture, with your thumb
over the intercom button, until even the torture dried out and blew
away.

You pushed.

You found out first of all that the intercom apparently had its own
amplifier, energized when you held the button down, and that it took
forever—well, three or four seconds—to warm up. First nothing, then a
carrier, then the beginnings of a signal; then at last the voice of your
shipmate, rushing up to full volume, as loud and as clear as if the
bulkhead did not exist. And you get off that button as if it were
suddenly white-hot, as if it had turned into a needle; and you’re
cowering against the outboard bulkhead, deep in shock, physically in
silence but with that voice going on and on and on, unbelievably in your
unbelieving brain.

It was crying.

It wept wearily, as if you had tuned in toward the end of a long session
of wild and lonesome grief. It cried quietly, exhaustedly, and as if
there was in all the universe no hope. And it cried in a voice which was
jokingly wrong for this place. It was a light, full voice, a tenor near
to contralto in timbre. Its overtones were childlike—not childish;
childlike—and it was wrong. Altogether wrong.

The wild ideas come first: Stowaway?

You almost laugh. For days before blast-off you were doped and drugged
and immersed in high-frequency fields; hypnotized, worked and reworked
mentally and physically. You were passively fed and passively
instructed; you don’t know now and you may never know all they did to
you. But you can be sure it was done inside six concentric rings of
“security” of one kind and another, and you can be sure that your
shipmate got the same. What it amounted to was concentrated attention
from a mob of specialists, every sleeping and waking second from the
time you beered it up at the class farewell dinner to the time the
accelerator tug lifted your ship and carried it screaming up and
outward. Nobody is in this ship but those who belong in it; that you can
absolutely bank on.

Mad idea the second: (Oh no; no! for a while you don’t even dare think
it. But with that kind of voice, that crying, you have to think of
something. So you do. and you’re scared! scared in a way you’ve never
imagined before, and to a degree you didn’t think was possible.) There’s
a girl in there!

You run those wordless syllables, those tired sobs, through your mind
again, seeking for vocalizations as separated from the breathy, painful
gasping that accompanied them. And you don’t know. You just can’t be
sure.

So punch the button again. Listen some more. Or—ask. But you can’t, you
can’t; the crazy idea might be true, and you couldn’t stand that. They
couldn’t, they just couldn’t put a girl on these ships with you—and then
put her behind the bulkhead.

Then you have an instant fantasy about that; you kneel suddenly, bumping
your skull on the overhead, and flap your hands around the bulkhead,
where it meets deck plates, nose compartment, overhead, after bulkhead;
and all around, your fingers ride the bead of a weld. You sit back,
sweating a little and half laughing at yourself. Scratch one fantasy;
there’ll be no sliding partitions into no harems, this trip.

You stop laughing and think, they couldn’t be that cruel! You’re on a
test run, sure, and it isn’t the ship that’s, being tested. You know
that and you accept it. But tests, tests...must you throw a glass vase
on a brick sidewalk to find out if it’s brittle? You see one of your own
hands going up and out to check for a panel, a join again. You sneer at
it, and watch it stop in embarrassment and slink home guiltily to the
deck beside you.

Well, say they weren’t that cruel. Who did they put in there?

Not Walkinok. Not Shank. Not Harris or Cohen, or any cadet. A cadet
wouldn’t lie there and cry like that, like a child, a schoolgirl, a
baby.

Some stranger, then. And now the anger comes, shouldering out all the
fear. They wouldn’t! This ship is everything a cadet was born for—made
for. That tight chain that bound you with the others, an easy thing you
all shared and never had to think about, that was a thing that didn’t
admit strangers. Aside from that, beyond that: this isn’t a matter of
desecrated esprit; it’s a matter of moral justice. Nobody but a cadet
deserves a ship! What did you give your life to, and what for? Why did
you fluff off marriage, and freedom, and all the wonderful,
unpredictable trivialities called “fun” that make most human lives worth
living? Why did you hold still for Base routines, for the hazing you got
from the upper classmen? Just to have some stranger, someone who wasn’t
even a cadet, wander in without training, shaping, conditioning,
experience, and get on your ship?

Oh, it has to be a cadet. It couldn’t be anyone else. Even a cadet that
could break down and cry—that’s a more acceptable idea than its being a
woman, or a stranger.

You’re-still angry, but now it’s not the kind of anger that stops you.
You push the button. You hear the carrier, then the beginnings of
something else...ah. Breathing. Difficult, broken breathing, the sound
of someone too tired to cry any more, even when crying has changed
nothing and there are more tears to come.

“What the hell are you bawling about?” you yell.

The breathing goes on, and goes on. Finally it stops for a moment, and
then a long, whispery, shuddery sigh. “Hey!” you yell. “Hey—you in
there!”

But there is no answer. The breathing is fainter, more regular. Whoever
it is, is going to sleep.

You press even harder on the button, as if that would do any good, and
you yell again, this time not even “Hey!” but a simpler, angrier
syllable. You can think only that your shipmate chooses—chooses, by
God—not to answer you.

You’re breathing hard now, but your shipmate isn’t. You hold your breath
and listen. You hear the deep, quiet inhalations, and then a small
catch, and a little sigh, the ghost of half a sob. “Hey!”

Nothing.

You let the button go, and in the sharp silence that replaces the
carrier’s faint hum, that wordless syllable builds and builds inside you
until it bursts free again. You can tell from the feel of your throat
and the ringing in your ears that it’s been a time, a long, long time
since you used your voice.

You’re angry and you’re hurt from these insults to yourself and to your
service, and you know what? You feel good. Some of the stereos you have
are pretty good; they take you right into battle, into the arms of
beautiful women, into danger, and from time to time you could get angry
at someone, in them. You could, but you haven’t for a long time now. You
haven’t laughed or been angry since...since...well, you can’t even
remember when. You forgot how and you’ve forgotten just when it was you
forgot. And now look. The heart’s going, the sweat...this is fine.

Push the button again, take another little sip of anger. It’s been
aging; it’s vintage stuff. Go ahead. You do, and up comes the carrier.

“Please,” says the voice. “Please, please...say something else.”

Your tongue is paralyzed and you choke, suddenly, on a drop of your own
saliva. You cough violently, let go the button, and pound yourself on
the chest. For a moment you’re in bad shape. Coughing makes your
thinking go in spurts, and your thinking is bouncing up and down on the
idea that until now you didn’t really believe there was anyone in there
at all. You get your wind and push the button again. The voice says,
“Are you all right? Can I do anything?”

You become certain of something else: that isn’t a voice you recognize.
If you ever heard it before you sure don’t remember it. Then the content
of it hits you. “Can I do anything?”

You get mad again. “Yeah,” you growl, “hand me a glass of water.” You
don’t have your thumb on the button so you just say what pops into your
mind. You shake yourself like a wet bird dog, take a deep breath, and
lean on the control again.

Before you can open your mouth you’re in a hailstorm of hysterical
laughter. “Glass of water...uh-uh-uh...that’s good. You don’t know what
this means,” says the voice, suddenly sober and plaintive, “I’ve waited
so long, I’ve listened to your music and the sound from your
stereos....You never talk, you never say anything at all; I never even
heard you cough before.”

Part of your mind reacts to that: That’s unnatural, not even to cough,
or laugh aloud or hum. Must be a conditioning. But most of it explodes
at this stranger, this intruder, talking away like that without a word
of explanation, of apology, talking as if that voice had a right to be
here. “Shaddap!”

“I was beginning to think you were deaf ‘n’ dumb. Or maybe even that you
weren’t there at all. That was the thing that scared me the most.”

“Shhut up,” you hiss, with all the fury, all the deadly warning you can
command.

“I knew they wouldn’t,” says the voice happily. “They’d never put a man
out here by himself. That would be too—” It stops abruptly as you
release the button.

My God, you think. The dam has boist. That character’ll chunter along
like that for the duration. You press the button quickly, hear “—all
alone out here, you get scared to look out the viewp—” and you cut him
off again.

That stuff like an invisible mist you see melting away is all that
conjecture, those wonderful half-formed plans of shipping out with
Walkinok or the Wire-haired Terror. You were going to review your
courses, remember? Slow and easy—take a week on spatial ballistics or
spectroscopy. Think it all over for a day between sentences. Or laugh
over the time you and the Shank got beered up at the canteen and
pretended you were going to tie up the C.O. and jet him off with
Provost, the head PD man, for a shipmate. The general would get all the
psychodynamics he needed. The general was always talking psychodynamics,
Colonel Provost was always doing psychodynamics. Ah, it seemed funny at
the time, anyway. It wasn’t so much the beer. It was knowing the
general, knowing Provost, that made it funny. How funny would it be with
a stranger?

They give you someone to talk to. They give you someone you haven’t
anything to talk to about! The idea of shipping a girl behind the
bulkhead, now, that was a real horrible idea. That was torture. Well,
so’s this. Only much more refined.

A thought keeps knocking, and you finally back off and let it in.
Something to do with the button. You push it and you can hear your
shipmate. You release it and...shut off the intercom? No, by the Lord
you don’t. When you were coughing, you were off that button. “Can I do
anything?”

Now what the hell kind of business is this? (That detached part of your
mind reaches hungrily for the pulses of fury: ah, it feels good!) Do you
mean to sit there and tell me, you rage silently at the PD men who
designed this ship, that unless I push that button my shipmate can hear
everything that goes on with me? The intercom’s open on the other side
all the time, open on this side only when I push the button, is that it?

You turn and glare out the viewport, staring down the cold distant eye
of infinity, and Where the hell, you rage silently, where the hell’s my
privacy?

This won’t do. This won’t do at all. You figured right from the start
that you and your shipmate would be pretty equal, sure, but on a ship,
even a little two-passenger can like this, someone’s got to be in
command. Given that the other compartment has the same stereos, the same
dispensers, the same food and water and everything else, and the only
difference between these living quarters is that button—who’s
privileged? Me, because I get to push the button? Or my shipmate, who
gets to listen in on me when I so much as belch?

Oh, I know, you think suddenly. That’s a PD operative in there, a
psychodynamics specialist assigned to observe me! You almost laugh out
loud; relief washes over you. PD work is naturally hush-hush. You’ll
never know how many hours during your course you were under hypnosis. It
was even rumored around that some guys had cerebral surgery done by PD
boys, and never knew it. They had to work in secret for the same reason
you don’t stir your coffee with an ink stick. PD is one field where the
tools must leave no mark.

Well, fine, fine. At last this shipmate makes some sense, you’ve got an
answer you can accept. This ship, this trip, is of and for a cadet, but
it’s PD business. The only non-cadet who’d conceivably board you would
have to be a PD tech.

So you grin and reach for the button—then, remembering the way it works,
that the intercom’s open from your side when you’re off the button, you
draw your hand back, face the bulkhead, and say easily, “Okay, PD, I’m
on to you. How’m I doing?” You wonder how many cadets tumble to the
trick this soon. You push the button and wait for the answer.

The answer is “Hah?” in a mixture of shyness and mystification.

You let go the button and laugh. “No sense stringing it out,
Lieutenant.” (This is clever. Most PD techs are looeys; one or two are
master sergeants. Right or not, you haven’t hurt his feelings.) “I know
you’re a PD man.”

There’s a silence from the other side, then, “What’s a PD man?”

You get a little sore. “Now see here, Lieutenant, you don’t have to play
any more games.”

“Gosh,” says the bulkhead, “I’m no lieutenant. I—”

You cut him off quickly. “Sergeant, then.”

“You got me all wrong,” says that damnable, shy tenor.

“Well, you’re PD, anyway,” I snap.

“I’m afraid I’m not.”

You can’t take much more of this. “Well, what the hell are you? You’re a
man, aren’t you?”

A silence. And as it beats by, that anger and that fear of torture begin
to mount, hand in hand. “Well!” you roar.

“Well,” says the voice, and you can practically see it shuffle its feet.
“I’m fifteen years old...”

You drag out your senior-class snap; there’s a way of talking to fourth
and third classmen that makes ’em jump. “Mister, you give an account of
yourself, but now. What’s your name?”

“Skampi.”

“Skampi? What the hell kind of a name is that?”

“It’s what they call me.”

Did you detect a whisper of defiance there? “Sir!” you rasp.

The defiance disappears. “It’s what they call me...sir.”

“And what are you doing on my ship, mister?”

A frightened gulp. “I—I’m sorry, uh, sir. They put me on.”

“They? They?”

“At the Base...sir,” he amended quickly.

“You were on Base just how long, mister?” That “mister” could be a
lead-shotted whiplash if you did it right. It was sure being done right.

“I don’t know, sir.” You have the feeling the punk’s going to burst into
tears again. “They took me to a big laboratory and there were a lot of
sort of booths with machines in them. They asked me a lot of questions
about did I want to be a space man. Well, I did, I always did ever since
I was a kid. So after a while they put me on a table and gave me a shot
and when I woke up I was here.”

“Who gave you a shot? What was his name?”

“I never...I didn’t find out, sir.” A pause. “A big man. Old. He had
gray hair, very short. He had green eyes.”

Provost, by God, you think. This is PD business, all right, but from
where I sit, it’s monkey business. “You know any spatial ballistics?”

“No, sir. Some day I—”

“Astrogation?”

“Only what I picked up myself. But I’ll—”

“Gravity mechanics? Differentials? Strength of materials? Light-metal
fission? Relativity?”

“I—I—”

“Well? Well? Speak up, mister.”

“I heard of them, sir.”

“You heard of them sir!” you mimic. “Do you know what this ship is for?”

“Oh, yes, sir! Everybody knows that. This is the Long Haul. When you
come back from this, you get your commission and they give you a star
ship!” And if the voice had shuffled feet once, now its eyes shone.

“You figure to get a star ship, mister?”

“Well, I—I—”

“You think they give commands to Boy Scouts just because the Boy Scout
wants to go to space awful bad?”

No answer.

You jeer, “Have you got the slightest idea how much training a cadet has
to go through, how much he has to learn?”

“Well, no, but I guess I will.”

“Sir!”

“Sir. Well, they put me aboard, all those officers who asked me the
questions and everything. It must be all right. Hey!” he says excitedly,
all the crushed timidity disappearing, replaced by a bubbling
enthusiasm, “I know! We have all this time...maybe you’re supposed to
teach me astrogation and relativity, and all that.”

Your jaw drops at the sheer childishness of it. And then something
really ugly drifts up and smothers everything else.

For some reason your mind flashes back to the bus, the day you got to
Base. You can remember back easily to all the faces you worked with,
those who made it and those who didn’t. But your class had thirty-eight
cadets in it’ That bus must’ve held fifty. What happened to the rest?
You’d always assumed they went into other sections—ground crew, computer
men, maintenance. Suppose they’d been sorted out, examined for some
special trait or talent that only the PD men knew about. Suppose they
were loaded right aboard ships, each with a graduate cadet?

And why?

Suppose these punks, greenhorns, Boy Scouts, children—suppose they were
the ones slated for a commission? Suppose guys like you, thinking you
were the cream of the crop, and the top cream off that, suppose all
along you’d tested out as second-grade material. Suppose you were the
one who did the sweating and cramming and took the hazing and the
demerits and the lousy mess-hall food, not to command a star ship, not
to get a commission, but just to be private tutor to a boy genius who
wanted to go to space awful bad.

This wouldn’t make sense anywhere else but in this service. It barely
made sense there. But look, a star-ship commander might make two trips
in his whole career, and that would be all. Eighteen years each round
trip, with his passengers in cold packs and a cargo of serums,
refractories, machine tools, and food concentrate for the xenologists
and e-t mineralogists who were crazy enough to work out there. Training
the commander for such a ship was easy, as far as operating knowledge
was concerned, though there was a powerful lot of it. But training him
to stay conscious—-awake and aware—-and alone—for all those years was
something else again. Few men like that were born; they had to be made.
Most of your recluses, your hermits, all through history, were guys who
had a couple of things drastically wrong with them. There couldn’t be
anything wrong with a star-ship commander. He had to be captain and deck
crew, and know his black hole as well (though most of the drive
machinery down there was automatic), and stay alert and sane in a black,
mad, weightless emptiness God never made him for. You could give him
more books and pictures, games and music than even he would have time
for, and still not be sure he’d stay sane unless he had some very
special inner resources. These—and one other thing—were what a cadet was
screened for, and what he was trained in. They packed him full of
technical knowledge, psyched him to a fare-thee-well, and when they
figured he was machine-finished and carrying a high gloss, they sealed
him in a can and threw it out for the Long Haul. The course was preset.
It might last fourteen months, and it might last three years, and after
a guy got back—if he got back—he would be fit to take out a star ship or
he would not. As for the shipmate—well, you’d always assumed that PD was
looking for a way to shake down two guys at once so that they could be
together on a star ship. Maybe someday the ships would carry eight, ten
at once, and at last natural human gregariousness would have a chance to
compete with the pall of black distances. So far, though, psychic
disorientation had made everything mean and murderous in a man explode
into action; putting more than a single human being on those boats was
just asking for slaughter and shipwreck.

The other thing required of you besides technical ability and these
inner resources is youth. You’re only twenty-two.

You’re twenty-two, so full of high-intensity training that, as Walkinok
once said, you feel your brain convolutions are blown out smooth like a
full bladder. And you’ve compacted this knowledge, coded it, used it.
You’re so full of it that it’s bound to ooze out onto anyone around you.
You’re twenty-two, and you’re sealed up in a can with a thirsty-headed
fifteen-year-old who knows nothing but wants to go to the stars awful
bad. And you can forget how stupid he seems to be, too, because you can
bet your bulging cortex that the kid has an I. Q, of nine hundred and
umpteen, so he can afford to act stupid. Cry.

What a dirty rotten lousy deal to put you through all this just to shave
seven years off the age of a star-ship commander! Next thing you know
they’ll put a diapered baby in with a work-weary sucker of a cadet, and
get three star trips out of him instead of two! And what’s become of
you? After you’ve done your generous stint of tutoring, they pin a
discharge emblem on your tunic and say well done, Cadet, now go raise
Brussels sprouts; and you stand at attention and salute the
downy-cheeked squirt in all the gold braid and watch him ride the gantry
to the control cabin you’ve aimed at and sweat for ever since you were
weaned!

You sprawl there in that living-space, so small you can’t stand up in
it, and you look at that bland belly of a bulkhead with its smooth round
navel of a button, and you think, well, there’s a lot of guts back of
that. You heave a deep breath (while still the detached part of your
mind looks on; new it’s saying wonderingly, aren’t you the guy who was
scared because nothing could get him excited anymore?) and you speak;
and yours voice comes out sounding quite different from anything you’ve
ever heard from anyone before. Maybe you’ve never been this mad before.

“Who told you to say that?”

You push the button and listen.

“Say...what? Uh, sir?”

“About me teaching you. Anybody at Base?”

“Why...” He seems to be thinking. “Why, no, sir. I just thought it would
be a good idea.”

You don’t say anything. Just hold the button down.

He says diffidently, “Sort of...pass the time?” When you still don’t say
anything, he says wistfully, “I’d try. I’d try awful hard.”

You let go the button and growl, “I just bet you would. You just thought
it up all your own little self, huh?”

“Well, yes.”

“You’re a bright boy. You’re a real smart ambitious little louse!” You
push the, button real quick but all you get is an astonished silence.
You say, real composed, almost gentle: “That ‘louse,’ now, that’s not
just a figure of speech, little boy. I mean that. I mean you’re a crummy
little crawler looking to suck blood after somebody else’s done all the
work. You know what you do? You just make like you’re all alone in this
can. You don’t talk to me and you don’t listen to me and I’ll do you a
favor, I’ll forget all about you too. I’m not going to bat your eyeballs
together just yet, but don’t call me generous, little boy. It’s just
that I can’t reach in there just now.”

“No!” Now, that boy can make a real piteous noise when he wants to.
“No—no! Wait—please!”

“Well?”

“I don’t under—I mean, I’m sorry, Cadet. I’m honest-to-pete sorry, I
never meant—”

But you cut him off. You lie back and close your eyes; you’re thrumming
with fury, right down to your toenails. (This, says your internal
observer, is all right. This is living.)

 

The weeks pass, and so do more weeks. You shoot a star and make some
notes, and wait a while and shoot it again, and pretty soon you have
enough data to fool around with. You get your stylus and block and the
point darts around the way you want it to, and those old figures sit up
and lie down and rush around just the way you want them to. You laugh
when you do it; wouldn’t Junior just love to learn some of these tricks?
Anyway, you figure you’re just past the cusp perihelion of your parabola
and you’re starting back. You know how far you’ve come and when you’ll
get back. You laugh again. The sound of your voice reminds you that he
can hear you, so you crawl over to the bulkhead and push the button.

“Cadet,” he says. “Please, Cadet. Please.” And you know what? His voice
is hoarse and weak; the syllables come out as if they’re meaningless
from repetition. He’s probably been lying in there for weeks bleating.
“Cadet—please—Cadet—please,” every time you clicked the stylus against
your teeth or set the quadrant on your sun gun.

You spend a lot of time looking out the viewport, but you get sick of
that and turn to the euphorics. You see a lot of stereo shows. You are
somehow aware of the button in the bulkhead but you ignore it. You read.
You get a lot of use out of the octant; it seems you take a lot more
bearings than you have to. And when at last the button starts to be
intrusive, you make a real effort and leave it alone; you figure out
something else to do instead.

You take a careful survey of your instruments to figure which one you
need least, and finally decide on the air-speed indicator. You’ve spent
plenty of time in a mock-up and you know you can compute your air speed
by the hull temperature plus your ground-rise radar. You dismount the
instrument and take it apart, and get the diamond bearing. You go
through the games locker and the equipment chest until you put together
a nickel rod and a coil, and you hook onto your short-range radio where
the oscillations suit you. You cement the diamond to the tip of the rod,
shove the rod through the long axis of the coil. You turn on the juice
and feel rather than hear the rod humming softly. The phenomenon, dear
pupil, you say—but silently—is magnetostriction, whereby the nickel rod
contracts slightly in the magnetic field. And since the field is in
oscillation, that diamond on the tip is vibrating like crazy.

You get your stylus and after careful consideration you decide on a
triangle with round corners, just big enough to shove an arm through
comfortably; the three corners would make peepholes, so you can see
where your arm’s going. All the while you have quick fantasies about it.
You’ll knock the triangular piece out of the bulkhead and stick your
face in the hole and say, “Surprise!” And he’ll be cowering there
wondering what goes on. And you’ll say, shake and let bygones be; and
he’ll jump over, all eager, and you’ll take his hand and drag it through
the hole and get his wrist in both hands and put your back against the
bulkhead and pull till his shoulder dislocates. And maybe you could
break the arm, too. All the while he’s gasping, “Cadet, please,” until
you get tired of amusing yourself and haul the wrist around and sink
your teeth in it. Then he starts to bleed, and you just hold him there
while! cadet-please gets fainter and fainter, and you explain to him all
about differential equations and mass ratios.

And while you’re thinking about this you’re going around and around the
blunted triangle with your vibrating diamond. The bulkhead is thick as
hell, and tough—it’s hull-metal, imagine that, for an inboard
bulkhead!—but that’s all right. You’ve got plenty of time. And bit by
bit, your scored line goes deeper and deeper.

Every once in a while you take a breather. It occurs to you to wonder
what you’ll say when you’re grappled in and the colonel sees that hole
in the bulkhead. You try not to wonder about this but you do all the
same, a whole lot. You run it over in your mind and sometimes the
colonel says good, cadet, that’s real resourcefulness, the kind I like
to see. But other times it doesn’t quite come out that way, especially
with the kid dead on one side of the bulkhead and his blood all over the
place on the other side.

So maybe you won’t kill him. You’ll just scare him. Have fun with him.

Maybe he’ll talk, too. Maybe this entire Long Haul was set up by PD just
to find out if you’d cooperate with your shipmate, try to teach him what
you know, at any cost. And you know, if you thought more of the Service
than you do about your own dirty career in it, that’s just what you’d
do. Maybe if you did that they’d give you a star ship anyway, you and
the kid both.

So anyway, this cutting job is long and slow and suits you fine; no
matter what you think you go on with it, just because you started. When
it’s finished you’ll know what to do.

Funny, the result of this trip was going to be the same as some of those
you’d heard whispered about, where a ship came in with one guy dead and
the other...but that was the difference. To do a thing like that, those
guys must have been space-happy, right out of the groove. You’re doing
it, sure, but for different reasons. You’re no raving loony. You’re slow
and steady, doing a job, knowing just exactly why....Or you will, when
the time comes.

You’re real happy this whole time.

Then all that changes. Just why you can’t figure out. You turned in and
you slept, and all of a sudden you’re wide awake. You’re thinking about
some lab work you did. It was a demonstration of eddy-current effects.
There was a copper disk as thick as your arm and a meter in diameter,
swinging from a rope in the center of the gymnasium. You hauled it up to
the high ceiling at the far end and turned it loose. There was a big
electromagnet set up in the middle of the place, and as the disk reached
the bottom of its long swing it passed between the poles of the magnet,
going like hell. You threw the switch and the disk stopped dead right
where it was, and rang like a big gong though nothing had touched it.

Then you remembered the sixty zillion measurements you’d taken off a
synchro-cosmotron so big that it took you four minutes at a fast walk to
get from one end to the other.

You remember the mock-ups, the hours and hours of hi-G, no-G; one
instrument out, another, all of ’em, some of ’em; simulated meteorites
on collision orbit; manual landing techniques, until your brains were in
your hands and the seat of your pants, and you did the right things with
them without thinking. Even exhausted, you did it right. Even doped up.

You remember the trips into town with Harris and Blaustein and the
others. Something happened to you every time you so much as walked down
a street with those guys. It was a thing you’d never told anyone. Part
of it was something that happened between the townspeople and your
group. Part of it was between your group and yourself. It all added up
to being a little different and a little better...but not in a cocky
way. In a way that made you grateful to the long heavy bulk of a star
ship, and what such ships are for.

You sit up in your bunk, with that mixed-up, wide-awake feeling,
reaching for something you can’t quite understand, some one simple thing
that would sum up the huge equipment, the thousands of measurements, the
hours of cramming and the suspense of examinations; the
seat-of-the-pants skills and the pride in town....

And suddenly you see what it is. That kid in there, he could have an I.
Q. of nine goddam thousand and never learn how to put down a rocket with
all his instruments out and the gyros on manual. Not by somebody telling
him over an intercom when he’s never even sat in a G-seat. He might
memorize twelve thousand slightly varying measurements off a linear
accelerator but he wouldn’t gain that certain important thing you get
when you make those measurements yourself. You could describe the way
the copper disk rang when the eddy current stopped it, but he would have
to see it happen before it did to him all the things it did to you.

You still don’t know who that kid is or why he’s here, but you can bet
one thing: he isn’t here to pick your brains and take your job. You
don’t have to like him and you can be mad he’s aboard instead of Harris
or Walky; but get that junk out of your head right now about his being a
menace to you. And where did that poisonous little crumb in your brain
come from? Since when are you subject to fear and jealousy and
insecurity; since when do you have to guard yourself against your own
imagination?

Come the hell off it, Cadet. You’re not that good a teacher; he’s not
that much of a monster.

Monster! God, did you hear him cry, that time?

You feel twenty pounds lighter (which is odd since you’re still in free
fall), and as if you’d just washed your face. “Hey, Krampi!”

You go push the button and wait. The carrier comes. Then you hear a
sharp, short inhalation. A sniff...no, you won’t call it that. “Skampi,
sir,” he corrects you timidly.

“Okay, whatever you say. And knock off the ‘sir.’”

“Yessir. Yes.”

“What were you crying about?”

“When, s—”

“Okay,” you say gently. “You don’t have to talk about it.”

“Oh, nonono. No. I wasn’t trying to deny it. I...cried twice. I’m sorry
you heard me. You must think...”

“I don’t think,” you say sincerely. “Not enough.”

He thinks that over and apparently drops it. “I cried right after
blast-off.”

“Scared?”

“No...yes, I was, but that wasn’t why. I just...”

“Take your time.”

“Th-thanks. It was just that I—I’d always wanted to be in space. I
thought about it in the daytime and dreamed about it at night. And all
of a sudden there it was, happening to me for real. I...thought I ought
to say something, and I opened my mouth to do it and all of a sudden I
was crying. I couldn’t help it. I guess I—Crazy, I guess.”

“I wouldn’t say so. You can hear talk and see pictures and get yourself
all ready, but there’s nothing like doing it. I know.”

“You, you’re used to it.” He seems to want to say something else; you
hold the button down. Finally, with difficulty, he says, “You...you’re
big, aren’t you? I mean, you’re...you know. Big.”

“Well, yes.”

“I wish I was. I wish I was good for...well, something.”

“Everybody push you around?”

“Mm.”

“Listen,” you say, “You know those star ships. You take a single human
being and put him down next to a star ship. They’re not the same size
and they’re not the same shape, and one of ‘em’s pretty insignificant.
But you can say this built this.”

“Y-e-eah.” It is a whisper.

“Well, you’re that human being, that self-same one. Ever think of that?”

“No.”

“Well, neither did I till now,” you say rapidly. “It’s the truth,
though.”

He says, “I wish I was a cadet.”

“Where do you come from, kid?”

“Masolo. It’s no-place. Jerk town. I like big places with big stuff
going on. Like the Base.”

“Awful lot of people charging around.”

“Yeah,” he says. “I don’t like crowds much, but the Base—it’s worth it.”

You sit and look at the bulkhead. It’s companionable suddenly, and sort
of changed, as if it were suddenly warm, or quilted. You get a splinter
of light off the bright metal where you’ve scored it. It’s down pretty
deep. A man could stand up to it and knock that piece out with a maul,
if a man could stand up, if he had a maul. You say, suddenly and very
fast as if you’re afraid something’s going to stop you, “Ever do
anything you were really ashamed of? I did when I talked to you the way
I did. I shouldn’t ‘ve done it like that. I don’t know what got into me.
Yes, I do and I’ll tell you. I was afraid you were a boy genius planted
on me to strip my brains and take my command. I got scared.” It all
comes out like that. You feel much better and at the same time you’re
glad Walkinok and Shank aren’t around to hear you spout like that.

The kid’s very quiet for a while. Then he says, “One time my mother sent
me to the market and something was a special, I forget what. But anyway
I had forty cents’ change and I forgot about it. I found it in my pants
in school next day and bought a star ship magazine with it, and never
told her about it. I used to get every issue that way after that. She
never missed it. Or maybe she did but didn’t say anything. We were
pretty hard up.”

You understand that the kid is trying to give you something, because you
apologized to him. You don’t say anything more about that. Right here a
wonder starts to grow. You don’t know what it is but you know that
stand-off-and-watch part of your mind is working on it. You say, “Where
is this Masolo?”

“Upstate. Not far from the Base. Ever since I was a baby the axi-tugs
were shaking the house when they took off. There’s a big tree outside
the house and all the leaves shiver, with the tugs, you know. I used to
climb out a limb and get on the roof and lie down on my back. Sometimes
you could see the star ships orbiting. Just after the sun goes down,
sometimes you can...He swallows; you can hear it plainly. “I used to put
out my hand. It was like a firefly, up there.”

“Some firefly,” you say.

“Yeah. Some firefly.”

Inside you the wonder is turning to a large and luminous astonishment.
It’s still inexpressible so you leave it alone.

The kid is saying, “I was with two other kids out by the high school one
time. I was just a kid, eleven I think. Well, some gorillas from the
high school, they chased us. We ran and they caught up with us. The
other kids started to fight them. I got over to one side and when I had
a chance I ran. I ran all the way home. I wish I’d stayed there with
those other two kids. They got the tar kicked out of them and I guess it
hurt, but I guess it stopped hurting after some teacher came along and
broke up the fight. But I get hurt every time I think about it, running
away like that. Boy, did those two give me a razzing when they saw me
next day. Boy. So what I wanted to ask you, you don’t think a kid who
would run away like that could be a cadet.” He ends it like that, flat.
No question.

You think about it. You’ve been in some fine brawls as a cadet. You’re
in a bar and someone cracks wise, and your blood bubbles up, and you
wade in, feeling fine. But maybe that’s just because of the corps, the
business of belonging. You say carefully, “I think if I was in a fight
I’d rather have a guy on my side who knew what cowardice felt like. I
think it would be like having two guys on my side, instead of one. One
of the guys wouldn’t care if he got hurt and the other guy would never
want to be hurt that way again. I think a fellow like that would be a
pretty good cadet.”

“Well, all right,” says the kid, in that funny whisper.

Suddenly the inner astonishment bursts into sight and you recognize what
it is about this kid. At first you were scared of him, but even when
that went away you didn’t like him. There was no question of liking him
or not liking him; he was a different species of being that you couldn’t
have anything to do with. And the more you talked with him the more you
began to feel that you didn’t have to set yourself apart from him, that
he had a whole lot you didn’t have and that you could use it. The way he
talked, honest and unabashed, you don’t know how to do that. You nearly
choked to death apologizing to him.

Suddenly it’s very important to get along with this kid. It isn’t
because the kid is important; it’s because if you can get along with
somebody so weak, so wet behind the ears, and yet in his peculiar way so
rich, why, you can get along with anybody, even your own lousy self. You
realize that this thing of getting along with him has extension after
extension. Somehow, if you can find more ways to get along with this
kid, if you can see more things the way he sees them with no intolerance
and no altitude, you’ll tap something in yourself that’s been dried up a
long time now.

You find all this pretty amazing, and you settle down and talk to the
kid. You don’t eke it out. You know he’ll last all the way back to the
Base and have plenty left over. You know too, that by the time you get
there this kid will know a cadet can be a louse too. You can give him
that much. The way you treated him he was hurt, but you know, he wasn’t
mad? He doesn’t think he’s good enough to get mad at cadet. Well, we’re
going to fix that.

 

The time goes by and the time comes; the acceleration tug reaches out
and grabs you high up, so after all that manual-control drill you don’t
have a thing to do but sit there and ride it down. The tug hovers over
the compound right near the administration building, which disappears in
a cloud of yellow dust. You sink down and down in the dust cloud until
you think they must be lowering you into a hole in the ground; then at
last there’s a slight thump and an inhuman amount of racket as the tug
blasts away free. After that there’s only the faint whisper of the air
circulator, the settling dust, and a profoundly unpleasant feeling in
calves and buttocks as the blood gets used to circulating in a I-G
environment.

“Now don’t you forget, Skampi,” you say. You find it difficult to talk;
you’ve got a wide grin plastered across your face and you can’t cast it
adrift. “Just as soon as ever they’re through with you, you come looking
for me, hear? I’ll buy you a soda.”

You lean back in your G-chair and hold the button. “I can drink beer,”
he says manfully.

“We’ll compromise. We’ll make your soda with beer. Listen kid. I can’t
promise, but I know they’re fooling with the idea of a two-man crew for
star ships. How’d you like to go with me, one trip anyhow? Course,
you’ll have to be conditioned six ways from the middle, double-time, and
it’ll be real tough. But—what do you say?”

And you know, he doesn’t say anything?

He laughs, though.

 

Now here comes Provost, the big brass of Psychodynamics, and a young
M.P. That’s all the welcoming committee you’ll get. The compound’s
walled and locked, and no windows look out on it. They must have
unloaded some pretty sorry objects from these cans from time to time.

They open the hatch from the outside and you immediately start coughing
like hell. Your eyes say the dust has settled but your lungs say no. By
the time you have your eyes wiped the M.P. is inside, and squatting on
the deck, crossed-legged. He says cheerfully, “Hi-kay dee. This here’s a
stun gun and if you so much as look wall-eyed at me or the colonel you
get flaked out like a heaving-line.”

“Don’t worry about me,” you say from behind that silly grin. “I got no
quarrel with anybody and I like it here. Good morning, Colonel.”

“Look out for this one,” said the M.P. “Likes it here. He’s sick.”

“Shat up, wheelhead,” says the colonel cheerfully. He has his gray
crewcut and barrel torso shoved into the hatch and it’s real crowded in
that little cabin. “Well, Cadet, how are we?”

“We’re fine,” you say. The M.P. cocks his head a little to one side and
gets bright-eyed; he thinks you’re sassing the colonel, but you’re not;
when you say “we” you mean you and your shipmate.

“Anything special happen?”

The answer to that is a big fat yes, but it would take forever to tell.
It’s all recorded anyway; PD doesn’t miss a trick. But that’s from then
till now, and done with. I’m concerned with from now on. “Colonel, sir,
I want to talk to you, right now. It’s about my shipmate.”

The colonel leans a little further in and slaps the M.P.’s gun hand.
He’s in front of the guy so I can’t see his face. “Beat it, wheelhead.”

The M.P. clears out. You stagger up out of the G-seat and climb through
the hatch. The colonel catches your biceps as you stagger. After a long
time in free fall your knees won’t lock as you walk; you have to stiffen
each one as your weight comes on it, and you have to concentrate. So you
concentrate but that doesn’t stop you from talking. You skim over the
whole business, from your long solo to being reduced to meeting the
shipmate, and the fight you had with yourself over that, and then this
thing that happened with the kid—weeks of it, and here you feel you’ve
only just begun. “You can pick ’em, sir,” you pant as you hobble along.
“Do you always use a little know-nothing kid? Where do you find ’em?
Does it always work out this well?”

“We get a commander on every ship,” he says.

“Hey, that’s great, sir.”

“We don’t have very many ships,” he says, just as cheerfully.

“Oh,” you say. Suddenly you stop. “Wait, sir, what about Skampi? He’s
still locked in his side.”

“You first,” says the colonel. We go on into the PD lab.

“Up you go,” he says, waving. You look at the big chair with its straps
and electrodes and big metal hood. “You know, they used chairs like
these in the French Revolution,” you say, showing off. You’re just
busting with cheerfulness today. You never felt like this. You sit in
the big chair. “Look, sir, I want to get started on a project right
away. This kid, now, I tell you he’s got a lot on the ball. He’s space
man right to the marrowbones. He comes from right around here, that
little place up the pike, Masolo. You know. He got shook out of his
bassinet by the axi-tugs; he spent his childhood lying on his back on
the roof looking for the star ships in orbit. He’s—”

“You talk all the time,” says the colonel mildly. “Sum up, will you? You
made out with your shipmate. You think you could do it again in a star
ship. That it?”

“Think we can try it? Hey, really? Look, can I be the one to tell him,
Colonel?”

“Shut your mouth and sit still.”

Those are orders. You sit still. The colonel gets you strapped in and
connected up. He puts his hand on the switch. “Where did you say you
came from?”

You didn’t say and you don’t, because the hood swings down and you’re
surrounded by a sudden dissonant chord of audio at tremendous amplitude.
If you had been allowed to say, though, you wouldn’t have known. The
colonel doesn’t even give you time to be surprised at this. You sink
into blackness.

 

It gets light again. You have no idea how much time has passed, but it
must be a good deal, because the sunlight from outside is a different
color and slants a different way through the Venetian blinds. On a bench
nearby is a stack of minicans with your case number painted on each
one—that’s the tape record of your Long Haul. There’s some stuff in
there you’re not proud of but you wouldn’t swap the whole story for
anything. “Hello, Colonel.”

“You with us again? Good.” He looks at an enlarged film strip and back
at me. He shows me. It’s a picture of the bulkhead with the triangular
score in it. “Magnetostriction vibrator, with a diamond bearing for a
drill bit, hm? Not bad. You guys scare me. You really do. I’d have sworn
that bulkhead couldn’t be cut and that there was nothing in the ship
that could cut it. You must’ve been real eager.”

“I wanted to kill him. You know that now,” you say happily.

“You damn near did.”

“Aw, now, Colonel, I wouldn’t have gone through with it.”

“Come on,” he says, opening the buckles.

“Where, sir?”

“To your space can. Wouldn’t you like to have a look at it from the
outside?”

“Cadets aren’t permitted—”

“You qualify,” says the old man shortly.

So out you-go to the compound. The can still stands where it was landed.
“Where’s Skampi?”

The colonel just passes you an odd look and walks on. You follow him up
to the can. “Here, around the front.”

You walk around to the bow and look up at it. It’s just the shape it
ought to be from the way it looked from inside, except it looks a little
like a picture of a whale caught winking at you...Winking? One-eyed!

“Do you mean to tell me you had that kid in a blind compartment, without
so much as a viewport?” you rage.

The colonel pushes you. He does it again. “Sit. Over there. On the
hatch. You returning heroes and your manic moods...siddown!”

You sit on the edge of the open hatch. “Sometimes they fall down when I
tell ’em,” he says gruffly. “Now, what was bothering you?”

“Locking that kid up in a dark—”

“There isn’t a kid. There isn’t a dark cabin. There’s no viewport on
that side of the can because it’s a hydrazine tank.”

“But I—but we—but the—”

“Where do you come from?”

“Masolo, but what’s that to—”

“What did your mother and all the kids call you when you were a
space-struck teener?”

“Scampy. They’re all—Scampy?”

“That’s right.”

You cover your face. “By God. By God. I can remember now—thinking back
in detail over my life—but it started in the bus that day I passed the
entrance exams. What is it? Please—what is it?”

“Well, if you want me to be technical they call it Dell’s hypothesis. It
was promulgated ‘way back’ in the 1960’s by a lay analyst named Dudley
Dell, who was, as I remember, the editor of a love-story magazine. He—”

“Please, Colonel,” you say. You’re in trouble.

“Okay, okay,” he says soothingly. “Well, up to that time psychologists,
particularly analysts, were banging their heads against a stone wall in
certain cases, and sometimes banging up the patient in the process.
These were cases where infantile behavior, or infantile impulses, were
running counter to adult environment and conditioning. Some of these
primitive head-shrinkers got close to the real difficulty when they
tried to have the patient act out this childish stuff. If a patient had
eight-year-old wishes, the doc would say, ‘All right, say it—or do it—as
if you were eight. This was—”

“Are you, sir, Colonel sir, going to tell me please the hell what’s with
me?”

“I am,” he says calmly. “This was worse than useless in most cases
because the ‘as if’ idea made the patient disbelieve in this active
eight-year-old within him—a very viable, hard-fighting eight-year-old it
was, too. So when behavior got more infantile, the doc would pull his
beard, or his chin, and say, ‘Hm-hm, schizophrenia,’ thereby scaring the
liverwurst out of the patient. Dell stopped all that.”

“Dell stopped all that,” you say, suffering.

“It was a little thing, little like E=MC2 or Newton’s apple, but oh, my,
what happened!”

“Oh, my,” you say. “What happened?”

“Dell began directing his therapy to the infantile segment, treating it
as a living, conscious organism. It responded excellently; it changed
the face of psychoanalysis. Those who suffered from childish acts had
the child who was acting that way contacted and controlled. Now, in your
case—you’re not going to interrupt? Good. In your case, an extension of
Dell’s hypothesis was used. The sum total of your life up until you took
your entrance examinations for Service training was arrested at age
fifteen. A hypnotic barrier was erected so that you could have no access
to any of this. You—all you cadets—literally start a new life here, with
no references whatever to an earlier one. Your technical education has
no referral factor to anything but itself. It-makes you learn quickly
and with uncluttered minds. You never miss your past because you carry a
powerful hypnotic command not to think of it.

“When this was first tried, our men were left with memories including
only their training, and permitted to go on indefinitely. Well, it
didn’t work. They were inhuman and un-sane. The conditioning of infants
is far too important to the total human being to be wiped out that way.
So we developed this new system, which has been used on you.

“But we discovered a peculiar thing. Even untrained adults—as opposed to
the sharp division of pre-and post-entrance that you have—even untrained
adults suffer to greater or less degree from an internal strife between
childhood acceptances and the adult matrix. An exaggerated example would
be a child’s implicit belief in Santa Claus and the Easter Bunny,
existing at the same time with the adult’s total discrediting of the
legends. The child (according to Dell, and to me) still exists and will
fight like the very devil for survival, beliefs and all.

“The schism between you and Scampy was extreme; you were, in effect,
born on different planets. To be a complete human being, you had to be
rejoined; but to be rejoined successfully, you and Scampy had to make
peace with one another. For Scampy it was not difficult—you, even in
injustice and cruelty—were a real live hero-image. But you had a rather
more stony path. But somewhere within yourself, somehow, you found an
element of tolerance and empathy, and used it to bridge the gap. I may
say,” the colonel adds severely, “that it takes a particularly fine kind
of person to negotiate this difficult merger. You are not usual, Cadet;
not usual at all.”

“Scampy,” you murmur. Impulsively you pull your shirt away from your
chest and look down as if there were something hiding there. You look
up. “But he—talked to me! Don’t tell me you’ve quietly invented a
telepathic converter with band-pass filters.”

“Of course not. When the barrier was erected between you and Scampy,
Scampy was conditioned to speak subvocally—that is back in the throat
and virtually without lip movement. You have a subminiature transmitter
deposited surgically in your pharynx. The button on your bulkhead
induced it to turn on. There had to be a button, you see; we couldn’t
have you two speaking at the same time, as people in the same room
invariably do.”

“I can’t get used to it. I can’t. I practically saw the boy! Listen,
Colonel, can I keep my transmitter where it is, and have the same rig on
my star ship?

“Who said you’re getting a star ship?” growls the colonel.

“Well, I thought—”

“Of course you’re getting a ship.” He smiles, although I think it hurts
his face. “You really want that transceiver set-up?”

“He’s a good kid.”

“Very well, Cadet. Commander. Dismissed.” He marches away. You look
after him, shaking your head. Then you duck into the space can. You look
at the bulkhead and at the button and at the scoring on the plate where
you came that close to filling your hydrazine supply. You shudder.

“Hey,” you call softly. “Scamp!”

You push the button. You hear the carrier, then “I’m thirsty,” says
Scampy.

You cut out of there and go down to the rec area and into the
short-order bar. “A beer,” you say. “And put a lump of vanilla ice-cream
in it. And straws.”

“You crazy?” says the man.

“No,” you say. “Oh, no.”

 



TINY AND THE MONSTER


SHE HAD TO FIND OUT ABOUT TINY—everything about Tiny.

They were bound to call him Tiny. The name was good for a laugh when he
was a pup, and many times afterward.

He was a Great Dane, unfashionable with his long tail, smooth and glossy
in the brown coat which fit so snugly over his heavily muscled shoulders
and chest. His eyes were big and brown and his feet were big and black;
he had a voice like thunder and a heart ten times his own great size.

He was born in the Virgin Islands, on St. Croix, which is a land of palm
trees and sugar, of soft winds and luxuriant undergrowth whispering with
the stealthy passage of pheasant and mongoose. There were rats in the
ruins of the ancient estate houses that’ stood among the foothills—ruins
with slave-built walls forty inches thick and great arches of weathered
stone. There was pasture land where the field mice ran, and brooks
asparkle with gaudy blue minnows.

But where in St. Croix had he learned to be so strange?

When Tiny was a puppy, all feet and ears, he learned many things. Most
of these things were kinds of respect. He learned to respect that swift,
vengeful piece of utter engineering called a scorpion when one of them
whipped its barbed tail into his inquiring nose. He learned to respect
the heavy deadness of the air about him that preceded a hurricane, for
he knew that it meant hurry and hammering and utmost obedience from
every creature on the estate. He learned to respect the justice of
sharing, for he was pulled from the teat and from the trough when he
crowded the others of his litter. He was the largest.

These things, all of them, he learned as respects. He was never struck,
and although he learned caution he never learned fear. The pain he
suffered from the scorpion—it happened only once—the strong but gentle
hands which curbed his greed, the frightful violence of the hurricane
that followed the tense preparations—all these things and many more
taught him the justice of respect. He half understood a basic ethic:
namely, that he would never be asked to do something, or to refrain from
doing something, unless there was a good reason for it. His obedience,
then, was a thing implicit, for it was half reasoned; and since it was
not based on fear, but on justice, it could not interfere with his
resourcefulness.

All of which, along with his blood, explained why he was such a splendid
animal. It did not explain how he learned to read. It did not explain
why Alec was compelled to sell him—not only to sell him but to search
out Alistair Forsythe and sell him to her.

She had to find out. The whole thing was crazy. She hadn’t wanted a dog.
If she had wanted a dog, it wouldn’t have been a Great Dane. And if it
had been a Great Dane, it wouldn’t have been Tiny, for he was a Crucian
dog and had to be shipped all the way to Scarsdale, New York, by air.

The series of letters she sent, to Alec were as full of wondering
persuasion «as his had been when he sold her the dog. It was through
these letters that she learned about the scorpion and the hurricane,
about Tiny’s puppyhood and’ the way Alec brought up his dogs. If she
learned something about Alec as well, that was understandable. Alec and
Alistair Forsythe had never met, but through Tiny they shared a greater
secret than many people who have grown up together.

“As for why I wrote you, of all people,” Alec wrote in answer to her
direct question, “I can’t say I chose you at all. It was Tiny. One of
the cruise-boat people mentioned your name at my place, over cocktails
one afternoon. It was, as I remember, a Dr. Schwellenbach. Nice old
fellow. As soon as your name was mentioned, Tiny’s head came up as if I
had called him. He got up from his station by the door and lolloped over
to the doctor with his ears up and his nose quivering. I thought for a
minute that the old fellow was offering him food, but no—he must have
wanted to hear Schwellenbach say your name again. So I asked about you.
A day or so later I was telling a couple of friends about it, and when I
mentioned the name again, Tiny came snuffing over and shoved his nose
into my hand. He was shivering. That got me. I wrote to a friend in New
York who got your name and address in the phone book. You know the rest.
I just wanted to tell you about it at first, but something made me
suggest a sale. Somehow, it didn’t seem right to have something like
this going on and not have you meet Tiny. When you wrote that you
couldn’t get away from New York, there didn’t seem to be anything else
to do but send Tiny to you. And now—I don’t know if I’m too happy about
it. Judging from those pages and pages of questions you keep sending me,
I get the idea that you are more than a little troubled by this crazy
business.”

She answered, “Please don’t think I’m troubled about this! I’m not. I’m
interested, and curious, and more than a little excited; but there is
nothing about the situation that frightens me. I can’t stress that
enough. There’s something around Tiny—sometimes I have the feeling it’s
something outside Tiny—that is infinitely comforting. I feel protected,
in a strange way, and it’s a different and greater thing than the
protection I could expect from a large and intelligent dog. It’s
strange, and it’s mysterious enough; but it isn’t at all frightening.”

“I have some more questions. Can you remember exactly what it was that
Dr. Schwellenbach said the first time he mentioned my name and Tiny
acted strangely? Was there ever any time that you can remember when Tiny
was under some influence other than your own, something which might have
given him these strange traits? What about his diet as a puppy? How many
times did he get...” and so on.

And Alec answered, in part, “It was so long ago now that I can’t
remember exactly; but it seems to me Dr. Schwellenbach was talking about
his work. As you know, he’s a professor of metallurgy. He mentioned
Professor Nowland as the greatest alloy specialist of his time—said
Nowland could alloy anything with anything. Then he went on about
Nowland’s assistant. Said the assistant was very highly qualified,
having been one of these Science Search products and something of a
prodigy; in spite of which she was completely feminine and as beautiful
a redhead as had ever exchanged heaven for earth. Then he said her name
was Alistair Forsythe. (I hope you’re not blushing, Miss Forsythe; you
asked for this!) And then it was that Tiny ran over to the doctor in
that extraordinary way.

“The only time I can think of when Tiny was off the estate and possibly
under some influence was the day old Debbil disappeared for a whole day
with the pup when he was about three months old. Debbil is one of the
characters who hang around here. He’s a Crucian about sixty years old, a
piratical-looking old gent with one eye and elephantiasis. He shuffles
around the grounds running odd errands for anyone who will give him
tobacco or a shot of white rum. Well, one morning I sent him over the
hill to see if there was a leak in the water line that runs from the
reservoir. It would only take a couple of hours, so I told him to take
Tiny for a run.

“They were gone for the whole day. I was short-handed and busy as a
squirrel in a nuthouse and didn’t have a chance to send anyone after
him. But he drifted in toward evening. I bawled him out thoroughly. It
was no use asking him where he had been; he’s only about quarter-witted
anyway. He just claimed he couldn’t remember, which is pretty usual for
him. But for the next three days I was busy with Tiny. He wouldn’t eat,
and he hardly slept at all. He just kept staring out over the cane
fields at the hill. He didn’t seem to want to go there at all. I went
out to have a look. There’s nothing out that way but the reservoir and
the old ruins of the governor’s palace, which have been rotting there in
the sun for the last century and a half. Nothing left now but an
overgrown mound and a couple of arches, but it’s supposed to be haunted.
I forgot about it after that because Tiny got back to normal. As a
matter of fact, he seemed to be better than ever, although, from then
on, he would sometimes freeze and “watch the hill as if he were
listening to something. I haven’t attached much importance to it until
now. I still don’t. Maybe he got chased by some mongoose’s mother. Maybe
he chewed up some ganja-weed—marijuana to you. But I doubt that it has
anything to do with the way he acts now, any more than that business of
the compasses that pointed west might have something to do with it. Did
you hear about that, by the way? Craziest thing I ever heard of. It was
right after I shipped Tiny off to you last fall, as I remember. Every
ship and boat and plane from here to Sandy Hook reported that its
compass began to indicate due west instead of a magnetic north!
Fortunately the effect only lasted a couple of hours so there were no
serious difficulties. One cruise steamer ran aground, and there were a
couple of Miami fishing-boat mishaps. I only bring it up to remind both
of us that Tiny’s behavior may be odd, but not exclusively so in a world
where such things as the crazy compasses occur.”

And in her next, she wrote. “You’re quite the philosopher, aren’t you?
Be careful of that Fortean attitude, my tropical friend. It tends to
accept the idea of the unexplainable to an extent where explaining, or
even investigating, begins to look useless. As far as that crazy compass
episode is concerned, I remember it very well indeed. My boss, Dr.
Nowland—yes, it’s true, he can alloy anything with anything!—has been up
to his ears in that fantastic happenstance. So have most of his
colleagues in half a dozen sciences. They’re able to explain it quite
satisfactorily, too. It was simply the presence of some quite
quasimagnetic phenomenon that created a resultant field at right angles
to the earth’s own magnetic influence. That solution sent the pure
theorists home happy. Of course, the practical ones—Nowland and his
associates in metallurgy, for example—only have to figure out what
caused the field. Science is a wonderful thing.

“By the way, you will notice my change of address. I have wanted for a
long time to have a little house of my own, and I was lucky enough to
get this one from a friend. It’s up the Hudson from New York, quite
countrified, but convenient enough to the city to be practical. I’m
bringing Mother here from Upstate. She’ll love it. And besides—as if you
didn’t know the most important reason when you saw it—it gives Tiny a
place to run. He’s no city dog....I’d tell you that he found the house
for me, too, if I didn’t think that, these days, I’m crediting him with
even more than his remarkable powers. Gregg and Marie Weems, the couple
who had the cottage before, began to be haunted. So they said, anyway.
Some indescribably horrible monster that both of them caught glimpses
of. inside the house and out of it. Marie finally got the screaming
meemies about it and insisted on Gregg’s selling the place, housing
shortage or no. They came straight to me. Why? Because they—Marie,
any-way; she’s a mystic little thing—had the idea that someone with a
large dog would be safe in that house. The odd part of that was that
neither of them knew I had recently acquired a Great Dane. As soon as
they saw Tiny they threw themselves on my neck and begged me to take the
place. Marie couldn’t explain the feeling she had; what she and Gregg
came to my place for was to ask, me to buy a big dog and take the house.
Why me? Well, she just felt I would like it, that was all. It seemed the
right kind of place for me. And my having the dog clinched it. Anyway,
you can put that down in your notebook of unexplainables.”

So it went for the better part of a year. The letters were long and
frequent, and, as sometimes happens, Alec and Alistair grew very close
indeed. Almost by accident they found themselves writing letters that
did not mention Tiny at all, although there were others that concerned
nothing else. And, of course, Tiny was not always in the role of canis
superior. He was a dog—all dog—and acted accordingly. His strangeness
came out only at particular intervals. At first it had been at times
when Alistair was most susceptible to being astonished by it—in other
words, when it was least expected. Later, he would perform his odd feats
when she was ready for him to do it, and under exactly the right
circumstances. Later still, he became the superdog only when she asked
him to....

 

The cottage was on a hillside, such a very steep hillside that the view
of the river skipped over the railroad, and the trains were a secret
rumble and never a sight at all. There was a wild and clean air about
the place—a perpetual tingle of expectancy, as though someone coming
into New York for the very first time on one of the trains had thrown
his joyous anticipation high in the air and the cottage had caught it
and breathed it and kept it forever.

Up the hairpin driveway to the house, one spring afternoon, toiled a
miniature automobile in its lowest gear. Its little motor grunted and
moaned as it took the last steep grade, a miniature Old Faithful
appearing around its radiator cap. At the foot of the brownstone porch
steps it stopped, and a miniature lady slid out from under the wheel.
But for the fact that she was wearing an aviation mechanic’s coveralls,
and that her very first remark—an earthy epithet directed at the
steaming radiator—was neither ladylike nor miniature, she might have
been a model for the more precious variety of Mother’s Day greeting
card.

Fuming, she reached into the car and pressed the horn button. The
quavering wail that resulted had its desired effect. It was answered
instantly by the mighty howl of a Great Dane at the peak of aural agony.
The door of the house crashed open and a girl in shorts and a halter
rushed out on the porch, to stand with her russet hair ablaze in the
sunlight, her lips parted, and her long eyes squinting against the light
reflected from the river.

“What—Mother! Mother, darling, is that you? Already? Tiny!” she rapped
as the dog bolted out of the open door and down the steps. “Come back
here!”

The dog stopped. Mrs. Forsythe scooped a crescent wrench from the ledge
behind the driver’s seat and brandished it. “Let him come, Alistair,”
she said grimly. “In the name of sense, girl, what are you doing with a
monster like that? I thought you said you had a dog, not a Shetland pony
with fangs. If he messes with me, I’ll separate him from a couple of
those twelve-pound feet and bring him down to my weight. Where do you
keep his saddle? I thought there was a meat shortage in this part of the
country. Whatever possessed you to take up your abode with that
carnivorous dromedary, anyway? And what’s the idea of buying a bam like
this, thirty miles from nowhere and perched on a precipice to boot, with
a stepladder for a driveway and an altitude fit to boil water at eighty
degrees Centigrade? It must take you forever to make breakfast.
Twenty-minute eggs, and then they’re raw. I’m hungry. If that Danish
basilisk hasn’t eaten everything in sight. I’d like to nibble on about
eight sandwiches. Salami on whole wheat. Your flowers are gorgeous,
child. So are you. You always were, of course. Pity you have brains. If
you had no brains, you’d get married. A lovely view, honey, lovely. I
like it here. Glad you bought it. Come here, you,” she said to Tiny.

He approached this small specimen of volubility with his head a little
low and his tail down. She extended a hand and held it still to let him
sniff it before she thumped him on the withers. He waved his
unfashionable tail in acceptance and then went to join the laughing
Alistair, who was coming down the steps.

“Mother, you’re marvelous.” She bent and kissed her. “What on earth made
that awful noise?”

“Noise? Oh, the horn.” Mrs. Forsythe busily went about lifting the hood
of the car. “I have a friend in the shoelace business. Wanted to
stimulate trade for him. Fixed this up to make people jump out of their
shoes. When they jump they break the laces. Leave their shoes in the
street. Thousands of people walking about in their stocking feet. More
people ought to, anyway. Good for the arches.” She pointed. There were
four big air-driven horns mounted on and around the little motor. Over
the mouth of each was a shutter, so arranged that it revolved about an
axle set at right angles to the horn, so that the bell was opened and
closed by four small DC motors. “That’s what gives it the warble. As for
the beat-note, the four of them are turned a sixteenth-tone apart.
Pretty?”

“Pretty,” Alistair conceded with sincerity. “No, please don’t
demonstrate it again, Mother! You almost wrenched poor Tiny’s ears off
the first time.”

“Oh, did I?” Contritely she went to the dog. “I didn’t mean to,
honey-poodle, really I didn’t.” The honey-poodle looked up at her with
somber brown eyes and thumped his tail on the ground. “I like him,” said
Mrs. Forsythe decisively. She put out a fearless hand and pulled
affectionately at the loose flesh of Tiny’s upper lip. “Will you look at
those tusks! Good grief, dog, reel in some of that tongue or you’ll turn
yourself inside out. Why aren’t you married yet, chicken?”

“Why aren’t you?” Alistair countered.

Mrs. Forsythe stretched. “I’ve been married,” she said, and Alistair
knew that now her casualness was forced. “A married season with the
likes of Dan Forsythe sticks with you.” Her voice softened. “Your daddy
was all kinds of good people, baby.” She shook herself. “Let’s eat. I
want to hear about Tiny. Your driblets and drablets of information about
that dog are as tantalizing as Chapter Eleven of a movie serial. Who’s
this Alec creature in St. Croix? Some kind of native—cannibal, or
something? He sounds nice. I wonder if you know how nice you think he
is? Good heavens, the girl’s blushing! I only know what I read in your
letters, darling, and I never knew you to quote any-one by the paragraph
before but that old scoundrel Nowland, and that was all about ductility
and permeability and melting points. Metallurgy! A girl like you mucking
about with molybs and durals instead of heartbeats and hope chests!”

“Mother, sweetheart, hasn’t it occurred to you at all that I don’t want
to get married? Not yet, anyway.”

“Of course it has. That doesn’t alter the fact that a woman is only
forty percent a woman until someone loves her, and only eighty percent a
woman until she has children. As for you and your precious career, I
seem to remember something about a certain Marie Sklodowska who didn’t
mind marrying a fellow called Curie, science or no science.”

“Darling,” said Alistair a little tiredly as they mounted the steps and
went into the cool house, “once and for all, get this straight. The
career, as such, doesn’t matter at all. The work does. I like it. I
don’t see the sense of being married purely for the sake of being
married.”

“Oh, for heaven’s sake, child, neither do I,” said Mrs. Forsythe
quickly. Then, casting a critical eye over her daughter, she sighed,
“But it’s such a waste.”

“What do you mean?”

Her mother shook her head. “If you don’t get it, it’s because there’s
something wrong with your sense of values, in which case there’s no
point in arguing. I love your furniture. Now, for pity’s sake feed me
and tell me about this canine Camera of yours.”

Moving deftly about the kitchen while her mother perched like a
bright-eyed bird on a utility ladder, Alistair told the story of her
letters from Alec and Tiny’s arrival.

“At first he was just a dog. A very wonderful dog, of course, and
extremely well trained. We got along beautifully. There was nothing
remarkable about him but his history, as far ‘as I could see, and
certainly no indication of...of anything. I mean, he might have
responded to my name the way he did because the syllabic content pleased
him.”

“It should,” said her mother complacently. “Dan and I spent weeks at a
sound laboratory graphing a suitable name for you. Alistair Forsythe.
Has a beat, you know. Keep that in mind when you change it.”

“Mother!”

“All right, dear. Go on with the story.”

“For all I knew, the whole thing was a crazy coincidence. Tiny didn’t
respond particularly to the sound of my name after he got here. He
seemed to take a perfectly normal, doggy pleasure in sticking around,
that was all.

“Then, one evening after he had been with me about a month, I found out
he could read.”

“Read!” Mrs. Forsythe toppled, clutched the edge of the sink, and
righted herself.

“Well, practically that. I used to study a lot in the evenings, and Tiny
used to stretch out in front of the fire with his nose between his paws
and watch me. I was tickled by that. I even got the habit of talking to
him while I studied. I mean, about the work. He always seemed to be
paying very close attention, which, of course, was silly. And maybe it
was my imagination, but the times he’d get up and nuzzle me always
seemed to be the times when my mind was wandering or when I would quit
working and go on to something else.

“This particular evening I was working on the permeability mathematics
of certain of the rare-earth group. I put down my pencil and reached for
my Handbook of Chemistry and Physics and found nothing but a big hole in
the bookcase. The book wasn’t on the desk, either. So I swung around to
Tiny and said, just for something to say, “Tiny, what have you done with
my handbook?’

“He went whuff, in the most startled tone of voice, leaped to his feet,
and went over to his bed. He turned up the mattress with his paw and
scooped out the book. He picked it up in his jaws—I wonder what he would
have done if he were a Scotty; that’s a chunky piece of literature!—and
brought it to me.

“I just didn’t know what to do. I took the book and riffed it. It was
pretty well shoved around. Apparently he had been trying to leaf through
it with those big splay feet of his. I put the book down and took him by
the muzzle. I called him nine kinds of a rascal and asked him what he
was looking for.” She paused, building a sandwich.

“Well?”

“Oh,” said Alistair, as if coming back from a far ‘distance. “He didn’t
say.”

There was a thoughtful silence. Finally Mrs. Forsythe looked up with her
odd bird-like glance and said, “You’re kidding. That dog isn’t shaggy
enough.”

“You don’t believe me.” It wasn’t a question.

The older woman got up to put a hand on the girl’s shoulder.
“Honey-lamb, your daddy used to say that the only things worth believing
were things you learned from people you trusted. Of course I believe
you. Thing is—do you believe you?”

“I’m not—sick, Mum, if that’s what you mean. Let me tell you the rest of
it.”

“You mean there’s more?”

“Plenty more.” She put the stack of sandwiches on the sideboard where
her mother could reach it. Mrs. Forsythe fell to with a will. “Tiny has
been goading me to do research. A particular kind of research.”

“Hut hine uffefa?”

“Mother! I didn’t give you those sandwiches just to feed you. The idea
was to soundproof you a bit, too, while I talked.”

“Hohay!” said her mother cheerfully.

“Well, Tiny won’t let me work on any other project but the one he’s
interested in. Mum, I can’t talk if you’re going to gape like that!
No...I can’t say he won’t let me do any work. But there’s a certain line
of endeavor that he approves. If I do anything else, he snuffles around,
joggles my elbow, grunts, whimpers, and generally carries on until I
lose my temper and tell him to go away. Then he’ll walk over to the
fireplace and flop down and sulk. Never takes his eyes off me. So, of
course, I get all soft-hearted and repentant and apologize to him and
get on with what he wants done.”

Mrs. Forsythe swallowed, coughed, gulped some milk, and exploded, “Wait
a minute, you’re away too fast for me! What is it that he wants done?
How do you know he wants it? Can he read, or can’t he? Make some sense,
child!”

Alistair laughed richly. “Poor Mum. I don’t blame you, darling. No, I
don’t think he can really read. He shows no interest at all in books or
pictures. The episode with the handbook seemed to be an experiment that
didn’t bring any results. But—he knows the difference between my books,
even books that are bound alike, even when I shift them around in the
bookcase. Tiny!”

The Great Dane scrambled to his feet from the corner of the kitchen, his
paws skidding on the waxed linoleum. “Get me Hoag’s Basic Radio, old
feller, will you?”

Tiny turned and padded out. They heard him going up the stairs. “I was
afraid he wouldn’t do it while you were here,” she said. “He generally
warns me not to say anything about his powers. He growls. He did that
when Dr. Nowland dropped out for lunch one Saturday. I started to talk
about Tiny and just couldn’t. He acted disgracefully. First he growled
and then he barked. It was the first time I’ve ever known him to bark in
the house. Poor Dr. Nowland. He was scared half out of his wits.”

Tiny thudded down the stairs and entered the kitchen. “Give it to Mum,”
said Alistair. Tiny walked sedately over to the stool and stood before
the astonished Mrs. Forsythe. She took the volume from his jaws.

“Basic Radio,” she breathed.

“I asked him for that because I have a whole row of technical books up
there, all from the same publisher, all the same color and about the
same size,” said Alistair calmly.

“But...but...how does he do it?”

Alistair shrugged. “I don’t know. He doesn’t read the titles. That I’m
sure of. He can’t read anything. I’ve tried to get him to do it a dozen
different ways. I’ve lettered instructions on pieces of paper and shown
them to him—you know. ‘Go to the door’ and ‘Give me a kiss’ and so on.
He just looks at them and wags his tail. But if I read them first—”

“You mean, read them aloud?”

“No. Oh, he’ll do anything I ask him to, sure. But I don’t have to say
it. Just read it, and he turns and does it. That’s the way he makes me
study what he wants studied.”

“Are you telling me that behemoth can read your mind?”

“What do you think? Here, I’ll show you. Give me the book.”

Tiny’s ears went up. “There’s something in here about the electrical
flux in supercooled copper that I don’t quite remember. Let’s see if
Tiny’s interested.”

She sat on the kitchen table and began to leaf through the book. Tiny
came and sat in front of her. his tongue lolling out, his big brown eyes
fixed on her face. There was silence as she turned pages, read a little,
turned some more. And suddenly Tiny whimpered urgently.

“See what I mean, Mum? All right, Tiny. I’ll read it over.”

Silence again, while Alistair’s long green eyes traveled over the page.
All at once Tiny stood up and nuzzled her leg.

“Hm-m-m? The reference? Want me to go back?”

Tiny sat again, expectantly. “There’s a reference here to a passage in
the first section on basic electric theory that he wants,” she
explained. She looked up. “Mother, you read it to him.” She jumped off
the table, handed the book over. “Here. Section forty-five. Tiny! Go
listen to Mum. Go on,” and she shoved him towards Mrs. Forsythe, who
said in an awed voice, “When I was a little girl, I used to read bedtime
stories to my dolls. I thought I’d quit that kind of thing altogether,
and now I’m reading technical literature to this...this canine
catastrophe here. Shall I read aloud?”

“No, don’t. See if he gets it.”

But Mrs. Forsythe didn’t get the chance. Before she had read two lines
Tiny was frantic. He ran to Mrs. Forsythe and back to Alistair. He
reared up like a frightened horse, rolled his eyes, and panted. He
whimpered. He growled a little.

“For pity’s sakes, what’s wrong?”

“I guess he can’t get it from you,” said Alistair. “I’ve had the idea
before that he’s tuned to me in more ways than one, and this clinches
it. All right, then. Give me back the—”

But before she could ask him, Tiny had bounded to Mrs. Forsythe, taken
the book gently out of her hands, and carried it to his mistress.
Alistair smiled at her paling mother, took the book, and read until Tiny
suddenly seemed to lose interest. He went back to his station by the
kitchen cabinet and lay down, yawning.

“That’s that,” said Alistair, closing the book. “In other words, class
dismissed. Well, Mum?”

Mrs. Forsythe opened her mouth, closed it again, and shook her head.
Alistair loosed a peal of laughter.

“Oh, Mum,” she gurgled through her laughter. “History has been made.
Mum, darling, you’re speechless!”

“I am not,” said Mrs. Forsythe gruffly. “I...I think...well, what do you
know! You’re right! I am!”

When they had their breath back—yes, Mrs. Forsythe joined in, for
Alistair’s statement was indeed true—Alistair picked up the book and
said, “Now look, Mum. it’s almost time for my session with Tiny. Oh,
yes; it’s a regular thing, and he certainly is leading me into some
fascinating byways.”

“Like what?”

“Like the old impossible problem of casting tungsten, for example. You
know, there is a way to do it.”

“You don’t say! What do you cast it in—a play?”

Alistair wrinkled her straight nose. “Did you ever hear of pressure ice?
Water compressed until it forms a solid at what is usually its boiling
point?”

“I remember some such.”

“Well, all you need is enough pressure, and a chamber that can take that
kind of pressure, and a couple of details like a high-intensity field of
umpteen megacycles phased with...I forget the figures; anyhow, that’s
the way to go about it.”

“‘If we had some eggs we could have some ham and eggs if we had some
ham,’” quoted Mrs. Forsythe. “And besides, I seem to remember something
about that pressure ice melting pretty much right now, like so,” and she
snapped her fingers. “How do you know your molded tungsten—that’s what
it would be, not cast at all—wouldn’t change state the same way?”

“That’s what I’m working on now,” said Alistair calmly. “Come along,
Tiny. Mum, you can find your way around all right, can’t you? If you
need anything, just sing out. This isn’t a séance, you know.”

“Isn’t it, though?” muttered Mrs. Forsythe as her lithe daughter and the
dog bounded up the stairs. She shook her head, went into the kitchen,
drew a bucket of water, and carried it down to her car, which had cooled
to a simmer. She was dashing careful handfuls of it onto the radiator
before beginning to pour when her quick ear caught the scrunching of
boots on the steep drive.

She looked up to see a young man trudging wearily in the mid-morning
heat. He wore an old sharkskin suit and carried his coat. In spite of
his wilted appearance, his step was firm and his golden hair was crisp
in the sunlight. He swung up to Mrs. Forsythe and gave her a grin, all
deep-blue eyes and good teeth. “Forsythe’s?” he asked in a resonant
baritone.

“That’s right,” said Mrs. Forsythe, finding that she had to turn her
head from side to side to see both of his shoulders. And yet she could
have swapped belts with him. “You must feel like the Blue Kangaroo
here,” she added, slapping her miniature mount on its broiling flank.
“Boiled dry.”

“You cahl de cyah de Blue Kangaroo?” he repeated, draping his coat over
the door and mopping his forehead with what seemed to Mrs. Forsythe’s
discerning eye, a pure linen handkerchief.

“I do,” she replied, forcing herself not to comment on the young man’s
slight but strange accent. “It’s strictly a dry-clutch job and acts like
a castellated one. Let the pedal out, she races. Let it out three
thirty-seconds of an inch more, and you’re gone from there. Always
stopping to walk back and pick up your head. Snaps right off, you know.
Carry a bottle of collodion and a couple of splints to put your head
back on. Starve to death without a head to eat with. What brings you
here?”

In answer he held out a yellow envelope, looking solemnly at her head
and neck, then at the car, his face quiet, his eyes crinkling with a
huge enjoyment.

Mrs. Forsythe glanced at the envelope. “Oh. Telegram. She’s inside. I’ll
give it to her. Come on in and have a drink. It’s hotter than the hinges
of Hail Columbia, Happy Land. Don’t go wiping your feet like that! By
jeepers, that’s enough to give you an inferiority complex! Invite a man
in, invite the dust on his feet, too. It’s good, honest dirt and we
don’t run to white broadlooms here. Are you afraid of dogs?”

The young man laughed. “Dahgs talk to me, ma’am.”

She glanced at him sharply, opened her mouth to tell him he might just
be taken at his word around here, then thought better of it. “Sit down,”
she ordered. She bustled up a foaming glass of beer and set it beside
him. “I’ll get her down to sign for the wire,” she said. The man half
lowered the glass into which he had been jowls-deep, began to speak,
found he was alone in the room, laughed suddenly and richly, wiped off
the mustache of suds, and dived down for a new one.

Mrs. Forsythe grinned and shook her head as she heard the laughter, and
went straight to Alistair’s study. “Alistair!”

“Stop pushing me about the ductility of tungsten, Tiny! You know better
than that. Figures are figures, and facts are facts. I think I see what
you’re trying to lead me to. All I can say is that if such a thing is
possible, I never heard of any equipment that could handle it. Stick
around a few years and I’ll hire you a nuclear power plant. Until then,
I’m afraid—”

“Alistair!”

“—there just isn’t...hm-m-m? Yes, Mother?”

“Telegram.”

“Oh. Who from?”

I don’t know, being only one fortieth of one percent as psychic as that
doghouse Dunninger you have there. In other words I didn’t open it.”

“Oh, Mum, you’re silly. Of course you could have...oh well, let’s have
it.”

I haven’t got it. It’s downstairs with Discobolus Junior, who brought
it. No one,” she said ecstatically, “has a right to be so tanned with
hair that color.”

“What are you talking about?”

“Go on down and sign for the telegram and see for yourself You will find
the maiden’s dream with his golden head in a bucket of suds, all hot and
sweaty from his noble efforts in at-taming this peak without spikes or
alpenstock, with nothing but his pure heart and Western Union to guide
him.”

“This maiden’s dream happens to be tungsten treatment” said Alistair
with some irritation. She looked longingly at her work sheet, put down
her pencil, and rose. “Stay here, Tiny. I’ll be right back as soon as I
have successfully resisted my conniving mother’s latest scheme to drag
my red hairing across some young buck’s path to matrimony.” She paused
at the door “Aren’t you staying up here, Mum?”

“Get that hair away from your face,” said her mother grimly I am not. I
wouldn’t miss this for the world. And don’t pun in front of that young
man. It’s practically the only thing in the world I consider vulgar.”

Alistair led the way down the stairs and through the corridor to the
kitchen, with her mother crowding her heels, once fluffing out her
daughter’s blazing hair, once taking a swift tuck in the back of the
girl’s halter. They spilled through the door almost together. Alistair
stopped and frankly stared.

For the young man had risen and, still with the traces of beer foam on
his molded lips, stood with his jaws stupidly open his head a little
back, his eyes partly closed as if against a bright light. And it seemed
as if everyone in the room forgot to breathe for a moment.

“Well!” Mrs. Forsythe exploded after a moment. “Honey you’ve made a
conquest. Hey, you, chin up, chest out.”

“I beg your humble pardon,” muttered the young man, and the phrase
seemed more a colloquialism than an affectation Alistair visibly pulling
herself together, said. “Mother, please,” and drifted forward to pick up
the telegram that lay on the kitchen table. Her mother knew her well
enough to realize that her hands and her eyes were steady only by a
powerful effort. Whether the effort was in control of annoyance,
embarrassment or out-and-out biochemistry was a matter for later
thought. At the moment Mrs. Forsythe was enjoying the situation
tremendously.

Please wait, said Alistair coolly. “There may be an answer to this. The
young man simply bobbed his head. He was still a little wall-eyed with
the impact of seeing Alistair, as many a young man had been before. But
there were the beginnings of his astonishing smile around his lips as he
watched her rip the envelope open.

“Mother! Listen!

“ARRIVED THIS MORNING AND HOPE I CAN CATCH YOU AT HOME. OLD DEBBIL
KILLED IN ACCIDENT BUT FOUND HIS MEMORY BEFORE HE DIED. HAVE INFORMATION
WHICH MAY CLEAR UP MYSTERY—OR DEEPEN IT. HOPE I CAN SEE YOU FOR I DON’T
KNOW WHAT TO THINK.

ALEC.”

“How old is this tropical savage?” asked Mrs. Forsythe.

“He’s not a savage and I don’t know how old he is and I can’t see what
that has to do with it. I think he’s about my age or a little older.”
She looked up and her eyes were shining.

“Deadly rival,” said Mrs. Forsythe to the messenger consolingly. “Rotten
timing here, somewhere.”

“I—” said the young man.

“Mother, we’ve got to fix something to eat. Do you suppose he’ll be able
to stay over? Where’s my green dress with the...oh, you wouldn’t know.
It’s new.”

“Then the letters weren’t all about the dog,” said Mrs. Forsythe with a
Cheshire grin.

“Mum, you’re impossible, This is...is important. Alec is...is...”

Her mother nodded. “Important. That’s all I was pointing out.”

The young man said, “I—”

Alistair turned to him. “I do hope you don’t think we’re totally mad.
I’m sorry you had such a climb.” She went to the sideboard and took’ a
quarter out of a sugar bowl. He took it gravely.

“Thank you, ma’am. If you don’t min’, I’ll keep this piece of silver for
the rest o’ my everlahstin’.”

“You’re wel—What?”

The young man seemed to get even taller. “I greatly appreciate your
hospitality, Mrs. Forsythe. I have you at a disadvantage, ma’am, and one
I shall correct.” He put a crooked forefinger between his lips and blew
out an incredible blast of sound.

“Tiny!” he roared. “Here to me, dahg, an’ mek me known!”

There was an answering roar from upstairs, and Tiny came tumbling down,
scrabbling wildly as he took the turn at the foot of the stairs and
hurtled over the slick flooring to crash joyfully into the young man.

“Ah, you beast,” crooned the man, cuffing the dog happily’. His accent
thickened. “You thrive yourself here wid de ladydem, you gray-yut
styoupid harse. You glad me, mon, you glad me.” He grinned at the two
astonished women. “Forgive me,” he said as he pummeled Tiny, pulled his
ears, shoved him away, and caught him by the jaws. “For true, I couldn’t
get in the first word with Mrs. Forsythe, and after that I couldn’t help
meself. Alec my name is, and the telegram I took from the true
messenger, finding him sighing and sweating at the sight of the hill
there.”

Alistair covered her face with her hands and said, “Oooh.”

Mrs. Forsythe whooped with laughter. When she found her voice she
demanded, “Young man, what is your last name?”

“Sundersen, ma’am.”

“Mother! Why did you ask him that?”

“For reasons of euphony,” said Mrs. Forsythe with a twinkle. Alexander
Sundersen. Very good. Alistair—”

“Stop! Mum, don’t you dare—”

“I was going to say, Alistair, if you and our guest will excuse me. I’ll
have to get back to my knitting.” She went to the door.

Alistair threw an appalled look at Alec and cried, “Mother! What are you
knitting?”

“My brows, darling. See you later.” Mrs. Forsythe chuckled and went out.

 

It took almost a week for Alec to get caught up with the latest
developments in Tiny, for he got the story in the most meticulous
detail. There never seemed to be enough time to get in all the
explanations and anecdotes, so swiftly did it fly when he and Alistair
were together. Some days he went into the city with Alistair in the
morning and spent the day buying tools and equipment for his estate. New
York was a wonder city to him—he had been there only once before—and
Alistair found herself getting quite possessive about the place, showing
it off like the contents of a jewel box. And then Alec stayed at the
house a couple of days. He endeared himself forever to Mrs. Forsythe by
removing, cleaning, and refacing the clutch on the Blue Kangaroo,
simplifying the controls on the gas refrigerator so it could be
defrosted without a major operation, and putting a building jack under
the corner of the porch that threatened to sag.

And the sessions with Tiny were resumed and intensified. At first he
seemed a little uneasy when Alec joined one of them, but within half an
hour he relaxed. Thereafter, more and more he would interrupt Alistair
to turn to Alec. Although he apparently could not understand Alec’s
thoughts at all. he seemed to comprehend perfectly when Alec spoke to
Alistair. And within a few days she learned to accept these
interruptions, for they speeded up the research they were doing. Alec
was almost totally ignorant of the advanced theory with which Alistair
worked, but his mind was clear, quick, and very direct. He was no
theorist, and that was good. He was one of those rare grease-monkey
geniuses, with a grasp of the laws of cause and effect that amounted to
intuition. Tiny’s reaction to this seemed to be approval. At any rate,
the occasions when Alistair lost track of what Tiny was after occurred
less and less frequently. Alec instinctively knew just how far to go
back, and then how to spot the turning at which they had gone astray.
And bit by bit they began to identify what it was that Tiny was after.
As to why—and how—he was after it. Alec’s experience with old Debbil
seemed a clue. It was certainly sufficient to keep Alec plugging away at
a possible solution to the strange animal’s stranger need.

“It was down at the sugar mill,” he told Alistair, after he had become
fully acquainted with the incredible dog’s actions and they were trying
to determine the why and the how. “He called me over to the chute where
cane is loaded into the conveyors.

“‘Bahss,’ he told me, ‘dat t’ing dere, it not safe, sah.’ And he pointed
through the guard over the bull gears that drove the conveyor. Great big
everlahstin’ teeth it has, Miss Alistair, a full ten inches long, and it
whirlin’ to the drive pinion. It’s old, but strong for good. Debbil,
what he saw was a bit o’ play on the pinion shaf’.

“‘Now, you’re an old fool,’ I told him.

“‘No, bahss,’” he says. ‘Look now, sah, de t’ing wit’ de teet’—dem, it
not safe, sah. I mek you see,’ and before I could move meself or let a
thought trickle, he opens the guard up and thrus’ his han’ inside! Bull
gear, it run right up his arm and nip it off, neat as ever, at the
shoulder. I humbly beg your pardon, Miss Alistair.”

“G-go on,” said Alistair, through her handkerchief.

“Well, sir, old Debbil was an idiot for true, and he only died the way
he lived, rest him. He was old and he was all eaten out with malaria and
elephantiasis and the like, that not even Dr. Thetford could save him.
But a strange thing happened. As he lay dyin’, with the entire village
gathered roun’ the door whisperin’ plans for the wake, he sent to tell
me come quickly. Down I run, and for the smile on his face I glad him
when I cross the doorstep.”

As Alec spoke, he was back in the Spanish-wall hut, with the air close
under the palm-thatch roof and the glare of the pressure lantern set on
the tiny window ledge to give the old man light to die by. Alec’s accent
deepened. “‘How you feel, mon?’ I ask him. ‘Bahss, I’m a dead man now,
but I got a light in mah hey-yud.’

“‘Tell me then, Debbil.’

“‘Bahss, de folk-dem say, ol’ Debbil, him cyahn’t remembah de taste of a
mango as he t’row away de skin. Him cyahn’t remembah his own house do he
stay away tree day.’

“‘Loose talk, Debbil.’

“‘True talk, Bahss. Foh de lahd give me a leaky pot fo’ hol’ ma brains.
But Bahss, I do recall one t’ing now, bright an’ clear, and you must
know. Bahss, de day I go up the wahtah line, I see a great jumbee in de
stones of de gov’nor palace dere.’”

“What’s a jumbee?” asked Mrs. Forsythe.

“A ghost, ma’am. The Crucians carry a crawlin’ heap of superstitions.
Tiny! What eats you, mon?”

Tiny growled again. Alec and Alistair exchanged a look. “He doesn’t want
you to go on.”

“Listen carefully. I want him to get this. I am his friend. I want to
help you help him. I realize that he wants as few people as possible to
find out about this thing. I will say nothing to anybody unless and
until I have his permission.”

“Well, Tiny?”

The dog stood restlessly, swinging his great head from Alistair to Alec.
Finally he made a sound like an audible shrug, then turned to Mrs.
Forsythe.

“Mother’s part of me,” said Alistair firmly. “That’s the way it’s got to
be. No alternative.” She leaned forward. “You can’t talk to us. You can
only indicate what you want said and done. I think Alec’s story will
help us to understand what you want and help you to get it more quickly.
Understand?”

Tiny gazed at her for a long moment, said, “Whuff,” and lay down with
his nose between his paws and his eyes fixed on Alec.

“I think that’s the green light,” said Mrs. Forsythe, “and I might add
that most of it was due to my daughter’s conviction that you’re a
wonderful fellow.”

“Mother!”

“Well, pare me down and call me Spud! They’re both blushing!” said Mrs.
Forsythe blatantly.

“Go on, Alec,” choked Alistair.

“Thank you. Old Debbil told me a fine tale of the things he had seen at
the ruins. A great beast, mind you, with no shape at all, and a face
ugly to drive you mad. And about the beast was what he called a ‘feelin’
good.’ He said it was a miracle, but he feared nothing. ‘Wet it was,
Bahss, like a slug, an’ de eye it have is whirlin’ an’ shakin’, an’ I
standin’ dar feelin’ like a bride at de altar step an’ no fear in me.’
Well, I thought the old man’s mind was wandering, for I knew he was
touched. But the story he told was that clear, and never a single second
did he stop to think. Out it all came like a true thing.

“He said that Tiny walked to the beast and that it Curved over him like
an ocean wave. It closed over the dog. and Debbil was rooted there the
livelong day, still without fear, and feelin’ no smallest desire to
move. He had no surprise at all. even at the thing he saw restin’ in the
thicket among the old stones.

“He said it was a submarine, a mighty one as great as the estate house
and with no break nor mar in its surface but for the glass part let in
where the mouth is on a shark.

“And then when the sun begun to dip, the beast gave a shudderin’ heave
and rolled back, and out walked Tiny. He stepped up to Debbil and stood.
Then the beast began to quiver and shake, and Debbil said the air aroun’
him heavied with the work the monster was doing, tryin’ to talk. A cloud
formed in his brain, and a voice swept over him. ‘Not a livin’ word,
Bahss, not a sound at all. But it said to forget. It said to leave
displace and forget, sah.’ And the last thing old Debbil saw as he
turned away was the beast slumping down, seeming all but dead from the
work it had done to speak at all. ‘An’ de cloud live in mah hey-yud,
Bahss, f’om dat time onward. I’m a dead man now, Bahss, but de cloud
gone and Debbil know de story.’ “Alec leaned back and looked at his
hands. “That was all. This must have happened about fifteen months
pahst, just before Tiny began to show his strange stripe.” He drew a
deep breath and looked up. “Maybe I’m gullible. But I knew the old man
too well. He never in this life could invent such a tale. I troubled
myself to go up to the governor’s palace after the buryin’. I might have
been mistaken, but something big had lain in the deepest thicket, for it
was crushed into a great hollow place near a hundred foot long. Well,
there you are. For what it’s worth, you have the story of a
superstitious an’ illiterate old man, at the point of death by violence
and many years sick to boot.”

There was a long silence, and at last Alistair threw her lucent hair
back and said, “It isn’t Tiny at all. It’s a...a thing outside Tiny.”
She looked at the dog, her eyes wide. “And I don’t even mind.”

“Neither did Debbil, when he saw it,” said Alec gravely.

Mrs. Forsythe snapped, “What are we sitting gawking at each other for?
Don’t answer; I’ll tell you. All of us can think up a story to fit the
facts, and we’re all too self-conscious to come out with it. Any story
that fit those facts would really be a killer.”

“Well said.” Alec grinned. “Would you like to tell us your idea?”

“Silly boy,” muttered Alistair.

“Don’t be impertinent, child. Of course I’d like to tell you, Alec. I
think that the good Lord, in His infinite wisdom, has decided that it
was about time for Alistair to come to her senses, and, knowing that it
would take a quasi-scientific miracle to do it, dreamed up this—”

“Some day,” said Alistair icily, “I’m going to pry you loose from your
verbosity and your sense of humor in one fell swoop.”

Mrs. Forsythe grinned. “There is a time for jocularity, kidlet, and this
is it. I hate solemn people solemnly sitting around being awed by
things. What do you make of all this, Alec?”

Alec pulled his ear and said, “I vote we leave it up to Tiny. It’s his
show. Let’s get on with the work and just keep in mind what we, already
know.”

To their astonishment, Tiny stumped over to Alec and licked his hand.

 

The blowoff came six weeks after Alec’s arrival. (Oh, yes, he stayed six
weeks, and longer. It took some fiendish cogitation for him to think of
enough legitimate estate business that had to be done in New York to
keep him that long, but after six weeks he was so much one of the family
that he needed no excuse.) He had devised a code system for Tiny, so
that Tiny could add something to their conversations. His point: “Here
he sits, ma’am, like a fly on the wall, seeing everything and hearing
everything and saying not a word. Picture it for yourself, and you in
such a position, full entranced as you are with the talk you hear.” And
for Mrs. Forsythe particularly, the mental picture was altogether too
vivid. It was so well presented that Tiny’s research went by the board
for four days while they devised the code. They had to give up the idea
of a glove with a pencil pocket in it, with which Tiny might write a
little, or any similar device. The dog was simply not deft enough for
such meticulous work; and besides, he showed absolutely no signs of
understanding any written or printed symbolism. Unless, of course,
Alistair thought about it.

Alec’s plan was simple. He cut some wooden forms—a disk, a square, a
triangle to begin with. The desk signified “yes” or any other
affirmation, depending on the context; the square was “no” or any
negation; and the triangle indicated a question or a change of subject.
The amount of information Tiny was able to impart by moving from one to
another of these forms was astonishing. Once a subject for discussion
was established, Tiny would take a stand between the disk and the
square, so that all he had to do was to swing his head to one side or
the other to indicate a “yes” or a “no.” No longer were there those
exasperating sessions in which the track of his research was lost while
they back-trailed to discover where they had gone astray. The
conversations ran like this:

“Tiny, I have a question. Hope you won’t think it too personal. May I
ask it?” That was Alec, always infinitely polite to dogs. He had always
recognized their innate dignity.

Yes, the answer would come, as Tiny swung his head over the disk.

“Were we right in assuming that you, the dog, are not communicating with
us, that you are the medium?”

Tiny went to the triangle. “You want to change the subject?” Tiny
hesitated, then went to the square. No.

Alistair said, “He obviously wants something from us before he will
discuss the question. Right, Tiny?”

Yes.

Mrs. Forsythe said, “He’s had his dinner, and he doesn’t smoke. I think
he wants us to assure him that we’ll keep his secret.”

Yes.

“Good. Alec, you’re wonderful,” said Alistair. “Mother, stop beaming. I
only meant—”

“Leave it at that, child. Any qualification will spoil it for the man.”

“Thank you, ma’am,” said Alec gravely, with that deep twinkle of
amusement around his eyes. Then he turned back to Tiny. “Well, what
about it, sah? Are you a superdog?”

No.

“Who...no, he can’t answer that. Let’s go back a bit. Was old Debbil’s
story true?”

Yes.

“Ah.” They exchanged glances. “Where is this—monster? Still in St.
Croix?”

No.

“Here?”

Yes.

“You mean here, in this room or in the house?”

No.

“Nearby, though?”

Yes.

“How can we find out just where, without mentioning the countryside item
by item?” asked Alistair.

“I know,” said Mrs. Forsythe. “Alec, according to Debbil, that
‘submarine’ thing was pretty big, wasn’t it?”

“That it was, ma’am.”

“Good. Tiny, does he...it...have the ship here, too?”

Yes.

Mrs. Forsythe spread her hands. “That’s it, then. There’s only one place
around here where you could hide such an object.” She nodded her head at
the west wall of the house.

“The river!” cried Alistair. “That right, Tiny?”

Yes. And Tiny went immediately to the triangle.

“Wait!” said Alec. “Tiny, beggin’ your pardon, but there’s one more
question. Shortly after you took passage to New York, there was a
business with compasses, where they all pointed to the west. Was that
the ship?”

Yes.

“In the water?”

No.

“Why,” said Alistair, “this is pure science fiction! Alec, do you ever
get science fiction in the tropics?”

“Ah, Miss Alistair, not often enough, for true. But well I know it. The
space ships are old Mother Goose to me. But there’s a difference here.
For in all the stories I’ve read, when a beast comes here from space,
it’s to kill and conquer; and yet—and I don’t know why—I know that this
one wants nothing of the sort. More, he’s out to do us good.”

“I feel the same way,” said Mrs. Forsythe thoughtfully. “It’s sort of a
protective cloud which seems to surround us. Does that make sense to
you, Alistair?”

“I know it from ‘way back,” said Alistair with conviction. She looked at
the dog thoughtfully. “I wonder why he...it...won’t show itself. And why
it can communicate only through me. And why me?”

“I’d say, Miss Alistair, that you were chosen because of your
metallurgy. As to why we never see the beast, well, it knows best. Its
reason must be a good one.”

Day after day, and bit by bit, they got and gave information. Many
things remained mysteries, but, strangely, there seemed no real need to
question Tiny too closely. The atmosphere of confidence and good will
that surrounded them made questions seem not only unnecessary but
downright rude.

And day by day, little by little, a drawing began to take shape under
Alec’s skilled hands. It was a casting with a simple enough external
contour, but inside it contained a series of baffles and a chamber. It
was designed, apparently, to support and house a carballoy shaft. There
were no openings into the central chamber except those taken by the
shaft. The shaft turned; something within the chamber apparently drove
it. There was plenty of discussion about it.

“Why the baffles?” moaned Alistair, palming all the neatness out of her
flaming hair. “Why carballoy? And in the name of Nemo, why tungsten?”

Alec stared at the drawing for a long moment, then suddenly clapped a
hand to his head. “Tiny! Is there radiation inside that housing? I mean,
hard stuff?”

Yes.

“There you are, then,” said Alec. “Tungsten to shield the radiation. A
casting for uniformity. The baffles to make a meander out of the shaft
openings—see, the shaft has plates turned on it to fit between the
baffles.”

“And nowhere for anything to go in, nowhere for anything to come
out—except the shaft, of course—and besides, you can’t cast tungsten
that way! Maybe Tiny’s monster can, but we can’t. Maybe with the right
flux and with enough power—but that’s silly. Tungsten won’t cast.”

“And we can’t build a space ship. There must be a way!”

“Not with today’s facilities, and not with tungsten,” said Alistair.
“Tiny’s ordering it from us the way we would order a wedding cake at the
corner bakery.”

“What made you say ‘wedding cake’?”

“You, too, Alec? Don’t I get enough of that from Mother?” But she smiled
all the same. “But about the casting—it seems to me that our mysterious
friend is in the position of a radio fiend who understands every part of
his set, how it’s made, how and why it works. Then a tube blows, and he
finds he can’t buy one. He has to make one if he gets one at all.
Apparently old Debbil’s beast is in that kind of spot. What about it,
Tiny? Is your friend short a part which he understands but has never
built before?”

Yes.

“And he needs it to get away from Earth?”

Yes.

Alec asked, “What’s the trouble? Can’t get escape velocity?”

Tiny hesitated, then went to the triangle. “Either he doesn’t want to
talk about it or the question doesn’t quite fit the situation,” said
Alistair. “It doesn’t matter. Our main problem is the casting. It just
can’t be done. Not by anyone on this planet, as far as I know; and I
think I know. It has to be tungsten, Tiny?”

Yes.

“Tungsten for what?” asked Alec. “Radiation shield?”

Yes.

He turned to Alistair. “Isn’t there something just as good?”

She mused, staring at his drawing. “Yes, several things,” she said
thoughtfully. Tiny watched her, motionless. He seemed to slump as she
shrugged dispiritedly and said, “But not anything with walls as thin as
that. A yard or so of lead might do it, and have something like the
mechanical strength he seems to want, but it would obviously be too big.
Beryllium—” At the word, Tiny went and stood right on top of the square,
a most emphatic no.

“How about an alloy?” Alec asked.

“Well, Tiny?”

Tiny went to the triangle. Alistair nodded. “You don’t know. I can’t
think of one. I’ll take it up with Dr. Nowland. Maybe—”

 

The following day Alec stayed home and spent the day arguing cheerfully
with Mrs. Forsythe and building a grape arbor. It was a radiant Alistair
who came home that evening. “Got it! Got it!” she caroled as she danced
in. “Alec, Tiny! Come on!”

They flew upstairs to the study. Without removing the green “beanie”
with the orange feather that so nearly matched her hair, Alistair hauled
out four reference books and began talking animatedly. “Auric
molybdenum. Tiny, what about that? Gold and molyb III should do it!
Listen!” And she launched forth into a spatter of absorption data,
Greek-letter formulae, and strength-of-materials comparisons that made
Alec’s head swim. He sat watching her without listening. Increasingly,
this was his greatest pleasure.

When Alistair was quite through, Tiny walked away from her and lay down,
gazing off into space.

“Well, strike me!” said Alec. “Look yonder, Miss Alistair. The very
first time I ever saw him thinking something over.”

“Sh-h! Don’t disturb him, then. If that is the answer, and if he never
thought of it before, it will take some figuring out. There’s no knowing
what fantastic kind of science he’s comparing it with.”

“I see the point. Like—well, suppose we crashed a plane in the Brazilian
jungle and needed a new hydraulic cylinder on the landing gear. Now,
then, one of the natives shows us ironwood, and it’s up to us to figure
out if we can make it serve.”

“That’s about it,” breathed Alistair. “I—” She was interrupted by Tiny,
who suddenly leaped up and ran to her, kissing her hands, committing the
forbidden enormity of putting his paws on her shoulders, running back to
the wooden forms and nudging the disk, the yes symbol. His tail was
going like a metronome without its pendulum.

Mrs. Forsythe came in in the midst of all this rowdiness and demanded,
“What goes on? Who made a dervish out of Tiny? What have you been
feeding him? Don’t tell me. Let me...You don’t mean you’ve solved his
problem for him? What are you going to do, buy him a pogo stick?”

“Oh, Mum, we’ve got it! An alloy of molybdenum and gold. I can get it
alloyed and cast in no time.”

“Good, honey, good. You going to cast the whole thing?” She pointed to
the drawing.

“Why, yes.”

“Humph!”

“Mother! Why, if I may ask, do you ‘humph’ in that tone of voice?”

“You may ask, Chicken, who’s going to pay for it?”

“Why, that will—I—oh. Oh!” she said, aghast, and ran to the drawing.
Alec came and looked over her shoulder. She figured in the corner of the
drawing, oh-ed once again and sat down weakly.

“How much?” asked Alec.

“I’ll get an estimate in the morning,” she said faintly. “I know plenty
of people. I can get it at cost—maybe.” She looked at Tiny despairingly.
He came and laid his head against her knee, and she pulled at his ears.
“I won’t let you down, darling,” she whispered.

 

She got the estimate the next day. It was a little over thirteen
thousand dollars.

Alistair and Alec stared blankly at each other and then at the dog.

“Maybe you can tell us where we can raise that much money?” said
Alistair, as if she expected Tiny to whip out a wallet.

Tiny whimpered, licked Alistair’s hand, looked at Alec, and then lay
down.

“Now what?” mused Alec.

“Now we go and fix something to eat,” said Mrs. Forsythe, moving toward
the door. The others were about to follow, when Tiny leaped to his feet
and ran in front of them. He stood in the doorway and whimpered. When
they came closer, he barked.

“Sh-h! What is it, Tiny? Want us to stay here a while?”

“Say, who’s the boss around here?” Mrs. Forsythe wanted to know.

“He is,” said Alec, and he knew he was speaking for all of them. They
sat down, Mrs. Forsythe on the studio couch, Alistair. at her desk, Alec
at the drawing table. But Tiny seemed not to. approve of the
arrangement. He became vastly excited, running to Alec, nudging him
hard, dashing to Alistair, taking her wrist very gently in his jaws and
pulling gently toward Alec.

“What is it, fellow?”

“Seems like matchmaking to me,” remarked Mrs. Forsythe.

“Nonsense, Mum,” said Alistair, coloring. “He wants Alec and me to
change places, that’s all.”

Alec said, “Oh,” and went to sit beside Mrs. Forsythe. Alistair sat at
the drawing table. Tiny put a paw up on it, poked at the large tablet of
paper. Alistair looked at him curiously, then tore off the top sheet.
Tiny nudged a pencil with his nose.

Then they waited. Somehow, no one wanted to speak. Perhaps no one could,
but there seemed to be no reason to try. And gradually a tension built
up in the room. Tiny stood stiff and rapt in the center of the room. His
eyes glazed, and when he finally keeled over limply, no one went to him.

Alistair picked up the pencil slowly. Watching her hand, Alec was
reminded of the movement of the pointer on a ouija board. The pencil
traveled steadily, in small surges, to the very top of the paper and
hung there. Alistair’s face was quite blank.

After that no one could say what happened, exactly. It was as if their
eyes had done what their voices had done. They could see, but they did
not care to. And Alistair’s pencil began to move. Something, somewhere,
was directing her mind—not her hand. Faster and faster her pencil flew,
and it wrote what was later to be known as the Forsythe Formulae.

There was no sign then, of course, of the furore that they would cause,
of the millions of words of conjecture that were written when it was
discovered that the girl who wrote them could not possibly have had the
mathematical background to write them. They were understood by no one at
first, and by very few people ever. Alistair certainly did not know what
they meant.

An editorial in a popular magazine came startlingly close to the true
nature of the formulae when it said: “The Forsythe Formulae, which
describe what the Sunday supplements call the ‘Something-for-Nothing
Clutch,’ and the drawing that accompanies them, signify little to the
layman. As far as can be deter-mined, the formulae are the description
and working principles of a device. It appears to be a power plant of
sorts, and if it is ever understood, atomic power will go the way of
gaslights.

“A sphere of energy is enclosed in a shell made of neutron-absorbing
material. This sphere has inner and outer ‘layers.’ A shaft passes
through the sphere. Apparently a magnetic field must be rotated about
the outer casing of the device. The sphere of energy aligns itself with
this field. The inner sphere rotates with the outer one and has the
ability to turn the shaft. Unless the mathematics used are disproved—and
no one seems to have come anywhere near doing that, unorthodox as they
are—the aligning effect between the rotating field and the two
concentric spheres, as well as the shaft, is quite independent of any
load. In other words, if the original magnetic field rotates at 3000
r.p.m., the shaft will rotate at 3000 r.p.m., even if there is only 1/16
horsepower turning the field while there is 10,000 braking stress on the
shaft.

“Ridiculous? Perhaps. And perhaps it is no more so than the apparent
impossibility of IS watts of energy pouring into the antenna of a radio
station, and nothing coming down. The key to the whole problem is in the
nature of those self-contained spheres of force inside the shell. Their
power is apparently inherent, and consists of an ability to align, just
as the useful property of steam is an ability to expand. If, as is
suggested by Reinhardt in his ‘Usage of the Symbol β in the Forsythe
Formulae,’ these spheres are nothing but stable concentrations of pure
binding energy, we have here a source of power beyond the wildest dreams
of mankind. Whether or not we succeed in building such devices, it
cannot be denied that whatever their mysterious source, the Forsythe
Formulae are an epochal gift to several sciences, including, if you
like, the art of philosophy.”

After it was over, and the formulae written, the terrible tension
lifted. The three humans sat in their happy coma, and the dog lay
senseless on the rug. Mrs. Forsythe was the first to move, standing up
abruptly. “Well!” she said.

It seemed to break a spell. Everything was quite normal. No hang-overs,
no sense of strangeness, no fear. They stood looking wonderingly at the
mass of minute figures.

“I don’t know,” murmured Alistair, and the phrase covered a world of
meaning. Then, “Alec—that casting. We’ve got to get, it done. We’ve just
got to, no matter what it costs us!”

“I’d like to,” said Alec. “Why do we have to?”

She waved toward the drawing table. “We’ve been given that.”

“You don’t say!” said Mrs. Forsythe. “And what is that?”

Alistair put her hand to her head, and a strange, unfocused look came
into her eyes. That look was the only part of the whole affair that ever
really bothered Alec. It was a place she had gone to, a little bit; and
he knew that no matter what happened, he would never be able to go there
with her.

She said, “He’s been...talking to me, you know. You do know that, don’t
you? I’m not guessing, Alec—Mum.”

“I believe you, chicken,” her mother said softly. “What are you trying
to say?”

“I got it in concepts. It isn’t a thing you can repeat, really. But the
idea is that he couldn’t give us any thing. His ship is completely
functional, and there isn’t anything he can exchange for what he wants
us to do. But he has given us something of great value...” Her voice
trailed off; she seemed to listen to something for a moment. “Of value
in several ways. A new science, a new approach to attack the science.
New tools, new mathematics.”

“But what is it? What can it do? And how is it going to help us pay for
the casting?” asked Mrs. Forsythe.

“It can’t, immediately,” said Alistair decisively. “It’s too big. We
don’t even know what it is. Why are you arguing? Can’t you understand
that he can’t give us any gadgetry? That we haven’t his techniques,
materials, and tools, and so we couldn’t make any actual machine he
suggested? He’s done the only thing he can; he’s given us a new science,
and tools to take it apart.”

“That I know,” said Alec gravely. “Well, indeed. I felt that. And I—I
trust him. Do you, ma’am?”

“Yes, of course. I think he’s—people. I think he has a sense of humor
and a sense of justice,” said Mrs. Forsythe firmly. “Let’s get our heads
together. We ought to be able to scrape it up some way. And why
shouldn’t we? Haven’t we three got something to talk about for the rest
of our lives?”

And their heads went together.

 

This is the letter that arrived two months later in St. Croix.

Honey-lamb,

Hold on to your seat. It’s all over.

The casting arrived. I missed you more than ever, but when you have to
go—and you know I’m glad you went! Anyway, I did as you indicated,
through Tiny, before you left. The men who rented me the boat and ran it
for me thought I was crazy, and said so. Do you know that once we were
out on the river with the casting, and Tiny started whuffing and
whimpering to tell me we were on the right spot, and I told the men to
tip the casting over the side, they had the colossal nerve to insist on
opening the crate? Got quite nasty about it. Didn’t want to be a party
to any dirty work. It was against my principles, but I let them, just to
expedite matters. They were certain there was a body in the box! When
they saw what it was, I was going to bend my umbrelly over their silly
heads, but they looked so funny I couldn’t do a thing but roar with
laughter. That was when the man said I was crazy.

Anyhow, over the side it went, into the river. Made a lovely splash.
About a minute later I got the loveliest feeling—I wish I could describe
it to you. I was sort of overwhelmed by a feeling of utter satisfaction,
and gratitude, and, oh, I don’t know. I just felt good, all over. I
looked at Tiny, and he was trembling. I think he felt it, too. I’d call
it a thank you, on a grand psychic scale. I think you can rest assured
that Tiny’s monster got what it wanted.

But that wasn’t the end of it. I paid off the boatmen and started up the
bank. Something made me stop and wait, and then go back to the water’s
edge.

It was early evening, and very still. I was under some sort of
compulsion, not an unpleasant thing, but an unbreakable one. I sat down
on the river wall and watched the water. There was no one around—the
boat had left—except one of those snazzy Sunlounge cruisers anchored a
few yards out. I remember how still it was, because there was a little
girl playing on the deck of the yacht, and I could hear her footsteps as
she ran about.

Suddenly I noticed something in the water. I suppose I should have been
frightened, but somehow I wasn’t at all. Whatever the thing was, it was
big and gray and slimy and quite shapeless. And somehow, it seemed to be
the source of this aura of well-being and protectiveness that I felt. It
was staring at me. I knew it was before I saw that it had an eye—a big
one, with something whirling inside of it. I don’t know. I wish I could
write. I wish I had the power to tell you what it was like. I know that
by human standards it was infinitely revolting. If this was Tiny’s
monster, I could understand its being sensitive to the revulsion it
might cause. And wrongly, for I felt to the core that the creature was
good.

It winked at me. I don’t mean blinked. It winked. And then everything
happened at once.

The creature was gone, and in seconds there was a disturbance in the
water by the yacht. Something gray and wet reached up out of the river,
and I saw it was going for that little girl. Only a tyke—about three,
she was. Red hair just like yours. And it thumped that child in the
small of the back just enough to knock her over into the river.

And can you believe it? I just sat there watching and said never a word.
It didn’t seem right to me that that baby could be struggling in the
water. But it didn’t seem wrong, either!

Well, before I could get my wits together. Tiny was off the wall like a
hairy bullet and streaking through the water. I have often wondered why
his feet are so big; I never will again. The hound is built like the
lower half of a paddle wheel! In two shakes he had the baby by the
scruff of the neck and was bringing her back to me. No one had seen that
child get pushed, Alistair! No one but me. But there was a man on the
yacht who must have seen her fall. He was all over the deck, roaring
orders and getting in the way of things, and by the time he had his
wherry in the water, Tiny had reached me with the little girl. She
wasn’t frightened, either, she thought it was a grand joke! Wonderful
youngster.

So the man came ashore, all gratitude and tears, and wanted to
gold-plate Tiny or something. Then he saw me. “That your dog?” I said it
was my daughter’s. She was in St. Croix on her honeymoon. Before I could
stop him, he had a checkbook out and was scratching away at it. He said
he knew my kind. Said he knew I’d never accept a thing for myself, but
wouldn’t refuse something for my daughter. I enclose the check. Why he
picked a sum like thirteen thousand I’ll never know. Anyhow, I know
it’ll be a help to you, and since the money really comes from Tiny’s
monster, I’m sure you’ll use it. I suppose I can confess now. The idea
that letting Alec put up the money—even though he had to clean out his
savings and mortgage his estate—would be all right if he were one of the
family, because then he’d have you to help him make it all back
again—well, that was all my inspiration. Sometimes, though, watching
you, I wonder if I really had to work so all-fired hard to get you two
married to each other.

Well, I imagine that closes the business of Tiny’s monster. There are a
lot of things we’ll probably never know. I can guess some things,
though. It could communicate with a dog but not with a human, unless it
half killed it-self trying. Apparently a dog is telepathic with humans
to a degree, though it probably doesn’t understand a lot of what it
gets. I don’t speak French, but I could probably transcribe French
phonetically well enough so a Frenchman could read it. Tiny was
transcribing that way. The monster could “send” through him and control
him completely. It no doubt indoctrinated the dog—if I can use the
term—the day old Debbil took him up the waterline. And when the monster
caught, through Tiny, the mental picture of you when Dr. Schwellenbach
mentioned you, it went to work through the dog to get you working on its
problem. Mental pictures—that’s probably what the monster used. That’s
how Tiny could tell one book from another without being able to read.
You visualize everything you think about. What do you think? I think
that mine’s as good a guess as any.

You might be amused to learn that last night all the compasses in this
neighborhood pointed west for a couple of hours! ‘By, now, chillun. Keep
on being happy.

Love and love, and a kiss for Alec,

Mum

P.S. Is St. Croix really a nice place to honeymoon? Jack—he’s the fellow
who signed the check—is getting very sentimental. He’s very like your
father. A widower, and—oh, I don’t know. Says fate, or something,
brought us together. Said he hadn’t planned to take a trip upriver with
his granddaughter, but something drove him to it. He can’t imagine why
he anchored just there. Seemed a good idea at the time. Maybe it was
fate. He is very sweet. I wish I could forget that wink I saw in the
water.

 



A WAY HOME


WHEN PAUL RAN AWAY FROM HOME, he met no one and saw nothing all the way
to the highway. The highway swept sudden and wide from the turn by
Keeper’s Rise, past the blunt end of the Township Road, and narrowed off
to a distant pinpoint pricking at the horizon. After a time Paul could
see the car.

It was new and long and it threw down its snout a little as the driver
braked, and when it stopped beside him it seesawed easily, once, on its
big soft springs.

The driver was a large man, large and costly, with a gray Stetson and a
dove-colored topcoat made of something that did not crease in the bend
of his arms but rolled and folded instead. The woman beside him had a
broad brow and a pointed chin. Her skin had peach shadings, but was
deeply tanned, and her hair was the red gold called “straw color” by a
smith as he watches his forge. She smiled at the man and she smiled at
Paul almost the same way.

“Hi, son,” the man said. “This is old Township Road?”

“Yes, sir,” said Paul, “it sure is.”

“Figured it was,” said the man. “A feller don’t forget.”

“Reckon you don’t,” said Paul.

“Haven’t seen the old town in twenty years,” said the man. “I guess it
ain’t changed much.”

“These old places don’t change much,” said Paul with scorn.

“Oh, they ain’t so bad to come back to,” said the man. “Hate to get
chained down in one all my life, though.”

“Me too,” agreed Paul. “You from around here?”

“Why sure,” said the man. “My name’s Roudenbush. Any more Roudenbushes
around here that you know of, boy?”

“Place is full of ’em,” said Paul. “Hey, you’re not the Roudenbush kid
that ran away twenty years ago?”

“The very one,” said the man. “What happened after I left?”

“Why, they talk about you to this day,” said Paul. “Your mother sickened
and died, and your pa got up in meetin’ a month after you left an’ asked
forgiveness for treatin’ you so mean.”

“Poor old feller,” said the man. “I guess it was a little rough of me to
run out like that. But he asked for it.”

“I bet he did.”

“This is my wife,” said the man.

The woman smiled at Paul again. She did not speak. Paul could not think
up what kind of a voice she might have. She leaned forward and opened up
the glove compartment. It-was cram-full of chocolate-covered cherries.

“Been crazy about these ever since I was a kid” said the man. “Help
yourself. I got ten pounds of them in the back.” He leaned into the
leather cushions, took out a silver cigar case, put a cigar between his
teeth, and applied a lighter that flamed up like a little bonfire in his
hand. “Yes, sir,” said the man. “I got two more cars back in the city,
and a tuxedo suit with shiny lapels I made a killing in the stock
market, and now I’m president of a railroad. I’ll be getting back there
this evening, after I give the folks in the old town a treat.”

Paul had a handful of chocolate-covered cherries. “Gee,” he said. After
that he walked on down the highway. The cherries disappeared and the man
and the lady and the car all disappeared but that didn’t matter. “It’ll
be like that,” said young Paul Roudenbush. “It’ll be just like that.”
Then, “I wonder what the lady’s name’ll be.”

A quarter of a mile down the pike was the turn-off to the school, and
there was the railroad crossing with its big X on a pole that he always
read RAIL CROSSING ROAD. The forenoon freight was bowling down the
grade, screaming two longs, a short, and a long. When he was a kid, two
years or so back, Paul used to think it saluted him:
Paul...Roud...n’Bush-h-h...with the final sibilant made visible in the
plume of steam on the engine’s iron shoulder. Paul trotted up to the
crossing and stood just where the first splintered plank met the road
surface. Engine, tender, Pennsylvania, Nickel Plate, T. & N. O.,
Southern, Southern, Pennsylvania, Père Marquette, Canadian Pacific. Cars
from all over: hot places, cold places, far places. Automobiles,
automobiles, cattle, tank. Tank tank cattle. Refrigerator, refrigerator,
automobiles, caboose. Caboose with a red flag flying, and a glimpse at
the window of a bull-necked trainman shaving, suds on his jowls like a
mad dog. Then the train was a dwindling rectangle on the track, and on
its top was the silhouette of a brakeman, leaning easily into wind and
velocity, walking on top of the boxcars.

With the train in one ear and dust in the other, Paul faced the highway.
A man stood at the other side of the tracks. Paul gaped at him.

He was wearing ‘an old brown jacket with a gray sheepskin collar, and
blue dungarees. These he was dusting off with long weather-beaten hands,
one of which—the right—looked like a claw. There was no ring finger or
little finger, and a third of the palm’s breadth was gone. From the side
of the middle finger to the side of the wrist, the hand was neatly
sealed with a type of flexible silvery scar-tissue.

He looked up from his dusting at Paul. “Hi, bub.” Either he had a beard
or he badly needed a shave. Paul could see the cleft in his square chin,
though. The man had eyes as pale as the color of water poured into a
glass after the milk had been drunk.

Paul said, “Hi,” still looking at the hand. The man asked him what that
town was over there in the hollow, and Paul told him. He knew now what
the man was—one of those fabulous characters who ride on freight trains
from place to place. Ride the rods. Catch a fast freight out of Casey,
which was K.C., which was Kansas City. They had been everywhere and done
everything, these men, and they had a language all their own. Handouts
and line bulls, Chi and mulligan and grab a rattler to Nollins.

The mail squinched up his eyes at the town, as if he were trying to
drive his gaze through the hill and see more. “The old place hasn’t
growed none,” he said, and spat.

Paul spat too. “Never will,” he said.

“You from there?”

“Yup.”

“Me too,” said the man surprisingly.

“Gosh,” said Paul. “You don’t look like you came from around here.”

The man crossed the single track to Paul’s side. “I guess I don’t. I
been a lot of places since I left here.”

“Where you been?” asked Paul.

The man looked into Paul’s open eyes, and through them to Paul’s open
credulousness. “All over the world,” he said. “All over this country on
freights, and all over the oceans on ships.” He bared his right forearm.
“Look there.” And sure enough he had a tattoo.

“Women,” said the man, flexing his claw so that the tattoo writhed.
“That’s what I like.” He closed one pale eye, pushed his mouth sidewise
under it, and clucked a rapid chick-chick from his pale cheek.

Paul wet his lips, spat again, and said, “Yeah. Oh, boy.”

The man laughed. He had bad teeth. “You’re like I was. Wasn’t room
enough in that town for me.”

“Me either,” said Paul. “I ain’t going back there no more.”

“Oh, you’ll go back. You’ll want to look it over, and ask a few
questions around, and find out what happened to your old gals, and see
how dead everything is, so’s you can go away again knowin’ you done
right to leave in the first place. This here’s my second trip back.
Seems like every time I go through this part o’ the world I just got to
drop by here and let the old burg give me a couple laughs.” He turned
his attention right around and looked outward again. “You really are
headin’ out, bub?”

“Headin’ out,” nodded Paul. He liked the sound of that. “Headin’ out,”
he said again.

“Where you bound?”

“The city,” Paul said, “unless I hit somethin’ I like better ‘fore I get
there.”

The man considered him. “Hey. Got any money?”

Paul shook his head cautiously. He had two dollars and ninety-two cents.
The man seemed to make some decision; he shrugged. “Well, good luck,
bub. More places you see, more of a man you’ll be. Woman told me that
once in Sacramento.”

“The—oh!” said Paul. Approaching the grade crossing was a maroon coupe.
“It’s Mr. Sherman!’

“Who’s he?”

“The sheriff. He’ll be out lookin’ for me!

“Sheriff! Me for the brush. Don’t tag, you little squirt! Go the other
way!” and he dived down the embankment and disappeared into the bushes.

Frightened by the man’s sudden harshness, confused by the necessity for
instant action, Paul shuffled for a moment, almost dancing, and then ran
to the other side. Flat on his stomach in a growth of fireweed, he
stopped breathing and peered at the road. The coupe slowed, all but
stopped. Paul closed his eyes in terror. Then he heard the grate of
gears and the rising whine as the car pulled over the tracks in second
gear and moaned on up the highway.

Paul waited five minutes, his fear leaving him exactly as fast as his
sweat dried. Then he emerged and hurried along the highway, keeping a
sharp watch ahead for the sheriff’s returning car. He saw no sign of the
man with the claw. But then, he hadn’t really expected to.

It could be like that, he thought. Travel this old world over. Gramps
used to say that men like that had an itching foot. Paul’s feet itched a
little, if he thought about it. Hurt a little, too. He could come back
years from now with a tattoo and a mutilated hand. Folk’d really take
notice. The stories he could tell! “I run down the bank, see, to haul
this tomato out o’ th’ drink. She was yellin’ her blond head off. No
sooner got my hooks on her when clomp, a alligator takes off part o’ me
hand. I didn’t mind none. Not when I carried this babe up the bank.” He
shut one eye, pushed his mouth sideways, and clucked. The sound,
somehow, reminded him of chocolate-covered cherries...

Another half mile, and the country became more open. He flicked his eyes
from side to side as he trudged. First sign of that maroon coupe and
he’d have to fade. Sheriff! Me for the brush! He felt good. He could
keep ahead of the law. Bet your life. Go where you want to go, do what
you want to do, come back for a laugh every once in a while. That was
better, even, than a big car and a tuxedo suit. Women. A smooth-faced
one in the car beside you or, chick-chick, women all over, Sacramento
and every place, to tell you what a man you are, because of all the
places you’ve been. Yup, that was it.

There was a deep drone from overhead. Paul looked up and saw the
plane—one of the private planes that based at the airport forty miles
away. Planes were no novelty, but Paul never saw one without an
expressed wish that something would happen—not necessarily a crash,
though that wouldn’t be bad. but much rather something that would bring
the plane down for a forced landing, so he could run over and see the
pilot get out, and maybe talk to him or even help him fix the trouble.
“Let me know next time you’re at the field,” the pilot would say.

Paul sloped, stopped, then went to the shoulder and sat down with his
feet in the dry ditch. He watched the plane. It dipped a wing and
circled, went off and came lower, made a run over the meadow. Paul
thought he was going to—well, of course, he was going to land!

The wheels touched, kicked up a puff of yellow dust that whisked out of
existence in the prop-wash. They touched again and held the earth; the
tail came down, bounced a little, and then the plane was carrying its
wings instead of being carried. The wings were orange and the fuselage
was blue, and it was glossy in the sun. The wings wobbled slightly as
the plane taxied over the lumpy meadow, and Paul knew that if he held
out his arms and wobbled them like that he would feel it in his
shoulders.

The motor barked, and the propeller blades became invisible as the pilot
braked one wheel and turned the ship in its own length. The propeller,
in profile, was a ghostly band and then a glass disc as the plane swung
toward Paul. It snorted and Wobbled across the meadow until it was
within twenty feet of the fence and the ditch. Then, with a roar, it
swung broadside to him and the sound of the motor dwindled to an easy
pwap-tick-tickety-pwap, while the pilot did knowledgeable things at the
controls. Paul could see him in there, plain as day, through the cabin
doors. The plane was beautiful; standing still it looked as if it were
going two hundred miles an hour. The windshield swept right back over
the pilot’s head. It was fine.

The pilot opened the door and vaulted to the ground. “Glory be! You’d
think they’d have a field built in town after all these years.”

“They never will,” said Paul. “Nice job you got there.”

The pilot, pulling off a pair of high-cuffed gloves, looked briefly at
the plane and grinned. He was very clean and had wide shoulders and
practically no hips. He wore a good soft leather jacket, and tight
breeches. “Know anybody in town, son?”

“Everybody, I guess.”

“Well, now. I can get all the news from you before I go on in.”

“Say—ain’t you Paul Roudenbush?”

Paul froze. He hadn’t said that. There were sudden icy cramps in the
backs of his knees. The plane vanished. The pilot vanished. Paul sat
with his feet in the dry ditch and slowly turned his head.

A maroon coupé stood by the ditch. Its door was open, and there, one
foot on the running-board, was Mr. Sherman. Sheriff! Me for the brush!

Instead, he licked his lips and said, “Hi, Mr. Sherman.”

“My,” said Mr. Sherman, “you give me a turn, you did. Saw you sitting
there so still, figured you’d been hit by a car or some such.”

“I’m all right,” said Paul faintly. He rose. Might as well get it over
with. “I was just...thinkin’, I guess.”

Thinking—and now he was caught, and the thoughts raced through him like
the cars of the forenoon freight; thoughts from hot places, cold places,
far places. Stock market, car, claw claw plane. Women, women, cigarette
lighter, landing field. Thoughts that were real, thoughts that he made
up; they barrelled on through him, with a roar and a swirl, and left him
standing, facing the highway and Mr. Sherman, who had caught him.

“Thinking, eh? Well, I’m right relieved,” said Mr. Sherman. He got back
in the car, slammed the door, stepped on the starter.

“Mr. Sherman, ain’t you—”

“Ain’t I what, son?”

“Nothin’, Mr. Sherman. Nothin’ at all.”

“You’re a weird one,” said Mr. Sherman, shaking his head. “Hey, I’m
heading back into town. Want a lift? It’s near eating time.”

“No, thanks,” said Paul immediately and with great sincerity. Paul
watched the maroon coupe move off, his mind racing. The car was going
into town. Without him. Mr. Sherman did not know he was running away.
Why not? Well; they hadn’t missed him yet. Unless...unless they didn’t
care whether he came back or not. No. No, that couldn’t be! The car
would go right past his house, soon’s it got in town. Wasn’t much of a
house. In it, though, was his own room. Small, but absolutely his own.

The trouble with the other ways to go back, it took time to make a
killing in the stock market and get married. It took time to acquire a
plane. It probably took quite a while to get part of your hand cut off.
But this way—

Suddenly he was in the road screaming, “Mr. Sherman! Mr. Sherman!”

Mr. Sherman didn’t hear him but he saw him in the rear-view mirror. He
stopped and backed up a bit. Paul climbed in, gasped his thanks, and sat
still, working on his wind. He got it all back just about the time they
turned into the Township Road.

Mr. Sherman glanced abruptly at the boy. “Paul.”

“Yes, sir.”

“I just had a thought, You, ‘way out there on the pike; were you running
away?”

Paul said, “No.” His eyes were more puzzled than anything else. “I was
coming back,” he said.

THE END

 



REQUEST FROM THE PUBLISHER


[img2.jpg]

Thank you so much for reading our book, we hope you really enjoyed it.

As you probably know, many people look at the reviews before they decide
to purchase a book.

If you liked the book, could you please take a minute to leave a review
with your feedback?

60 seconds is all I’m asking for, and it would mean the world to us.

Thank you so much,

Pickle Partners Publishing

 
