[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon with his third wife, Marion Sturgeon. Halloween, 1961
or 1962, in the Streibel House, Woodstock, New York.

[]

Copyright © 2002 the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1954, 1955 by Theodore Sturgeon and the
Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. All rights reserved. No portion of
this book, except for brief review, may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without written
permission of the publisher.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

_Bright Segment_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native
Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are
to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Sturgeon, Theodore.
      Bright segment / Theodore Sturgeon; edited by Paul Williams;
foreword by William Tenn.
          p. cm. — (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon; v. 8)
      eISBN: 978-1-58394-752-4
      1. Science fiction, American.  I. Williams, Paul, 1948–
II.  Title.
      PS3569.T875 A6 2002 vol.8
      813′.54—dc21

2002005447

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the eighth of a series of volumes that will collect all of
his short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel. The
volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized chronologically
by order of composition (insofar as it can be determined). This eighth
volume contains stories written in 1953, 1954, and 1955. The last two
(short-short) stories were written in 1946 and 1947, and are out of
chronological sequence because copies of them have only recently been
found.

Preparation of each of these volumes would not be possible without the
hard work and invaluable participation of Noël Sturgeon, Debbie Notkin,
and our publishers, Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. I would also
like to thank, for their significant assistance with this volume,
William F. Seabrook, Phil Klass, the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust,
Marion Sturgeon, Jayne Williams, Ralph Vicinanza, Jennifer Privateer,
Paula Morrison, Alan Bostick, Eric Weeks, Robin Sturgeon, Kim
Charnovsky, Cindy Lee Berryhill, T. V. Reed, and all of you who have
expressed your interest and support.

BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON

_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To_ _Marry_ Medusa] (1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the_ _Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore_ _Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget]_, _and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News …_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (2010)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

Editor’s Note

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword by William Tenn

_Cactus Dance_

_The Golden Helix_

_Extrapolation_

_Granny Won’t Knit_

_To Here and the Easel_

_When You’re Smiling_

_Bulkhead_

_The Riddle of Ragnarok_

_Twink_

_Bright Segment_

_So Near the Darkness_

Story Notes by Paul Williams

_Clockwise_

_Smoke!_



FOREWORD



STURGEON, THE IMPROBABLE MAN


By Philip Klass (William Tenn)

I first met Ted Sturgeon in 1939 in an all-night cafeteria in New York
City. The place was on West 57th Street between Eighth Avenue and
Broadway, and around 2 A.M. served as a hangout for what might be called
the midtown Bohemians. These were indigent writers and artists and
actors and students, as well as many of the orators from Columbus
Circle. The Circle, in its very close proximity to Central Park, was
then pretty much the American version of the London’s debaters’ heaven,
Hyde Park.

I met his slightly older brother, Peter, at the same time. I called
Peter, who had just returned, utterly disillusioned and spent, from
fighting on the Loyalist side in the Spanish Civil War, I called Peter
“the real Sturgeon.” I called Ted “the improbable Sturgeon,” why I
didn’t know right then. But as I got to know him, I realized my original
instinct had been exactly right.

My friend Rouben Samberg brought me over to meet him. Rouben was a very,
very indigent painter who was just then about to give up the easel for
the camera and was thereby to find enormous riches in advertising. He
knew I was trying to write science fiction.

“Listen, Phil,” he said, grabbing my arm and pointing me at a table in
the rear of the cafeteria. “Your ambition is very clear and simple: You
aspire to starve for art in the pulps. I want you to meet someone who’s
already made it. This is Ted Sturgeon, a successful, selling pulp
writer. He’s starving.”

I shook hands with Ted and his brother, Peter, sitting beside him. Peter
was thin and gloomy, prematurely slightly bald and slightly gray. Ted
was thin and vibrant, with dancing eyes under a head of surprisingly
curly hair.

Both of them had half-filled cups of coffee in front of them, cups which
they raised to their mouths from time to time but from which they were
careful not to drink. (The deal was simple: If you had some coffee left
in the cup, you were still a customer who was finishing his meal and the
management would not ask you to leave the steam-heated cafeteria and go
outside into the ice and snow of 57th Street. Therefore I had carried my
own half-filled cup of coffee over to the Sturgeon table, and—as I sat
down—I carefully put it in front of me as a token of cafeteria
respectability.)

While Peter spoke gloomily and bitterly of his experiences in Spain (he
had gone there to fight the fascist Franco on behalf of the Spanish
Republic, had become a POUMist, and therefore had been treated with
careful viciousness by the Stalinist-dominated Loyalists), Ted lifted
the neck of a nonexistent guitar with his left hand and began fingering
its chords. After a while, he picked up an imaginary pick with the other
hand and carefully and intently played the imaginary guitar. And then,
as Peter spoke of specific battles and intricate left-wing Spanish
politics, Ted, still strumming the imaginary guitar, began singing in a
very low voice, providing an unmistakable musical background to Peter’s
what-should-I-call-it?—to Peter’s _documentary_.

He sang “Los Quatros Generales,” the original Spanish version of a song
much sung in those days by intellectuals who saw themselves as on the
side of the hard-pressed Loyalist government of Spain, the government
fighting for its very existence against Francisco Franco and the powers
of fascism. I had only heard it up to then in its English version, “The
Four Insurgent Generals.”

When Ted had finished singing—still in a very, very low voice, for why
irritate the management or the busboys of the cafeteria?—and Peter had
paused in his tale of a bloody night along the Ebro, I asked Ted with a
bit of a chuckle why he didn’t get himself a real guitar.

“I have a real guitar,” he said. “But it’s in hock right now. If
Campbell buys my new story for _Unknown_, I’ll get it out. Then you must
come and visit me, and I’ll play for you.”

He phoned me two weeks later and told me the story had sold. He gave me
his address and asked me to come to his furnished room that evening. By
then I had read his first sale to _Astounding_, “Ether Breather,” and
not thought too much of it. But I was terribly impressed with the fact
that he was truly a published writer, and, above all, a published writer
in my favorite magazine, Street & Smith’s _Astounding_.

He played a lot of wonderful stuff for me, but I’m afraid I was a wee
bit snotty about his performance. After all, I told myself, I had
recently heard both Leadbelly and Woody Guthrie in the same room, taking
turns: Leadbelly on his twelve-string guitar, playing his own “It’s a
Bourgeois Town”; Guthrie in his cowboy hat, playing his own “Talking
Dust Bowl.”

This, of course, was years before Sturgeon came back from a disastrous
couple of years in the tropics with a quiverful of wonderful songs which
I and others would beg him to play again and again at parties and
science fiction conventions.

One of the songs he played that night, as cockroaches marched up and
down the walls of his furnished room, was something he had written to a
girl he’d just met, celebrating in verse after verse her _“deux yeux si
bleu.”_ Then he played her reply, a delightful little piece in which she
thanked him for the song but mused over the cruel _dommage_ that her
eyes were _“brun pas bleu.”_

Very definitely the improbable Sturgeon, I thought.

No, back then I was not all that impressed with Sturgeon as a guitarist,
but when it came to sheer writing, it was a totally different matter.

He showed me manuscripts on which he was working for John Campbell’s
_Unknown_, the sister magazine of _Astounding_.

He showed me early versions and first drafts of “Shottle Bop” and
“Yesterday Was Monday” and “It.” I read them and grew more and more
impressed.

He told me what he had been living on before selling work to Campbell
and after having been beached as a seaman: short-short stories to the
McClure daily newspaper syndicate for which the pay was five dollars
(_five dollars!)_ … on publication. (True, money went a lot farther
then, but after he had paid his room rent of four dollars a week, indeed
there was not very far at all left to go.)

Then he asked me what kind of ideas I had been trying to develop into
science fiction or fantasy stories. He listened, and broke my plots down
into their constituent elements, discussing them first in terms of
craft, then in terms of art. “You must always begin with craft,” he
cautioned, “but you must always move to art. Else why bother?”

It is no overstatement to say that my lips were dry with awe by the time
I left.

Then there were three and a half years of war for me, and marriage and a
family and a stint in construction work in the tropics for Ted. We lost
touch with each other until I read a published letter by him that gave
his current address on Eighth Avenue in Manhattan. By that time I had
read his “Killdozer,” and—to me, even more important—his “Microcosmic
God.” I looked him up, determined not to show the enormous admiration
which I was beginning to feel for him as a writer.

He was delighted to learn that I had just sold my first story to John
Campbell. He read the manuscript in carbon, approved it (which even then
I felt was too nice of him), and asked what I was working on. I showed
him my latest and as yet unsold story, “Child’s Play.”

“It’s good, Phil,” he said. “Quite good. Listen, I’m also operating as a
literary agent these days. Would you like me to represent you?”

I told him I could think of nothing I’d like more. And so I became his
client, along with other struggling unknowns like James Blish, and Damon
Knight, and Judith Merril.

He was a very good agent, selling each of us to many more markets than
we’d ever have thought of for ourselves.

But more important, far more important than his agenting were his
critiques. The hours he spent discussing a character, a plot twist, a
goddam single sentence! I never had an agent like that afterwards, and
I’ve had many, ranging from quite poor to moderately superb. Ted, Ted
was pure gold.

He was a most rare, most improbable combination. He was a true artist
and poet who had an extraordinary amount of market savvy, unsurpassed in
any commercial writer or literary agent I’ve encountered since. Except
for a very brief period in his life when he wrote directly and only for
John Campbell of _Astounding_, he was incapable of doing more than five
consecutive sentences that were not literature—yet he was almost
indecently proud of the medium, pulp science fiction, in which he worked
and the statements which he felt only it could make.

When he asked Ray Bradbury to write an introduction to his first
collection of short stories, _Without Sorcery_, and Bradbury came up
with a piece praising Sturgeon’s work, but full of apologies about the
cheapness and absurdity of most science fiction, Ted sent the intro back
together with a letter that must have taken at least a quarter of an
inch of skin off the full length of Bradbury’s body. This letter, please
remember, was to a contemporary whose work Ted respected more than
anyone else’s in the science fiction of that period. Bradbury returned a
totally new introduction (note that in the publishing economy of that
day, he correctly had no expectation of being paid a thin dime for
either piece!) along with a beautifully written _mea culpa_. One of the
word-pictures Bradbury painted in that second introduction was a view of
Ted Sturgeon banging away at his typewriter as he sat under a gigantic
toadstool around which other, nontyping, elves and various strange small
creatures were romping merrily.

(And surely I will be pardoned for pointing out that today, individual
hardbound copies of _Without Sorcery_ bring many times more dollars than
Ted got for his total advance _and_ all his royalties on the book.)

All this, of course, was before Ted gave up his rather sizable agency,
presenting it to Scott Meredith for nothing but zilch and good will. He
always tended to be at his most improbable where his own finances were
concerned. It was before the brief spell that he worked at a huge salary
in the _Time-Life_ publications circulation division, where he left
behind him dozens of hilarious, coruscating anecdotes about his tenure
and his contributions. And it was before …

It was before he at last found a comfortable literary home in Horace
Gold’s _Galaxy_ and Tony Boucher’s _Magazine of Fantasy and Science
Fiction_—thus, before he was able to write stories that pleased him
completely (“The [Widget], the [Wadget] and Boff,” for example) and that
he felt were utterly his all the way through; it was before the novels
like _More Than Human_ and _The Dreaming Jewels_, where he could roam
freely through his improbable mind and flex his improbable literary
muscles.

And it was before—speaking of unlikely, improbable beauty—it was before
he met and married Marion and had his second set of offspring, the first
three of which were Robin, Tandy, and Noël (my wife, Fruma, when asked
at that time about his children, used to reply, “He has one of each”).

It was also long, long before I broke up with a woman after a two-year
relationship, and left my low-rent-despite-the-housing-shortage
apartment to her, as a gentleman should. And Ted, hearing of this and
knowing that I had barely the price of a single day’s hotel room in my
pocket, insisted on turning over his just-acquired and newly decorated
East Village flat to me. (“But Ted, where will you sleep?” “Oh, I have
friends. Here and there.”)

Also, and finally, it was before we quarreled—over some inconsequential
matter like politics or life and death—and didn’t see each other for
far, far too many years.

My improbable friend, Theodore Hamilton Sturgeon, died in 1985. We, the
world, were left with nothing but genuine probability and damn grim
reality.

It is so much less than we had had.



CACTUS DANCE


THE BOOK, THEY DECIDED, would bring Fortley Grantham back East if
nothing else would, and at first I’d agreed with them. Later, I didn’t
know. Later still, I hardly cared, for it grew heavy in my pack. Once,
somewhere in the desert between Picacho and Vekol, two prospectors found
me squatted on the scorching sand, heat-mad, dreaming out loud. It
wouldn’t do for them to explain to me about the puncture in my canteen;
I insisted that the book had soaked up my water as I walked, and I could
get it back by wringing it out. I still have the book, and on it still
are my tooth-marks.

By train and stage and horse and mule I went, and, when I had to, on
foot. I cursed the Territories in general and Arizona in particular. I
cursed Prescott and Phoenix and Maricopa; Sacaton on the Gila River
Reservation and Snowflake on Silver Creek. At Brownell in the Quijotas I
learned that William Howard Taft had signed the enabling act that would
make a state of that hellish country, and thereafter I cursed him too.
From time to time I even cursed myself and the stubborn streak which ran
counter to comfort and career and intelligence itself—it would have been
so simple, so wise, to go back to the green lawns of the Institute, the
tinkle of teacups, to soft polite laughter and the coolth of ivied
libraries.

But most of all, far and away most of all, from his books to his beard,
from his scalp to his scholarship, I cursed Fortley Grantham who had
leapt from the altitude of the Pudley Chair in Botany into this
dehydrated wilderness. He could have died under the wheels of a
brewery-dray, and I’d have wept and honored him. He might have risen to
be Dean, perhaps even to Chairman. Failing these things, if he felt he
must immolate himself in this special pocket of Hell, why, _why_ could
he not resign?

But no, not Fortley Grantham. He simply stayed out west, drifting,
faintly radiating rumors that he was alive. If mail ever reached him, he
never answered it. If he intended to return, he informed no one. He
would not come back, he would not be decently dead, he would not resign.

And I wanted that Chair. I had worked for it. I had earned it. What was
I to do—wait for some sort of Enoch Arden divorce between Grantham and
the Chair, so that he would be legally dead and the Chair legally
vacant? No, I must find him or his grave, bring him back or prove him
dead.

His last letter had come from Silver King, and at Silver King they told
me he’d gone to Florence. He had not, and I was tired and sick when I
got there to learn that. A Mohave up from Arizola had seen him, though,
and from there the trail led along the Union Pacific to Red Rock and
then to the railhead at Silverbell.

Had it not been for a man of the cloth at Silverbell, a Reverend
Sightly, I’d have lost the trail altogether. But the good man told me,
with horror in his voice, of the orgies indulged in by the local
Indians, who sat in a ring around a fire gobbling mescal buttons and
having visions. I took the trouble to correct the fellow as to the
source of the narcotic, which comes from the peyotl and not from the
mescal at all, whereupon he grew positively angry with me—not, as I
first supposed, because I had found him in error, but because he took me
to be “that unholy scoundrel who has brought the gifts of science to aid
and abet the ignorant savage in his degraded viciousness.” When at last
I convinced him of the innocence of my presence and person, he
apologized and explained to me that a renegade botanist was loose in the
desert, finding the rare and fabled peyotl with unheard-of accuracy, and
trading the beastly stuff to whomever wanted it.

From that point on the trail was long and winding, but at least it was
clear. When I could, I enquired after Grantham, and when no one had
heard of Grantham I had merely to ask about the problem of obtaining
mescal buttons. Always there were stories of the white man who was not a
prospector nor a miner nor a drummer nor anything else but the purveyor
of peyotl. He was a tall, broad man with a red-and-silver beard and a
way of cocking his head to one side a bit when he spoke. He was
Grantham, all right—may the vultures gulp his eyeballs and die of it.

Between the Eagle Tails and Castle Dome is the head of Posas Valley, and
at its head is a filthy little oasis called Kofa. I confess I was happy
to see it. It was August, and the heat and the glare had put knobs like
knuckles in my sinus tissues; I could feel them grind together as I
breathed.

I was afoot, the spavined nag I had bought in Arlington having died in
New Water Pass. I had a burro for my pack and gear, and it was all she
could handle. She was old and purblind, and if she had left her strength
and durability behind with her youth, she had at least left her
stubbornness too. She carried the little she could and let me walk.

I could hardly have been more depressed. I had little money left, and
less hope. My canteen was a quarter-full of tepid mud which smelled
faintly of the dead horned toad I’d seen in the waterhole in the pass.
My feet hurt and my hipjoints creaked audibly as I plodded along. Half
silently I mumbled what I once facetiously had called my “Anthem for
Grantham,” a sort of chant which ran:

_ … I shall people his classroom with morons. I shall have him seduced
by his chambermaid and I shall report it to the Dean. I shall publicly
refute his contention that the_ Echinopsis _cacti are separate from the
genus_ Cereus. _I shall lock him in his rooms at banquet time on
Founder’s Day. I shall uproot his windowboxes and spread rumors about
him with the Alumni Association_ …

It was the only way I had left of cheering myself up.

For weeks now I had trailed the rumors of Grantham’s peyotl traffic
farther and farther from peyotl grounds. It was saguaro country here,
and all about they stretched their yearning, otherworldly arms out and
upward, as if in search for a lover who might forget their thorns. Down
the valley, westward, was a veritable forest of Dracenoideae, called
yucca hereabouts. I did not know if yucca and peyotl could coexist, and
I thought not. If not, my main method of trailing Grantham was lost.

In such hopeless depression I staggered into Kofa, which, primitive as
it was, afforded a chance of better company than my black thoughts and a
doddering burro. I knew better than to hope for a restaurant and so went
to the sole source of refreshment, the bar.

It seemed so dark inside, after the merciless radiance outside, that I
stood blinking like an owl for thirty seconds before I could orient
myself. At last I could locate the bar and deduce that a man stood
behind it.

I croaked out an order for a glass of milk, which the bartender greeted
with a thundering laugh and the quotation of a price so fantastic that I
was forced to order whiskey, which I despise. The fool’s nostrils spread
when I demanded water with the whiskey, but he said nothing as he poured
it from a stone jar.

I took the two glasses as far back in that ‘dobe cavern as I could get
from him, and slumped down into a chair. For a long moment there was
nothing in my universe but the feel of my lips in the water, which,
though alkaline, was wet and cool.

Only then, leaning back and breathing deeply, did I realize that someone
sat across the table from me. He cocked his head on one side and said,
“Well, well! If Mahomet won’t come to the mountain, the Institute brings
forth a mouse.”

“Dr. _Grantham!_”

He watched me for a moment and then laughed. It was the same laugh, the
deep rumble, the flash of strong white teeth which I used to envy so
much. His eyes opened after it and he leaned forward. “Better shut your
mouth now, sonny.”

I had not realized it was open. I shut it and felt it with my fingers
while I looked at him. He was in worn Levi’s and a faded shirt to which
had been sewn four or five extra pockets and a sort of shoulder cape
with its lower edge cut into a fringe in the buckskin style. His hair
and beard were untrimmed. His hands seemed stiff with yellowish calluses
in the palms, and they were indifferently clean. A broad strap hung over
one shoulder and across his chest to support a large leather pouch. He
was a far cry from Fortley Grantham, M.A., F.B.S., D.Sc., with lifetime
tenure of the Pudley Chair in Botany at the Institute; yet there was no
mistaking him.

“Big Horn!” he roared to the bartender. “Set ’em up here. This here’s a
perfessor from back East an’ we’re goin’ to have a faculty meetin’.”
That’s how he pronounced it—“perfessor.” He dealt me a stunning thump on
the left biceps. “Right, Chip?”

“Chip?” I looked behind me; there was no one there. And the bartender’s
name obviously was Big Horn. It penetrated that he was calling _me_
Chip. “You surely haven’t forgotten my name, Doctor.”

“I surely ain’t, Doctor,” he said mimicking my voice. He smiled
engagingly. “Everybody’s got two names,” he explained, “the name they’s
born with an’ the name I think they ought to have. The name you ought to
have, now, it’s Chip. There’s a little crittur lives in an’ out of the
rocks, sits up straight an’ looks surprised, holds up its two little
paws, an’ lets its front teeth hang out. Chipmunk, they call it back
East, though it’s a rock squirrel other places. Get me, Chip?”

I put both hands on the table and pressed my lips together. Big Horn
arrived just then and put more whiskey down before me. I said coldly,
“No, thank you.” Big Horn paid absolutely no attention to me, but walked
away leaving the whiskey where it was.

“Come on, climb down. This ain’t the hallowed halls.”

“That is the one thing I’m sure of,” I said haughtily.

He shook his head in pity. He looked down at his glass and his eyebrows
twitched. He made no attempt to say anything and I began to feel that
perhaps I, not he, should be making the overtures. I said, for want of
anything better, “I suppose ‘Big Horn’ is another of your appellations.”

He nodded. “To him it’s a sort of compliment.” He laughed. “Some people
carry their vanity in the damnedest places.”

I felt I should not pursue this, somehow. He tilted his head and said,
“You’re not jumpin’ salty because I call you Chip?”

“I don’t read a compliment into it.”

“Shucks, now, son—they’re real purty little animals!” He waved. “Drink
up now, an’ warm yoreself. I’m not insultin’ you. You wouldn’t be
wonderin’ about it if I did—I’d see to that. Don’t you understand, I was
callin’ you Chip—privately, I mean—from the minute I saw you, years
back.”

“I was beginning to think,” I said acidly, “that you had forgotten
everything that happened before you came to Arizona.”

“Never fear, colleague,” he intoned in precisely the voice that once
boomed through the lecture halls. “I can still distinguish a rhizome
from a tuber and a faculty tea from deep hypnosis.” Instantly he
reverted to this appalling new self. “I got a handle too. They call me
Buttons.”

“To what characteristic is that attributed?”

He looked at me admiringly. “I druther listen to that kind of talk than
a thirsty muleskinner cussin’.” He pulled at the thongs that tied down
the flap of his pouch, reached in, and tossed a handful of what seemed
to be small desiccated mushrooms to me.

I picked one up, squeezed it, turned it over, smelled it. “Lophophora.”

“Good boy,” he said sincerely. “Know which one?”

“Williamsii, I think.”

“Sharp as a sidewinder’s front fang,” he said, giving me another of
those buffets. “Hereabouts they’re mescal buttons.”

“Oh,” I said. “Oh yes. So they call you Buttons. You—uh—are rather
widely known in connection with this—uh—vegetable.”

He laughed. “I didn’t think a botanist ever used the word ‘vegetable.’ ”

I ignored this. I rose. “One moment, please. I think I can show you that
you have a wider reputation in this matter than you realize.”

He made as if to stop me but did not. I went out to my burro. She was
standing like a stone statue in the blazing sun, her upper lip just
touching the surface of the water in the horse-trough, breathing
water-vapor in patient ecstasy. I dug into my pack and wormed out the
book. Inside again, I placed it carefully by Grantham’s glass.

He looked at it, at me, then picked it up. Holding it high, he moved his
head back and his chin in with the gesture of a seaman forcing his
horizoned eyes to help with threading a needle.

“Journal of the Botanical Sciences,” he read. “Catalogue, Volume Four,
revised. 1910, huh? Right up to the minute. Oh bully.” He squinted.
“Cactaceae. Phyla and genera reclassified. Hey, Big Horn,” he roared,
“the perfessor here’s got reclassified genera.”

The bartender clucked sympathetically. Grantham leafed rapidly. “Nice.
Nice.”

“We thought you’d like it. Look up lophophora.”

He did. Suddenly he grunted as if I had kneed him, and stabbed a horny
forefinger onto the page. “ ‘Lophophora granthamii’ I’ll be
Billy-be-damned! So they took note of old Grantham, did they?”

“They did. As I said, you are widely known in connection with peyotl.”

He chuckled. He made no attempt to hide the fact that he was vastly
pleased.

“When you were sending back specimens and reports, you were of great
value to us,” I pointed out. I coughed. “Something seems—ah—to have
happened.”

He kept his eyes on the listing, wagging his big head delightedly. “Yup,
yup,” he said. “Something happened.” He suddenly snapped the book closed
and slid it across to me. “Last thing in the world I ever expected to
see again.”

“I didn’t think you would, either,” I said bitterly. “Dr. Grantham—”

“Buttons,” he corrected.

“Dr. Grantham, I have traveled across this continent and through some of
the most Godforsaken topography on Earth just to put this volume in your
hands.”

He started. I think that he realized only then that I had sought him
out, that this was no accident on a field trip.

“You didn’t!” He lifted his glass and tossed it to his lips, found it
empty, looked around in a brief confusion, then reached and took mine.
He wiped his mouth with the bristly back of his hand. “What in hell
_for?_”

I tapped the book. “If I may speak frankly—”

“Fire away.”

“We felt that this might—uh—bring you back to your senses.”

“I got real healthy senses.”

“Dr. Grantham, you don’t understand. You—you—” I floundered, picked up
my second whiskey and drank some of it. It made my eyes stream. My
throat made a sort of death-rattle and suddenly I could breathe again. I
could feel the whiskey sinking a tap-root down my esophagus while
tendrils raced up and out to my earlobes where, budding, they began to
heat.

“You left for a field trip and did not return. You were granted your
sabbatical year to cover this because of your prominence in the field
and because of the excellence of the collections you sent back;
specimens such as the peyotl now named for you. Then the specimens
dwindled and ceased, the reports dwindled and ceased—and then nothing,
nothing at all.”

He scratched his thick pelt of red-and-silver. “Reckon I just figured it
didn’t matter much no more.”

“Didn’t matter?” I realized I squeaked, and then that my voice was high
and nagging, but I no longer cared. “Don’t you realize that as long as
you are alive you hold the Pudley Chair?”

I saw the glint in his eye and clutched his wrist. “If you shout out to
that bartender that you have a Pudley Chair, I’ll—I’ll—” I whispered,
but could not finish for the cannonade of rich laughter he sent up. I
sat tense and furious, helpless to do or say anything until he finished.
At last he wiped his eyes.

“I’m sorry,” he said sincerely, quite as if he were civilized. “You
caught me off guard. I’m really sorry, Professor.”

“It’s all right,” I lied. “Doctor, I want that Chair if you don’t. I’ve
worked hard for it. I’ve earned it. I—I _need_ it.”

“Well gosh, son, go to it. It’s all yours.”

I had wanted to hear that for so long, I’d dreamed of it so much—and
now, hearing it, I became furiously angry. “Why didn’t you resign?” I
shouted. “That’s all you had to do, resign, put a two-cent stamp on an
envelope, save me all this work, this worry—I nearly died with a hole in
my canteen,” I wept, waving at the pottery kiln they call “outdoors” in
this terrible land. “Two horses I killed, my work is waiting, my books,
students—”

I found myself patting the table inarticulately, glaring into his
astonished eyes. “Why?” I yelled. “Why, why, why—” I moaned.

He got up and came round the table and stood behind me. On my shoulders
he put two huge warm hands like epaulets. “I didn’t know, son. I—damn
it, I did know, I guess.” I hated myself for it, but my shoulders shook
suddenly. He squeezed them. “I did know. I reckon I just didn’t care.”

He took his hands away and went back to his chair. He must have made a
sign because Big Horn came back with more whiskey.

After a time I said, with difficulty, “All the way out here I hated you,
understand that? I’m not—I don’t—I mean, I never hated anything before,
I lived with books and people who talk quietly and—and scholastic
honors … Damn it, Dr. Grantham, I admired and respected you, you
understand? If you’d stayed at the Institute for the next fifty years,
then for fifty years I’d’ve been happy with it. I admired the Chair and
the man who was in it, things were the way they should be. Well, if you
didn’t want to stay, good. If you didn’t want the Chair, good. But if
you care so little about it—and I respect your judgment—you understand?”

“Oh gosh yes. Shut up awhile. Drink some whiskey. You’re going to bust
yourself up again.”

We sat quietly for a time. At length he said, “I didn’t care. I admit
it. Not for the Institute nor the Chair nor you. I should’ve cared about
you, or anyone else who wanted it as bad as you do. I’m sorry. I’m real
sorry. I got—involved. Other things came to be important.”

“Peyotl. Selling drugs to the Indians,” I snarled. “You’ve probably got
a nice little heap of dust salted away!”

The most extraordinary series of expressions chased each other across
his face. I think if the first one—blind fury—had stayed, I’d have been
dead in the next twelve seconds.

“I don’t have any money,” he said gently. “Just enough for a stake every
once in a while, so I can—” He stared out at the yellow-white glare.
Then, as if he had not left an unfinished sentence, he murmured,
“Peyotl. Professor, you know better than to equate these buttons with
opium and hashish. Listen, right near here, in the seventeenth century,
there used to be a mission called Santo de Jesús Peyotes. Sort of looks
as if the Spanish priests thought pretty well of it, hm? Listen,” he
said urgently, “Uncle Sam brought suit against an Indian by the name of
Nah-qua-tah-tuck, because Uncle’s mails had been used to ship peyotl
around. When the defense witnesses were through testifying about how
peyotl-eaters quit drinking, went back to their wives, and began to work
hard; when a sky pilot name of Prescott testified about his weekly
services where he served the stuff to his parish, and they were the most
God-fearing parish in the Territories, why, Uncle Sam just packed up and
went right back home.”

I knew something of the forensics of the alkaloid mescaline. I said,
“Well and good, but you haven’t told me how you—how you could—”

“Easy, ea—sy,” he soothed, and just in time too. “Chip, you’re the
injured party, for sure. I wish I could—well, make up for it, part way.”

“Perhaps we’d just better not talk about it.”

“No, wait.” He studied me. “Chip, I’m going to tell you about it. I’m
going to tell you how a man like me could do what he’s done, how he
could find something more important than all the Institutes running.
But—”

I waited.

“—I don’t expect you to believe it. Want to hear it anyway? It’s the
truth.”

I thought about it. If I left him now, the Chair waiting for me, my
personal and academic futures assured—wouldn’t that content me?

It wouldn’t, I answered myself. Because Grantham wouldn’t return or
resign. I’d lost two years, almost. I should know why I’d lost them. I
_had_ to know. I’d lost them because Grantham was callous and didn’t
care; or because Grantham was crazy; or because of something much bigger
“than all the Institutes running.” Which?

“Tell me, then.”

He hesitated, then rose. “I will.” He thumped his chest, and it sounded
like the grumble you hear sometimes after heat lightning. “But I’ll tell
it my way. Come on.”

“Where?”

He tossed a thumb toward the west. “The forest.”

The “forest” was the heavy growth of Draconaenoideae I’d seen down in
the valley. It was quite a haul and I was still tired, but I got up
anyway. Grantham gave me an approving look. He went outside and
unstrapped my pack from the burro. “We’ll let Big Horn hold this.” He
took it inside and emerged a moment later.

“Why don’t you leave your pouch?”

Grantham twinkled. “They call me Buttons, remember? I never leave this
anywhere.”

We walked for nearly an hour in silence. The yucca appeared along the
trail in ones and twos, then in clusters and clumps with spaces between.
Their presence seemed to affect Grantham in some way. He began to walk
with his head up, instead of fixing his eyes on the path, and his mind
God knows where.

“See there?” he said once. He pointed to what was left of a shack,
weed-grown and ruined. I nodded but he had nothing more to offer.

A little later, as we passed a fine specimen of melocactus, the spiny
“barrel,” Grantham murmured, “It’s easy to fall under the spell of the
cacti. You know. It caught you a thousand miles away from here. Ever
smell the cereus blooming at night, Chip? Ever wonder what makes the
Turk’s-head wear a fez? Why can’t a chinch-bug make cochineal out of
anything but nopal? And why the spines, why? When most of ’em would be
safe from everyone and everything even sliced up with gravy on …”

I answered none of his questions, because at first I thought them
foolish. I thought, it’s like asking why hair grows on a cat’s back but
not on its nose—then gradually I began to yield, partly because it
seemed after all that a cactus is indeed a stranger thing than a cat—or
a human, for that matter; and partly because it was Grantham, _the_
Grantham, who murmured these things.

“This will do,” he said suddenly, and stopped.

The trail had widened and then disappeared, to continue three hundred
yards down the valley where again the yucca grew heavily. Flash floods
had cut away the earth to leave an irregular sandy shelf on the north
side, and Grantham swung up on this and squatted on his heels. I
followed slowly and sat beside him.

He bowed his head and pressed his heavy eyebrow ridges against his
knees, hugging his legs hard. He radiated tension, and, just as
noticeably, the tension went away. He raised his head slowly and looked
off down the valley. I followed his gaze. The bald hills were touched to
gold by the dropping sun, and their convoluted shadows were a purple
that was black, or a black that was purple. Grantham began to talk.

“Back there. That shack.”

He paused. I recalled it.

He said, “Used to be a family there. Mexican. Miguel, face as hard and
bald as those hills, and a great fat wife like a suet pudding with a
toupee. Inside Miguel was soft and useless and cruel the way only lazy
people can be cruel. And the wife was hickory with thorns, inside, with
another kind of cruelty. Miguel would never go out of his way to be
kind. The woman would travel miles, work days on end, to be cruel.

“Kids.”

Somewhere a lizard scuffled, somewhere a gopher sent the letter B in
rapid, expert Morse. I held two fingers together, and with one eye
closed used the fingers to cover the sun limb to limb. When the lower
limb peeped under my finger, Grantham’s breath hissed in and out
quickly, once each, and he said, “They had kids. Two or three
pigeon-breasted toddlers. One other. But I met her later.

“That was when I first came, when I was doing that collecting and
reporting that impressed you all so much. I arranged with Miguel the
same deal I had with others before: he was to keep his eyes open for
this plant or that, or an unseasonal flower; and certain kinds he was to
cut and save for me, and others he was to locate and lead me to. He’d
get a copper or two for what I liked, and once in a while a dime just to
keep ’em going. Quite a trick when no one speaks the other’s language
and the signs you make mean different things all around. Still, the law
of averages figures here, too, and I always got my money’s worth.

“I made my deal and he called in the family, all but one, and when all
the heads were nodding and the jabbering stopped, I waved my hand and
headed this way. Miguel shouted something at me a moment later, and I
turned and saw them all clustered together looking at me bug-eyed, but I
didn’t know what he meant, so I just waved and walked on. They didn’t
wave back.

“I’d about reached where we’re sitting now when I heard a sort of growl
up ahead. I’d been looking at the flora all the way up, and never
noticed the things I’d smell or hear or just—just _feel_ now. Anyway, I
looked up and the first thing I saw was a little girl standing here in
the cut. The second thing was a black roiling wall of water and cloud
towering up and over me, coming down like a dynamited wall. The third
thing was a gout of white spray thirty feet tall squirting out of the
landscape not a quarter of a mile away.

“How long does it take to figure things out at a time like that? It was
like standing still for forty minutes, thinking it out laboriously, and
at the same time being able to move only two feet a minute like a slow
loris. Actually I suppose I looked up, then jumped, but a whole lot
happened in that second.

“I shouted and was beside the girl in two steps. She didn’t move. She
was looking at the sky and the spume with the largest, darkest eyes I
have ever seen. She was a thin little thing like the rest of Miguel’s
litter. She was by no means pretty; her face was badly pocked and either
she’d lost a front tooth or so or the second set had never made up its
mind to go on with the job.

“Thing is, she was a native and I wasn’t. To me the flash flood was a
danger, but she was completely unafraid. It wasn’t a stupid calm. If
ever there was a package of sensitivity, this was it. How can I describe
it? Look, you know how a beloved house-cat watches you enter a room? The
paws are turned under, the eyes are one-third open, and the purr goes on
and on like a huge and sleepy bee. The cat can do that because it means
no violence to you and you mean no violence to it.

“Now imagine coming suddenly on a wild deer—how would you feel if it
looked up at you with just such fearlessness? It was as if violence
couldn’t occur near this girl. It was unthinkable. Before her was this
hellish wall of water and beside her a rather large bearded stranger
shouting like a rag-peddler, and there she stood, awake, aware, not
stunned, not afraid.

“I scooped her up and made for the bank. I—I had help. I thought at the
time it was the vanguard of that tall press of wind. Later I thought—I
don’t know what I thought, but anyway, the yuccas folded toward me,
tangling their leathery swords together; even at their tips I had
something thick as your arm and strong as an anchor-cable to take hold
of. I swung up past one, two, three of them that way and then the
williwaw came down shouting and knocked me flat as a domino.

“I twisted as I fell so I wouldn’t land on the child. I held her tight
to me with my right arm, and I threw up my left as some sort of guard
over both of us. I distinctly saw a forty-foot Chaya cactus twist past
overhead, and then I was hit. By what, I couldn’t say, but it hit my
left forearm and my left fist came down on my chin, and that, for me,
was the end of that part of the adventure.

“When I opened my eyes I thought first I’d gone blind, and then it came
to me that it was night, a black, scudding night, cold the way only this
crazy either-or-and-all-the-way country can get. I was shaking like a
gravel-sorter. Something had hold of my arm, which hurt, and I tried to
pull it away and couldn’t.

“It was the kid. She was crouched beside me, holding my left forearm in
both her hands. She wasn’t shivering. Her hands were warm, too, though I
suppose anything over forty degrees would feel warm just then. I stopped
pulling and heaved up to see what I could see. The scud parted and let a
sick flicker of moon show through, and that helped.

“I had a five-inch gash in my arm—up and down, fortunately, not across,
so it had missed any major blood-vessel. I could see the two ends of the
cut, but between those ends lay the girl’s hands. Their pressure was
firm and unwavering, and clotted blood had cemented her to me nice as
you please. And she’d been sitting there holding the edges of the cut
together—how long? Three hours? Four, five? I didn’t know. I don’t know
now.

“She tugged at me gently and we got our feet under us. We scrabbled down
the bank until I could see the deep, strong creek that hadn’t been there
that afternoon. We went downstream a piece until the bank shelved,
squatted by the edge, and got her hands and my arm together into the
water. In a few moments she worked a hand free, then the other. I bled a
bit then, but not too much, and she helped me tie on my kerchief.

“I sat down, partly to rest, mostly to look at her. She looked right
back, with that same fearlessness showing even in the scudding dark. I
thanked her but she didn’t say anything. I grinned at her but she didn’t
smile. She just looked at me, not appraising, not defiant, just liking
what she saw, and unafraid.

“I took her back to Miguel’s. The old lady was raising particular hell,
shaking her fists at the sky. Their rotten corral-pole was down and
they’d lost two head of their hairy, bony, bot-ridden scrub cattle. I
got a vague impression of two of the little ones staring big-eyed and
scared from the drafty corner. I propelled the girl forward to the
doorway and the old sow put out a claw and snatched her inside. I
thought she raised her fist but I wasn’t ready to believe anything like
that. Not that night. Then the door was closed and I slogged off toward
Kofa.

“About ten minutes later I saw her again, standing by the bank just out
of the shadows of the yucca. If the moon hadn’t flashed I’d have missed
her altogether. She faded back into the shadows and when I reached the
place she was gone, though I yelled my head off. I do believe she had
come to see for sure if I could navigate all right. How she got clear of
the house and passed me in the dark is another thing I’ll never know.

“It was a couple of days before I could get around easily with that arm.
It was badly bruised and it swelled like a goatskin bottle, but the cut
healed faster than a cut like that ought to. Call it clean air and good
constitution, if you like. Got any makings?”

“I don’t smoke,” I said.

“That’s right.” He sighed. “No matter.

“Well, a couple of days later I went back. Miguel had quite a pile of
stuff for me. Good stuff, too, a lot of it. A colchicum, or what looked
like one, but without the bulging ‘corm’ at the base; a gloriosa with,
by God, pink petals; a Chaya only eight inches tall. Lot of junk, too,
of course, and maybe more treasures—I wouldn’t know. I caught a movement
out of the corner of my eye—and there, just off Miguel’s reservation,
the girl stood in the shadows.

_“Herf!”_ he snorted, “once in the West Indies I cut into a jungle glade
and saw a wild magnolia as big as my head. It was so big, so pale in the
dimness that I was actually scared; might just as well’ve been a lion
for a second or so, the way I jumped. This kid, she gleamed out of the
shadows the same way.

“Like the big brainless buffalo I am, I had to straighten up and wave
and grin, and before I could blink the old lady flashed off and collared
the kid. My God, you wouldn’t believe how that two-ton carcass could
_move!_ She’d caught her and had cuffed her in the face, forward and
back, three times before I could get the slack out of my jaw.

“I don’t know what sort of a noise I made but whatever it was it stopped
her as if I’d thrown a brick. I got the girl away from her and then I
went back and with my machete I chopped up the specimens into ensilage.
Talk about substitution! I was wild!

“When the red fog went away I conveyed to Miguel that there was no
_chapa_ for him this day nor any other day when I saw them strike a
child. Once he got the idea he turned and bitterly berated his wife, who
screamed some things the gist of which was that I was an ungrateful scut
because she had hit the child only for bringing no specimens. Miguel
bellowed something to her and then turned to me all scrapes and smiles,
and promised to arrange everything any way I wanted it.

“I growled like a grampus and charged off downstream. I was mad at
everything and everybody. I’ve since gotten a cormless colchicum but I
never saw another dwarf Chaya. Well … the things you do …

“I’d stamped along perhaps a hundred yards before I became aware that I
still held the girl’s arm. I stopped at once and hunkered down and gave
her a hug and told her how sorry I was.

“She had two angry welts on one side of her face and three on the other;
and she had those eyes; and you know, those eyes were just the way
they’d been when I first saw them, fearless and untouched and
untouchable.

“I’d had a strange semi-dream the day before, when I was trying to sleep
through the throbbing of my arm. It was a sort of visualization of what
would have happened in the flood if I hadn’t been there, like a
cinematograph, if you’ve ever seen one of the things. There she stood,
and when the water reached her it turned and went around her, and the
wind too, just as if she were under a bell-jar. Hm! But it wasn’t like
that, and here were the bruises on her face to prove it. At the same
time the vision was correct, for no matter what happened to her, it
couldn’t really reach her. See what I mean?”

“Cowed,” I said. “Poor kid.”

He put his hands together and squeezed them for a moment. I think he was
angry at me. Then he relaxed. “Not cowed, Chip. You have to be afraid
for that. Fearless, don’t you understand? As much fear as a granite
cliff looking at a hurricane, as much as a rose listening to garden
shears.”

“Beyond me,” I said.

“Beyond me too,” he said immediately. He looked at me. “I’ll stop now?”

“Stop? No!”

“Very well. Don’t forget, I didn’t tell you to believe me. All I said
was that it was the truth.” He looked up at the sky. “I must hurry …

“She didn’t answer my hug or my apologies, but somehow I knew they
reached the places where fear could not. Then I remembered what was in
my specimen bag. I’d managed to find a child’s dress in the trading post
at Kofa. It was white with blue polka dots all over it, made of some
heavy, hard-finish material that ought to wear a hole in sandpaper. I
didn’t think too much of it myself—it was only the best I could do—but I
can’t describe what happened when I handed it over.

“I mean just that, Chip—I can’t describe it. Look, she couldn’t or
wouldn’t talk. Whether she could hear or not I don’t know. And she might
as well have been born without motor nerves in her face, or at least her
cheeks, because not once did she ever smile.

“Yet she stood looking at the dress when I shook it out, and perhaps her
eyes got rounder. She didn’t move, so I held it up against her. She put
those eyes on me and slowly brought her hands together in front of her.
I nodded my head and smiled and told her to go ahead, put it on, it’s
for you. And then she—”

Grantham twisted his thick forefinger into and out of his beard, picked
up a pebble, threw it, watching studiously.

“—began to glow,” he continued. “This Arizona moon, in the fall, when
the brush-fires shroud the sky … the moon’s up, full, off the hills and
you can’t see it, and gradually you know it’s there. It isn’t a thing,
it’s a _place_ in the sky, that’s all. Then it rises higher, and the
smoke blows down, and it gets brighter and brighter and brighter
until—you don’t know how or just when—you realize you could read a man’s
palm by it. The kid did that, somehow. When whatever she felt was at
peak you—sort of—had to squinch up your eyes to see her.” He punched the
sand. “I don’t know,” he muttered.

“She put up her hands to shuck out of the rag she was wearing and I
turned my back. In a second she danced past me, wearing the blue-dotted
dress. Her and that quiet, pock-marked, unsmiling little face, glowing
like that, spinning like a barn swallow, balancing like a gull. Ever see
a bird smile, Chip? A lily laugh? Does a passionflower have to sing?
Hell. I mean, hell. Some people don’t have to say anything.

“That was the first day I saw her do what I called her Yucca Dance. She
stood on the cap of a rise in the yucca forest and the fresh damp
buffalo grass hiding her feet. With her elbows close to her sides, her
forearms stretched upward and her hands out, she just barely moved her
fingers, and I suddenly got the idea—the still, thick stem, the
branching of leaves, the long slender neck and crown of flowers.

“I laughed like a fool and ran to the nearest cactus. I pulled two firm
white blossoms and went and put them in her hair, and stepped back,
laughing. Both of them fell out, and she made no attempt to pick them
up. I caught her eyes then, and I got the general idea that I’d made
some sort of mistake. I stumbled back, feeling like a damned idiot, and
she went back into her trance, being a yucca awaiting the wind.

“And when the wind came she made the only sound I ever heard from her,
but for her footsteps. It was, in miniature, precisely the whispering of
the leather leaves touching together. When the wind gusted, her whisper
was with it, and she leaned with—with the—other—Chip?”

I said, “Yes, Grantham.”

“You don’t forget it, standing in her white dress with blue spots,
rooted and spreading and stretched, whispering in the wind. Chip?”

I answered again.

“You know about the moth, Chip?”

I said, “Pronuba yuccasella.”

He grinned. It was good to see his face relax. “Good entomology, for a
botanist.”

“Not especially,” I said. “Pronuba’s a fairly botanical sort of bug.”

“Mmm.” He nodded. “It doesn’t eat anything but yucca nectar, and the
yucca blossom can be fertilized by no other insect. Chip, did you know a
termite can’t digest cellulose?”

“Out of my line.”

“Well, it can’t,” said Grantham. “But there’s a bacterium lives in his
belly that can. And what he excretes, the termite feeds on.”

“Symbiosis,” I said.

“Wonder how you’d get along,” he mused, “with folks who didn’t know as
much as you do? Yes, symbiosis. Two living things as dissimilar as a
yucca and a moth, and neither can live without the other.”

“Like Republicans and Dem—”

“Ah, stow it, cork it, and shove it,” Grantham said bluntly. He looked
at the western hills, and the light put blood on his great lion’s head.
“Pretty natural thing, that symbiosis. Lot of it around.”

He began to talk again, rapidly, with, now and again, a quick glance at
the darkling west. “Six months, seven, maybe, I collected around here.
No trouble with Miguel. He collected a bunch of weeds and sticks, but
once in a while he earned his keep, retroactively. The old lady kept her
hands off. The kid spent every day with me. I guess I had the area
pretty well sieved in four months, but I went out every day anyhow.”

“I remember,” I said.

“Yes, yes, I didn’t send so many specimens. Later, none. I know. I said
I was sor—”

For the first time I barked at him. “Go on with your story.”

“Where—oh. The moth. The moth that won’t go near anything but a yucca.”

I thought he had forgotten me. “Hey,” I said.

“She danced,” he said, examining his hands carefully in the dim light,
“any time it occurred to her, for a long time or a little. Or at night.
At night,” he said clearly, heaving himself upright and not looking at
me, “the petals open and the moths fly. They were a cloud around her
head.”

I waited. He said, “It’s only the truth. And once in the late sunset,
still some light, and me close to her, I saw a moth crawl into her ear.
I got scared, I—put out my hand to do something, pluck it out, shake
her, do _something_. She didn’t exactly push me away. She looked up at
me and raised her hand, slowly—or it seemed to be slowly, but it was
there before my hand was. She just stood, still as a tree, waiting, and
the moth came out again.”

I didn’t say anything. Not anything at all. We sat watching the western
mountains.

“I went away,” said Grantham, his words stark and clear against the heat
inside him. “To get more specimens, you understand.”

“Some more came,” I said.

“I was away for three months. A long time. Too long. Then I had no
business back in Kofa but I went back anyway—oh, in case I’d left
anything there or something. I was supposed to go back to the Institute,
I guess. Mm.

“The first face I saw in Kofa that I knew was Miguel’s. I fell over him.
He was standing like a brown statue on the duckboards near the saloon
and I tripped and knocked his hat off. I pulled him to his feet and
asked him _Com’ esta?_

“_Malo, muy malo_ and a flood of north-Mex is all I could get. I guess I
looked a little foolish. Why is it when you talk to someone who doesn’t
know your language, you holler at him? Finally I got impatient and ran
him into the bar. I asked Big Horn what Miguel was trying to tell me.

“The general idea was that the little ones had died. I never did find
out how many, two or three. Miguel shrugged at this, took off his hat,
raised his eyes and his eyebrows, in that order, at the ceiling. I
gather he felt no responsibility over this; such matters were out of his
hands, but one could always make more. What bothered Miguel, Big Horn
told me, was the loss of his wife, who had broken her leg, gotten a bone
infection, and died _muy rapido_. She had been, it seemed, a very hard
worker.

“The girl? He didn’t know. He didn’t know any more after I got excited
and tried to shake it out of him. Big Horn was over the bar with his
bung-starter before I could pull myself together. He never minded
anybody getting rough at his bar providing both parties were enjoying
it. He pointed out to me that Miguel had come in here peaceably even if
I hadn’t. Then he sat Miguel down and questioned him quietly while I
fumed, and then he told Miguel to go, which he did much faster than
usual.

“ ‘He says,’ Big Horn told me, ‘that the girl just wandered away. He
says she always spent more nights out in the yucca forest than home
anyhow. She went away and she just didn’t come back. He says he went
looking for her, too, after the old lady died. I guess he wanted his
tortillas pounded. He looked real hard.’

“I told him thanks, and came out here. I wish you had the makings,
Chip.”

“Sorry,” I said.

“I came out here and wandered for a while. A man can eat out here, sleep
out here, right time of year. You could, Chip, knowing it just from
books. I guess I felt real bad. Funny thing,” he mused. “I wanted to
call her, but I had never found out what her name was.”

He was quiet. The evening breeze sprang and died, stopped and pressed
and sprang again. The yuccas whispered and whispered.

“Hear?”

“I hear,” I said.

“I heard it one night, sleeping here, and came up standing. There was no
wind. She was here, right here, Chip. Dancing like a yucca, whispering.”

“See her?”

“No, I didn’t see her.” I couldn’t see his face, but I knew he was
smiling, and I wondered what in time he was smiling about.

“You, Professor, you want something more than you want anything else
there is, more than money or your name in books or a woman. You want
that Pudley Chair in Botany. I bet you’d kill anyone who tried to get it
away from you.”

“Anyone but you.”

His fringed shirt rustled as he twisted toward me. “You mean that. You
do mean that. That’s fine, Chip. That’s nice.” He rested his chin on his
knees and paid attention to the evening star. “Everybody wants some one
single thing that bad. Some get it, some don’t. Some know what it is,
some never find out. You found out. I found out.”

“Want to tell me?”

“Sure I do. Sure. Chip, no offense, but you and I are different kinds of
botanist.”

“I know that. But—well, go on.”

“You want botany out of books. Some window boxes, some lab, sure. You
learned it right; there’s not a thing wrong in being that way, you see?
Very valuable. You learned botany so’s you could be a botanist, the best
damn botanist in the world, if you could make it. You might make it,
too.”

“And you?”

“I got to be a botanist so I could be—close to something. Something like
that symbiosis you were talking about. I’m a man, but man and
cloverleaf, man and Chaya, man and piñon juniper—is that so much crazier
than moth and cactus?”

I said nothing. I try to form my spoken opinions from some sort of
precedent.

“Heard a story once about a man went away to a river island to carve
statues. He carved statues for fourteen years and stashed ’em all in a
big barn, dozens of ’em. When he figured his time was up, he dynamited
the barn. Was he crazy?”

“Out of my field,” I said briefly.

“I think I know why he did it. Other sculptors wanted to get close to
people—moneywise, socialwise, what have you—and used sculpture to do it.
This fellow, he just wanted to get close to sculpturing. Maybe people
mattered to him, but sculpture mattered more. Now do you see?”

“You’re trying to tell me that you want to go on with botany by
yourself—no texts, no classes, no references.”

He waved a hand; I saw it pass against the dark skyline. “Texts and
references all here, Chip. Just not strained through a book first,
that’s all.”

I said, “Then no reports, no books written, no articles in the
_Journal_.”

“That’s right. This is for me.”

“Selfish, isn’t it?”

He said, very gently, “Not after eleven years in the Pudley Chair.”

I understood that, and had nothing to say. Instead I asked him, “How
close do you think you can carry this symbiosis of yours? Or was it just
a figure of speech?”

“Time to show you, I reckon,” he said. He rose. I followed.

“It’s dark.”

“Sure,” he said. “I know the way. Hook on to the back of my belt.”

I did, and he strode off purposefully into the pitch-black shadows of
the yucca. How we turned, climbed, slithered, I couldn’t say. It might
have been a long way, and it might have been a circle.

We stopped. He fumbled in his pouch. “It’s her birthday.”

“How do you know?” I whispered. This was a place to whisper.

“Just know. Pick a day, stay with it from then on. Amounts to the same
thing. Here.”

He put something into my hand. Cloth, very fine cloth. Layers, lace.
Hard knob one end, two sticks other end …

“A doll.”

“Yup,” he said. “Purtiest one I ever saw.” He took it away from me.
“Chip, hush now. Wait till the wind dies.”

I waited in the whispering dark. The breeze was fitful, careless. It
would drop to almost nothing, until all the other breathings and
stirrings could be heard, and then giggle on up to be a breeze again.
Suddenly, then, it was gone. From before us, in the pitch blackness, a
yucca whispered.

“There she is,” Grantham murmured. He stepped forward, and an
unreasoning terror sent cold sweat oozing in my armpits. I stepped after
him. He was leaning forward, apparently putting the doll into the lower
swords of a young yucca.

Something touched my face and I bit my tongue. Then I realized that
Grantham’s heavy hand had tilted the plant toward us. Without conscious
motivation I reached up swiftly and closed my hand on a flower. Without
conscious reasoning I was exquisitely careful to twist it free without a
sound or a detectible motion. I slipped it into my side pocket.

“ ’Bye, baby.” He stood up and nudged me. “Let’s go.”

If anything, the way back was longer. I stumbled along behind him,
wondering if he were sane enough to write that resignation coherently.
When we reached the trail a loom of silver was staining the eastern sky.
“Easy going now,” was all he said.

We trudged into the rising moon. I was deeply disturbed, but Grantham
was calm and apparently deeply content.

The yuccas thinned, and we started up the valley’s throat. Abruptly
Grantham grunted and stopped.

“What is it?”

Silently he pointed. Fifty feet up the slope something wavered and
flickered in the moonlight. “Bless her heart,” he said. “Come on, Chip.”

He struck off toward whatever it was, and I followed him, walking on the
balls of my feet, my eyes too wide, so that they hurt.

When I caught up with him he stopped, turned to me, and drew his knife.
“Symbiosis, Chip.”

I don’t think he could see my face. I wouldn’t want to.

He dropped to one knee and I leapt backward, stood spraddled, gasping. I
watched him digging carefully in the ground, while over and around him
fluttered a silent cloud of small white moths. They were not yucca
moths. I know they weren’t because yucca moths never, _never_ cluster
near the ground. I mean, moths that cluster that way are not yucca
moths, they aren’t, they were not, they couldn’t be.

Look it up if you don’t believe it.

Grantham grunted, pulled, and up out of the ground came an object that
looked like a large parsnip. “Ever see one of these in the flesh, Chip?”

Gingerly, I took it, squinted at it in the brightening moonlight. It was
like a tuber, spineless, and with the upper end rounded and ribbed. I
slipped my fingers along the grooves between the ribs and felt the small
round protuberances.

“Lophophora,” I said. My voice sounded odd to me. “I don’t know which
one.”

“Doesn’t matter.” He trimmed off the grooved part and dropped it into
his satchel. “Long as it’s peyotl, who’s quibbling?”

Back on the trail, I swallowed hard and asked, “That’s symbiosis? You
leave a doll on a yucca, and moths find peyotl for you?”

He laughed his big laugh. “You can’t see further than your nose,” he
said gaily and insultingly, “let alone as far as your front teeth.”

“If you’ll explain,” I said stiffly, “I shall listen.”

“The doll’s a symbol,” he said, suddenly deeply serious. “It represents
something as vital as cellulose to a bacterium, or bacterial products to
a termite. I didn’t need the doll itself, except it was her birthday.
Long as I bring what she needs—and I do.”

“And it—she—I mean, you get peyotl out of it,” I floundered. “That’s no
symbol. That’s cash money.”

“It is? What do I do with the money? Well, _what?_”

“Grubstake,” I mumbled, frightened by his intensity.

“I sell it for just what I need, no more,” he said. “And with it I stay
out here and”—he chuckled—“study my references.”

At the saloon Grantham wrote his resignation, and I was glad to see that
it was written exactly as the old Grantham would have done it. I tucked
it away safely. We dined heartily and slept in the same room back of the
bar, and in the morning he helped me buy a horse. It was, therefore, not
until I was out on the hot sand again that I had a chance to study my
specimen.

I felt very good that morning. I was, of course, sorry for poor mad
Grantham. On the other hand—what was the little white moth that
clustered over peyotl at night? Not the yucca moth, surely. Surely not.

I wondered what had happened to that strange, pathetic little girl.
Wandered out in her blue polka-dot dress to die among the yuccas, no
doubt.

I studied the wilted flower as I rode. Poor Grantham! This was enough to
tip any trained botanist over the edge—this freak, sport, mutant yucca.
Who ever heard of a white yucca flower with a large blue patch on each
petal?

I closed my eyes and smiled, seeing through the red heat-haze of my lids
the cool shadowed library, turning the clop-clop of my horse into the
delicate music of teacups on saucers.



THE GOLDEN HELIX


TOD AWOKE FIRST, probably because he was so curious, so deeply alive;
perhaps because he was (or had been) seventeen. He fought back, but the
manipulators would not be denied. They bent and flexed his arms and
legs, squeezed his chest, patted and rasped and abraded him. His joints
creaked, his sluggish blood clung sleepily to the walls of his veins,
reluctant to move after so long.

He gasped and shouted as needles of cold played over his body, gasped
again and screamed when his skin sensitized and the tingling intensified
to a scald. Then he fainted, and probably slept, for he easily reawoke
when someone else started screaming.

He felt weak and ravenous, but extraordinarily well rested. His first
conscious realization was that the manipulators had withdrawn from his
body, as had the needles from the back of his neck. He put a shaky hand
back there and felt the traces of spot-tape, already half-fused with his
healing flesh.

He listened comfortably to this new screaming, satisfied that it was not
his own. He let his eyes open, and a great wonder came over him when he
saw that the lid of his Coffin stood open.

He clawed upward, sat a moment to fight a vicious swirl of vertigo,
vanquished it, and hung his chin on the edge of the Coffin.

The screaming came from April’s Coffin. It was open too. Since the two
massive boxes touched and their hinges were on opposite sides, he could
look down at her. The manipulators were at work on the girl’s body,
working with competent violence. She seemed to be caught up in some
frightful nightmare, lying on her back, dreaming of riding a runaway
bicycle with an off-center pedal sprocket and epicyclic hubs. And all
the while her arms seemed to be flailing at a cloud of dream-hornets
round her tossing head. The needle-cluster rode with her head, fanning
out behind the nape like the mechanical extrapolation of an Elizabethan
collar.

Tod crawled to the end of his Coffin, stood up shakily, and grasped the
horizontal bar set at chest level. He got an arm over it and snugged it
close under his armpit. Half-suspended, he could then manage one of his
feet over the edge, then the other, to the top step. He lowered himself
until he sat on it, outside the Coffin at last, and slumped back to
rest. When his furious lungs and battering heart calmed themselves, he
went down the four steps one at a time, like an infant, on his buttocks.

April’s screams stopped.

Tod sat on the bottom step, jackknifed by fatigue, his feet on the metal
floor, his knees in the hollows between his pectorals and his shoulders.
Before him, on a low pedestal, was a cube with a round switch-disc on
it. When he could, he inched a hand forward and let it fall on the disc.
There was an explosive tinkle and the front panel of the cube
disappeared, drifting slowly away as a fine glittering dust. He lifted
his heavy hand and reached inside. He got one capsule, two, carried them
to his lips. He rested, then took a beaker from the cube. It was
three-quarters full of purple crystals. He bumped it on the steel floor.
The beaker’s cover powdered and fell in, and the crystals were suddenly
a liquid, effervescing violently. When it subsided, he drank it down. He
belched explosively, and then his head cleared, his personal horizons
expanded to include the other Coffins, the compartment walls, the ship
itself and its mission.

Out there somewhere—somewhere close, now—was Sirius and its captive
planet, Terra Prime. Earth’s first major colony, Prime would one day
flourish as Earth never had, for it would be a planned and tailored
planet. Eight and a half light-years from Earth, Prime’s population was
composed chiefly of Earth immigrants, living in pressure domes and
slaving to alter the atmosphere of the planet to Earth normal.
Periodically there must be an infusion of Earth blood to keep the strain
as close as possible on both planets, for unless a faster-than-light
drive could be developed, there could be no frequent interchange between
the worlds. What took light eight years took humans half a lifetime. The
solution was the Coffins—the marvelous machine in which a man could slip
into a sleep which was more than sleep while still on Earth, and awaken
years later in space, near his destination, subjectively only a month or
so older. Without the Coffins there could be only divergence, possibly
mutation. Humanity wanted to populate the stars—but with humanity.

Tod and his five shipmates were hand-picked. They had
superiorities—mechanical, mathematical, and artistic aptitudes. But they
were not all completely superior. One does not populate a colony with
leaders alone and expect it to live. They, like the rest of their cargo
(machine designs, microfilms of music and art, technical and medical
writings, novels and entertainment) were neither advanced nor
extraordinary. Except for Teague, they were the tested median, the
competent; they were basic blood for a mass, rather than an elite.

Tod glanced around the blank walls and into the corner where a thin line
delineated the sealed door. He ached to fling it open and skid across
the corridor, punch the control which would slide away the armor which
masked the port, and soak himself in his first glimpse of outer space.
He had heard so much about it, but he had never seen it—they had all
been deep in their timeless sleep before the ship had blasted off.

But he sighed and went instead to the Coffins.

Alma’s was still closed, but there was sound and motion, in varying
degrees, from all the others.

He glanced first into April’s Coffin. She seemed to be asleep now. The
needle-cluster and manipulators had withdrawn. Her skin glowed; it was
alive and as unlike its former monochrome waxiness as it could be. He
smiled briefly and went to look at Teague.

Teague, too, was in real slumber. The fierce vertical line between his
brows was shallow now, and the hard, deft hands lax and
uncharacteristically purposeless. Tod had never seen him before without
a focus for those narrow, blazing green eyes, without decisive spring
and balance in his pose. It was good, somehow, to feel that for all his
responsibilities, Teague could be as helpless as anyone.

Tod smiled as he passed Alma’s closed Coffin. He always smiled at Alma
when he saw her, when he heard her voice, when she crossed his thoughts.
It was possible to be very brave around Alma, for gentleness and comfort
were so ready that it was almost not necessary to call upon them. One
could bear anything, knowing she was there.

Tod crossed the chamber and looked at the last pair. Carl was a furious
blur of motion, his needle-cluster swinging free, his manipulators in
the final phase. He grunted instead of screaming, a series of implosive,
startled gasps. His eyes were open but only the whites showed.

Moira was quite relaxed, turned on her side, poured out on the floor of
the Coffin like a long golden cat. She seemed in a contented abandonment
of untroubled sleep.

He heard a new sound and went back to April. She was sitting up,
cross-legged, her head bowed apparently in deep concentration. Tod
understood; he knew that sense of achievement and the dedication of an
entire psyche to the proposition that these weak and trembling arms
which hold one up shall _not_ bend.

He reached in and gently lifted the soft white hair away from her face.
She raised the albino’s fathomless ruby eyes to him and whimpered.

“Come on,” he said quietly. “We’re here.” When she did not move, he
balanced on his stomach on the edge of the Coffin and put one hand
between her shoulder blades. “Come on.”

She pitched forward but he caught her so that she stayed kneeling. He
drew her up and forward and put her hands on the bar. “Hold tight, Ape,”
he said. She did, while he lifted her thin body out of the Coffin and
stood her on the top step. “Let go now. Lean on me.”

Mechanically, she obeyed, and he brought her down until she sat, as he
had, on the bottom step. He punched the switch at her feet and put the
capsules in her mouth while she looked up at him numbly, as if
hypnotized. He got her beaker, thumped it, held it until its foaming
subsided, and then put an arm around her shoulders while she drank. She
closed her eyes and slumped against him, breathing deeply at first, and
later, for a moment that frightened him, not at all. Then she sighed,
“Tod …”

“I’m here, Ape.”

She straightened up, turned and looked at him. She seemed to be trying
to smile, but she shivered instead. “I’m cold.”

He rose, keeping one hand on her shoulder until he was sure she could
sit up unassisted, and then brought her a cloak from the clips outside
the Coffin. He helped her with it, knelt and put on her slippers for
her. She sat quite still, hugging the garment tight to her. At last she
looked around and back; up, around, and back again. “We’re—there!” she
breathed.

“We’re _here_,” he corrected.

“Yes, here. Here. How long do you suppose we …”

“We won’t know exactly until we can take some readings. Twenty-five,
twenty-seven years—maybe more.”

She said, “I could be old, old—” She touched her face, brought her
fingertips down to the sides of her neck. “I could be forty, even!”

He laughed at her, and then a movement caught the corner of his eye.
“Carl!”

Carl was sitting sidewise on the edge of his Coffin, his feet still
inside. Weak or no, bemused as could be expected, Carl should have
grinned at Tod, should have made some healthy, swaggering gesture.
Instead he sat still, staring about him in utter puzzlement. Tod went to
him. “Carl! Carl, we’re here!”

Carl looked at him dully. Tod was unaccountably disturbed. Carl always
shouted, always bounced; Carl had always seemed to be just a bit larger
inside than he was outside, ready to burst through, always thinking
faster, laughing more quickly than anyone else.

He allowed Tod to help him down the steps, and sat heavily while Tod got
his capsules and beaker for him. Waiting for the liquid to subside, he
looked around numbly. Then drank, and almost toppled. April and Tod held
him up. When he straightened again, it was abruptly. “Hey!” he roared.
“We’re here!” He looked up at them. “April! Tod-o! Well what do you
know—how are you, kids?”

“Carl?” The voice was the voice of a flute, if a flute could whisper.
They looked up. There was a small golden surf of hair tumbled on and
over the edge of Moira’s Coffin.

Weakly, eagerly, they clambered up to Moira and helped her out. Carl
breathed such a sigh of relief that Tod and April stopped to smile at
him, at each other.

Carl shrugged out of his weakness as if it were an uncomfortable garment
and went to be close to Moira, to care about Moira and nothing else.

A deep labored voice called, “Who’s up?”

“Teague! It’s Teague … all of us, Teague,” called Tod. “Carl and Moira
and April and me. All except Alma.”

Slowly Teague’s great head rose out of the Coffin. He looked around with
the controlled motion of a radar sweep. When his head stopped its one
turning, the motion seemed relayed to his body, which began to move
steadily upward. The four who watched him knew intimately what this cost
him in sheer willpower, yet no one made any effort to help. Unasked, one
did not help Teague.

One leg over, the second. He ignored the bar and stepped down to seat
himself on the bottom step as if it were a throne. His hands moved very
slowly but without faltering as he helped himself to the capsules, then
the beaker. He permitted himself a moment of stillness, eyes closed,
nostrils pinched; then life coursed strongly into him. It was as if his
muscles visibly filled out a little. He seemed heavier and taller, and
when he opened his eyes, they were the deeply vital, commanding
light-sources which had drawn them, linked them, led them all during
their training.

He looked toward the door in the corner. “Has anyone—”

“We were waiting for you,” said Tod. “Shall we … can we go look now? I
want to see the stars.”

“We’ll see to Alma first.” Teague rose, ignoring the lip of his Coffin
and the handhold it offered. He went to Alma’s. With his height, he was
the only one among them who could see through the top plate without
mounting the steps.

Then, without turning, he said, “Wait.”

The others, half across the room from him, stopped. Teague turned to
them. There was no expression on his face at all. He stood quite
motionless for perhaps ten seconds, and then quietly released a breath.
He mounted the steps of Alma’s Coffin, reached, and the side nearest his
own machine sank silently into the floor. He stepped down, and spent a
long moment bent over the body inside. From where they stood, tense and
frightened, the others could not see inside. They made no effort to move
closer.

“Tod,” said Teague, “get the kit. Surgery _Lambda_. Moira, I’ll need
you.”

The shock of it went to Tod’s bones, regenerated, struck him again; yet
so conditioned was he to Teague’s commands that he was on his feet and
moving before Teague had stopped speaking. He went to the after bulkhead
and swung open a panel, pressed a stud. There was a metallic whisper,
and the heavy case slid out at his feet. He lugged it over to Teague,
and helped him rack it on the side of the Coffin. Teague immediately
plunged his hands through the membrane at one end of the kit, nodding to
Moira to do likewise at the other. Tod stepped back, studiously avoiding
a glance in at Alma, and returned to April. She put both her hands tight
around his left biceps and leaned close. “_Lambda_.…” she whispered.

“That’s … parturition, isn’t it?”

He shook his head. “Parturition is Surgery _Kappa_,” he said painfully.
He swallowed. “_Lambda’s_ cesarean.”

Her crimson eyes widened. “Cesarean? _Alma?_ She’d never need a
cesarean!”

He turned to look at her, but he could not see, his eyes stung so. “Not
while she lived, she wouldn’t,” he whispered. He felt the small white
hands tighten painfully on his arm. Across the room, Carl sat quietly.
Tod squashed the water out of his eyes with the heel of his hand. Carl
began pounding knuckles, very slowly, against his own temple.

Teague and Moira were busy for a long time.

II

Tod pulled in his legs and lowered his head until the kneecaps pressed
cruelly against his eyebrow ridges. He hugged his shins, ground his back
into the wall-panels, and in this red-spangled blackness he let himself
live back and back to Alma and joy, Alma and comfort, Alma and courage.

He had sat once, just this way, twisted by misery and anger, blind and
helpless, in a dark corner of an equipment shed at the spaceport. The
rumor had circulated that April would not come after all, because
albinism and the Sirius Rock would not mix. It turned out to be untrue,
but that did not matter at the time. He had punched her, punched _Alma!_
because in all the world he had been given nothing else to strike out
at, and she had found him and had sat down to be with him. She had not
even touched her face, where the blood ran; she simply waited until at
last he flung himself on her lap and wept like an infant. And no one but
he and Alma ever knew of it.…

He remembered Alma with the spaceport children, rolling and tumbling on
the lawn with them, and in the pool; and he remembered Alma, her face
still, looking up at the stars with her soft and gentle eyes, and in
those eyes he had seen a challenge as implacable and pervasive as space
itself. The tumbling on the lawn, the towering dignity—these co-existed
in Alma without friction. He remembered things she had said to him; for
each of the things he could recall the kind of light, the way he stood,
the very smell of the air at the time. “Never be afraid, Tod. Just think
of the worst possible thing that might happen. What you’re afraid of
will probably not be _that_ bad—and anything else just has to be
better.” And she said once, “Don’t confuse logic and truth, however good
the logic. You can stick one end of logic in solid ground and throw the
other end clear out of the cosmos without breaking it. Truth’s a little
less flexible.” And, “Of _course_ you need to be loved, Tod! Don’t be
ashamed of that, or try to change it. It’s not a thing you have to worry
about, ever. You are loved. April loves you. And I love you. Maybe I
love you even more than April, because she loves everything you are, but
I love everything you were and ever will be.”

And some of the memories were deeper and more important even than these,
but were memories of small things—the meeting of eyes, the touch of a
hand, the sound of laughter or a snatch of song, distantly.

Tod descended from memory into a blackness that was only loss and
despair, and then a numbness, followed by a reluctant awareness. He
became conscious of what, in itself, seemed the merest of trifles: that
there was a significance in his pose there against the bulkhead.
Unmoving, he considered it. It was comfortable, to be so turned in upon
oneself, and so protected, unaware … and Alma would have hated to see
him this way.

He threw up his head, and self-consciously straightened from his foetal
posture. _That’s over now_, he told himself furiously, and then, dazed,
wondered what he had meant.

He turned to look at April. She was huddled miserably against him, her
face and body lax, stopped, disinterested. He thumped his elbow into her
ribs, hard enough to make her remember she had ribs. She looked up into
his eyes and said, “How? How could …”

Tod understood. Of the three couples standard for each ship of the
Sirian project, one traditionally would beget children on the planet;
one, earlier, as soon as possible after awakening; and one still
earlier, for conception would take place within the Coffin. But—not
_before_ awakening, and surely not long enough before to permit of
gestation. It was an impossibility; the vital processes were so retarded
within the Coffin that, effectively, there would be no stirring of life
at all. So—“How?” April pleaded. “How could …”

Tod gazed upon his own misery, then April’s, and wondered what it must
be that Teague was going through.

Teague, without looking up, said, “Tod.”

Tod patted April’s shoulder, rose and went to Teague. He did not look
into the Coffin. Teague, still working steadily, tilted his head to one
side to point. “I need a little more room here.”

Tod lifted the transparent cube Teague had indicated and looked at the
squirming pink bundle inside.

He almost smiled. It was a nice baby. He took one step away and Teague
said, “Take ’em all, Tod.”

He stacked them and carried them to where April sat. Carl rose and came
over, and knelt. The boxes hummed—a vibration which could be felt, not
heard—as nutrient-bearing air circulated inside and back to the
power-packs. “A nice normal deliv—I mean, a nice normal batch o’ brats,”
Carl said. “Four girls, one boy. Just right.”

Tod looked up at him. “There’s one more, I think.”

There was—another girl. Moira brought it over in the sixth box. “Sweet,”
April breathed, watching them. “They’re sweet.”

Moira said, wearily, “That’s all.”

Tod looked up at her.

“Alma …?”

Moira waved laxly toward the neat stack of incubators. “That’s all,” she
whispered tiredly, and went to Carl.

_That’s all there is of Alma_, Tod thought bitterly. He glanced across
at Teague. The tall figure raised a steady hand, wiped his face with his
upper arm. His raised hand touched the high end of the Coffin, and for
an instant held a grip. Teague’s face lay against his arm, pillowed,
hidden and still. Then he completed the wiping motion and began
stripping the sterile plastic skin from his hands. Tod’s heart went out
to him, but he bit the insides of his cheeks and kept silent. _A strange
tradition_, thought Tod, _that makes it impolite to grieve …_

Teague dropped the shreds of plastic into the disposal slot and turned
to face them. He looked at each in turn, and each in turn found some
measure of control. He turned then, and pulled a lever, and the side of
Alma’s Coffin slid silently up.

_Good-bye …_

Tod put his back against the bulkhead and slid down beside April. He put
an arm over her shoulders. Carl and Moira sat close, holding hands.
Moira’s eyes were shadowed but very much awake. Carl bore an expression
almost of sullenness. Tod glanced, then glared at the boxes. Three of
the babies were crying, though of course they could not be heard through
the plastic incubators. Tod was suddenly conscious of Teague’s eyes upon
him. He flushed, and then let his anger drain to the capacious inner
reservoir which must hold it and all his grief as well.

When he had their attention, Teague sat cross-legged before them and
placed a small object on the floor.

Tod looked at the object. At first glance it seemed to be a metal spring
about as long as his thumb, mounted vertically on a black base. Then he
realized that it was an art object of some kind, made of a golden
substance which shimmered and all but flowed. It was an interlocked
double spiral; the turns went round and up, round and down, round and up
again, the texture of the gold clearly indicating, in a strange and
alive way, which symbolized a rising and falling flux. Shaped as if it
had been wound on a cylinder and the cylinder removed, the thing was
formed of a continuous wire or rod which had no beginning and no end,
but which turned and rose and turned and descended again in an exquisite
continuity.… Its base was formless, an almost-smoke just as the gold
showed an almost-flux; and it was as lightless as ylem.

Teague said, “This was in Alma’s Coffin. It was not there when we left
Earth.”

“It must have been,” said Carl flatly.

Teague silently shook his head. April opened her lips, closed them
again. Teague said, “Yes, April?”

April shook her head. “Nothing, Teague. Really nothing.” But because
Teague kept looking at her, waiting, she said, “I was going to
say … it’s beautiful.” She hung her head.

Teague’s lips twitched. Tod could sense the sympathy there. He stroked
April’s silver hair. She responded, moving her shoulder slightly under
his hand. “What is it, Teague?”

When Teague would not answer, Moira asked, “Did it … had it anything to
do with Alma?”

Teague picked it up thoughtfully. Tod could see the yellow loom it cast
against his throat and cheek, the golden points it built in his eyes.
“Something did.” He paused. “You know she was supposed to conceive on
awakening. But to give birth—”

Carl cracked a closed hand against his forehead. “She must have been
awake for anyway two hundred and eighty days!”

“Maybe she made it,” said Moira.

Tod watched Teague’s hand half-close on the object as if it might be
precious now. Moira’s was a welcome thought, and the welcome could be
read on Teague’s face. Watching it, Tod saw the complicated spoor of a
series of efforts—a gathering of emotions, a determination; the closing
of certain doors, the opening of others.

Teague rose. “We have a ship to inspect, sights to take,
calculations … we’ve got to tune in Terra Prime, send them a message if
we can. Tod, check the corridor air.”

“The stars—we’ll see the stars!” Tod whispered to April, the heady
thought all but eclipsing everything else. He bounded to the corner
where the door controls waited. He punched the test button, and a spot
of green appeared over the door, indicating that with their awakening,
the evacuated chambers, the living and control compartments, had been
flooded with air and warmed. “Air okay.”

“Go on then.”

They crowded around Tod as he grasped the lever and pushed. _I won’t
wait for orders_, Tod thought. _I’ll slide right across the corridor and
open the guard plate and there it’ll be—space, and stars!_

The door opened.

There was no corridor, no bulkhead, no armored port-hole, no—

No _ship!_

There was a night out there, dank, warm. It was wet. In it were hooked,
fleshy leaves and a tangle of roots; a thing with legs which hopped up
on the sill and shimmered its wings for them; a thing like a flying
hammer which crashed in and smote the shimmering one and was gone with
it, leaving a stain on the deck-plates. There was a sky aglow with a
ghastly green. There was a thrashing and a scream out there, a pressure
of growth, and a wrongness.

Blood ran down Tod’s chin. His teeth met through his lower lip. He
turned and looked past three sets of terrified eyes to Teague, who said,
“Shut it!”

Tod snatched at the control. It broke off in his hand …

How long does a thought, a long thought, take? Tod stood with the
fractured metal in his hand and thought:

_We were told that above all things we must adapt. We were told that
perhaps there would be a thin atmosphere by now, on Terra Prime, but
that in all likelihood we must live a new kind of life in
pressure-domes. We were warned that what we might find would be
flash-mutation, where the people could be more or less than human. We
were warned, even, that there might be no life on Prime at all. But look
at me now—look at all of us. We weren’t meant to adapt to this! And we
can’t …_

Somebody shouted while somebody shrieked, each sound a word, each
destroying the other. Something thick as a thumb, long as a hand, with a
voice like a distant airhorn, hurtled through the door and circled the
room. Teague snatched a folded cloak from the clothing rack and, poising
just a moment, batted it out of the air. It skittered, squirming, across
the metal door. He threw the cloak on it to capture it. “Get that door
closed.”

Carl snatched the broken control lever out of Tod’s hand and tried to
fit it back into the switch mounting. It crumbled as if it were dried
bread. Tod stepped outside, hooked his hands on the edge of the door,
and pulled. It would not budge. A lizard as long as his arm scuttled out
of the twisted grass and stopped to stare at him. He shouted at it, and
with forelegs much too long for such a creature, it pressed itself
upward until its body was forty-five degrees from the horizontal, it
flicked the end of its long tail upward, and something flew over its
head toward Tod, buzzing angrily. Tod turned to see what it was, and as
he did the lizard struck from one side and April from the other.

April succeeded and the lizard failed, for its fangs clashed and it fell
forward, but April’s shoulder had taken Tod on the chest and, off
balance as he was, he went flat on his back. The cold, dry, pulsing tail
swatted his hand. He gripped it convulsively, held on tight. Part of the
tail broke off and buzzed, flipping about on the ground like a
click-beetle. But the rest held. Tod scuttled backward to pull the
lizard straight as it began to turn on him, got his knees under him,
then his feet. He swung the lizard twice around his head and smashed it
against the inside of the open door. The part of the tail he was holding
then broke off, and the scaly thing thumped inside and slid, causing
Moira to leap so wildly to get out of its way that she nearly knocked
the stocky Carl off his feet.

Teague swept away the lid of the Surgery _Lambda_ kit, inverted it,
kicked the clutter of instruments and medicaments aside and clapped the
inverted box over the twitching, scaly body.

“April!” Tod shouted. He ran around in a blind semicircle, saw her
struggling to her feet in the grass, snatched her up and bounded inside
with her. “Carl!” he gasped, “Get the door …”

But Carl was already moving forward with a needle torch. With two deft
motions he sliced out a section of the power-arm which was holding the
door open. He swung the door to, yelling, “Parametal!”

Tod, gasping, ran to the lockers and brought a length of the synthetic.
Carl took the wide ribbon and with a snap of the wrists broke it in two.
Each half he bent (for it was very flexible when moved slowly) into a U.
He placed one against the door and held out his hand without looking.
Tod dropped the hammer into it. Carl tapped the parametal gently and it
adhered to the door. He turned his face away and struck it sharply.
There was a blue-white flash and the U was rigid and firmly welded to
the door. He did the same thing with the other U, welding it to the
nearby wall plates. Into the two gudgeons thus formed, Moira dropped a
luxalloy bar, and the door was secured.

“Shall I sterilize the floor?” Moira asked.

“No,” said Teague shortly.

“But—bacteria … spores …”

“Forget it,” said Teague.

April was crying. Tod held her close, but made no effort to stop her.
Something in him, deeper than panic, more essential than wonderment,
understood that she could use this circumstance to spend her tears for
Alma, and that these tears must be shed now or swell and burst her
heart. _So cry_, he pled silently, _cry for both of us, all of us_.

With the end of action, belated shock spread visibly over Carl’s face.
“The ship’s gone,” he said stupidly. “We’re on a planet.” He looked at
his hands, turned abruptly to the door, stared at it and began to
shiver. Moira went to him and stood quietly, not touching him—just being
near, in case she should be needed. April grew gradually silent. Carl
said, “I—” and then shook his head.

_Click. Shh. Clack, click_. Methodically Teague was stacking the
scattered contents of the medical kit. Tod patted April’s shoulder and
went to help. Moira glanced at them, peered closely into Carl’s face,
then left him and came to lend a hand. April joined them, and at last
Carl. They swept up and racked and stored the clutter, and when Teague
lowered a table, they helped get the dead lizard on it and pegged out
for dissection. Moira cautiously disentangled the huge insect from the
folds of the cloak and clapped a box over it, slid the lid underneath to
bring the feebly squirming thing to Teague. He studied it for a long
moment, then set it down and peered at the lizard. With forceps, he
opened the jaws and bent close. He grunted. “April …”

She came to look. Teague touched the fangs with the tip of a scalpel.
“Look there.”

“Grooves,” she said. “Like a snake.”

Teague reversed the scalpel and with the handle he gingerly pressed
upward, at the root of one of the fangs. A cloudy yellow liquid beaded,
ran down the groove. He dropped the scalpel and slipped a watch-glass
under the tooth to catch the droplet. “Analyze that later,” he murmured.
“But I’d say you saved Tod from something pretty nasty.”

“I didn’t even think,” said April. “I didn’t … I never knew there was
any animal life on Prime. I wonder what they call this monster.”

“The honors are yours, April. You name it.”

“They’ll have a classification for it already!”

“Who?”

Everyone started to talk, and abruptly stopped. In the awkward silence
Carl’s sudden laugh boomed. It was a wondrous sound in the frightened
chamber. There was comprehension in it, and challenge, and above all,
Carl himself—boisterous and impulsive, quick, sure. The laugh was
triggered by the gush of talk and its sudden cessation, a small thing in
itself. But its substance was understanding, and with that an emotional
surge, and with that, the choice of the one emotional expression Carl
would always choose.

“Tell them, Carl,” Teague said.

Carl’s teeth flashed. He waved a thick arm at the door. “That this isn’t
Sirius Prime. Nor Earth. Go ahead, April—name your pet.”

April, staring at the lizard, said, “_Crotalidus_, then, because it has
a rattle and fangs like a diamondback.” Then she paled and turned to
Carl, as the full weight of his statement came on her. “Not—_not
Prime?”_

Quietly, Teague said, “Nothing like these ever grew on Earth. And Prime
is a cold planet. It could never have a climate like that,” he nodded
toward the door, “no matter how much time has passed.”

“But what … where …” It was Moira.

“We’ll find out when we can. But the instruments aren’t here—they were
in the ship.”

“But if it’s a new … another planet, why didn’t you let me sterilize?
What about airborne spores? Suppose it had been methane out there or—”

“We’ve obviously been conditioned to anything in the atmosphere. As to
its composition—well, it isn’t poisonous, or we wouldn’t be standing
here talking about it. Wait!” He held up a hand and quelled the babble
of questions before it could fully start. “Wondering is a luxury like
worrying. We can’t afford either. We’ll get our answers when we get more
evidence.”

“What shall we do?” asked April faintly.

“Eat,” said Teague. “Sleep.” They waited. Teague said, “Then we go
outside.”

III

There were stars like daisies in a field, like dust in a sunbeam, and
like flying, flaming mountains; near ones, far ones, stars of every
color and every degree of brilliance. And there were bands of light
which must be stars too distant to see. And something was stealing the
stars, not taking them away, but swallowing them up, coming closer and
closer, eating as it came. And at last there was only one left. Its name
was Alma, and it was gone, and there was nothing left but an absorbent
blackness and an aching loss.

In this blackness Tod’s eyes snapped open, and he gasped, frightened and
lost.

“You awake, Tod?” April’s small hand touched his face. He took it and
drew it to his lips, drinking comfort from it.

From the blackness came Carl’s resonant whisper, “We’re awake. Teague?…”

The lights flashed on, dim first, brightening swiftly, but not so fast
as to dazzle unsuspecting eyes. Tod sat up and saw Teague at the table.
On it was the lizard, dissected and laid out as neatly as an exploded
view in a machine manual. Over the table, on a gooseneck, was a
floodlamp with its lens masked by an infrared filter. Teague turned away
from the table, pushing up his “black-light” goggles, and nodded to Tod.
There were shadows under his eyes, but otherwise he seemed the same as
ever. Tod wondered how many lonely hours he had worked while the two
couples slept, doing that meticulous work under the irritating glow so
that they would be undisturbed.

Tod went to him. “Has my playmate been talking much?” He pointed at the
remains of the lizard.

“Yes and no,” said Teague. “Oxygen-breather, all right, and a true
lizard. He had a secret weapon—that tail-segment he flips over his head
toward his victims. It has primitive ganglia like an Earth salamander’s,
so that the tail-segment trembles and squirms, sounding the rattles,
after he throws it. He also has a skeleton that—but all this doesn’t
matter. Most important is that he’s the analog of our early Permian
life, which means (unless he’s an evolutionary dead-end like a
cockroach) that this planet is a billion years old at the least. And the
little fellow here—” he touched the flying thing—“bears this out. It’s
not an insect, you know. It’s an arachnid.”

“With _wings?_”

Teague lifted the slender, scorpion-like pincers of the creature and let
them fall. “Flat chitinous wings are no more remarkable a leg adaptation
than those things. Anyway, in spite of the ingenuity of his engineering,
internally he’s pretty primitive. All of which lets us hypothesize that
we’ll find fairly close analogs of what we’re used to on Earth.”

“Teague,” Tod interrupted, his voice lowered, his eyes narrowed to
contain the worry that threatened to spill over, “Teague, what’s
happened?”

“The temperature and humidity here seem to be exactly the same as that
outside,” Teague went on, in precisely the same tone as before. “This
would indicate either a warm planet, or a warm season on a temperate
planet. In either case it is obvious that—”

“But, _Teague—_”

“—that a good deal of theorizing is possible with very little evidence,
and we need not occupy ourselves with anything else but that evidence.”

“Oh,” said Tod. He backed off a step. “Oh,” he said again, “sorry,
Teague.” He joined the others at the food dispensers, feeling like a
cuffed puppy. _But he’s right_, he thought. _As Alma said … of the many
things which might have happened, only one actually has. Let’s wait,
then, and worry about that one thing when we can name it_.

There was a pressure on his arm. He looked up from his thoughts and into
April’s searching eyes. He knew that she had heard, and he was
unreasonably angry at her. “Damn it, he’s so cold-blooded,” he blurted
defensively, but in a whisper.

April said, “He has to stay with things he can understand, every
minute.” She glanced swiftly at the closed Coffin. “Wouldn’t you?”

There was a sharp pain and a bitterness in Tod’s throat as he thought
about it. He dropped his eyes and mumbled, “No, I wouldn’t. I don’t
think I could.” There was a difference in his eyes as he glanced back at
Teague. _But it’s so easy, after all, for strong people to be strong_,
he thought.

“Teague, what’ll we wear?” Carl called.

“Skinflex.”

“Oh, no!” cried Moira. “It’s so clingy and hot!”

Carl laughed at her. He swept up the lizard’s head and opened its jaws.
“Smile at the lady. She wouldn’t put any tough old skinflex in the way
of your pretty teeth!”

“Put it down,” said Teague sharply, though there was a flicker of
amusement in his eyes. “It’s still loaded with God-knows-what alkaloid.
Moira, he’s right. Skinflex just doesn’t puncture.”

Moira looked respectfully at the yellow fangs and went obediently to
storage, where she pulled out the suits.

“We’ll keep close together, back to back,” said Teague as they helped
each other into the suits. “All the weapons are … were … in the forward
storage compartment, so we’ll improvise. Tod, you and the girls each
take a globe of anesthene. It’s the fastest anesthetic we have and it
ought to take care of anything that breathes oxygen. I’ll take scalpels.
Carl—”

“The hammer,” Carl grinned. His voice was fairly thrumming with
excitement.

“We won’t attempt to fasten the door from outside. I don’t mean to go
farther than ten meters out, this first time. Just—you, Carl—lift off
the bar as we go out, get the door shut as quickly as possible, and prop
it there. Whatever happens, do not attack anything out there unless you
are attacked first, or unless I say so.”

Hollow-eyed, steady, Teague moved to the door with the others close
around him. Carl shifted the hammer to his left hand, lifted the bar and
stood back a little, holding it like a javelin. Teague, holding a
glittering lancet lightly in each hand, pushed the door open with his
foot. They boiled through, stepped aside for Carl as he butted the rod
deep into the soil and against the closed door. “All set.”

They moved as a unit for perhaps three meters, and stopped.

It was daytime now, but such a day as none of them had dreamed of. The
light was green, very nearly a lime-green, and the shadows were purple.
The sky was more lavender than blue. The air was warm and wet.

They stood at the top of a low hill. Before them a tangle of jungle
tumbled up at them. So vital, so completely alive, it seemed to move by
its own power of growth. Stirring, murmuring, it was too big, too much,
too wide and deep and intertwined to assimilate at a glance; the
thought, _this is a jungle_, was a pitiable understatement.

To the left, savannah-like grassland rolled gently down to the choked
margins of a river—calm-faced, muddy and secretive. It too seemed astir
with inner growings. To the right, more jungle. Behind them, the bland
and comforting wall of their compartment.

Above—

It may have been April who saw it first; in any case, Tod always
associated the vision with April’s scream.

They moved as she screamed, five humans jerked back then like five dolls
on a single string, pressed together and to the compartment wall by an
overwhelming claustrophobia. They were ants under a descending heel,
flies on an anvil … together their backs struck the wall and they
cowered there, looking up.

And it was not descending. It was only—big. It was just that it was
there, over them.

April said, later, that it was like a cloud. Carl would argue that it
was cylindrical, with flared ends and a narrow waist. Teague never
attempted to describe it, because he disliked inaccuracies, and Moira
was too awed to try. To Tod, the object had no shape. It was a luminous
opacity between him and the sky, solid, massive as mountains. There was
only one thing they agreed on, and that was that it was a ship.

And out of the ship came the golden ones.

They appeared under the ship as speckles of light, and grew in size as
they descended, so that the five humans must withstand a second shock;
they had known the ship was huge, but had not known until now how very
high above them it hung.

Down they came, dozens, hundreds. They filled the sky over the jungle
and around the five, moving to make a spherical quadrant from the
horizontal to the zenith, a full hundred and eighty degrees from side to
side—a radiant floating shell with its concave surface toward, around,
above them. They blocked out the sky and the jungle-tops, cut off most
of the strange green light, replacing it with their own—for each glowed
coolly.

Each individual was distinct and separate. Later, they would argue about
the form and shape of the vessel, but the exact shape of these golden
things was never even mentioned. Nor did they ever agree on a name for
them. To Carl they were an army, to April, angels. Moira called them
(secretly) “the seraphim,” and to Tod they were masters. Teague never
named them.

For measureless time they hung there, with the humans gaping up at them.
There was no flutter of wings, no hum of machinery to indicate how they
stayed aloft, and if each individual had a device to keep him afloat, it
was of a kind the humans could not recognize. They were beautiful,
awesome, uncountable.

And nobody was afraid.

Tod looked from side to side, from top to bottom of this incredible
formation, and became aware that it did not touch the ground. Its lower
edge was exactly horizontal, at his eye level. Since the hill fell away
on all sides, he could see under this lower edge, here the jungle, there
down across the savannah to the river. In a new amazement he saw eyes,
and protruding heads.

In the tall grass at the jungle margin was a scurry and cease, scurry
and cease, as newtlike animals scrambled not quite into the open and
froze, watching. Up in the lower branches of the fleshy, hook-leaved
trees, heavy scaly heads of leaf-eaters showed, and here and there was
the armed head of a lizard with catlike tearing tusks.

Leather-winged fliers flapped clumsily to rest in the branches, hung for
a moment for all the world like broken umbrellas, then achieved balance
and folded their pinions. Something slid through the air, almost caught
a branch, missed it and tumbled end-over-end to the ground, resolving
itself into a broad-headed scaly thing with wide membranes between fore
and hind legs. And Tod saw his acquaintance of the night before, with
its serrated tail and needle fangs.

And though there must have been eater and eaten there, hunter and
hunted, they all watched silently, turned like living compass-needles to
the airborne mystery surrounding the humans. They crowded together like
a nightmare parody of the Lion and the Lamb, making a constellation, a
galaxy of bright and wondering eyes; their distance from each other
being, in its way, cosmic.

Tod turned his face into the strange light, and saw one of the golden
beings separate from the mass and drift down and forward and stop. Had
this living shell been a segment of curving mirror, this one creature
would have been at its focal point. For a moment there was complete
stillness, a silent waiting. Then the creature made a deep … _gesture_.
Behind it, all the others did the same.

If ten thousand people stand ten thousand meters away, and if, all at
once, they kneel, it is hardly possible to see just what it is they have
done; yet the aspect of their mass undergoes a definite change. So it
was with the radiant shell—it changed, all of it, without moving. There
was no mistaking the nature of the change, though its meaning was beyond
knowing. It was an obeisance. It was an expression of profound respect,
first to the humans themselves, next, and hugely, to something the
humans represented. It was unquestionably an act of worship.

_And what_, thought Tod, _could we symbolize to these shining ones?_ He
was a scarab beetle or an Egyptian cat, a Hindu cow or a Teuton tree,
told suddenly that it was sacred.

All the while there flooded down the thing which Carl had tried so
ineptly to express: _“We’re sorry. But it will be all right. You will be
glad. You can be glad now.”_

At last there was a change in the mighty formation. The center rose and
the wings came in, the left one rising and curling to tighten the curve,
the right one bending inward without rising. In a moment the formation
was a column, a hollow cylinder. It began to rotate slowly, divided into
a series of close-set horizontal rings. Alternate rings slowed and
stopped and began a counter-rotation, and with a sudden shift, became
two interlocked spirals. Still the over-all formation was a hollow
cylinder, but now it was composed of an upward and a downward helix.

The individuals spun and swirled down and down, up and up, and kept this
motion within the cylinder, and the cylinder quite discrete, as it began
to rise. Up and up it lifted, brilliantly, silently, the living original
of that which they had found by Alma’s body … up and up, filling the eye
and the mind with its complex and controlled ascent, its perfect
continuity; for here was a thing with no beginning and no end, all flux
and balance where each rising was matched by a fall and each turn by its
counterpart.

High, and higher, and at last it was a glowing spot against the hovering
shadow of the ship, which swallowed it up. The ship left then, not
moving, but fading away like the streamers of an aurora, but faster. In
three heartbeats it was there, perhaps it was there, it was gone.

Tod closed his eyes, seeing that dynamic double helix. The tip of his
mind was upon it; he trembled on the edge of revelation. He _knew_ what
that form symbolized. He knew it contained the simple answer to his life
and their lives, to this planet and its life and the lives which were
brought to it. If a cross is more than an instrument of torture, more
than the memento of an event; if the _crux ansata_, the Yin-and-Yang,
David’s star and all such crystallizations were but symbols of great
systems of philosophy, then this dynamic intertwined spiral, this
free-flowing, rigidly choreographed symbol was … was—

Something grunted, something screamed, and the wondrous answer turned
and rose spiraling away from him to be gone in three heartbeats. Yet in
that moment he knew it was there for him when he had the time, the
phasing, the bringing-together of whatever elements were needed. He
could not use it yet but he had it. He had it.

Another scream, an immense thrashing all about. The spell was broken and
the armistice over. There were chargings and fleeings, cries of
death-agony and roaring challenges in and over the jungle, through the
grasses to the suddenly boiling river. Life goes on, and death with it,
but there must be more death than life when too much life is thrown
together.

IV

It may be that their five human lives were saved, in that turbulent
reawakening, only by their alienness, for the life around them was
cheek-and-jowl with its familiar enemy, its familiar quarry, its
familiar food, and there need be no experimenting with the five soft
containers of new rich juices standing awestruck with their backs to
their intrusive shelter.

Then slowly they met one another’s eyes. They cared enough for each
other so that there was a gladness of sharing. They cared enough for
themselves so that there was also a sheepishness, a troubled
self-analysis: _What did I do while I was out of my mind?_

They drew together before the door and watched the chase and slaughter
around them as it subsided toward its usual balance of hunting and
killing, eating and dying. Their hands began to remember the weapons
they held, their minds began to reach for reality.

“They were angels,” April said, so softly that no one but Tod heard her.
Tod watched her lips tremble and part, and knew that she was about to
speak the thing he had almost grasped, but then Teague spoke again, and
Tod could see the comprehension fade from her and be gone. “Look! Look
there!” said Teague, and moved down the wall to the corner.

What had been an inner compartment of their ship was now an isolated
cube, and from its back corner, out of sight until now, stretched
another long wall. At regular intervals were doors, each fastened by a
simple outside latch of parametal.

Teague stepped to the first door, the others crowding close. Teague
listened intently, then stepped back and threw the door open.

Inside was a windowless room, blazing with light. Around the sides,
machines were set. Tod instantly recognized their air-cracker, the
water-purifiers, the protein-converter and one of the auxiliary power
plants. In the center was a generator coupled to a light-metal fusion
motor. The output buses were neatly insulated, coupled through fuseboxes
and resistance controls to a “Christmas tree” multiple outlet. Cables
ran through the wall to the Coffin compartment and to the line of
unexplored rooms to their left.

“They’ve left us power, at any rate,” said Teague. “Let’s look down the
line.”

_Fish_, Tod snarled silently. _Dead man! After what you’ve just seen you
should be on your knees with the weight of it, you should put out your
eyes to remember better. But all you can do is take inventory of your
nuts and bolts_.

Tod looked at the others, at their strained faces and their continual
upward glances, as if the bright memory had magnetism for them. He could
see the dream fading under Teague’s untimely urgency. _You couldn’t let
us live with it quietly, even for a moment_. Then another inward voice
explained to him, _But you see, they killed Alma_.

Resentfully he followed Teague.

Their ship had been dismantled, strung out along the hilltop like a row
of shacks. They were interconnected, wired up, re-stacked, ready and
reeking with efficiency—the lab, the library, six chambers full of mixed
cargo, then—then the noise Teague made was as near to a shout of glee as
Tod had ever heard from the man. The door he had just opened showed
their instruments inside, all the reference tapes and tools and manuals.
There was even a dome in the roof, and the refractor was mounted and
waiting.

“April?” Tod looked, looked again. She was gone. “April!”

She emerged from the library, three doors back. “Teague!”

Teague pulled himself away from the array of instruments and went to
her. “Teague,” she said, “every one of the reels has been read.”

“How do you know?”

“None of them are rewound.”

Teague looked up and down the row of doors. “That doesn’t sound like the
way they—” The unfinished sentence was enough. Whoever had built this
from their ship’s substance worked according to function and with a fine
efficiency.

Teague entered the library and picked a tape-reel from its rack. He
inserted the free end of film into a slot and pressed a button. The reel
spun and the film disappeared inside the cabinet.

Teague looked up and back. Every single reel was inside out on the
clips. “They could have rewound them,” said Teague, irritated.

“Maybe they wanted us to know that they’d read them,” said Moira.

“Maybe they did,” Teague murmured. He picked up a reel, looked at it,
picked up another and another. “Music. A play. And here’s our personal
stuff—behavior film, training records, everything.”

Carl said, “Whoever read through all this knows a lot about us.”

Teague frowned. “Just us?”

“Who else?”

“Earth,” said Teague. “All of it.”

“You mean we were captured and analyzed so that whoever they are could
get a line on Earth? You think they’re going to attack Earth?”

“ ‘You mean … You think …’ ” Teague mimicked coldly. “I mean nothing and
I think nothing! Tod, would you be good enough to explain to this
impulsive young man what you learned from me earlier? That we need
concern ourselves only with evidence?”

Tod shuffled his feet, wishing not to be made an example for anyone,
especially Carl, to follow. Carl flushed and tried to smile. Moira took
his hand secretly and squeezed it. Tod heard a slight exhalation beside
him and looked quickly at April. She was angry. There were times when he
wished she would not be angry.

She pointed. “Would you call _that_ evidence, Teague?”

They followed her gesture. One of the tape-readers stood open. On its
reelshelf stood the counterpart of the strange object they had seen
twice before—once, in miniature, found in Alma’s Coffin; once again,
huge in the sky. This was another of the miniatures.

Teague stared at it, then put out his hand. As his fingers touched it,
the pilot-jewel on the tape-reader flashed on, and a soft, clear voice
filled the room.

Tod’s eyes stung. He had thought he would never hear that voice again.
As he listened, he held to the lifeline of April’s presence, and felt
his lifeline tremble.

Alma’s voice said:

_“They made some adjustments yesterday with the needle-clusters in my
Coffin, so I think they will put me back into it … Teague, oh Teague,
I’m going to die!_

_“They brought me the recorder just now. I don’t know whether it’s for
their records or for you. If it’s for you, then I must tell you … how
can I tell you?_

_“I’ve watched them all this time … how long? Months … I don’t know. I
conceived when I awoke, and the babies are coming very soon now; it’s
been long enough for that; and yet—how can I tell you?_

_“They boarded us, I don’t know how, and I don’t know why, nor
where … outside, space is strange, wrong. It’s all misty, without stars,
crawling with blurs and patches of light_.

_“They understand me; I’m sure of that—what I say, what I think. I can’t
understand them at all. They radiate feelings—sorrow, curiosity,
confidence, respect. When I began to realize I would die, they gave me a
kind of regret. When I broke and cried and said I wanted to be with you,
Teague, they reassured me, they said I would. I’m sure that’s what they
said. But how could that be?_

_“They are completely dedicated in what they are doing. Their work is a
religion to them, and we are part of it. They … value us, Teague. They
didn’t just find us. They chose us. It’s as if we were the best part of
something even they consider great_.

_“The best …! Among them I feel like an amoeba. They’re beautiful,
Teague. Important. Very sure of what they are doing. It’s that certainty
that makes me believe what I have to believe: I am going to die, and you
will live, and you and I will be together. How can that be? How can that
be?_

_“Yet it is true, so believe it with me, Teague. But—find out how!_

_“Teague, every day they have put a machine on me, radiating. It has to
do with the babies. It isn’t done to harm them, I’m sure of that. I’m
their mother and I’m sure of it. They won’t die_.

_“I will. I can feel their sorrow_.

_“And I will be with you, and they are joyous about that …”_

_“Teague—find out how!”_

Tod closed his eyes so that he would not look at Teague, and wished with
all his heart that Teague had been alone to hear that ghostly voice. As
to what it had said, the words stood as a frame for a picture he could
not see, showing him only where it was, not what it meant. Alma’s voice
had been tremulous and unsure, but he knew it well enough to know that
joy and certitude had lived with her as she spoke. There was wonderment,
but no fear.

Knowing that it might be her only message to them, should she not have
told them more—facts, figures, measurements?

Then an old, old tale flashed into his mind, an early thing from the
ancient Amerenglish, by Hynlen (Henlyne, was it? no matter) about a man
who tried to convey to humanity a description of the superbeings who had
captured him, with only his body as a tablet and his nails as a stylus.
Perhaps he was mad by the time he finished, but his message was clear at
least to him: _“Creation took eight days.”_ How would he, Tod, describe
an association with the ones he had seen in the sky outside, if he had
been with them for nearly three hundred days?

April tugged gently at his arm. He turned toward her, still avoiding the
sight of Teague. April inclined her shining white head to the door.
Moira and Carl already stood outside. They joined them, and waited
wordlessly until Teague came out.

When he did, he was grateful, and he need not say so. He came out, a
great calm in his face and voice, passed them and let them follow him to
his methodical examination of the other compartments, to finish his
inventory.

Food stores, cable and conduit, metal and parametal rod and sheet stock,
tools and tool-making matrices and dies. A hangar, in which lay their
lifeboat, fully equipped.

But there was no long-range communication device, and no parts for one.

And there was no heavy space-drive mechanism, nor tools to make one, nor
fuel if they should make the tools.

Back in the instrument room, Carl grunted. “Somebody means for us to
stick around.”

“The boat—”

Teague said, “I don’t think they’d have left us the boat if Earth was in
range.”

“We’ll build a beacon,” Tod said suddenly. “We’ll get a rescue ship out
to us.”

“Out where?” asked Teague dryly.

They followed his gaze. Bland and silent, merciless, the decay
chronometer stared back at them. Built around a standard radioactive, it
had two dials—one which measured the amount of energy radiated by the
material, and one which measured the loss mass. When they checked, the
reading was correct. They checked, and the reading was 64.

“Sixty-four years,” said Teague. “Assuming we averaged as much as
one-half light speed, which isn’t likely, we must be thirty light-years
away from Earth. Thirty years to get a light-beam there, sixty or more
to get a ship back, plus time to make the beacon and time for Earth to
understand the signal and prepare a ship …” He shook his head.

“Plus the fact,” Tod said in a strained voice, “that there is no
habitable planet in a thirty-year radius from Sol. Except Prime.”

Shocked, they gaped silently at this well-known fact. A thousand years
of scrupulous search with the best instruments could not have missed a
planet like this at such a distance.

“Then the chronometer’s wrong!”

“I’m afraid not,” said Teague. “It’s sixty-four years since we left
Earth, and that’s that.”

“And this planet doesn’t exist,” said Carl with a sour smile, “and I
suppose that is also that.”

“Yes, Teague,” said Tod. “One of those two facts can’t exist with the
other.”

“They can because they do,” said Teague. “There’s a missing factor. Can
a man breathe underwater, Tod?”

“If he has a diving helmet.”

Teague spread his hands. “It took sixty-four years to get to this planet
_if_. We have to find the figurative diving helmet.” He paused. “The
evidence in favor of the planet’s existence is fairly impressive,” he
said wryly. “Let’s check the other fact.”

“How?”

“The observatory.”

They ran to it. The sky glowed its shimmering green, but through it the
stars had begun to twinkle. Carl got to the telescope first, put a big
hand on the swing-controls, and said, “Where first?” He tugged at the
instrument. “Hey!” He tugged again.

“Don’t!” said Teague sharply. Carl let go and backed away. Teague
switched on the lights and examined the instrument. “It’s already
connected to the compensators,” he said. “Hmp! Our hosts are most
helpful.” He looked at the setting of the small motors which moved the
instrument to cancel diurnal rotation effects. “Twenty-eight hours,
thirteen minutes plus. Well, if that’s correct for this planet, it’s
proof that this isn’t Earth or Prime—if we needed proof.” He touched the
controls lightly. “Carl, what’s the matter here?”

Carl bent to look. There were dabs of dull silver on the threads of the
adjusting screws. He touched them. “Parametal,” he said. “Unflashed, but
it has adhered enough to jam the threads. Take a couple days to get it
off without jarring it. Look here—they’ve done the same thing with the
objective screws!”

“We look at what they want us to see, and like it,” said Tod.

“Maybe it’s something we want to see,” said April gently.

Only half-teasing, Tod said, “Whose side are you on, anyway?”

Teague put his eye to the instrument. His hands, by habit, strayed to
the focusing adjustment, but found it locked the same way as the others.
“Is there a Galactic Atlas?”

“Not in the rack,” said Moira a moment later.

“Here,” said April from the chart table. Awed, she added, “Open.”

Tensely they waited while Teague took his observation and referred to
the atlas and to the catalog they found lying under it. When at last he
lifted his face from the calculations, it bore the strangest expression
Tod had ever seen there.

“Our diving helmet,” he said at last, very slowly, too evenly, “—that
is, the factor which rationalizes our two mutually exclusive facts—is
simply that our captors have a faster-than-light drive.”

“But according to theory—”

“According to our telescope,” Teague interrupted, “through which I have
just seen Sol, and these references so thoughtfully laid out for us …”
Shockingly, his voice broke. He took two deep breaths, and said, “Sol is
two-hundred and seventeen light-years away. That sun which set a few
minutes ago is Beta Librae.” He studied their shocked faces, one by one.
“I don’t know what we shall eventually call this place,” he said with
difficulty, “but we had better get used to calling it home.”

They called the planet Viridis (“the greenest name I can think of,”
Moira said) because none among them had ever seen such a green. It was
more than the green of growing, for the sunlight was green-tinged and at
night the whole sky glowed green, a green as bright as the brightest
silver of Earth’s moon, as water molecules, cracked by the star’s
intense ultraviolet, celebrated their nocturnal reunion.

They called the moons Wynken, Blynken, and Nod, and the sun they
called—the sun.

They worked like slaves, and then like scientists, which is a change of
occupation but not a change of pace. They built a palisade of a
cypress-like, straight-grained wood, each piece needle-pointed,
double-laced with parametal wire. It had a barred gate and peepholes
with periscopes and permanent swivel-mounts for the needle-guns they
were able to fabricate from tube-stock and spare solenoids. They roofed
the enclosure with parametal mesh, which, at one point, could be rolled
back to launch the lifeboat.

They buried Alma.

They tested and analyzed, classified, processed, researched everything
in the compound and within easy reach of it—soil, vegetation, fauna.
They developed an insect-repellent solution to coat the palisade and an
insecticide with an automatic spray to keep the compound clear of the
creatures, for they were numerous, large, and occasionally downright
dangerous, like the “flying caterpillar” which kept its pseudopods in
its winged form and enthusiastically broke them off in the flesh of
whatever attacked it, leaving an angry rash and suppurating sores. They
discovered three kinds of edible seed and another which yielded a fine
hydrocarbonic oil much like soy, and a flower whose calyces, when dried
and then soaked and broiled, tasted precisely like crabmeat.

For a time they were two separate teams, virtually isolated from each
other. Moira and Teague collected minerals and put them through the mass
spectroscope and the radioanalyzers, and it fell to April to classify
the life-forms, with Carl and Tod competing mightily to bring in new
ones. Or at least photographs of new ones. Two-ton _Parametrodon_,
familiarly known as Dopey—a massive herbivore with just enough
intelligence to move its jaws—was hardly the kind of thing to be carried
home under one’s arm, and _Felodon_, the scaly carnivore with catlike
tusks, though barely as long as a man, was about as friendly as a
half-starved wolverine.

_Tetrapodys_ (Tod called it ‘Umbrellabird’) turned out to be a rewarding
catch. They stumbled across a vine which bore foul-smelling pods; these
the clumsy amphibious bats found irresistible. Carl synthesized the evil
stuff and improved upon it, and they smeared it on tree-boles by the
river. _Tetrapodys_ came there by the hundreds and laid eggs apparently
in sheer frustration. These eggs were camouflaged by a frilly green
membrane, for all the world like the ground-buds of the giant
water-fern. The green shoots tasted like shallots and were fine for
salad when raw and excellent as onion soup when stewed. The half-hatched
_Tetrapodys_ yielded ligaments which when dried made excellent
self-baited fishhooks. The wing muscles of the adult tasted like veal
cutlet with fish sauce, and the inner or main shell of the eggs afforded
them an amazing shoe sole—light, tough, and flexible, which, for some
unknown reason, _Felodon_ would not track.

_Pteronauchis_, or “flapping frog,” was the gliding newt they had seen
on that first day. Largely nocturnal, it was phototropic; a man with
strong light could fill a bushel with the things in minutes. Each
specimen yielded twice as many, twice as large, and twice as good
frog-legs as a Terran frog.

There were no mammals.

There were flowers in profusion—white (a sticky green in that light),
purple, brown, blue, and, of course, the ubiquitous green. No red—as a
matter of fact, there was virtually no red anywhere on the planet.
April’s eyes became a feast for them all. It is impossible to describe
the yearning one can feel for an absent color. And so it was that a
legend began with them. Twice Tod had seen a bright red growth. The
first time he thought it was a mushroom, the second it seemed more of a
lichen. The first time it was surrounded by a sea of crusher ants on the
move—a fearsome carpet which even _Parametrodon_ respected. The second
time he had seen it from twenty meters away and had just turned toward
it when not one but three _Felodons_ came hurtling through the
undergrowth at him.

He came back later, both times, and found nothing. And once Carl swore
he saw a brilliant red plant move slowly into a rock crevice as he
approached. The thing became their _edelweiss_—very nearly their Grail.

Rough diamonds lay in the streambeds and emeralds glinted in the
night-glow, and for the Terran-oriented mind there was incalculable
treasure to be scratched up just below the steaming humus: iridium,
ruthenium, metallic neptunium 237. There was an unaccountable (at first)
shift toward the heavier metals. The ruthenium-rhodium-palladium group
was as plentiful on Viridis as the iron-nickel-cobalt series on Earth;
cadmium was actually more plentiful here than its relative, zinc.
Technetium was present, though rare, on the crust, while Earth’s had
long since decayed.

Vulcanism was common on Viridis, as could be expected in the presence of
so many radioactives. From the lifeboat they had seen bald-spots where
there were particularly high concentrations of “hot” material. In some
of these there was life.

At the price of a bout of radiation sickness, Carl went into one such
area briefly for specimens. What he found was extraordinary—a tree which
was warm to the touch, which used minerals and water at a profligate
pace, and which, when transplanted outside an environment which
destroyed cells almost as fast as they developed, went cancerous, grew
enormously, and killed itself with its own terrible viability. In the
same lethal areas lived a primitive worm which constantly discarded
segments to keep pace with its rapid growth, and which also grew visibly
and died of living too fast when taken outside.

The inclination of the planet’s axis was less than 2°, so that there
were virtually no seasons, and very little variation in temperature from
one latitude to another. There were two continents and an equatorial
sea, no mountains, no plains, and few large lakes. Most of the planet
was gently rolling hill-country and meandering rivers, clothed in thick
jungle or grass. The spot where they had awakened was as good as any
other, so there they stayed, wandering less and less as they amassed
information. Nowhere was there an artifact of any kind, nor any
slightest trace of previous habitation. Unless, of course, one
considered the existence itself of life on this planet. For Permian life
can hardly be expected to develop in less than a billion years; yet the
irreproachable calendar inherent in the radioactive bones of Viridis
insisted that the planet was no more than thirty-five million years old.

V

When Moira’s time came, it went hard with her, and Carl forgot to
swagger because he could not help. Teague and April took care of her,
and Tod stayed with Carl, wishing for the right thing to say and not
finding it, wanting to do something for this new strange man with Carl’s
face, and the unsure hands which twisted each other, clawed the ground,
wiped cruelly at the scalp, at the shins, restless, terrified. Through
Carl, Tod learned a little more of what he never wanted to know—what it
must have been like for Teague when he lost Alma.

Alma’s six children were toddlers by then, bright and happy in the only
world they had ever known. They had been named for moons—Wynken, Blynken
and Nod, Rhea, Callisto and Titan. Nod and Titan were the boys, and they
and Rhea had Alma’s eyes and hair and sometimes Alma’s odd, brave
stillness—a sort of suspension of the body while the mind went out to
grapple and conquer instead of fearing. If the turgid air and the
radiant ground affected them, they did not show it, except perhaps in
their rapid development.

They heard Moira cry out. It was like laughter, but it was pain. Carl
sprang to his feet. Tod took his arm and Carl pulled it away. “Why can’t
I do something? Do I have to just _sit_ here?”

“Shh. She doesn’t feel it. That’s a tropism. She’ll be all right. Sit
down, Carl. Tell you what you can do—you can name them. Think. Think of
a nice set of names, all connected in some way. Teague used moons. What
are you going to—”

“Time enough for that,” Carl grunted. “Tod … do you know what I’ll … I’d
be if she—if something happened?”

“Nothing’s going to happen.”

“I’d just cancel out. I’m not Teague. I couldn’t carry it. How does
Teague do it?…” Carl’s voice lapsed to a mumble.

“Names,” Tod reminded him. “Seven, eight of ’em. Come on, now.”

“Think she’ll have eight?”

“Why not? She’s normal.” He nudged Carl. “Think of names. I know! How
many of the old signs of the zodiac would make good names?”

“Don’t remember ’em.”

“I do. Aries, that’s good. Taurus. Gem—no; you wouldn’t want to call a
child ‘Twins.’ Leo—that’s _fine!_”

“Libra,” said Carl, “for a girl. Aquarius, Sagittarius—how many’s that?”

Tod counted on his fingers. “Six. Then, Virgo and Capricorn. And you’re
all set!” But Carl wasn’t listening. In two long bounds he reached
April, who was just stepping into the compound. She looked tired. She
looked more than tired. In her beautiful eyes was a great pity, the
color of a bleeding heart.

“Is she all right? Is she?” They were hardly words, those hoarse, rushed
things.

April smiled with her lips, while her eyes poured pity. “Yes, yes,
she’ll be all right. It wasn’t too bad.”

Carl whooped and pushed past her. She caught his arm, and for all her
frailty, swung him around.

“Not yet, Carl. Teague says to tell you first—”

“The babies? What about them? How many, April?”

April looked over Carl’s shoulder at Tod. She said, “Three.”

Carl’s face relaxed, numb, and his eyes went round. “Th—what? Three so
far, you mean. There’ll surely be more …”

She shook her head.

Tod felt the laughter explode within him, and he clamped his jaws on it.
It surged at him, hammered in the back of his throat. And then he caught
April’s pleading eyes. He took strength from her, and bottled up a great
bray of merriment.

Carl’s voice was the last fraying thread of hope. “The others died,
then.”

She put a hand on his cheek. “There were only three. Carl … don’t be
mean to Moira.”

“Oh, I won’t,” he said with difficulty. “She couldn’t … I mean it wasn’t
her doing.” He flashed a quick, defensive look at Tod, who was now glad
he had controlled himself. What was in Carl’s face meant murder for
anyone who dared laugh.

April said, “Not your doing either, Carl. It’s this planet. It must be.”

“Thanks, April,” Carl muttered. He went to the door, stopped, shook
himself like a big dog. He said again, “Thanks,” but this time his voice
didn’t work and it was only a whisper. He went inside.

Tod bolted for the corner of the building, whipped around it and sank to
the ground, choking. He held both hands over his mouth and laughed until
he hurt. When at last he came to a limp silence, he felt April’s
presence. She stood quietly watching him, waiting.

“I’m sorry,” he said. “I’m sorry. But … it _is_ funny.”

She shook her head gravely. “We’re not on Earth, Tod. A new world means
new manners, too. That would apply even on Terra Prime if we’d gone
there.”

“I suppose,” he said, and then repressed another giggle.

“I always thought it was a silly kind of joke anyway,” she said primly.
“Judging virility by the size of a brood. There isn’t any scientific
basis for it. Men are silly. They used to think that virility could be
measured by the amount of hair on their chests, or how tall they were.
There’s nothing wrong with having only three.”

“Carl?” grinned Tod. “The big ol’ swashbuckler?” He let the grin fade.
“All right, Ape. I won’t let Carl see me laugh. Or you either. All
right?” A peculiar expression crossed his face. “What was that you said?
April! Men never had hair on their chests!”

“Yes, they did. Ask Teague.”

“I’ll take your word for it.” He shuddered. “I can’t imagine it unless a
man had a tail too. And bony ridges over his eyes.”

“It wasn’t so long ago that they had. The ridges, anyway. Well—I’m glad
you didn’t laugh in front of him. You’re nice, Tod.”

“You’re nice too.” He pulled her down beside him and hugged her gently.
“Bet you’ll have a dozen.”

“I’ll try.” She kissed him.

When specimen-hunting had gone as far as it could, classification became
the settlement’s main enterprise. And gradually, the unique pattern of
Viridian life began to emerge.

Viridis had its primitive fish and several of the mollusca, but the
fauna was primarily arthropods and reptiles. The interesting thing about
each of the three branches was the close relationship between species.
It was almost as if evolution took a major step with each generation,
instead of bumbling along as on Earth, where certain stages of
development are static for thousands, millions of years. _Pterodon_, for
example, existed in three varieties, the simplest of which showed a
clear similarity to _pteronauchis_, the gliding newt. A simple
salamander could be shown to be the common ancestor of both the flapping
frog and massive _Parametrodon_, and there were strong similarities
between this salamander and the worm which fathered the arthropods.

They lived close to the truth for a long time without being able to see
it, for man is conditioned to think of evolution from simple to complex,
from ooze to animalcule to mollusc to ganoid; amphibid to monotreme to
primate to tinker … losing the significance of the fact that all these
co-exist. Was the vertebrate eel of prehistory a _higher_ form of life
than his simpler descendant? The whale lost his legs; this men call
recidivism, a sort of backsliding in evolution, and treat it as a kind
of illegitimacy.

Men are oriented out of simplicity toward the complex, and make of the
latter a goal. Nature treats complex matters as expediencies and so is
never confused. It is hardly surprising, then, that the Viridis colony
took so long to discover their error, for the weight of evidence was in
error’s favor. There was indeed an unbroken line from the lowest forms
of life to the highest, and to assume that they had a common ancestor
was a beautifully consistent hypothesis, of the order of accuracy an
archer might display in hitting dead center, from a thousand paces, a
bowstring with the nock of his arrow.

The work fell more and more on the younger ones. Teague isolated
himself, not by edict, but by habit. It was assumed that he was working
along his own lines; and then it became usual to proceed without him,
until finally he was virtually a hermit in their midst. He was aging
rapidly; perhaps it hurt something in him to be surrounded by so much
youth. His six children thrived, and, with Carl’s three, ran naked in
the jungle armed only with their sticks and their speed. They were
apparently immune to practically everything Viridis might bring against
them, even _Crotalidus’s_ fangs, which gave them the equivalent of a
severe bee-sting (as opposed to what had happened to Moira once, when
they had had to reactivate one of the Coffins to keep her alive).

Tod would come and sit with him sometimes, and as long as there was no
talk the older man seemed to gain something from the visits. But he
preferred to be alone, living as much as he could with memories for
which not even a new world could afford a substitute.

Tod said to Carl, “Teague is going to wither up and blow away if we
can’t interest him in something.”

“He’s interested enough to spend a lot of time with whatever he’s
thinking about,” Carl said bluntly.

“But I’d like it better if he was interested in something here, now. I
wish we could … I wish—” But he could think of nothing, and it was a
constant trouble to him.

Little Titan was killed, crushed under a great clumsy _Parametrodon
_which slid down a bank on him while the child was grubbing for the
scarlet cap of the strange red mushroom they had glimpsed from time to
time. It was in pursuit of one of these that Moira had been bitten by
the _Crotalidus_. One of Carl’s children was drowned—just how, no one
knew. Aside from these tragedies, life was easy and interesting. The
compound began to look more like a _kraal_ as they acclimated, for
although the adults never adapted as well as the children, they did
become far less sensitive to insect bites and the poison weeds which
first troubled them.

It was Teague’s son Nod who found what was needed to bring Teague’s
interest back, at least for a while. The child came back to the compound
one day, trailed by two slinking _Felodons_ who did not catch him
because they kept pausing and pausing to lap up gouts of blood which
marked his path. Nod’s ear was torn and he had a green-stick break in
his left ulna, and a dislocated wrist. He came weeping, weeping tears of
joy. He shouted as he wept, great proud noises. Once in the compound, he
collapsed, but he would not lose consciousness, nor his grip on his
prize, until Teague came. Then he handed Teague the mushroom and
fainted.

The mushroom was and was not like anything on Earth. Earth has a fungus
called _schizophyllum_, not uncommon but most strange. Though not
properly a fungus, the red “mushroom” of Viridis had many of the
functions of _schizophyllum_.

_Schizophyllum_ produces spores of four distinct types, each of which
grows into a genetically distinct, completely dissimilar plant. Three of
these are sterile. The fourth produces _schizophyllum_.

The red mushroom of Viridis also produced four distinct heterokaryons or
genetically different types, and the spores of one of these produced the
mushroom.

Teague spent an engrossing earth-year in investigating the other three.

VI

Sweating and miserable in his integument of flexskin, Tod hunched in the
crotch of a finger-tree. His knees were drawn up and his head was down;
his arms clasped his shins and he rocked slightly back and forth. He
knew he would be safe here for some time—the fleshy fingers of the tree
were clumped at the slender, swaying ends of the branches and never
turned back toward the trunk. He wondered what it would be like to be
dead. Perhaps he would be dead soon, and then he’d know. He might as
well be.

The names he’d chosen were perfect and all of a family: Sol, Mercury,
Venus, Terra, Mars, Jupiter … eleven of them. And he could think of a
twelfth if he had to.

For what?

He let himself sink down again into the blackness wherein nothing lived
but the oily turning of _what’s it like to be dead?_

Quiet, he thought. _No one would laugh_.

Something pale moved on the jungle floor below him. He thought instantly
of April, and angrily put the thought out of his mind. April would be
sleeping now, having completed the trifling task it had taken her so
long to start. Down there, that would be Blynken, or maybe Rhea. They
were very alike.

It didn’t matter, anyway.

He closed his eyes and stopped rocking. He couldn’t see anyone, no one
could see him. That was the best way. So he sat, and let time pass, and
when a hand lay on his shoulder, he nearly leaped out of the tree. “Damn
it, Blynken—”

“It’s me. Rhea.” The child, like all of Alma’s daughters, was large for
her age and glowing with health. How long had it been? Six, eight … nine
Earth years since they had landed.

“Go hunt mushrooms,” Tod growled. “Leave me alone.”

“Come back,” said the girl.

Tod would not answer. Rhea knelt beside him, her arm around the primary
branch, her back, with his, against the trunk. She bent her head and put
her cheek against his. “Tod.”

Something inside him flamed. He bared his teeth and swung a heavy fist.
The girl doubled up soundlessly and slipped out of the tree. He stared
down at the lax body and at first could not see it for the haze of fury
which blew and whirled around him. Then his vision cleared and he
moaned, tossed his club down and dropped after it. He caught up the club
and whacked off the tree-fingers which probed toward them. He swept up
the child and leapt clear, and sank to his knees, gathering her close.

“Rhea, I’m sorry, I’m sorry … I wasn’t … I’m not—_Rhea!_ Don’t be dead!”

She stirred and made a tearing sound with her throat. Her eyelids
trembled and opened, uncovering her pain-blinded eyes. “Rhea!”

“It’s all right,” she whispered, “I shouldn’t’ve bothered you. Do you
want me to go away?”

“No,” he said. “No.” He held her tight. _Why not let her go away?_ a
part of him wondered, and another part, frightened and puzzled, cried,
_No! No!_ He had an urgent, half-hysterical need to explain. _Why
explain to her, a child? Say you’re sorry, comfort her, heal her, but
don’t expect her to understand_. Yet he said, “I can’t go back. There’s
nowhere else to go. So what can I do?”

Rhea was quiet, as if waiting. A terrible thing, a wonderful thing, to
have someone you have hurt wait patiently like that while you find a way
to explain. Even if you only explain it to yourself … “What could I do
if I went back? They—they’ll never—they’ll laugh at me. They’ll all
laugh. They’re laughing now.” Angry again, plaintive no more, he
blurted, “April! _Damn_ April! She’s made a eunuch out of me!”

“Because she had only one baby?”

“Like a savage.”

“It’s a beautiful baby. A boy.”

“A man, a real man, fathers six or eight.”

She met his eyes gravely. “That’s silly.”

“What’s happening to us on this crazy planet?” he raged. “Are we
evolving backward? What comes next—one of you kids hatching out some
amphibids?”

She said only, “Come back, Tod.”

“I can’t,” he whispered. “They’ll think I’m … that I can’t …”
Helplessly, he shrugged. “They’ll laugh.”

“Not until you do, and then they’ll laugh _with_ you. Not at you, Tod.”

Finally, he said it, “April won’t love me; she’ll never love a
weakling.”

She pondered, holding him with her clear gaze. “You really need to be
loved a whole lot.”

Perversely, he became angry again. “I can get along!” he snapped.

And she smiled and touched the nape of his neck. “You’re loved,” she
assured him. “Gee, you don’t have to be mad about that. I love you,
don’t I? April loves you. Maybe I love you even more than she does. She
loves everything you are, Tod. I love everything you ever were and
everything you ever will be.”

He closed his eyes and a great music came to him. A long, long time ago
he had attacked someone who came to comfort him, and she had let him
cry, and at length she had said … not exactly these words, but—it was
the same.

“Rhea.”

He looked at her. “You said all that to me before.”

A puzzled small crinkle appeared between her eyes and she put her
fingers on it. “Did I?”

“Yes,” said Tod, “but it was before you were even born.”

He rose and took her hand, and they went back to the compound, and
whether he was laughed at or not he never knew, for he could think of
nothing but his full heart and of April. He went straight in to her and
kissed her gently and admired his son, whose name was Sol, and who had
been born with hair and two tiny incisors, and who had heavy bony ridges
over his eyes …

“A fantastic storage capacity,” Teague remarked, touching the top of the
scarlet mushroom. “The spores are almost microscopic. The thing doesn’t
seem to want them distributed, either. It positively hoards them,
millions of them.”

“Start over, please,” April said. She shifted the baby in her arms. He
was growing prodigiously. “Slowly. I used to know something about
biology—or so I thought. But _this—_”

Teague almost smiled. It was good to see. The aging face had not had so
much expression in it in five Earth-years. “I’ll get as basic as I can,
then, and start from there. First of all, we call this thing a mushroom,
but it isn’t. I don’t think it’s a plant, though you couldn’t call it an
animal, either.”

“I don’t think anybody ever told me the real difference between a plant
and an animal,” said Tod.

“Oh … well, the most convenient way to put it—it’s not strictly
accurate, but it will do—is that plants make their own food and animals
subsist on what others have made. This thing does both. It has roots,
but—” he lifted an edge of the skirted stem of the mushroom—“it can move
them. Not much, not fast; but if it wants to shift itself, it can.”

April smiled, “Tod, I’ll give you basic biology any time. Do go on,
Teague.”

“Good. Now, I explained about the heterokaryons—the ability this thing
has to produce spores which grow up into four completely different
plants. One is a mushroom just like this. Here are the other three.”

Tod looked at the box of plants. “Are they really all from the mushroom
spores?”

“Don’t blame you,” said Teague, and actually chuckled. “I didn’t believe
it myself at first. A sort of pitcher plant, half full of liquid. A
thing like a cactus. And this one. It’s practically all underground,
like a truffle, although it has these cilia. You wouldn’t think it was
anything but a few horsehairs stuck in the ground.”

“And they’re all sterile,” Tod recalled.

“They’re not,” said Teague, “and that’s what I called you in here to
tell you. They’ll yield if they are fertilized.”

“Fertilized how?”

Instead of answering, Teague asked April, “Do you remember how far back
we traced the evolution of Viridian life?”

“Of course. We got the arthropods all the way back to a simple segmented
worm. The insects seemed to come from another worm, with pseudopods and
a hard carapace.”

“A caterpillar,” Tod interpolated.

“Almost,” said April, with a scientist’s nicety. “And the most primitive
reptile we could find was a little gymnoderm you could barely see
without a glass.”

“Where did we find it?”

“Swimming around in—oh! In those pitcher plant things!”

“If you won’t take my word for this,” said Teague, a huge enjoyment
glinting between his words, “you’ll just have to breed these things
yourself. It’s a lot of work, but this is what you’ll discover.

“An adult gymnoderm—a male—finds this pitcher and falls in. There’s
plenty of nutriment for him, you know, and he’s a true amphibian. He
fertilizes the pitcher. Nodules grow under the surface of the liquid
inside there—” he pointed “—and bud off. The buds are mobile. They grow
into wrigglers, miniature tadpoles. Then into lizards. They climb out
and go about the business of being—well, lizards.”

“All males?” asked Tod.

“No,” said Teague, “and that’s an angle I haven’t yet investigated. But
apparently some males breed with females, which lay eggs, which hatch
into lizards, and some find plants to fertilize. Anyway, it looks as if
this plant is actually the progenitor of all the reptiles here; you know
how clear the evolutionary lines are to all the species.”

“What about the truffle with the horsehairs?” asked Tod.

“A pupa,” said Teague, and to the incredulous expression on April’s
face, he insisted, “Really—a pupa. After nine weeks or so of dormance,
it hatches out into what you almost called a caterpillar.”

“And then into all the insects here,” said April, and shook her head in
wonderment. “And I suppose that cactus-thing hatches out the nematodes,
the segmented ones that evolve into arthropods?”

Teague nodded. “You’re welcome to experiment,” he said again, “but
believe me—you’ll only find out I’m right; it really happens.”

“Then this scarlet mushroom is the beginning of everything here.”

“I can’t find another theory,” said Teague.

“I can,” said Tod.

They looked at him questioningly, and he rose and laughed. “Not yet. I
have to think it through.” He scooped up the baby and then helped April
to her feet. “How do you like our Sol, Teague?”

“Fine,” said Teague. “A fine boy.” Tod knew he was seeing the heavy
occipital ridges, the early teeth, and saying nothing. Tod was aware of
a faint inward surprise as the baby reached toward April and he handed
him over. He should have resented what might be in Teague’s mind, but he
did not. The beginnings of an important insight welcomed criticism of
the child, recognized its hairiness, its savagery, and found these
things good. But as yet the thought was too nebulous to express, except
by a smile. He smiled, took April’s hand, and left.

“That was a funny thing you said to Teague,” April told him as they
walked toward their quarters.

“Remember, April, the day we landed? Remember—” he made a gesture that
took in a quadrant of sky—“Remember how we all felt … good?”

“Yes,” she murmured. “It was like a sort of compliment, and a
reassurance. How could I forget?”

“Yes. Well …” He spoke with difficulty but his smile stayed. “I have a
thought, and it makes me feel like that. But I can’t get it into words,”
After a thoughtful pause, he added, “Yet.”

She shifted the baby. “He’s getting so heavy.”

“I’ll take him.” He took the squirming bundle with the deep-set, almost
humorous eyes. When he looked up from them, he caught an expression on
April’s face which he hadn’t seen in years. “What is it, Ape?”

“You_—like_ him.”

“Well, sure.”

“I was afraid. I was afraid for a long time that you … he’s ours, but he
isn’t exactly a pretty baby.”

“I’m not exactly a pretty father.”

“You know how precious you are to me?” she whispered.

He knew, for this was an old intimacy between them. He laughed and
followed the ritual: “How precious?”

She cupped her hands and brought them together, to make of them an ivory
box. She raised the hands and peeped into them, between the thumbs, as
if at a rare jewel, then clasped the magic tight and hugged it to her
breast, raising tear-filled eyes to him. “That precious,” she breathed.

He looked at the sky, seeing somewhere in it the many peak mountains of
their happiness when she made that gesture, feeling how each one,
meticulously chosen, brought all the others back. “I used to hate this
place,” he said. “I guess it’s changed.”

“You’ve changed.”

_Changed how?_ he wondered. He felt the same, even though he knew he
looked older …

The years passed, and the children grew. When Sol was fifteen
Earth-years old, short, heavy-shouldered, powerful, he married Carl’s
daughter Libra. Teague, turning to parchment, had returned to his
hermitage from the temporary stimulation of his researches on what they
still called “the mushroom.” More and more the colony lived off the land
and out of the jungle, not because there was any less to be synthesized
from their compact machines; but out of preference; it was easier to
catch flapping frogs or umbrella-birds and cook them than to bother with
machine settings and check-analyses, and, somehow, a lot more fun to eat
them, too.

It seemed to them safer, year by year. _Felodon_, unquestionably the
highest form of life on Viridis, was growing scarce, being replaced by a
smaller, more timid carnivore April called _Vulpidus_ (once, for it
seemed not to matter much any more about keeping records) and everyone
ultimately called “fox,” for all the fact that it was a reptile.
_Pterodon_ was disappearing too, as were all the larger forms. More and
more they strayed after food, not famine-driven, but purely for variety;
more and more they found themselves welcome and comfortable away from
the compound. Once Carl and Moira drifted off for nearly a year. When
they came back they had another child—a silent, laughing little thing
with oddly long arms and heavy teeth.

The warm days and the glowing nights passed comfortably and the stars no
longer called. Tod became a grandfather and was proud. The child, a
girl, was albino like April, and had exactly April’s deep red eyes. Sol
and Libra named her Emerald, a green name and a ground-term rather than
a sky-term, as if in open expression of the slow spell worked on them
all by Viridis. She was mute—but so were almost all the new children,
and it seemed not to matter. They were healthy and happy.

Tod went to tell Teague, thinking it might cheer the old one up a
little. He found him lying in what had once been his laboratory, thin
and placid and disinterested, absently staring down at one of the
arthropodal flying creatures that had once startled them so by zooming
into the Coffin chamber. This one had happened to land on Teague’s hand,
and Teague was laxly waiting for it to fly off again, out through the
unscreened window, past the unused sprays, over the faint tumble of
rotted spars which had once been a palisade.

“Teague, the baby’s come!”

Teague sighed, his tired mind detaching itself from memory episode by
episode. His eyes rolled toward Tod and finally he turned his head.
“Which one would that be?”

Tod laughed. “My grandchild, a girl. Sol’s baby.”

Teague let his lids fall. He said nothing.

“Well, aren’t you glad?”

Slowly a frown came to the papery brow. “Glad.” Tod felt he was looking
at the word as he had stared at the arthropod, wondering limply when it
might go away. “What’s the matter with it?”

“What?”

Teague sighed again, a weary, impatient sound. “What does it look like?”
he said slowly, emphasizing each one-syllabled word.

“Like April. Just like April.”

Teague half sat up, and blinked at Tod. “You don’t mean it.”

“Yes, eyes red as—” The image of an Earth sunset flickered near his mind
but vanished as too hard to visualize. Tod pointed at the four
red-capped “mushrooms” that had stood for so many years in the
test-boxes in the laboratory. “Red as those.”

“Silver hair,” said Teague.

“Yes, beau—”

“All over,” said Teague flatly.

“Well, yes.”

Teague let himself fall back on the cot and gave a disgusted snort. “A
monkey.”

_“Teague!”_

“Ah-h-h … go ’way,” growled the old man. “I long ago resigned myself to
what was happening to us here. A human being just can’t adapt to the
kind of radioactive ruin this place is for us. Your monsters’ll breed
monsters, and the monsters’ll do the same if they can, until pretty soon
they just won’t breed any more. And that will be the end of that, and
good riddance …” His voice faded away. His eyes opened, looking on
distant things, and gradually found themselves focused on the man who
stood over him in shocked silence. “But the one thing I can’t stand is
to have somebody come in here saying, ‘Oh, joy, oh happy day!’ ”

“Teague …” Tod swallowed heavily.

“Viridis eats ambition; there was going to be a city here,” said the old
man indistinctly. “Viridis eats humanity; there were going to be people
here.” He chuckled gruesomely. “All right, all right, accept it if you
have to—and you have to. But don’t come around here celebrating.”

Tod backed to the door, his eyes horror-round, then turned and fled.

VII

April held him as he crouched against the wall, rocked him slightly,
made soft unspellable mother-noises to him.

“Shh, he’s all decayed, all lonesome and mad,” she murmured. “Shh. Shh.”

Tod felt half-strangled. As a youth he had been easily moved, he
recalled; he had that tightness of the throat for sympathy, for empathy,
for injustices he felt the Universe was hurling at him out of its
capacious store. But recently life had been placid, full of love and
togetherness and a widening sense of membership with the earth and the
air and all the familiar things which walked and flew and grew and bred
in it. And his throat was shaped for laughter now; these feelings hurt
him.

“But he’s right,” he whispered. “Don’t you see? Right from the beginning
it … it was … remember Alma had six children, April? And a little later,
Carl and Moira had three? And you, only one … how long is it since the
average human gave birth to only one?”

“They used to say it was humanity’s last major mutation,” she admitted,
“Multiple births … these last two thousand years. But—”

“Eyebrow ridges,” he interrupted. “Hair … that skull, Emerald’s skull,
slanting back like that; did you see the tusks on that little … _baboon_
of Moira’s?”

“Tod! _Don’t!_”

He leaped to his feet, sprang across the room and snatched the golden
helix from the shelf where it had gleamed its locked symbolism down on
them ever since the landing. “Around and down!” he shouted. “Around and
around and down!” He squatted beside her and pointed furiously. “Down
and down into the blackest black there is; down into _nothing_.” He
shook his fist at the sky. “You see what they do? They find the highest
form of life they can and plant it here and watch it slide down into the
muck!” He hurled the artifact away from him.

“But it goes up too, round and up. Oh, Tod!” she cried. “Can you
remember them, what they looked like, the way they flew, and say these
things about them?”

“I can remember Alma,” he gritted, “conceiving and gestating alone in
space, while they turned their rays on her every day. You know _why?_”
With the sudden thought, he stabbed a finger down at her. “To give her
babies a head-start on Viridis, otherwise they’d have been born normal
here; it would’ve taken another couple of generations to start them
downhill, and they wanted us all to go together.”

“No, Tod, no!”

“Yes, April, yes. How much proof do you need?” He whirled on her.
“Listen—remember that mushroom Teague analyzed? He had to _pry_ spores
out of it to see what it yielded. Remember the three different plants he
got? Well, I was just there; I don’t know how many times before I’ve
seen it, but only now it makes sense. He’s got four mushrooms now; do
you see? Do you see? Even back as far as we can trace the bugs and newts
on this green hell-pit, Viridis won’t let anything climb; it must fall.”

“I don’t—”

“You’ll give me basic biology any time,” he quoted sarcastically. “Let
me tell you some biology. That mushroom yields three plants, and the
plants yield animal life. Well, when the animal life fertilized those
heterowhatever—”

“Heterokaryons.”

“Yes. Well, you don’t get animals that can evolve and improve. You get
one pitiful generation of animals which breeds back into a mushroom, and
there it sits hoarding its spores. Viridis wouldn’t let one puny newt,
one primitive pupa build! It snatches ’em back, locks ’em up. That
mushroom isn’t the beginning of everything here—_it’s the end!_”

April got to her feet slowly, looking at Tod as if she had never seen
him before, not in fear, but with a troubled curiosity. She crossed the
room and picked up the artifact, stroked its gleaming golden coils. “You
could be right,” she said in a low voice. “But that can’t be all there
is to it.” She set the helix back in its place. “They _wouldn’t_.”

She spoke with such intensity that for a moment that metrical formation,
mighty and golden, rose again in Tod’s mind, up and up to the
measureless cloud which must be a ship. He recalled the sudden shift,
like a genuflection, directed at them, at _him_, and for that moment he
could find no evil in it. Confused, he tossed his head, found himself
looking out the door, seeing Moira’s youngest ambling comfortably across
the compound.

“They _wouldn’t?_” he snarled. He took April’s slender arm and whirled
her to the door. “You know what I’d do before I’d father another one
like _that?_” He told her specifically what he would do. “A lemur next,
hm? A spider, an oyster, a jellyfish!”

April whimpered and ran out. “Know any lullabies to a tapeworm? he
roared after her. She disappeared into the jungle, and he fell back,
gasping for breath …

Having no stomach for careful thought nor careful choosing, having
Teague for an example to follow, Tod too turned hermit. He could have
survived the crisis easily perhaps, with April to help, but she did not
come back. Moira and Carl were off again, wandering; the children lived
their own lives, and he had no wish to see Teague. Once or twice Sol and
Libra came to see him, but he snarled at them and they left him alone.
It was no sacrifice. Life on Viridis was very full for the contented
ones.

He sulked in his room or poked about the compound by himself. He
activated the protein converter once, but found its products tasteless,
and never bothered with it again. Sometimes he would stand near the edge
of the hilltop and watch the children playing in the long grass, and his
lip would curl.

_Damn Teague!_ He’d been happy enough with Sol all those years, for all
the boy’s bulging eyebrow ridges and hairy body. He had been about to
accept the silent, silver Emerald, too, when the crotchety old man had
dropped his bomb. Once or twice Tod wondered detachedly what it was in
him that was so easily reached, so completely insecure, that the
suggestion of abnormality should strike so deep.

Somebody once said, _“You really need to be loved, don’t you, Tod?”_

No one would love this tainted thing, father of savages who spawned
animals. He didn’t deserve to be loved.

He had never felt so alone. _“I’m going to die. But_ I _will be with you
too.”_ That had been Alma. Huh! There was old Teague, tanning his brains
in his own sour acids. Alma had believed something or other … and what
had come of it? That wizened old crab lolling his life away in the lab.

Tod spent six months that way.

“Tod!” He came out of sleep reluctantly, because in sleep an inner self
still lived with April where there was no doubt and no fury; no
desertion, no loneliness.

He opened his eyes and stared dully at the slender figure silhouetted
against Viridis’s glowing sky. “April?”

“Moira,” said the figure. The voice was cold.

“Moira!” he said, sitting up. “I haven’t seen you for a year. More. Wh—”

“Come,” she said. “Hurry.”

“Come where?”

“Come by yourself or I’ll get Carl and he’ll carry you.” She walked
swiftly to the door.

He reeled after her. “You can’t come in here and—”

“Come on.” The voice was edged and slid out from between clenched teeth.
A miserable part of him twitched in delight and told him that he was
important enough to be hated. He despised himself for recognizing the
twisted thought, and before he knew what he was doing he was following
Moira at a steady trot.

“Where are—” he gasped, and she said over her shoulder, “If you don’t
talk you’ll go faster.”

At the jungle margin a shadow detached itself and spoke. “Got him?”

“Yes, Carl.”

The shadow became Carl. He swung in behind Tod, who suddenly realized
that if he did not follow the leader, the one behind would drive. He
glanced back at Carl’s implacable bulk, and then put down his head and
jogged doggedly along as he was told.

They followed a small stream, crossed it on a fallen tree, and climbed a
hill. Just as Tod was about to accept the worst these determined people
might offer in exchange for a moment to ease his fiery lungs, Moira
stopped. He stumbled into her. She caught his arm and kept him on his
feet.

“In there,” she said, pointing.

“A finger tree.”

“You know how to get inside,” Carl growled.

Moira said, “She begged me not to tell you, ever. I think she was
wrong.”

“Who? What is—”

“Inside,” said Carl, and shoved him roughly down the slope.

His long conditioning was still with him, and reflexively he sidestepped
the fanning fingers which swayed to meet him. He ducked under them,
batted aside the inner phalanx, and found himself in the clear space
underneath. He stopped there, gasping.

Something moaned.

He bent, fumbled cautiously in the blackness. He touched something
smooth and alive, recoiled, touched it again. A foot.

Someone began to cry harshly, hurtfully, the sound exploding as if
through clenched hands.

_“April!”_

“I told them not to …” and she moaned.

“April, what is it, what’s happened?”

“You needn’t … be,” she said, sobbed a while, and went on, “… angry. It
didn’t live.”

“What didn’t … you mean you … April, you—”

“It wouldn’t’ve been a tapeworm,” she whispered.

“Who—” he fell to his knees, found her face. “When did you—”

“I was going to tell you that day, that very same day, and when you came
in so angry at what Teague told you, I specially wanted to, I thought
you’d … be glad.”

“April, why didn’t you come back? If I’d known …”

“You _said_ what you’d do if I ever … if you ever had another … you
meant it, Tod.”

“It’s this place, this Viridis,” he said sadly. “I went crazy.”

He felt her wet hand on his cheek.

“It’s all right. I just didn’t want to make it worse for you,” April
said.

“I’ll take you back.”

“No, you can’t. I’ve been … I’ve lost a lot of … just stay with me a
little while.”

“Moira should have—”

“She just found me,” said April. “I’ve been alone all the—I guess I made
a noise. I didn’t mean to. Tod … don’t quarrel. Don’t go into a lot
of … It’s all right.”

Against her throat he cried. _“All right!”_

“When you’re by yourself,” she said faintly, “you think; you think
better. Did you ever think of—”

“April!” he cried in anguish, the very sound of her pale, pain-wracked
voice making this whole horror real.

“Shh, sh. Listen,” she said rapidly. “There isn’t time, you know, Tod.
Tod, did you ever think of us all, Teague and Alma and Moira and Carl
and us, what we are?”

“I know what I am.”

“_Shh_. Altogether we’re a leader and mother; a word and a shield; a
doubter, a mystic …” Her voice trailed off. She coughed and he could
feel the spastic jolt shoot through her body. She panted lightly for a
moment and went on urgently. “Anger and prejudice and stupidity,
courage, laughter, love, music … it was all aboard that ship and it’s
all here on Viridis. Our children and theirs—no matter what they look
like, Tod, no matter how they live or what they eat—they have that in
them. Humanity isn’t just a way of walking, merely a kind of skin. It’s
what we had together and what we gave Sol. It’s what the golden ones
found in us and wanted for Viridis. You’ll see. You’ll see.”

“Why Viridis?”

“Because of what Teague said—what you said.” Her breath puffed out in
the ghost of a laugh. “Basic biology … ontogeny follows phylogeny. The
human foetus is a cell, an animalcule, a gilled amphibian … all up the
line. It’s there in us; Viridis makes it go backward.”

“To what?”

“The mushroom. The spores. We’ll be spores, Tod. Together … Alma _said_
she could be dead, and together with Teague! That’s why I said … it’s
all right. This doesn’t matter, what’s happened. We live in Sol, we live
in Emerald with Carl and Moira, you see? Closer, nearer than we’ve ever
been.”

Tod took a hard hold on his reason. “But back to spores—why? What then?”

She sighed. It was unquestionably a happy sound. “They’ll be back for
the reaping, and they’ll have us, Tod, all we are and all they worship:
goodness and generosity and the urge to build: mercy; kindness.”

“They’re needed too,” she whispered. “And the spores make mushrooms, and
the mushrooms make the heterokaryons; and from those, away from Viridis,
come the life-forms to breed us_—us_, Tod! into whichever form is
dominant. And there we’ll be, that flash of old understanding of a new
idea … the special pressure on a painter’s hand that makes him a
Rembrandt, the sense of architecture that turns a piano player into a
Bach. Three billion extra years of evolution, ready to help wherever it
can be used. On every Earth-type planet, Tod—millions of us, blowing
about in the summer wind, waiting to give …”

“Give! Give what Teague is now, rotten and angry?”

“That isn’t Teague. That will die off. Teague lives with Alma in their
children, and in theirs … she _said_ she’d be with him!”

“Me … what about me?” he breathed. “What I did to you …”

“Nothing, you did nothing. You live in Sol, in Emerald. Living,
conscious, alive … with me …”

He said, “You mean … you could talk to me from Sol?”

“I think I might.” With his forehead, bent so close to her, he felt her
smile. “But I don’t think I would. Lying so close to you, why should I
speak to an outsider?”

Her breathing changed and he was suddenly terrified. “April, don’t die.”

“I won’t,” she said. “Alma didn’t.” She kissed him gently and died.

It was a long darkness, with Tod hardly aware of roaming and raging
through the jungle, of eating without tasting, of hungering without
knowing of it. Then there was a twilight, many months long, soft and
still, with restfulness here and a promise soon. Then there was the
compound again, found like a dead memory, learned again just a little
more readily than something new. Carl and Moira were kind, knowing the
nature of justice and the limits of punishment, and at last Tod was
alive again.

He found himself one day down near the river, watching it and thinking
back without fear of his own thoughts, and a growing wonder came to him.
His mind had for so long dwelt on his own evil that it was hard to break
new paths. He wondered with an awesome effort what manner of creatures
might worship humanity for itself, and what manner of creatures humans
were to be so worshipped. It was a totally new concept to him, and he
was completely immersed in it, so that when Emerald slid out of the
grass and stood watching him, he was frightened and shouted.

She did not move. There was little to fear now on Viridis. All the large
reptiles were gone, and there was room for the humans, the humanoids,
the primates, the … children. In his shock the old reflexes played. He
stared at her, her square stocky body, the silver hair which covered it
all over except for the face, the palms, the soles of the feet. _“A
monkey!”_ he spat, in Teague’s tones, and the shock turned to shame. He
met her eyes, April’s deep glowing rubies, and they looked back at him
without fear.

He let a vision of April grow and fill the world. The child’s rare red
eyes helped (there was so little, so very little red on Viridis). He saw
April at the spaceport, holding him in the dark shadows of the
blockhouse while the sky flamed above them. _We’ll go out like that
soon, soon, Tod. Squeeze me, squeeze me …_ Ah, he’d said, _who needs a
ship?_

Another April, part of her in a dim light as she sat writing; her hair,
a crescent of light loving her cheek, a band of it on her brow; then she
had seen him and turned, rising, smothered his first word with her
mouth. Another April wanting to smile, waiting; and April asleep, and
once April sobbing because she could not find a special word to tell him
what she felt for him … He brought his mind back from her in the past,
from her as she was, alive in his mind, back to here, to the bright mute
with the grave red eyes who stood before him, and he said, “How
precious?”

The baby kept her eyes on his, and slowly raised her silken hands. She
cupped them together to make a closed chamber, looked down at it, opened
her hands slightly and swiftly to peer inside, rapt at what she
pretended to see; closed her hands again to capture the treasure,
whatever it was, and hugged it to her breast. She looked up at him
slowly, and her eyes were full of tears, and she was smiling.

He took his grandchild carefully in his arms and held her gently and
strongly. Monkey?

“April,” he gasped. “Little Ape. Little Ape.”

Viridis is a young planet which bears (at first glance) old life-forms.
Come away and let the green planet roll around its sun; come back in a
while—not long, as astronomical time goes.

The jungle is much the same, the sea, the rolling savannahs. But the
life …

Viridis was full of primates. There were blunt-toothed herbivores and
long-limbed tree-dwellers, gliders and burrowers. The fish-eaters were
adapting the way all Viridis life must adapt, becoming more fit by
becoming simpler, or go to the wall. Already the sea-apes had
rudimentary gills and had lost their hair. Already tiny forms competed
with the insects on their own terms.

On the banks of the wandering rivers, monotremes with opposed toes
dredged and paddled, and sloths and lemurs crept at night. At first they
had stayed together, but they were soon too numerous for that; and a
half dozen generations cost them the power of speech, which was, by
then, hardly a necessity. Living was good for primates on Viridis, and
became better each generation.

Eating and breeding, hunting and escaping filled the days and the
cacophonous nights. It was hard in the beginning to see a friend cut
down, to watch a slender silver shape go spinning down a river and know
that with it went some of your brother, some of your mate, some of
yourself. But as the hundreds became thousands and the thousands
millions, witnessing death became about as significant as watching your
friend get his hair cut. The basic ids each spread through the changing,
mutating population like a stain, crossed and recrossed by the strains
of the others, co-existing, eating each other and being eaten and all
the while passing down through the generations.

There was a cloud over the savannah, high over the ruins of the
compound. It was a thing of many colors and of no particular shape, and
it was bigger than one might imagine, not knowing how far away it was.

From it dropped a golden spot that became a thread, and down came a
golden mass. It spread and swung, exploded into a myriad of individuals.
Some descended on the compound, erasing and changing, lifting,
breaking—always careful to kill nothing. Others blanketed the planet,
streaking silently through the green aisles, flashing unimpeded through
the tangled thickets. They combed the river-banks and the half-light of
hill waves, and everywhere they went they found and touched the mushroom
and stripped it of its spores, the compaction and multiplication of what
had once been the representatives of a very high reptile culture.

Primates climbed and leaped, crawled and crept to the jungle margins to
watch. Eater lay by eaten; the hunted stood on the hunter’s shoulder,
and a platypoid laid an egg in the open which nobody touched.

Simian forms hung from the trees in loops and ropes, in swarms and
beards, and more came all the time, brought by some ineffable magnetism
to watch at the hill. It was a fast and a waiting, with no movement but
jostling for position, a crowding forward from behind and a pressing
back from the slightest chance of interfering with the golden visitors.

Down from the polychrome cloud drifted a mass of the golden beings,
carrying with them a huge sleek ship. They held it above the ground,
sliced it, lifted it apart, set down this piece and that until a shape
began to grow. Into it went bales and bundles, stocks and stores, and
then the open tops were covered. It was a much bigger installation than
the one before.

Quickly, it was done, and the golden cloud hung waiting.

The jungle was trembling with quiet.

In one curved panel of the new structure, something spun, fell outward,
and out of the opening came a procession of stately creatures,
long-headed, bright-eyed, three-toed, richly plumed and feathered. They
tested their splendid wings, then stopped suddenly, crouched and looking
upward.

They were given their obeisance by the golden ones, and after there
appeared in the sky the exquisite symbol of a beauty that rides up and
up, turns and spirals down again only to rise again; the symbol of that
which has no beginning and no end, and the sign of those whose worship
and whose work it is to bring to all the Universe that which has shown
itself worthy in parts of it.

Then they were gone, and the jungle exploded into killing and flight,
eating and screaming, so that the feathered ones dove back into their
shelter and closed the door …

And again to the green planet (when the time was right) came the
cloud-ship, and found a world full of birds, and the birds watched in
awe while they harvested their magic dust, and built a new shelter. In
this they left four of their own for later harvesting, and this was to
make of Viridis a most beautiful place.

From Viridis, the ship vaulted through the galaxies, searching for
worlds worthy of what is human in humanity, whatever their manner of
being alive. These they seeded, and of these, perhaps one would produce
something new, something which could be reduced to the dust of Viridis,
and from dust return.



EXTRAPOLATION


“READ IT FOR YOURSELF,” said the Major.

She took the sheaf of flimsies from him and for a moment gave him that
strange dry gaze. _The woman’s in shock_, he thought, and did what he
could to put down the other two memories he had of eyes like that: an
injured starling which had died in his hand; his four-year-old niece,
the time he struck her, and the long unbearable moment between the
impact and her tears.

Mrs. Reger read carefully and slowly. Her face slept. Her eyes reflected
and would not transmit. Her long hands were more vulnerable. The Major
heard the whisper of the thin paper; then she turned far enough away
from him to steady the backs of her fingers against the mantel. When at
last she was finished, she put the report down on the black coffee table
gently, gently, as if it might shatter. They stood together looking down
on it and its blue blare of stamp-pad ink: TOP SECRET.

She said, at last, “That is the foulest thing a human being has ever
done.” Then her mouth slept again.

“I’m glad you agree,” he said. “I was afraid that—” and then she was
looking at him again and he could not go on.

“I don’t think I understood you,” he said tonelessly. “You meant the
report. I thought you meant Wolf Reger.”

“That’s what I was afraid of,” she said.

She glanced down at the report. “That isn’t Wolf. Wolf might be a lot of
things … things that are … hard to understand. But he isn’t a traitor.”
The Major saw her face lifting and turned his head to avoid those hurt
eyes. “I think,” she said quietly, “that you’d better go, Major, and
take those lies with you.”

He made no move toward the report. “Mrs. Reger,” he suddenly shouted,
“do you think I’m enjoying this? Do you think I volunteered for this
job?”

“I hadn’t thought about you at all.”

“Try it,” he said bitterly. Then, “Sorry. I’m sorry. This whole thing …”
He pulled himself together. “I wish I could believe you. But you’ve got
to realize that a man died to make that report and get it back to us. We
have no choice but to take it for the truth and act accordingly. What
else can we do?”

“Do what you like. But don’t ask me to believe things about my husband
that just aren’t so.”

Watching her, he felt that if she lost that magnificent control it would
be more than he could bear. God, he thought, _where did a rat like Reger
ever find such a woman?_ As gently as he could, he said, “Very well,
Mrs. Reger. You needn’t believe it … May I tell you exactly what my
assignment is?”

She did not answer.

He said, “I was detailed to get from you everything which might have any
bearing on—on this report.” He pointed. “Whether I believe it or not is
immaterial. Perhaps if you can tell me enough about the man, I won’t
believe it. Perhaps,” he said, knowing his voice lacked conviction, “we
can clear him. Wouldn’t you help clear him?”

“He doesn’t need clearing,” she said impatiently. Then, when he made a
tiny, exasperated sound, she said, “I’ll help you. What do you want to
know?”

All the relief, all the gratitude, and all the continuing distaste for
this kind of work were in his voice. “Everything. Why he might do a
thing like that.” And quickly, “Or why he wouldn’t.”

She told him about Wolf Reger, the most hated man on Earth.

_Beware the fury of a patient man_.

Wolf Reger had so many talents that they were past enumerating. With
them he had two characteristics which were extreme. One was
defenselessness. The other was an explosive anger which struck without
warning, even to Reger himself.

His defenselessness sprang from his excess of ability. When blocked, it
was all too easy for him to excel in some other field. It was hard to
make him care much for anything. Rob him, turn him, use him—it didn’t
matter. In a day, a week, he could find something better. For this he
was robbed, and turned, and used.

His anger was his only terror. When he was eight he was chasing another
boy—it was fun; they ran and laughed and dodged through the boy’s large
old house. And at the very peak of hilarity, the other boy ran outside
and slammed the French doors in Wolf’s face and stood grinning through
the glass. Wolf instantly hit the face with his fist. The double-thick
glass shattered. Wolf severed two tendons and an artery in his wrist,
and the other boy fell gasping, blood from his carotid spurting between
his futile fingers. The boy was saved, but the effect on Wolf was worse
than if he had died. His anger had lasted perhaps three microseconds,
and when it was gone, it was gone completely. So brief a thing could
hardly be termed a madness—not even a blindness. But it left the boy
with the deep conviction that one day this lightning would strike and be
gone, and he would find himself looking at a corpse.

He never ran and shouted again. He lived every moment of the next four
years under the pressure of his own will, holding down what he felt was
an internal devil, analyzing every situation he met for the most remote
possibility of its coming to life again. With that possibility
visualized, he would avoid the situation. He therefore avoided sandlot
baseball and school dances; competitions and group activities;
friendship. He did very well with his school work. He did very badly
with his fellows.

When he was twelve he met a situation he could not avoid. He was in his
second year of high school then, and every day for three weeks a bulky
sophomore twice his size would catch him on his way from English to
Geometry II, wrap a thick arm around his neck, and grind a set of
knuckles into his scalp. Wolf took it and took it, and one day he tore
himself free and struck. He was small and thin, and the chances are that
the surprise of the attack was more effective than its power. Their legs
were entangled and the bigger boy was off balance. He hit the tile floor
with his head and lay quite still with his lips white, and blood
trickling from his ear. For six weeks they did not know if he would live
or not. Wolf was expelled from school the day it happened, and never
went to another. From that point on he never dared be angry.

It was easy to hate Wolf Reger. He surpassed anyone he worked with and
was disliked for it. He retreated from anyone who wanted what he had,
and was despised for it. He communicated but would not converse. He
immediately and forcefully rejected any kind of companionship;
apparently because he did not need it, but actually because he did not
dare let anyone come close to him. And his basic expertness was
extrapolation—the ability to project every conceivable factor in a
situation to every possible conclusion. He chose his work this way. He
chose his restaurants this way, his clothes—everything he did and was.
He lived to avoid others for their own protection.

He had two great successes—one a chemical process and one an electronic
device. They taught him enough about fame to frighten him away from it.
Fame meant people, meetings, associates. After that he let others take
the credit for the work he did.

At thirty he was married.

“Why?”

The question hung offensively in the air between them for an appreciable
time before the Major realized that he had spoken it aloud and
incredulously.

She said, carefully, “Major, what have you in your notebook so far?”

He looked down at the neat rows of symbols. “A few facts. A few
conjectures.”

With an accuracy that shook him in his chair, she said coldly, “You have
him down as a warped little genius with every reason to hate humanity.
If I weren’t sure of that, I wouldn’t go on with this. Major,” she said
suddenly in a different voice, “suppose I told you that I was walking
down the street and a man I had never seen before suddenly roared at me,
leapt on my back, knocked me down, beat me and rolled me in the gutter.
Suppose you had fifty eyewitnesses who would swear it happened. What
would you think of the man?”

He looked at her sleek hair, her strong, obedient features. Despite
himself he felt a quixotic anger toward her attacker, even in
hypothesis. “Isn’t it obvious? The man would have to be a drunk, a
psychopath. At the very least he would have to be deluded, think you
were someone else. Even if he did, only a real skunk would do a thing
like that to a woman.” He suddenly realized how easily she had pulled
him away from his subject, and was annoyed. “What has this to do—”

“You’ll see.” She captured his gaze, and he had the sensation that for
the very first time she was examining him, looking at his eyes, his
mouth; looking at him as a man instead of an unavoidable talking-machine
in uniform. “I hope you’ll see,” she said thoughtfully. Then, “You
wanted to know why he married me.”

_The Army wants to know that_, he corrected silently. _I’d like to know
why you married him_.

She committed suicide.

Relentlessly she told the Major why, and he put his pencil down until
she had finished with that part of the story. This was a report on
Reger, not on his wife. Her reasons were good, at the time, and they
constituted a tale of disillusion and defeat which has been, and will
be, told again and again.

She stumbled out into the desert and walked until she dropped; until she
was sure there could be no rescue; until she had barely strength to lift
the phial and drink. She regained consciousness eight months later, in
civilian married quarters at Space Base Two. She had been dead twice.

It was a long time before she found out what had happened. Reger, who
would not permit himself to move about among people, took his exercise
at night, and found her; she had walked almost to the Base without
knowing it, and Reger all but tripped over her body. It was not a small
body, and he was not a large man, but somehow he got her back to his
quarters, a one-room-and-bath affair as near to the edge of the housing
area as it could be and still be in the Base. She was still
alive—barely.

How he saved her, no one but Reger could know. He knew she was drugged
or poisoned, and exhausted. He found the right medication to keep her
from slipping further away, but for weeks he could not bring her back.
He did the job for which he was hired, and he worked over her as well,
and no one knew she was there. Twice her heart stopped and he started it
again, once with adrenalin and once with electric shock.

Her autonomic nervous system was damaged. When she began to convalesce,
he started drug therapy. He kept her paralyzed and at the edge of
unconsciousness, so that the slow business of repair could proceed
without hindrance. He fed her intravenously.

And still he kept his job, and no one knew.

And then one day there was a knock on his door. One room and bath; to
open the door was to open the whole room to an outsider. He ignored the
knock and it came again, and then again, timidly but insistently. He
extrapolated, as always, and disliked his conclusion. A woman in his
bachelor quarters created a situation which could only mean people and
people, and talk and talk—and the repeated, attenuated annoyance which,
of all things, he feared most.

He picked her up and carried her into the bathroom and shut the door.
Then he answered the knock. It was nothing important—a chirping little
bird of a woman who was taking up a collection for a Thanksgiving party
for the orphans in town. He wrote her a check and got rid of her,
snarling suddenly that she must never bother him again—and pass the
word. That, and the size of the check, took care of her and anyone like
her.

He nearly collapsed from reaction after she had gone. He knew he could
not possibly outguess the exigencies which might arise to bring other
people on other errands. A power failure, a fire, even curious boys or a
peeping Tom; the law of averages dictated that in spite of his
reputation for being a recluse, in spite of the isolation of his
quarters, somebody had to discover his secret. She had been with him for
four months now. How could he explain her? Doctors would know she had
been under treatment for some time; the Air Force people at the Base,
and their cackling wives, would make God only knew what sort of racket
about it.

So he married her.

It took another six weeks to build her up sufficiently to be moved. He
drove her to a town a hundred and fifty miles away and married her in a
hotel room. She was under a skilfully applied hypnotic, and carefully
instructed. She knew nothing about it at the time and remembered nothing
afterward. Reger then applied for married quarters, moved her back to
the Base and continued her therapy. Let them pry. He had married, and
his bride was not only ill but as anti-social as he.

“There’s your androphobe,” said Mrs. Reger. “He could have let me die.
He could have turned me over to the doctors.”

“You’re a very attractive woman,” he pointed out. “You were that, plus a
challenge … two kinds of challenge. Could he keep you alive? Could he do
it while doing his job? A man who won’t compete with people generally
finds something else to pit himself against.”

“You’re quite impartial while you wait for all the facts,” she said
bitterly.

“No, I’m not,” he said, and quite astonished himself by adding, “It’s
just that I can’t lie to you.” There was a slight emphasis on the last
word which he wished he could go back and erase.

She let it pass and went on with her story.

She must have had consciousness of a sort long before he was aware of
it. She was born again, slowly, aware of comfort and safety, an
alteration of light and dark, a dim appreciation of the way in which her
needs were met, a half-conscious anticipation of his return when she
found herself alone.

He surrounded her with music—the automatic phonograph when he was away,
the piano when he was home and not busy. Music was his greatest escape,
and he escaped deeply into it. She had been musical all her life, and
recognized an astonishing sensitivity in the silent man. Security and
the wordless reaches of music broadened her consciousness from a thin
line to a wide swath, forward and back, past and future. The more she
fumbled her way back, the more she appreciated her present, and the more
it mystified her. Because of this she lay quiet for many days when she
could have spoken to him, trying to understand. When at last she was
ready, she frightened him badly. She had never dreamed that anyone could
be quite so shy, so self-abasing. She had not known that a human being
could dislike himself so much. Yet he had an inner strength and
unlimited resourcefulness. He was completely efficient in everything he
did except in his effort to talk with her.

He told her, with terror in his eyes, of their marriage, and he begged
her pardon for it. It was as if a harsh word from her would destroy him.
And she smiled and thanked him. He went silently away and sat down at
the piano, though he did not play it again while she was there.

She convalesced very quickly after that. She tried her very best to
understand him. She succeeded in making him talk about himself, and was
careful not to help him, ever, nor to work with him at anything. He
never touched her. She divined that he never should, until he was quite
ready, and so she never forced the issue. She fell completely in love
with him.

At the time, the _Starscout_ was in the ways, and they were running
final tests on it. Reger was forced to spend more and more time out at
the gantry area. Sometimes he would work fifty or sixty consecutive
hours, and though she hated to see him stumble home, drawn and tired,
she looked forward to these times. For in his deepest sleep, she could
tiptoe into his room and sit near and watch his face, study it with the
stiffness of control gone, find in it the terrified eight-year-old with
blood spouting from his wrist, watching a playmate with a cut throat.
She could isolate the poet, the painter, in him, speaking and creating
and expressing only in music, for words and shapes could not be trusted.
She loved him. She could wait. Those who love love, and those who love
themselves, cannot wait. Those who love another can and do. So she
watched him silently and tiptoed out when he stirred.

His extrapolations never ceased, and he was aware before she was that,
not being a Wolf Reger, her needs were different from his. He suggested
that she walk in the sun when he was away. He told her where the
commissary was, and left money for shopping. She did as he expected her
to do.

Then he didn’t come back from the gantry area any more, and when the
fifty or sixty hours got to be seventy and eighty, she made up her mind
to find him. She knew quite a few people at the Base by that time. She
walked in, stopping at the post office on the way. The divorce papers
were waiting for her there.

The Major dropped his pencil.

“You didn’t know about that.”

“Not yet. We’d have found out anyway.” He stooped, groping for the
pencil, and cracked his head noisily on the coffee table. He demanded,
“Why? Why did he divorce you?”

“He didn’t. He filed suit. It has to be put on the court calendar and
then heard, and then adjudicated, and then there’s a ninety-day
wait … you know. I went to a dance.”

“A—oh.” He understood that this was in answer to his question. “He
divorced you because you went to a dance?”

“No!… well, yes.” She closed her eyes. “I used to go to the Base movie
once in a while when Wolf was working. I went down there and there was a
dance going on instead. I sat with one of the women from the commissary
and watched, and after a while her husband asked me to dance. I did. I
knew Wolf would have let me if he’d been there—not that he ever would.

“And I happened to glance through the door as we danced past, and Wolf
was standing just outside. His face …”

She rose and went to the mantel. She put out her hand very slowly,
watching it move, and trailed the tips of her fingers along the polished
wood. “All twisted. All …

“As soon as the music stopped,” she whispered, “I ran out to him. He was
still there.”

The Major thought, _Don’t break, for God’s sake don’t. Not while I’m
here_.

“Extrapolation,” she said. “Everything he saw, he computed and
projected. I was dancing. I suppose I was smiling. Wolf never learned to
dance, Major. Can you imagine how important that can be to a man who can
do anything?

“When I got outside he was just the same as always, quiet and
controlled. What he was going through inside, I hate to think. We walked
home and the only thing that was said was when I told him I was sorry.
He looked at me with such astonishment that I didn’t dare say anything
else. Two days later he left.”

“On the _Starscout_. Didn’t you know he was a crewmember?”

“No. I found out later. Wolf had so many skills that he was nine-tenths
of a crew all by himself. They’d wanted him for the longest time, but
he’d always refused. I guess because he couldn’t bear sharing space with
someone.”

“He did, with you.”

“Did he?”

The Major did not answer. She said, “That was going to end. He was sure
of that. It could end any time. But space flight’s something else
again.”

“Why did he divorce you?”

She seemed to shake herself awake. “Have I been talking out loud?” she
asked.

“What? Yes!”

“Then I’ve told you.”

“Perhaps you have,” he conceded. He poised his pencil.

“What are you going to write?” When he would not answer, she said, “Not
telling the truth any more, Major?”

“Not now,” he said firmly.

For the second time she gave him that searching inspection, really
seeing him. “I wonder what you’re thinking,” she murmured.

He wrote, closed the book and rose. “Thank you very much for cooperating
like this,” he said stiffly.

She nodded. He picked up his hat and went to the door. He opened it,
hesitated, closed it again. “Mrs. Reger—”

She waited, unbelievably still—her body, her mouth.

“In your own words—why did he file suit?”

She almost smiled. “You think my words are better than what you wrote?”
Then, soberly, “He saw me dancing and it hurt him. He was shocked to the
core. He hadn’t known it would hurt. He hadn’t realized until then that
he loved me. He couldn’t face that—he was afraid we might be close. And
one day he’d lose his temper, and I’d be dead. So he went out into
space.”

“Because he loved you.”

“Because he loved me enough,” she said quietly.

He looked away from her because he must, and saw the report still lying
on the coffee table. “I’d better take this along.”

“Oh yes, do.” She picked it up, handed it to him. “It’s the same thing
as that story I told you—about the man knocking me down.”

“Man—oh. Yes, that one. What was that about?”

“It really happened,” she said. “He knocked me down and beat me, right
in broad daylight, in front of witnesses, and everything I said about it
is true.”

“Bastard,” growled the Major, and then blushed like a girl. “I’m sorry.”

She did smile, this time. “There was a loading-dock there, in front of a
warehouse. A piece of machinery in a crate got loose and slid down a
chute toward the street. It hit a drum of gasoline and struck a spark.
The first thing I knew, I was all over flames. That man knocked me down
and beat them out with his bare hands. He saved my life.”

Slowly, his jaw dropped. She said, “It makes a difference, when you know
all the facts, doesn’t it? Even when the first facts you got are all
true?” She rapped the TOP SECRET stamp with her fingernails. “I said
this was all a lie. Well, maybe it’s all true. But if it is, it’s like
the first part of that little story. You need the rest of it. I don’t.
You don’t know Wolf Reger. I do. Goodbye, Major.”

He sat in his office at Headquarters and slowly pounded the fresh copy
of his transcribed notes. _I have to send them the way they are_, he
thought, and _but I can’t. I can’t_.

He swore violently and got up. He went to the water-cooler, punched out
a paper cup, filled it, and hurled it into the wastebasket. _All I have
is facts. She has faith_.

The world was full of women, and a perfectly normal percentage of them
were capable of knocking him for a loop. He wasn’t immune. But surely he
was old enough and wise enough by now not to let it interfere with
facts. Especially in this case. If the world knew what was in that TOP
SECRET report, the world would know how to feel about Wolf Reger. And
then Reger’s wife would be one against three and a quarter billion. How
could a man in his right mind worry about a choice, with odds like that?

He cursed again and snatched up his briefcase, unlocked it, and took out
the secret report. He slammed it down on top of his transcript. _One
more look. One more look at the facts_.

He read:

_This is the fourth time I’ve erased this tape and now I got no time for
officialese if I’m going to get it all on here. A tape designed for
hull-inspection reports in space wasn’t designed for a description of a
planetary invasion. But that’s what it’s got to be. So, for the record,
this is Jerry Wain_, Starscout _navigator, captive on one of the
cruisers that’s going to invade Earth. First contact with
extra-terrestrials. Supposed to be a great moment in human history.
Likely to be one of the last moments, too_.

The Starscout’s _gone and Minelli, Joe Cook, and the Captain are dead.
That leaves me and that bastard Reger. The aliens had us bracketed
before we knew it, out past Jupiter. They cut up the_ ’scout _with some
sort of field or something that powdered the hull in lines as broad as
your hand. No heat, no impact. Just fine powder, and she fell apart. Joe
never got to a suit. The Captain went forward, to stay with the ship I
guess, and couldn’t have lived long after they sliced the dome off the
control room. The three of us got clear and they took us in. They cut
Minelli up to see what his guts looked like. I haven’t seen Reger, but
he’s alive, all right. Reger, he can take care of himself_.

_I’ve only seen two of the aliens, or maybe I saw one of ’em twice. If
you can imagine a horseshoe crab made out of blue airfoam, a wide skirt
all the way around it, the whole works about four and a half meters
across, that’s close. I’m not a biologist, so I guess I can’t be much
help on the details. That skirt sort of undulates front to back when it
moves. I’d say it swims through the air—hop and glide, hop and glide. It
can crawl too. First I thought it slid along like a snail, but once I
saw a whole mess of little legs, some with pincers on them. I don’t know
how many. Too many, anyhow. No eyes that I could spot, although it must
have ’em; it’s light in here, grayish, like on a snowfield on an
overcast day. It comes from the bulkhead. Floor, too—everywhere_.

_Gravity, on a guess, is about one-sixth Earth. The atmosphere’s hot.
Seems to be light gases. I cracked my oxy relief valve and struck a
spark on it with the back of my glove, and that was pretty spectacular.
Hydrogen for sure. Something else that gives an orange cast to the
flame. You figure it. I wish I knew as much as Reger. Though I wouldn’t
use it like he’s doing_.

_The compartment I’m in is altogether bare. There’s a transparent oval
port on one bulkhead. No frame; looks just as if the hull material was
made transparent just there. Looking in at an angle I can see she’s
double-hulled, and there’s some sort of optical trickery that makes it
possible to see almost directly forward and aft, although I’d say the
outside of the port was flush with the skin. I can’t tell you a thing
about the drive. I barely saw them before they had us boxed, and then
all hell broke loose. I did get a look while we were adrift, though, and
some of the ships were maneuvering. It isn’t jets; that’s for sure. They
can take off like a bullet and stop as if they’d hit a wall. They have
some way of canceling inertia. Or most of it. Riding inside is pretty
rough, but coming to a dead stop in two seconds from a thousand k.p.h.
or better should butter you all over the walls instead of just slamming
you into the bulkhead like it does. They can’t operate in an atmosphere
without wings, and they don’t have wings. Yet_.

_I counted twenty-six ships—sixteen big ones, cruisers I guess you’d
call them; two-fifty to three hundred meters long, perfect cylinders.
And ten small ones, oblate spheres, thirty meters or so in diameter.
Destroyers, maybe. Fast as hell, even compared to the big ones. I think
my count’s accurate, and you needn’t expect any more than that. But
that’s plenty, with what they can do_.

_When they brought us in first they slung me in here and nothing
happened that I knew about, for sixteen hours. Then that first bug came
in through a sort of pucker in the wall that got transparent and spread
out and let him through and then bing! the wall was solid again. I guess
I was pretty paralyzed for a while, looking it over and then wondering
which way it was going to jump. Then I saw what it was carrying on one
side, the skirt-thing curled up like a sort of shelf. It was Minelli’s
leg lying there. That tattoo, you know, the girl holding the space-ship.
I could see the top end of the femur, where it’s supposed to fit into
the hip-joint. That leg wasn’t cut off. The joint had been torn apart_.

_I guess I went a little crazy. I had my antenna-wrench off the
belt-rack and was throwing it almost before I knew what I was doing. I
missed. Didn’t allow for the gravity, I guess. It went high. The bug
sort of humped itself and next thing I knew I couldn’t move. I could,
inside the space-suit, but the suit was like a single iron casting_.

_The bug slid over to me and hitched up a little—that’s when I saw all
those little legs—and got everything off my belt—torch, stillson,
antenna-reel, everything that would move. It didn’t touch my tanks—I
guess it knew already about the tanks. From Reger, busy-boy Reger. It
took the whole bundle over to the outer bulkhead and all of a sudden
there was a square hole there. It dropped my stuff in and the hole went
away, and out through the port I could see my stuff flash away from the
ship, going like hell. So that’s how I found out about the disposal
chute_.

_The bug slid away to the other wall and I was going to give it a shot
from my heel-jets, but somehow I had sense enough not to. I didn’t know
what damage they’d do, and I might be able to use ’em later. If anyone’s
hearing this, I did_.

_About three weeks later I had another visit from one of ’em, but I
charged it as soon as it was inside. It slid away through the air and
then froze me again. I guess after that they gave me up as a bad job_.

_They don’t feed me, and my converters are pretty low. I’ve rationed my
air and water all I could, but it’s past conversion now, without a
complete recharge, and I’m not likely to get that. I was hungry, like I
never knew hunger could be, after my emergency rations were gone, but I
don’t feel that any more. Just weak_.

_This whole time, the ships have been busy. We’re in the Belt, I’d
guess, without instruments, around 270-20-95. Check those coordinates
and hunt a spiral from that center—I’m pretty sure we’re near that
position. Put infra-red on it; even if they’ve gone by then, there
should be residual heat in these rocks out here. They’ve leeched onto a
big one and it’s practically gone now. They make long fast passes back
and forth like a metal-planer. I can’t see a ray or beam or anything,
but the surface flows molten as the ships pass. Mining. I guess they
filter the slag some way and distill the metals out. I wouldn’t know.
I’m a navigator. All I can think of is those ships making passes like
that over the Golden Gate and Budapest and LaCrosse, Wisconsin_.

_I found out how to work the disposal chute. Just lean against it. It’s
an air-lock with some sort of heavy coils around it, inside, I guess to
project refuse away from the ship so it won’t orbit. They must’ve known
I was fooling with it but nobody stopped me. They knew I couldn’t get
anywhere. Even if they knew about my heel-jets, they probably knew I
couldn’t get far enough with them to make no never mind_.

_Well, six hours ago a sort of dark spot began to show on the inboard
bulkhead. It swelled up until it was a knob about the size of your two
fists, shiny black, with some kind of distortion field around it so it
was muzzy around the edges. For a while I couldn’t figure it at all. I
touched it and then took hold of it, and I realized it was vibrating
around five hundred cycles, filling my suit with the note. I got my
helmet onto it right away_.

_The note went on and then changed pitch some and finally spread out
into a noise like a forty-cycle carrier, and something started
modulating it, and next thing it was saying my name, flat and raspy, no
inflection. An artificial voice, for sure. “Wain,” it said, clearing
itself up as it went along “Wain, Wain.”_

_So I kept my head tight against it and yelled, “Wain here.”_

_It was quiet for a while, just the carrier, and then the voice came in
again. I won’t bother you with exactly what it sounded like. The
language was rugged but clear, like “Wain we no have planet you have
planet we take you help.”_

_There was a lot of yelling back and forth until I got the picture. And
what I want to tell you most is this: once in a while when I listened
real carefully I heard another voice, murmuring away. Reger—that I’ll
swear. It was as if this voder, or voice machine, was being run by one
of the bugs and Reger was telling it what to say but they wouldn’t trust
him to talk directly to me_.

_Anyway, the bugs had a planet and something had happened to it, I don’t
know what; but Earth was as close as anything they’d seen to what they
want. They figure to land and establish a base and set up machinery to
take over. They had spores that would grow in our sea-water and get rid
of most of the oxygen, I guess by combining it with all the elements in
the ocean that could take it. Meanwhile, they’d convert rocks to put
whatever else they needed into the atmosphere_.

_So damn cold-blooded … it wasn’t us they were after. You clear a patch
of wood, you’re not trying especially to dispossess the squirrels and
the termites. That just happens while you work_.

_For a while I hoped we could maybe do something, but item by item they
knocked that out of my head. Reger’d told ’em everything. You look up
that guy’s record. He knows atomics and ship design and chemistry and
about every damn thing, and it’s all theirs. You know that field, or
whatever, that they paralyzed my suit with; it’s an application of the
inertia-control their ships have. You know, if you throw an A-bomb at
that field, the bomb won’t hit and it won’t fire? You couldn’t even
throw rocks at it—they’d have no inertia at contact. They know we have
no space fleet, only a half-dozen exploring scouts, and the
moon-shuttle_.

_We’re done, that’s all_.

_So I asked what’s the proposition, and they said they could use me.
They didn’t really need me, but they could use me. They said I could
have anything I wanted on Earth, and all the slaves I could put to work.
Slaves. I heard Reger give ’em the word. I’d have thirty, forty years of
that before they all died off. I’d work under Reger. He was directing
the landing for them. Designing wings for them to come in on, too—that’s
what the mining was for, the wings. They’ll put the base down in a
desert somewhere, and first thing anyone knows the oxygen will start to
go. And even if you do see ’em come in, you won’t be able to touch ’em_.

_Maybe I shouldn’t even try to warn you. Maybe it’ll be better if you
never know what hit you …_

_Reger, he … he’s … ah, stick to facts, Wain. Something makes him hate
Earth enough to … I don’t see even a coward doing a thing like this just
to save his skin. He has to have some other reason_.

_The bump on the wall said, “Reger says work with him, you can trust.”_

_Yeah, I can trust. I told them what to do with their proposition and
shove Reger along after it_.

_Now this is what I am going to do. Try, anyhow. My suit’s the only one
with a tape recorder, and it’s internal. Could be that Reger doesn’t
even know about it. What I’m going to do is wait until this ship starts
paring away at the asteroid. It gets up quite a hell of a speed at each
pass, more than you’d think, because of the inertialess field. At the
sunward end of one pass, I’ll go out the chute. I’ll have the ship’s
speed plus the throw-out coils in the chute_.

_I’ll gyro around to head for the sun. I’ve wired the heel-jet starter
to my oxy supply. When the oxy stops flowing the jets’ll cut in. I hope
by then I’ll be far enough away so they won’t detect me, or won’t bother
with me. That’s something I won’t live to know about_.

_And I’ve wired the fuel gauge to my distress squealer. When the fuel’s
all gone the squealer’ll cut in. There ought to be scouts out searching
for my ship; maybe one will scoop me in_.

_We’re positioning over the rock now_.

_Maybe I won’t get through the chute. Maybe they’ll powder me before I
get clear. Maybe they’ll pick up my jets when they cut in. Maybe they’ll
hear the squealer when the jets are gone. So many maybes_.

_Don’t anybody call me a hero for doing this. I’m not doing it for you.
I’m doing it to Reger. That bastard Reger …_

_Jerry Wain here, over and out_.

The Major lifted his head from the report. Maybe one day he would be
able to read it without his eyes stinging like this.

He lifted the flimsies away to uncover his own transcript. Coldly it
listed the pertinent facts of his interview with the traitor’s wife. He
read them through again slowly, right through the last paragraph, which
said:

_SUMMATION: It is indicated that the subject is a brilliant but twisted
individual, and that early influences as noted, plus his mode of life,
have induced a morbid fear of himself and a deep distrust of every human
being, including his wife. His extrapolative ability plus his vivid
imagination seem to have created a certainty in him that he had been
betrayed, or that he certainly would be. His actions as reported by Wain
are apparently motivated by vengeance—a vengeance against all humanity
including even himself_.

The talker hissed, and a voice said, “Major, the Colonel would like your
report on the Reger interview.”

“Roger.” He caught it up, held it, then slid it into his autowriter and
rapidly tapped out:

_The undersigned wishes to stress the partial nature of the above
report, based as it is on the statement of a man under serious strain.
Further evidence might conceivably alter the conclusions as stated_.

He signed it and added his rank and section, rolled it, canned it and
slapped it into the pneumatic tube.

“Now what the hell did I do that for?” he asked himself. He knew what
the answer was. He rose and went to the mirror in the corner by the
water-cooler, and peered into it. He shook his head in disgust.

When the ships were sighted, Wain’s recording came out of the files and
went straight to the wire services. One of the columnists said later
that the ensuing roar from Earth all but moved the Moon out of its
orbit. Suddenly, there was no such thing as a secret weapon anywhere.
Suddenly, there was—for the time being—nothing that could be called a
nation. There was only the thunder of panic, fear, and fury, and in each
of these, the name of Reger, rolling in the hollows of the Himalayas,
blasting through the wide streets of Buenos Aires and the alleys of
London. They feared the alien, but they hated Reger.

Without Wain’s recording, the alien might have slipped close, or even
landed, before the world was alerted. Without it, a general alarm
certainly would have awaited some sort of identification. But Earth was
as ready as three billion fierce, fearing, furious humans could make it
in the brief time they had.

The ships came single file, faster than any man-made object had ever
traveled. They were exactly what Wain had described—sixteen large
cylinders, ten small spheres. They were in six flights, one behind the
other, each but one composed of both types, and the other an ominous
line of five of the heavies.

They bore straight in for Earth, their single file presenting the
smallest possible profile to Earth radar. (Reger knew radar.) When every
known law of spatial ballistics dictated that with that course, at that
velocity, they must plunge straight into the planet, they decelerated
and swung to take up an orbit—rather, a powered course—around the
planet, just out of rocket interceptor range (which Reger knew).

And now their wings could be seen. Telefax and television, newspapers
and government agencies researched their contours in minutes. They were
familiar enough—a gull-wing design which one aeronautical engineer
described as having “every characteristic that could be built into a
wing.” Each wing, from root to tip, had its own reverse dihedral. Each
was sharply tapered, and sharply swept back. Even the little spherical
destroyers had them, along with a boom to support the butterfly tail.
There was one Earth design almost exactly like it—an extremely stable
large-plane airfoil for sub-sonic use. The designer: Wolf Reger.

The space scouts roared up to challenge them, heavy with armament and
anger. They sent a cloud of missiles ahead of them. There was H.E. and
atomics, solid-shot and a whole spectrum of random-frequency radio, just
in case.

The radio waves affected the aliens precisely as much—as little—as the
fusion warheads. Telescopic lenses watched the missiles race to their
targets and simply stop there, to slide around the shining hulls and
hang until, one by one, they were brought aboard.

And then the little scouts tried to ram, and were deflected like angling
guppies from the sides of an aquarium, to go screaming off into space
and a laborious turn.

For three days the enemy circled outside the atmosphere, holding their
formation, absorbing or ignoring everything Earth could throw at them.

The Major telephoned Reger’s wife to ask if she had removed her name
from her mailbox and doorbell. She said indignantly that she had not,
would not, and need not. The Major sighed and sent a squad down late
that night to arrest her. She was furious. Yet she conceded his point
fairly the next morning when she saw the newspaper photographs of her
apartment. Even the window-frames were gone. The mob had chopped right
through the floor in places, had even heaved the bathtub twelve floors
down to the street. “You should know as much about people as you think
you know about Wolf Reger,” he said.

“You should know as much about Wolf as you do about people,” she
countered. There was, with her composure, a light he had not seen
before. He said, suddenly, “You know something.”

“I do?”

“You act as if you’d had a special delivery letter from that—from your
husband.”

“You’re quite right.”

_“What?”_

She laughed. It was the first time he had heard her laugh, and something
with hands, ever so deep within him, wrung them.

“I shouldn’t tease you, Major. If I promise to tell you when it’s time,
will you promise not to ask me now?”

“My job is to find out every little detail that can possibly bear on the
situation,” he said stiffly.

“Even if it didn’t add one bit to your understanding?”

“You can’t judge that.”

“I certainly can.”

He shook his head. “It’s our job to decide. I’m afraid you’ll have to
tell me whatever it is.”

Her gaiety slipped away inside her, and a new kind of brightness shone
in her eyes. “Well, I won’t.”

He began to speak, then stopped. He need make no experiments to discover
that this extraordinary woman could not be bribed, coerced, or even
surprised. He said gently, “Very well. I won’t ask. And you’ll tell me
as soon as you can?”

“The very second.”

He kept her in his office. She seemed not to mind. He let her read all
the invasion reports as they came in, and he watched every flicker of
expression in her face. “When are you going to admit that enough facts
are in to show that there’s no hero in this story, no one beating out
flames?”

“Never. Have you ever been married, Major?”

Sourly, he thought, _Have you?_ “No,” he said.

“You’ve loved someone, though?”

He wondered how she kept her features so controlled under stress. He
would like to learn that trick. He said, “Yes.”

“Well, then. You only need a few facts about the one you love. Just
enough to put point the way.”

“Three points on a graph to give you a curve, so you can know its
characteristics and extend it. Is that what you mean?”

“That’s one of the things I mean.”

“They call that extrapolation. Your boy’s specialty.”

“I like that,” she said softly. “I like that very much.” She detached
her eyes from him, from the room, and smiled at what she saw. _“God!”_
he exploded.

“Major!”

“You’re going to get clobbered,” he said hoarsely. “You’re going to get
such a kick in the teeth … and there isn’t a thing in the world I can do
about it.”

“Poor Major,” she said, looking at him as if he were a memory.

There was a click, and electronic noise filled the room. The talker
barked, “Enemy spiralling in. Stand by for trajectory.”

“Now you’ll see.” They realized that they had spoken in unison, but it
was the wrong time to exchange a smile.

“Arizona!” said the speaker, and “Stand by.”

“Stand by hell,” growled the Major. “We’ll get the fine points by radio.
Come on.”

“You’ll take me?”

“Wouldn’t let you out of my sight.”

They ran to the elevators, shot to the roof. A helicopter whisked them
to the field, and a jet took them in and tore up and out to the lowering
sun.

An unbroken cordon can be thrown about a hundred square miles in less
than an hour and a half. This is true, because it was done immediately
after the alien fleet touched Earth. Once the landing site was
determined, the roads writhed with traffic, the desert crawled with men
and machines, the air shook with aircraft, blossomed with parachutes.
The ring had not quite closed when the formation came down almost
exactly in the predicted center. No longer a single file, the formation
was nearly spherical. It arrived on Earth with two thunders—one, the
terrible crack as the cloven air smashed back to heal itself, and
rebounded and smashed again; the other, a shaking of the Earth itself.

And the cordon stopped, flattened, lay still as a stain while the
furious globe built itself in the desert, flung its coat of many colors
about itself, mounted the sky and donned its roiling plumes.

And there were no devils there in the desert, but hell itself.

They saw it from the jet, because they were keeping close radio contact
with the landing, and straining their eyes into the sunset for a glimpse
of the fleet. Their pilot said he saw them, coming in at an impossible
speed. The Major missed them as they blinked by, but he did see their
wings, like a flurry of paper over a windy corner, drifting brokenly
down. And then the fireball fought the sun and, for a while, defeated
it, until it became a leaning ghost in a broad, torn hat.

It seemed a long, long time after that when the Major, his palms tight
to his eyes, whispered, “You knew that would happen.”

“No I didn’t,” she whispered back, cathedral-awed. “I knew something
would happen.”

“Reger did this?”

“Of course.” She stirred, glanced at the tower of smoke, and shuddered.
“Can you see yet?”

He tried. “Some …”

“Here,” she said. “I promised you. My special-delivery letter.”

He took it. “I’ve seen this. The picture of the fleet.”

Exactly as she had once before, she murmured, “Poor Major.” She took the
print from him, turned it over, deftly slipped his gold pencil from
under the pocket-flap of his tunic. “First there was a cruiser, and a
cruiser, and a cruiser,” she said, and drew a short line for each, one
after the other, “and a destroyer and a destroyer.” For each of these
she made a black disk. “Then the second flight: destroyer, cruiser,
destroyer.” And so she charted the entire formation. He stared at the
marks until she laughed at him. “Captain!”

“Yes ma’am,” answered the pilot.

“Would you read this to the Major, please?”

She handed it forward. The Major said, “What do you mean, read it?” but
she shushed him.

The pilot glanced at it and handed it back. “It says eighty-eight,
thirty, W R.”

“No, no—say the codes too.”

“Oh—sorry.” He glanced at it again. “It says ‘Love and kisses. That’s
all I have for you. W R.’ ”

“Give me that,” snapped the Major. “By God, it’s Morse!”

“He hung it up there for three whole days and you couldn’t read it.”

“Why wouldn’t you tell me?”

“How would you have read it before _that_ happened?”

He followed her gesture and saw the great hot cloud. “You’re right,” he
breathed. “You’re so right. He did that just for you?”

“For you. For everyone. It must have been the only thing he could do to
let us know what he was doing. They wouldn’t let him radio. They
wouldn’t even let him talk to Wain.”

“Yet they let him deploy their ships.”

“I guess because he made the wings for them; they thought he would know
best how to use them.”

“The wings tore off.” To the pilot he said, “Isn’t that what happened,
Captain?”

“It sure is,” said the young man. “And no wonder, the way they flashed
in. I’ve seen that happen before. You can fly under the speed of sound
or over it, but you better not stay just _at_ it. Looked to me as if
they hung on the barrier all the way in.”

“All flown from one set of controls … probably an automatic pilot, with
the course and speed all set up.” He looked at the woman. “Reger set it
up.” Suddenly he shook his head impatiently. “Oh _no!_” They wouldn’t
have let him get away with it.”

“Why not?” she said. “Everything else he told them was true.”

“Yes, but they’d have known about the barrier. Captain, just what is the
speed of sound up in the stratosphere?”

“Depends, sir. At sea level it’s around three-forty meters per second.
Up at thirty kilometers or so it’s around three hundred, depending on
the temperature.”

“The density.”

“No sir. Most people think that, but it isn’t so. The higher the
temperature, the higher the speed of sound. Anyway, the ‘sound barrier’
they talk about is just a convenient term. It happens that shock waves
form around a ship anywhere from eighty-five percent to
one-hundred-fifteen percent of the speed of sound, because some airflow
around it is supersonic and some still subsonic, and you get real weird
flow patterns. Some of the buffeting’s from that, but most of it’s from
shock waves, like the ones from the nose hitting the wing tips, or wing
shock waves hitting the tail.”

“I see. Captain, could you set up a flight-plan which would keep an
aircraft at the buffeting stage from the top of the atmosphere down to
the bottom?”

“Imagine I could, sir. Though you wouldn’t get much buffeting above 35
kilometers or so. No matter what the sonic speed, the air’s too thin for
shock wave formation.”

“Tell you what. You work out a plan like that. Then radio Radar at
Prescott and get the dope on Reger’s approach.”

“Yes, sir.” The young man went to work at his chart table.

“It’s so _hard_ for you,” Mrs. Reger said.

“What is?”

“You won’t believe it until your little graph’s all plotted, with every
fact and figure in place. Me, I _know_. I’ve known all along. It’s so
easy.”

“Hating is easy too,” said the Major. “You’ve probably never done much
of that. But _un_hating’s a pretty involved process. There’s no way of
doing it but to learn the facts. The truth.”

They were five minutes away from the mushroom when the Captain finished
his calculations. “That’s it, sir, that’s what happened. It couldn’t
have been an accident. All the way down, under power, those ships stayed
within four percent of sonic speed, and tore themselves to pieces. And
here’s something else. Radar says that from 32 kilometers on down they
showed a different pip. As if they’d shut off that inertia field of
theirs.”

“They’d have to, or they wouldn’t have any kind of supporting airflow
over the wings! You can’t use an airfoil if the air can’t touch it! I
guess for some reason their inertia field can’t be used near a strong
gravitic field.”

“And Reger planned that approach, that way?”

“Looks like it. From thirty kilometers to the ground, at that speed … it
was all over in fifteen seconds.”

“Reger,” muttered the pilot. He went back to the controls and switched
off the automatics. “One of the radar pix showed Reger’s space-suit,
Major,” he said. “Looks like he bailed out the same as Wain did—through
the disposal chute.”

“He’s alive!”

“Depends.” The young man looked up at the Major. “You think that mob
down there is going to wait while we compute velocities for ’em?”

“That’s a military setup, Captain. They’ll do what they’re told.”

“About _Reger_, sir?

He turned his attention to the controls, and the Major went thoughtfully
back to his seat. As they whistled down to the airstrip behind the
cordon, he suddenly thumped his knee. “Light gases, high temperature—of
_course_ those bugs never heard of a shock wave at what we call sonic
speed! You see? You see?”

“No,” she said. He understood that she did not need to see. She knew.

Maybe, he thought, the female of the species extrapolates without
realizing it, and intuitive faith is nothing more than high-velocity
computation.

He kept the thought to himself.

The Major walked quietly through the mob, listening. There were soldiers
and Air Force men, security officers and civilians. Behind him, the
cordon, tightening, reducing the strip between themselves and the
radioactive area. In the cordon, a human getaway: FBI, CIA, G-2,
screening those inside. The Major listened.

“He’s got to be inside somewhere.”

“Don’t worry, we’ll get the—”

“Hey George, tell you what. We get our hands on him, let’s keep our
mouth shut. Army gets him, it’s a trial and all kind of foofaraw. This
bunch gets him, they’ll tear him to pieces right _now_.”

“So?”

“Too quick. You and me, one or two other guys from around here—”

“I hear you.”

From somewhere back of the cordon, a tremendous huffing and puffing, and
a casual, enormous voice, “Mike hot, Lieutenant,” and then the Psycho
Warfare officer: “All right, Reger. We know you didn’t mean it. No one
here will hurt you. You’ll get fair treatment all down the line. We
understand why you did it. You’ll be safe. We’ll take care of you. Just
step right up.” And an interruption and a “Oh, sorry, Sir,” and clearly
through the amplifier, “You don’t coddle a son of a bitch like that
while I’m around.” Then, harshly, “Reger, step the hell up here and take
your medicine. You got it coming to you and you’re going to get it
sooner or later.”

The Major heard part of a suggestion about an operation with a blunt
nailfile, and walked away from it into “You nail one loop of gut to a
tree, see, and walk him around until—”

The space-suit hung grotesquely by its neck against a shattered barn
wall. A scraggly man in filthy coveralls stood by a pile of rocks and
chunks of four-by-four. “Just three for a dime, gents, and the ladies
free. Step right up and clobber the son. Limber up for the real thing. I
thank you sir: Hit him hard.” A corporal hefted a round stone and let
fly. It hit the space-suit in the groin and the crowd roared. The
scraggly man chittered, “One on the house, one on the house!” and handed
over another stone.

The Major touched a smooth-faced lieutenant on the arm. “What goes on?”

“Huh? The suit, sir? Oh, it’s all right. G-2’s been and gone. His, all
right. He’s got to be around someplace. Well, it’s us or the hot
stuff—he can take his choice. The cordon’s getting radiation armor.”

“There’ll be hell to pay over this caper.”

“Don’t think so,” said the Lieutenant. “General Storms himself pegged a
couple.”

“Make ‘im bleed, corp’ral,” shouted the barker to a pfc. He hopped from
one foot to another, jingling coins in his pocket. “Whatsa matter, boys,
you love ’im?”

“Imagine him, making a buck,” said the Lieutenant admiringly. “Regular
clown.”

“Yeah, a clown,” said the Major, and walked away.

A soft voice said, “One look around here, I wish Reger’d gotten away
with it.”

The Major said warmly, “You’re a regular freak around here, mister,” and
was completely misunderstood. The man ran away, and the Major could have
bitten his tongue in two.

_I want to be in a place_, the Major thought suddenly, passionately,
_where the truth makes a difference_. And _If I were a genius at
extrapolation, where would I hide?_

“Mr. Reger, you’re a reasonable man,” bellowed the speaker.

“Three for a dime. For a quarter you can throw a second lootenant.”

“He should hold out. He should go back into the bald-spot and fry
slowly.”

The cordon moved in a foot. _I just thought of the funniest gag_,
thought the Major. _You pour vinegar on this sponge, see, and hold it up
on this stick_ …

Slowly he walked back toward the cordon, and then like a warm, growing
light, it came to him what he would do if he were a genius at
extrapolation, trapped between the advancing wolves and the leaping
flames. He’d be a flame, or a wolf. But he couldn’t be this kind of a
flame. He couldn’t be an advancing wolf. He’d have to be a wolf which
stayed in one spot and let the advance pass him.

He went and stood by the man. This wasn’t the notorious Reger face,
hollowed, slender, with the arched nose.

He realized abruptly that the man’s nose was broken and not bruised. And
a man would have to wear coveralls for weeks to get them that filthy.

“I’ll take three,” he said, and handed the man a dime.

“Atta boy, Maje.” He handed over two rocks and a billet. The Major aimed
carefully, and said from the side of his mouth, “Okay, love-and-kisses.
We’ve got to get you out of here.”

The barker had an instant of utter stillness. Behind him, the speaker
roared. “You can trust _me_, Mr. Reger.”

The barker roared back, “An’ I’ll trust _you_ Mr. Reger. Step right up
and I’ll let you have a coupla rocks.” To the Major he said, “See, Maje?
I’m in a position I can trust practically anyone.”

The Major hurled his rock at the space-suit. From the side of his mouth,
hardly moving his lips, he said, “High temperature, light gases, no
barrier. I know what you did. Let me get you out of here.” He threw
again and hit the front of the space-suit.

“One on the house, one on the house. I like the way you’re going, Maje.”

The Major said, softly, “One thing you never extrapolated, genius.
Suppose she loved you so much she would take you on faith when three
billion people hated your guts?” He hurled the billet, and took out
another dime. “I’ll call it. I’m going to break a nose.” He aimed slowly
and said almost into his shoulder, “She never broke faith for a second.
She’s here now. Will you come?” He threw the rock and hit the
face-plate.

“Come on, Reger,” shouted the barker. “You got it coming to you sooner
or later anyway.” He picked up one of his rocks, and
whispered—whimpered, perhaps, “I might kill her if I go back …”

“She might die if you don’t.”

“There’s one you never expected, Reger!” roared the barker, and threw
his rock. “Want to yell a while?” he said to a buck-toothed youth in
overalls. “I got to go brush my teeth.” He walked straight toward the
ambulant gate in the cordon, the Major right behind him. Roughly, the
Major shoved the little man through. “If it’s all the same to you,” he
said to the FBI man, “I’m curtailing this enterprise.”

A CIA man nearby hitched at a shoulder holster and growled, “Fine idea,
Major. I was about to mistake him for Reger, the dirty little
bloodsucker.” They passed outside.

“Never thought I’d find you yelling and gabbing and mixing like that,”
said the Major.

“You do what you have to do,” said the little man. “I once saw a woman
lift a six-hundred-pound garage door with one hand and pull her little
boy out with the other.” He stumbled.

The Major caught him. “Man—you’re whipped!”

“You don’t know,” he whispered. Suddenly, “Don’t you love her enough to
turn me over to _them?_” You’ll never have a better chance.”

“Did I say I loved her?”

“One way or another.”

They were quiet all the way back to the airstrip. The Major said, in a
choked voice, “I love her more than that … enough to …” He thumped the
side of the plane. “I found him,” he called.

The door opened. “I knew you would,” she said. They helped Reger in. The
Major climbed in beside the pilot. “Fly,” he said.

The Major thought, _She knew I would. She has faith in me, too_.

A long time later he thought, _That’s something, anyway_.



GRANNY WON’T KNIT


FOR ROAN, THERE WAS a flicker of blackness, almost too brief to notice,
and he had arrived at his destination. He stepped down from the
transplat and took three preoccupied steps before he realized,
shockingly, that he had not materialized in the offices of J. & D. Walsh
at all, but in a small plat-court hung with heavy and barbarous drapes.
There was a fresh and disturbing odor in the air, which was too warm.

He cast about him worriedly, hunting for the dialpost that would send
him to his father’s office. It was not where it should be, at the corner
of the court. Petals! He was late, and lateness meant trouble.

“Well-l-l?” drawled a half singing, half whispering voice.

Roan spun, hitting the side of his foot painfully on the corner of the
transplat. It made him hop. He had never felt so excruciatingly foolish
in his entire thirty years.

“I’m sorry,” he spluttered. “I must have dialed the wrong number.” He
located the source of the voice—a door across from him was open at its
top panel, and, in the small space, was framed a face …

_The_ face!

If you dream about faces, you dream about them _after_ you meet them,
not before! The thought blazed at him, made him blink, and he blinked
again at the cloud of golden hair and the laughing green eyes.

“… the wrong, you see,” he concluded lamely, “number.”

“Maybe it was and maybe it wasn’t,” she said, in tones which could have
been scored on a musical staff. Her hand appeared, to press back the
side of the golden cloud.

A bare hand.

Tingling with shock at such wanton exposure, he looked away quickly.
“I’ll have to—uh—may I use your transplat?”

“It’s better than walking,” she said and smiled. “It’s over there.” A
long bare arm appeared, carrying a pointing finger. The arm was
retracted and there was a small fumbling at the door-latch. “I’ll show
you.”

_“No!”_ How could this creature forget that—that she wasn’t decently
covered? “I’ll find it.” He floundered against the drapes, fumbled along
them, at last threw one away from the dial pedestal. With his back
firmly toward her, he said, “I have no tokens with me.”

“Do you _have_ to go?”

“Yes!”

She laughed, “Well, either way, be my guest.”

“Thanks,” he managed. “I’ll—uh—send—” he began to dial busily and
carefully, to avoid another wrong number—“send it to when I as soon as
good of you three _five_.”

Averting his eyes, he stood on the transplat. She was still inside her
cubicle, thank the powers. Then he remembered that he hadn’t the
slightest idea of the number he had mistakenly dialed; although it had
stared him in the face on her dialpost, he had been too distraught to
read it.

“Oh, I didn’t get your number!” he said hoarsely, but the familiar
flicker of total blackness had come and gone, and he was standing on the
transplat inside the office of J. & D. Walsh, waving his hand stupidly
at Corsonmay, the oldish receptionist with the youngish hair.

“My number?” Corsonmay echoed. Appallingly, she giggled. “Why, Roan
_Walsh_, I never!” Under the privacy hood, her hands flickered. As he
passed her desk, she pressed upon him a slip of paper. “It’s really a
very easy one to remember,” she simpered.

He wordlessly stepped to his door. It slid back. He entered and, while
it was closing behind him, hurled the paper violently at the disposal
slot. _“Blossom!”_ he cursed and slumped into his chair.

“Roan, step in here a moment!” snarled the grille above him.

“Yes, Private!” Roan gasped out.

He sat for a moment, drawing deep breaths as if the extra oxygen would
somehow give him the right words to say. Then he rose and approached a
side panel, which slid open for him. His father sat glowering at him.
His father was dressed exactly as he was, exactly as Hallmay and
Corsonmay and Walshmam and everyone else in the world was, except—but
don’t think about _her_ now, whatever happens!

Private Walsh swung his glower, beard and all, across Roan, then slipped
his gloved hands under the privacy hood and studied them thoughtfully.
Though Roan could not see them, he knew they were held with the fingers
decently together, as unlike living things as possible.

“I am not pleased,” said Private Walsh.

_What now?_ Roan wondered hopelessly.

“There is more to a business than making profits,” said the bearded man.
“There is more to this business than moving goods. It is not a large
business, but an arch’s key is not necessarily a large stone. The
transportation platform—” he droned, using the device’s formal name as
if the service wore a mitred hat—“is the keystone of our entire culture,
and this firm is the keystone of the transplat industry. Our
responsibilities are great. _Your_ responsibilities are great. A
position such as yours requires certain intangibles over and above your
ability to make out manifests. Integrity, boy, reliability—respect for
privacy. And, above all, personal honor and decency.”

Roan, having heard this many times before, wrenched his features into an
expression of penitence.

“One of the first indications of a gentleman—and to be a good
businessman, one must be a good man, and the best of good men is a
gentleman—one of the first ways of detecting the presence of a gentleman
in our midst, I say, is to ask oneself this question: “Is he punctual?”
Private Walsh leaned so far forward that his beard audibly brushed the
privacy hood. The sound made Roan’s flesh creep. “You were late this
morning!”

Roan had a hysterical impulse to blurt, “Well, you see, I stopped off at
a girl’s place on the way and had a chat with her while she waved her
bare arm …” But even hysteria yielded to his conditioning. And then his
mind began to work again.

“Private,” he said sorrowfully, “I _was_ late. I can explain—” he heard
the intake of breath and raised his voice slightly—“but I cannot excuse
and will not try.” The breath slid out again. Roan stepped backward one
step. “With your permission, then, Byepry.”

“Bye nothing. What is this explanation?”

This had better be good, Roan told himself. He put his hand behind him.
He knew this, with face downcast, added to his penitent appearance.

“I awoke this morning caught up with a great idea,” he said. “I think I
have found an _economy_.”

“If you have,” rumbled the beard, “it’s been hiding from me.”

“Each load of freight we transplat carries a man with it. This man does
nothing but hold the manifest in his hand and look up the receiver’s
clerk at the arrival point. My plan is to eliminate that man.”

“You awoke with this in mind?”

“Yes, Private,” Roan lied, still marveling at his mental
resourcefulness.

“And thinking about it delayed you?”

“Yes, Private.”

“Since you were apparently fated to be late in any case,” the old man
said acidly, “you’d have done better to stay asleep. You would have
wasted less of your time—and mine.”

Roan knew enough to keep his mouth shut.

“In the history of matter transmission,” said his father, “nine
shipments have gone astray. The consequences are appalling. I shall
assign you to read the history of these nine cases and memorize the
figures. In one such case—the arrival of one hundred and twelve cubic
meters of pig-iron in a private house measuring eighty-four meters—the
results were spectacularly expensive.”

“But that can’t happen now!”

“No, it can’t,” admitted Private Walsh. “Not since the capacity-lock,
which prevents the shipment of any volume to a smaller one. But there is
still room for some gruesome possibilities, as in the Fathers of Leander
case, when two hundred female assembly workers were sent, in error, into
the monastery of this silent order. The damages—first degree violation
of privacy, you know—were quadrupled for the particular aggravation and
multiplied by the number of Fathers and novitiates. Eight hundred and
fourteen, if I remember correctly, and I do.

“Now, the employment of a properly trained operator would have reduced
the presence of these females in that building to a matter of tenths of
a second and the damages accordingly. The shipment would have been
returned to its source almost before it had arrived. As long as such
things can occur, the wages paid these operators are cheap insurance
indeed.” He paused ironically. “Is there anything else you want to
suggest?”

“If you please, Private,” Roan said formally, “I am acquainted with
these matters. My suggestion was this—that phone contact be made with
the receiving party when the shipment is ready—that our bonded transplat
operator dial seven of the eight digits necessary—and that the final
impulse be activated at the receiving point by audio or video, or even
by a separate beamed radio, which we could supply to our regular
customers or deliver by messenger a few minutes before the main
shipment.”

It got very quiet in the office.

“You see,” said Roan, pressing his advantage, “if the final shipping
orders come from the receiver himself, it is difficult to imagine how
anyone else could possibly receive the load.”

This silence was longer, and was ended by a sound from the beard
precisely as if the old man had bitten into an olive pit. “You mentioned
a messenger for the impulse-device. Where’s your saving?”

“Most of our trade is with regular customers. Each of these could be
given his own machine.”

Silence.

Roan all but whispered, “An exclusive service of J. & D. Walsh.”

“Well!” said Private Walsh. It was the most unreadable syllable Roan had
ever heard. “This is not a suggestion, nor the consequence of anything
specific which may or may not have happened; it is purely a request for
a private opinion. Which strikes you as more—shall we say euphonious—J.
& D. Walsh & Son, or J., D. & R. Walsh?”

Roan felt one of his fingernails bite through his glove as he clasped
his hands behind him. He hoped his voice would not shake when he
answered. “I could not presume to express an opinion on such a matter to
one as familiar with …” and, beyond that, his voice would not go.

He flashed a glance at his father, and almost extraneously it occurred
to him that if the old man ever smiled, he might not be able to see it
at all through the beard. Chalk yet one more advantage up to the
enviable state of being head of a family.

He thought for a moment that his father was about to say something
pleasant, but the impossibility remained impossible, and the old man
merely nodded at the door. “You’re expected at my Mam’s this evening,”
he said curtly. “Be prompt there, at least.”

It stung, and the old man followed it up. “Lying abed immersed in
company problems, even if they are of doubtful value, speaks well of an
employee’s devotion to his work. Unpunctuality speaks badly of it. A
Private—” he squared his shoulders—“can be on time _and_ be inspired.”

Roan lowered his chin another notch and shuffled backward to the panel.
It opened. He went through. When the panel clicked home, Roan leaped
straight up in the air, his whole being filled with a silent shout. _The
partnership! He’s going to shake loose that gorgeous, beautiful,
blossomy old partnership!_ His gloved hands pounded silently and
gleefully together. _Oh, Roan, you dog you, how do you do it? What makes
that fuzzy head of yours tick when you get in a jam? Oh, you’re a—_

He stopped, his mouth slack and his eyes abulge. There on his desk, in
precisely the same pose, sat the golden-haired vision he had seen during
the night and whose number he had dialed by error in the morning.

She was dressed—if one could call it dressed—in a long garment which
fell from her throat and cascaded softly around her, rolling and folding
and completely unlike the wrinkle-free, metrical cone-thrust-in-a-cone
of conventional garb. Her arms were entirely bare and so, incredibly,
were the feet which peeped out from under the flowing hem. She sat with
both hands crossed on one knee and regarded him gravely. She smiled and
was for a second transparent—and then she vanished.

Roan saw people and huge cargoes vanish every day—but not sixty meters
from the nearest transplat! And not people indecently clad in outlandish
fabrics which fell close to the body instead of standing properly away
from it!

There was a heat in his face, and he became aware that he had not
breathed in—how long? There was a straining ache about him and he
realized that, at some point in his extraordinary experience, he had
slumped to his knees on the carpet.

He got shakily to his feet and let himself be preoccupied with the
reflex of adjusting his pantalets. They were neat and glossy and
perfectly cylindrical, and not at all like the delicate pink taper of
her—her limb. She’d had toes, too. Had it ever occurred to him before to
wonder if women had toes? Surely not! Yet they had. _She had_.

Then reaction struck him and he staggered to his desk.

His first lucid thought was to wonder what this vision would look like
properly clad and he found that he could not possibly imagine it. He
found, further, that he did not want to imagine it, and he descended
into a scalding shame at the discovery. Oh, cried every ounce of
upbringing within him, the Private was right in withholding the
partnership for so long; he’d be so wrong in trusting me with it! What
am I, he sobbed silently, what horrible thing am I?

II

Private Whelan Quinn

Quinn and Glass,

Level 4

Matrix 124-10-9783.

Honored Private:

In reference to yours of the seventeenth instant, we regret to inform
you that the supply of chromium-plated ventilator girls is, at the
moment, insufficient to complete the minimum mass for transplat shipment
to you, which must total two toes. However, knowing that you use prefab
paneling in considerable amounts, we are prepared to make up the weight
in standard sheets if this is marriageable to you. We have the material
in white, gold, dream and ivory. Please inform the undersigned as soon
as possible if a doctor would be of any help.

Yours in Privacy,

Roan stared dully at the words which glowed on the voicewriter screen,
his hand hovering over the SEND button of his telefax. He was wondering
mistily whether that line about radiator grilles was quite right when
the annunciator hummed.

“Yes?”

Corsonmay’s giggly voice then emerged. “Greenbaum Grofast just called,
Roan Walsh. Query on a ’fax transmitted at 1013 from your matrix. They
want to know what is meant by item eleven on it.”

“What’s item eleven?”

“It says here, ‘smiling toenails.’ ”

“Whatever it means, it’s wrong. Is there a price on the item?”

“Just a blank.”

“Then it doesn’t matter. Tell them to cancel the line and up-number the
other items. You could have thought of that.”

“I’m sawrrree,” she said in such a disgustingly ingratiating tone that,
had she been in the room with him, he would certainly have bashed her
head clear down to her bedroom—no, _backbone_.

“Listen,” he snapped, “lift the copy of every ’fax I’ve sent out since I
got here this morning and bring them in.”

Roan growled. The shot of adrenalin his irritation yielded up cleared
his mind and his vision, and he stared appalled at the letter on his
screen. Shuddering, he cleared it. He could just see old Quinn puzzling
out _“if this is marriageable to you.”_ Further, he could see the deep,
secret ripplings at the base of his father’s beard, if by any chance
Quinn happened to check through to him.

Corsonmay minced in with a sheaf of copies. “This one says—”

“Give me those. Byemay,” he rapped.

“Well, bye.” At the panel, she stopped and said solicitously, “Roan
Walsh, you look—I mean is there anything …”

“_Bye_may!” he roared.

She gulped. “You could tell _me_.” Then her eyes widened as she watched
his face. That odd, detached part of himself which irrepressibly
wondered about such things wondered now just what expression he was
wearing. Whatever it was, it blew her out of the office as if the room
were a cannon and she the shell.

He looked at the top sheet. _‘… your question as to how many support
poles in a lading ton. The clerk in charge will supply the information.
What is her number anyway?’_ Then there was another reference to gold,
this time _with the light behind it_, and a fantastic paragraph about
shipping a generator _complete with ankling bolts_.

Going through the sheets, the most recent first, he was relieved to see
that his preoccupation had noticeably affected only the last four
messages. He settled himself down to a grim and careful enunciation of
the corrections, worded with apologies but without explanations, checked
them carefully and sent them. Then he destroyed the copies he had
corrected.

When he straightened up, his face was flushed and his head spun. Noon
already. Thank the powers for that.

Then he saw the note on his desk, at the corner on which the vision had
appeared. In beautiful firm calligraphy was a transplat number—nothing
more.

_Hussy!_

But he put it in his pocket.

On the way out, he said to Corsonmay, without looking at her, “Won’t be
back today. Field work.”

“Oh, but you’re not scheduled for—”

Before she could finish, he whirled and glared at her. She gulped so
hard, he had the mad conviction that she was about to swallow her own
lips. He strode to the dialpost, spun a number and got out of there.

He stood for a moment under the sky—well, under the metal-glas
canopy—drinking in the sights of Grosvenor Center. There were shops and
a restaurant and a library, and a theater as well, an immense structure
honeycombed from top to bottom with its one-seat cells and one-man
screens. Something called _The Glory of Stasis_ was playing. He
remembered the reviews—a two-hour prose poem dedicated to the fantasy of
eternal afternoons, permanent roses and everlasting youthfulness. He
should see it, he thought. After all, wasn’t that what he needed—a
reaffirmation in the permanence of things and his place in this eternal
society?

How comforting the Center was! People moved from one shop to another,
not hurrying, not idling, each as sure of where he was going as where he
had come from. Each dressed alike, walked alike, the rectangular feet
unhesitating, the tubular limbs alternating, the cone-in-cone clothing
never rippling, never draping, never clinging close to bodies …

He shook himself.

 … And concealed under the decent capes, stockinged hands were folded,
unused until needed—just as Godmade as a bird’s wing—and hidden when
they worked, as all working mechanisms were housed. And as far as the
eye could see them, these sane folk were identifiable, correct. One was
never in doubt, for that smooth-faced one was a Bachelor like himself,
and the long hair yonder was a May, and the bound hair a Mam, and the
bearded ones were Privates.

Noble title, Private—constant reminder of the great principle of
Privacy, which was the very essence of all order. It was born, he had
been taught, of the people themselves when, in the days of the
barbarities, they had formed great armies—millions upon millions of just
people in a single organization—and their majority were called Private.
Magnificent then and magnificent today.

He saw the bank of transplats and felt a surge of pride. Someone had
used the term “keystone.” A good one. For the transplat covered the
Earth like a great clean cape, standardizing language, dress, customs
and ambitions. Every spot on Earth was but a step and a split-second
away from every other, and all resources lay ready for the seeking
glove. He had been curious enough, at one time, to attempt an
orientation in geographic distances. He soon gave it up as profitless.
What did it matter that the company offices were in Old New Mexico and
his home near what had once been called Philadelphia? Could it be
important that Corsonmay arrived each morning from Deutsch Polska and
Hallmay, the Private’s secretary, slept each night in Karachi?

The population was stabilized below its resources. Why, there was enough
copper to supply power fuel for seven centuries—copper which, so they
said, was once used to carry feeble little pulses of electricity. And
when the copper was gone, it would be simple enough to synthesize more.
Food—filthy, necessary, secret stuff—was no longer a problem. And for
delicacies of mind and heart, there were the spaceships, roaring away to
the stars and returning years later, carrying strange fossils and odd
stones, after having traveled every laborious inch out and every inch
back again, aging their crews and enriching the world.

Once, he knew, there had been talk of interplanetary transplat, but it
was now unshakably established that the effect was possible only in a
gravitic field of planetary “viscosity.” Once the immense task of
establishing the dial central was finished, the system could be extended
anywhere on a planet, but never between them. And a good thing, too, as
his father had explained to him. What would happen to the beautifully
balanced cultural structure if humanity were suddenly free to scatter
through the Universe as it now scattered over the Earth? And why leave?
What could there possibly be for anyone—except a crazy spaceman—off
Earth?

He had read this, too: _A species which can build perfection as fast as
we have done is a species capable of maintaining perfection forever_. It
took fifteen thousand years to populate the Earth and then explode it in
a mighty war. It took half a thousand years to concentrate the few
hundred thousand survivors in Africa, the only continent left in which
men could live. It took the African Colony six hundred years to reach
the transplat stage in its technology. But _that_ was only a hundred and
fifty years back. The transplat built cities in days, floated them on
impervious bedplates and shielded them with radiation-proof domes when
necessary. People could settle anywhere—and they did. People could work
the Earth for its resources almost anywhere—and they did.

Roan sighed, feeling much better. He looked away from the calm but busy
Center and idly took in what could be seen of the horizon. There a
snow-capped mountain hung like a cloud, and yonder was blue water as far
as the eye could see. He wondered what mountain it might be, what sea;
and then he laughed. It was all the same to a man, all the same to
humanity.

He paced out the Center, from one end to the other, delighted, proud. He
was young and vital and marriageable—perhaps all such as he suffered
from the equivalent of his blonde apparition when that time of life came
upon them. Marriage, after all, held certain animal mysteries, and like
those of his flower-shop, where he cleaned his body and teeth and stoked
himself with food concentrates, they just could not be discussed. He
would wait and see; when the time came, the mysteries would be
explained, even as had all the others.

He came out into the walkway loving everybody, even, for a moment,
Granny.

Granny! He stopped and closed his eyes, his face twisted. He’d very
nearly forgotten about her. Well, she could blossom well wait. He’d had
a bad time this morning and the very thought of Granny then had been
unbearable. Who, in the throes of self-abasement, wanted contact with a
veritable monolith of respectability? And who, having regained his
respectability, needed the monolith? Either way, the visit was
insupportable. He’d make his sister Valerie go. Someone from the family
had to make the visit once a week. Why, he didn’t know and had never
asked. Let Valerie do it. What was the use of having a sister if you
couldn’t get her to do the dirty work once in a while?

He crossed the walkway, went to the phone banks and dialed Valerie’s
number after a glance at his watch. She should be back at work from
noonrest by now.

She was. As soon as she saw his face, she said, “Roan Walsh, if you’re
calling up to palm that visit to Granny off on _me_, you have another
think coming. I do my duty by the family and I’m blessed if I can see
why I should do any more than my duty or why you should do any less, so
don’t even say a word about it.” He opened his mouth, but before
anything came out of it, she said, “And don’t be late either. And
especially, don’t be early.”

Roan opened his mouth again, but the screen went blank.

Out in the filtered sunlight again, he let the chagrin fade and the
amusement grow. It grew into something rare in Roan—an increasing glow
of heady resentment and conscious command. How did these magnificent
human beings get so magnificent in the first place? Why, by asking if
everything was all right, or if it weren’t—and, if it weren’t, then they
changed things until it was. Now everything was all right with him,
except this Granny business. Then ask the question—why should he go see
Granny? Because someone always had to. That was no answer. Put it
another way, then—what would happen if he just didn’t go?

He strode buoyantly down the walkway, beaming fiercely at the passersby,
and the wonderful thought defeated him in exactly seven minutes, twenty
seconds. Because the answer to ‘What if he just didn’t go?’ was:

From Mam, that hurt look and then an avalanche of “understanding.”

From Val, a silent, holier-than-thou waspishness, day after day.

And from the Private, thunder and lightning. And no partnership. Well,
buds with the partnership!

At this point, he stopped walking. What did you do when you walked out
on your family’s business?

He’d never known anyone who had. Where did you go? What did you do?

His other, inner self said, banteringly, _Aw, come off it. Are you going
to kick over the Cosmos to save yourself sixty minutes with the old
woman?_

Roan said nothing to that. So the voice added, _What have you got
against Granny, anyway?_

“She bothers me,” Roan said aloud. He turned and went into a decorator.

_What for?_ demanded the inner Roan.

“To buy something for Granny,” he replied. And the inner voice, damn its
stinking stamens, chuckled and said, _Know what, Roan? You’re a crawling
coward_.

“Why can’t you be on my side for once?” he demanded, but its only answer
was a snigger so smug that even his sister Valerie might have envied it.

The decorator was an old bachelor with a fierce countenance. Roan bought
roses and hybrid jonquils, paid for them and started out. Suddenly he
went back, prodded by his weird questioning mood, and said, “What did
they call a place where you buy roses before they called it a
decorator?”

The man uttered a soprano nickering which, Roan deduced, was laughter.
He leaned across the counter and, looking over each of his shoulders in
turn, said in a shrill whisper, “Flower shop.” He clung to the counter
and twisted up his face until the tears spurted.

Roan waited patiently until the man calmed down and then asked, “Well,
then, why do they call the you-know-what a flower shop?”

This seemed to sober the man. He scratched his pale, cropped head. “I
don’t know. I guess because, whatever they called it before, people used
to make jokes and cuss-words about it. Like now with—with Flower Shops.”

Roan shuddered. Its motivation was beyond definition for him, but with
it came a feeling of having taken a ludicrous path to a great truth, and
somehow he knew he would never joke or swear about flower shops again.
Or, for that matter, about whatever new name they gave the plumbing
after they got through with muddying up this one. For this much he could
say aloud, “There ought to be something else to curse and make jokes
about.”

The man’s fierce face yielded for a moment to puzzlement, and then he
shrugged. To Roan, it was a disgusting gesture and an alarming one, the
one his father had made years ago, when Roan’s tongue was a little more
firmly attached to his curiosity than it had been of late. It was
transplat this and transplat that, until he had suddenly asked his
father how the thing worked. The Private had stopped dead, hesitated,
then shrugged just that way. It was a gesture which said, “That’s how
things are, that’s all.”

On the way to the transplats, Roan stopped where people clustered. There
was a shop there dealing in, according to its sign, FAD AND FASHION.
Having passed through a number of engrossing fads in his life—Whirlstick
and Chase and Warp and, once, a little hand loom on which he had woven a
completely useless strip of material twice his length and two fingers
wide—he stopped to see what people were buying.

It was a motion-picture of white-gloved hands manipulating two thick
needles and a sort of heavy thread. No one would have dared to do such a
thing in the open, but the picture was acceptable, though giggle-making.

On a shelf at waist height were many samples of the fabric which seemed
to be the product of this exercise. He stepped forward until his cape
covered enough of the shelf for him to pick up a piece of the material.

It was loosely woven, with a paradoxical texture, very rough, yet very
soft.

It fell on and around his hand and draped away like—like …

“What is it? What’s this called?” he blurted.

A woman next to him said, “They call it knitting.”

III

He skipped to the laFarge yards and Kimberley, Danbury Marble and
Krasniak, checking inventories and consulting accountants. He did it all
without notes, which he had left in his office when he charged out at
noon. He did it efficiently and he did it, without at first knowing why
or even how, in the most superb cross-spoor fashion, so that, by
quitting time, it would take far more trouble than it was worth for the
office to discover he had used the first two hours of the afternoon for
his own purposes.

This small dishonesty troubled him more than a little. Honor was part of
the decency-privacy-perfection complex, and yet, to a degree, it seemed
to be on the side of good business and high efficiency to operate
without it. Did this mean that he was not and could not be what his
father called a gentleman? If not, how much did it matter?

He decided it didn’t matter, cursed silently and jovially at the inner
voice which sneered at him, and went to see his grandmother.

There was very little difference between one transplat court and
another. A business might have a receptionist and homes might have a
larger or smaller facility, but with the notable exception of the
blonde’s apartment in his dream—surely it _was_ a dream—when he first
found walls covered with drapes, he had never noticed much difference
between courts.

Granny’s, however, always gave him a special feeling of awe. If it could
be found anywhere on Earth, here, right here in this court, was the sum
and symbol of their entire culture—neat, decent, _correct_.

He stepped off the transplat and went to the dialpost to check the time,
and was pleased. He could hardly have been any more punctual.

There was a soft sound and a panel stood open. It was the same one as
always and he wondered, as he had many times before, about the other
rooms in Granny’s house. He would not have been surprised if they all
proved to be empty. What could she need but her rectitude, her solitude
and a single room?

He entered and stood reverently. Granny, all ivory and white wax, made a
slight motion with her hooded eyes and he sat opposite her. Between them
was a low, bare table.

“Great Mam,” he said formally, “good Stasis to you.”

“Hi,” she said quaintly. “How you doing, boy?” For all his patient
irritation with Granny, as always he felt the charm of her precise,
archaic speech. Her voice was loud enough, clear enough, but always had
the quality of a distant wind. “You look like you hoed a hard row.”

Roan understood, but only because of many years of experience with her
odd phrasing. “It’s not too bad. Business.”

Tell me about it.” The old woman lived in some hazy, silent world of her
own, separated incalculably in time and space from the here and now, and
yet she never failed to ask this question.

He said, “Just the usual … I’ve brought you something.” From the pocket
under his cape, he took the decorations he had bought, twisted the tube
which confined them and handed the explosion of roses and daffodils to
her. The other package clattered to the table.

There was the demure flash of a snowy glove and she had the stems. She
put her face down into the fragrant mass and he heard her breath
whisper. “That was very kind,” she said. “And what’s this?” She popped
the wrapping and peeped down between the edge of the table and the hem
of her cape to see. “_Knitting!_ I didn’t know anyone remembered
knitting. Used to be just the thing for the old folk, when I was a
sprout like you. Sit in the sun and rock and knit, waiting for the end.”

“I thought you’d like it.” He caught the slight movement of her
shoulders and heard the snap of the wrappings as she closed the package
again and slid it to the undershelf.

They beamed at each other and she asked him, “Aren’t you working too
hard? You look—well, you were going to tell me about the business.”

He said, “It’s about the same. Oh, I had an idea this morning and told
the Private about it. I think he’s going to use it. He was pleased. He
talked about the partnership.”

“That’s fine, boy. What was the idea?”

She wouldn’t understand. But he told her anyway, choosing his words
carefully, about his plan to eliminate the transplat operators. She
nodded gravely as he spoke, and at one point he had a mad impulse to
start making up nonsense technological terms out of his head, just to
see if she’d keep nodding. She would; it was all the same to her. She
was just being polite.

He restrained himself and concluded, “So, if it works out, it will be a
real economy. There just wouldn’t be any way for a shipment to go astray
the way—” he almost blurted out the story of the arrival of the
passenger van at the monastery, and caught himself just in time; the old
lady would have been shocked to death—“the way some have in the past.”

“I reckon they couldn’t,” she agreed, nodding as if she understood. He
ought to return her courtesy, he thought, and said, “And what has
occupied you, Great Mam?”

“I do wish you’d keep calling me Granny,” she said, a shade of petulance
creeping into the weary whisper. “What have I been doing? What might I
be doing at my age? Know how old I am, Roan?”

He nodded.

“A hundred and eighty-three come spring,” she said, ignoring him. “I’ve
seen a lot in my time. The stories I could tell you … Did you know I was
born in the Africa Colony?”

He nodded again, and again she ignored him. “Yes indeedy, I was about
your age when all this started, when the transplat broke the bubble we
lived in and scattered us all over the world.”

_Yes, you saw it happen!_ he thought, for the first time fully realizing
something he had merely known statistically before. _You saw folk
dancing chest to chest and having food together and no one thinking a
thing about it. You knew the culture before there was any real privacy
or decency—you, who are the most private and decent of people today. The
stories you could tell? Oh, yes—couldn’t you, though! What did they call
them before they called them ‘flower shops’?_

Certain she couldn’t conceivably divine his motivations, he asked, “What
did people _do_ then, Granny? I mean—today, if you could name one single
job all of us had to do, it would be keeping the perfection we have.
Could you say that you folks had any one thing like that?”

Her eyes lighted. Granny had the brightest eyes and the whitest,
soundest teeth of anyone he knew. “Sure we had.” She closed her eyes.
“Can’t say we thought much about perfection—not in the early days. I
think the main job was the next step up.” “The next step up,” she
repeated, savoring the phrase. “You know, Roan, what we have today—well,
we’re the first people in human history that wasn’t working on that, one
way or another. They’d ought to teach human history nowadays. Yes, they
should. But I guess most folks wouldn’t like it. Anyway, folks always
wanted to be a bit better in those days.

“Sometimes they stopped dead a couple hundred years and tried to make
their souls better, and sometimes they forgot all about their souls and
went ahead gettin’ bigger and faster and tougher and noisier. Sometimes
they were real wrong and sometimes they did right just by accident; but
all the time they worked and worked on that next step up. Not now,” she
finished abruptly.

“Of course not. What would we do with a step up? What would we step up
to?”

She said, “Used to be when nobody believed you could stop progress. A
grass seed can bust a piece of granite half in two, you know. So can a
cup o’ water if you freeze it in the right place.”

“We’re different,” he said smugly. “Maybe that’s the real difference
between us and other kinds of life. We can stop.”

“You can say that again.” He did not understand her inflection. Before
he could wonder about it, she said, “What do you know about psi, Roan?”

“Psi?” He had to search his mind. “Oh—I remember it. Fad and Fashion was
selling it a couple of years ago. I thought it was pretty silly.”

_“That!”_ she said, with as much scorn as her fragile, distant-wind
voice could carry. “That was a weejee-board. That thing’s older’n anyone
knows about. It didn’t deserve the name of psi. Well, look here—for ten
thousand years, there’ve been folks who believed that there was a whole
world of powers of the mind—telepathy, telekinesis, teleportation,
clairvoyance, clairaudience … lots more. Never mind, I’m not going to
give you a lecture,” she said, her eyes suddenly sparkling.

He realized that he had essayed a yawn—just a small one—with his mouth
closed, and that she had caught him at it. He flushed hotly. But she
went right on.

“All I’m saying is this—there’s plenty of proof of this power if you
know where to look. One mind talks to another, a person moves in a blink
from place to place without a transplat, a mind moves material things,
someone knows in advance what’s going to happen—all this by mind power.
Been going on for thousands of years. All that time, nobody understood
it—and now nobody needs to. But it’s still around.”

He wondered what all this had to do with the subject at hand. As if she
had heard him wonder, she said, “Now you wanted to know what the next
step up might be, in case anybody was interested. Well, that’s it.”

“I can’t see that as a step upward,” he said, respectfully but
positively. “We already do move things—speak over distances—all those
things you mentioned. We even know what’s going to happen next.
Everything is arranged that way. What good would it be?”

“What good would it be to move the operators off the transplats?”

“Oh, that’s an economy.”

“What would you call it if telekinesis and teleportation moved goods and
people without the transplat?”

_“Without the transplat?”_ he almost shouted. “But you—but we—”

“We’d all be in the same boat with those operators you’re replacing.”

“The op—I never thought about them!”

She nodded.

Shaken, he mused, “I wonder why the Private never thought of that when I
told him about it this morning.”

There was a dry, delighted sound from deep in the old chest. “He
wouldn’t. He never did understand how anything works. He just rides it.”

Roan controlled himself. One did not listen to criticism of one’s
parents. But this was Great Mam herself. The effort for control helped
bring the whole strange conversation into perspective and he laughed
weakly. “Well, I hardly think we’re going to have any such—economy—as
that.”

She raised her eyebrows. “This progress we were talking about. You know,
even in my time most folks had the idea that humans planned human
progress. But when you come to think of it, the first human who walked
upright didn’t do it because he wanted to. He did it because he already
could.” When she saw no response on his face, she added, “What I mean is
that _if_ the old-timers were right and progress _can’t_ be corked up,
then it’s just going to bust loose. And if it busts loose, it’s going to
do it whether you’re the head of J. & D. Walsh or a slag-mucker, whether
you’re happy about it or not.”

“Well, I don’t think it will happen.”

“Haven’t you been listening to me? It’s _always_ been with us.”

“Then why didn’t they—why should it show up now and not a thousand years
from now?”

“We never stopped progressing before—not like this,” she said, with a
sweeping glance at the walls and ceiling which clearly indicated the
entire planet.

“Granny, do you _want_ this to happen? _You?_”

“What I want doesn’t matter. There’ve always been people who had—powers.
All I’m suggesting is that now, of all times, is the moment for them to
develop—now that we don’t develop in any other way.”

He was persistent. “You think it’s a good thing, then?”

She hesitated. “Look at me, how old I am. Is that a good thing? It
doesn’t matter—it happened—it had to happen.”

“Why have you told me this?” he whispered.

“Because you asked me what was occupying me,” she said, “and I figured
to tell you, for a change. Frighten you?”

Sheepishly, he nodded.

She did, too, and laughed. “Do you good. In my day, we were frightened a
whole lot. It took us a long way.”

He shook his head. _Do you good?_ He failed to see what good could come
of any so-called “progress” that threatened the transplat. Why, what
would happen to things? What would happen to their very way of life—to
privacy itself, if anyone could—what was it, teleport?—teleport into a
man’s office or cubicle …

“Look, boy, you don’t have to wait until it’s your turn, to come chat
with your old Granny, you know. Come over anytime you have something to
talk about. Just let me know first, that’s all.”

There was nothing in life he wanted less than another session like this
one, but he remembered to thank her. “Byemam.”

“Byeboy.”

He rushed out to the dialpost and feverishly got the number of his home.
He stepped up on the platform and the last he saw of Granny’s face
through the open panel was her expression of—was it pity?

Or perhaps compassion was a better name for it.

IV

He went straight to his cubicle, brushing past his sister as she stood
at the edge of the court. He thought she was going to speak, but
deliberately showed his back and quickened his stride. Her kind of
smugness, her endless, placid recitations of her day’s occupations, were
the prime thing he could do without at the moment. He needed privacy,
lots of it, and right now.

He leaned back against the panel when it closed. His head spun. It was a
head which had the ability to thrust indigestible ideas into
compartments, there to seal them off from one another until he had time
to ruminate. This was how he was able to handle so many concurrent
business affairs. It was also how he had been able to get through this
extraordinary day—till then. But the compartments were full; nothing
else must happen.

He had awakened before daylight to see, in the soft glow of the walls, a
girl in a flowing garment who regarded him gravely. Her hair had been
golden and her hands were clasped over one knee. He had not been able to
see her feet—not then.

He had stepped on the ’plat to get to the office and had arrived,
instead, in an unmentionable place containing drapes and this same girl.
She had spoken to him.

He had seen her again, perched on his desk.

He had lost two hours in an unwonted self-examination, which had left
him bewildered and unsure of himself, and had gone most respectably to
see his most respectable grandmother, who had filled him full of the
most frightening conjectures he had ever experienced—including the one
which brought this mad business full circle. For she had suggested to
him that, by a force called tele-something-or-other, certain people
might appear just anywhere, transplat or no transplat.

He snorted. You didn’t need a transplat to have a dream! He had dreamed
the girl here and in the draped court. He had dreamed her in the office.
“There!” he said to himself. “Feel better?”

_No_.

Anyone who had dreams like that had to be off his ’plat.

All right: they _weren’t_ dreams.

In which case, Granny was right; someone had something so much better
than a transplat that the world—his world—would come to an end. If only
this were a technological development, it could be stopped, banned, to
maintain the Stasis. But it wasn’t—it was some weird, illogical,
uncontrollable mystery known to only certain people _and he, Roan,
wasn’t one of them_.

It was unthinkable, insupportable. Indecent!

Going into his flower shop, he reached for his dinner ration. He grunted
in surprise, for instead of the usual four tablets and tumbler of
vitabroth, his hand fell on something hot, slightly greasy and fibrous.
He lifted it, turned it over. It was like nothing edible he had ever
seen before. On the other hand, there had been innovations from time to
time, as the Nutrient Service saw fit to allow for this or that change
in the environment, the isolation of mutated bacteria and their
antibiotics, the results of their perpetual inventory of sample basals.

But this thing was far too big to be swallowed. Maybe, he thought
suddenly, it was a combination of nutrients and roughage.

His teeth sank readily into it. Hot, reddish juice dribbled down his
chin and a flavor excruciatingly delectable filled his mouth and throat,
his nostrils and, it seemed, his very eyes. It was so good, it made his
jaw-hinges ache.

He demolished the entire portion before it had a chance to get cold,
then heaved a marveling sigh. He fumbled about the food-shelf in the
vain hope of finding more—but that was all, except for the usual broth.
He lifted the cup, then turned and carefully poured it down the sink.
Nothing was going to wash that incredible flavor out of his mouth as
long as he could help it.

He slipped into his dressing shield and changed rapidly. As he
transferred his wallet, he paused to glance into it to see if it needed
replenishing.

He grunted with the impact of memory. As he had left the Private’s
office, he had come face to face with his—with that—well, dream or no,
there she had been. And had disappeared. And on the corner of his desk,
just where she had sat, had been the ’plat number_—this_ number, here in
his hand.

Like the dream she was—wasn’t she?—the girl had not spoken to him here
in his cubicle or in the office. But in the draped court she had. That
episode, improbable as it seemed, could hardly have been a dream. He had
dialed that transplat to get there. He might have misdialed, but he had
been wide awake when he did it.

She must be one of those—those next-step-upward monsters Granny was
talking about, he decided. He had to know, had to speak to her again.
Not because of her hair, of course, or the brazen garment. It was
because of the transplat, because of the hard-won Stasis that held
society together. It was a citizen’s simple duty to his higher pink
toes. No, his higher self.

He adjusted a fresh pair of gloves and strode out to the court. Valerie
was still there, looking wistful.

“Roan!”

“Later,” he barked, already spinning the dial.

“_Please!_ Only a minute!”

“I haven’t got a minute,” he snapped and stepped up on the platform. The
flicker of blackness cut off her pleading.

He stepped down from his arrival platform and stopped dead.

No drapes! No perfume! No—oh, holy Private in Heaven!

“Roan _Walsh!_” squeaked Corsonmay. The secretary’s eyeballs all but
stood out on her dry cheekbones. Under them, her hands—decently gloved,
thank the powers—were pressed, and in her hair obscenely hung a comb
which, he deduced, he had interrupted in midstroke. He saw instantly
what had happened, and a coruscation of fury and embarrassment spun
dazzlingly inside him.

She must have seen him throw away the number she had written down for
him and supplied him with another. And he had had to go and assume that
it was … oh, to expect the drapes, the arms, the—and all that—and to
come face to face with _this!_

“Private!” she shrilled. _“Mam! Mam!”_ Calling her parents. Well, of
course. Any decent girl would.

He dived for the dialpost. So did she, but he got there first.

“Don’t go, Roan Walsh,” she panted. “Corsonmam and my father, they’re
not here, they would have been if only I’d known, they’ll be back soon,
so _please_ don’t go.”

“Look,” he said. “I found the number on my desk and I thought Grig
Labine had left it there. I was supposed to see him and I’m late now.
I’m sorry I invaded your privacy, but it was a mistake, see? Just a
mistake.”

The eagerness faded from her almost-wrinkled face and homely hot eyes.
She seemed to shrink two inches in a tenth of a second. Her mouth
pouted, wet and pathetic, and quivering puckers appeared at its sides.
_Oh, you stinker, what did she ever do to you?_ he said to himself.

“Be serene,” he blurted. He dialed his home.

“Oh-h-h-h …” her wail was cut off by the transplat.

He stood where he was, his eyes squeezed closed on his embarrassment,
and breathed hard.

And then he became aware of a whimpering “Please …” and, for one awful
moment, thought Corsonmay’s transplat had not operated. He opened his
eyes cautiously and then sighed and stepped down. He was home. It was
Valerie who was whimpering.

“Well, what’s the matter with you?” he asked.

“Roan,” she wept, “_please_ don’t be angry with me. I know I was a
beast. It was just—oh, I meant it, but I didn’t have to be so …”

“What are you talking about?”

“When you called about wanting me to go to Granny’s.”

That seemed so long ago and so completely trivial. “Forget it, Val. You
were absolutely right. I went, so forget it.”

“You’re not mad?”

“Of course I’m not.”

“Well, I’m glad, because I want to talk to you. Can I?” she begged.

This was unusual. “What about?”

“Can we go out, Roan?”

“Where are the parents?”

“In the Family Room. We can be right back. Please, Roan,” she pleaded.

He yielded. In his cosmos, Val was merely a perennial and harmless
irritation; this was probably the first time he had consciously realized
that she might be a person, too, with personal problems.

“Grosvenor Center?” he asked.

She nodded. He dialed it and stepped up on the platform and down again
at Grosvenor. It was still daylight there and he wondered vaguely where
on Earth it might be. The sea on one side was an evening blue, the
moutaintop a glory.

Val appeared on the transplat and stepped down. They walked silently
past the decorator and the Fad and Fashion and the restaurant until they
reached the park. They sat down side by side on a bench, with its
shoulder-high partitions between each seat, and looked at the fountain.

She was very pale and her shoulders were moving under the cape, a
complex motion that was partly stifled sobs and partly the kneading of
hands.

He said, as gently as he could, “What’s up?”

“You don’t like me.”

“Aw, sure I do. You’re all right.”

“No, please don’t like me. I don’t _want_ you to. I came to you because
you don’t like me.”

This was completely incomprehensible to Roan. He decided that listening
might extract more data than talking.

Valerie said in a low voice, “I’ve got to tell you something that would
make you hate me if you didn’t already, so that’s why. Oh, Roan, I’m no
_good!”_

He opened his mouth to deny this, but closed it silently. He had the wit
not to agree with her, either.

“There’s somebody I—saw. I have to see him again, talk with him. He’s—I
want—Oh!” she cried, and burst into tears.

Roan fumbled for a clean handkerchief and passed it deftly around the
front of the partition, down low. He felt it taken from his fingers.

“A May’s supposed to wait,” she said brokenly, “and one day her Private
will come looking for her, and he will be her Private, and she will be
his help and service until the end. But I don’t want to be help and
service to the Private who comes. Who knows, one might come any minute.
I want _this_ one to come!”

“Maybe he will,” soothed Roan. “Who is he?”

“I don’t _know!_” she said in agony. “I only saw him. Roan, you have to
find him for me.”

“Well, where—”

“He’s tall, as tall as you,” she said hurriedly. “His eyes are green. He
has—” she gulped and her voice sank—“long hair, only not like a May. And
right on the bottom of his chin there’s a little cleft and on one
side—yes, on the left side—there’s a little curl of a scar.”

“Hair? Men don’t have long hair!”

“_This_ one has.”

“Now look,” he said, suppressing his laughter at the outlandish concept.
“If there were such a man, long hair and all, _everybody’d_ know where
he is.”

“Yes,” she said miserably.

“So there you are. There’s no such man.”

“But there _is!_ I _saw_ him!”

“Where?” She was silent. He said impatiently, “If you don’t tell me
where, how can I find him?”

“I can’t tell you,” she said at last, painfully. “It doesn’t
matter—you’d never find him—there.” She colored. “He must be somewhere
else, too. Please find him, Roan. His name. Where he is. Even if he
never—I’d like to know what his name is,” she finished wistfully. She
stood up. “The Private will miss us.”

On the way back to the transplat, she said to the air straight in front
of her, “You think I’m just awful, don’t you?”

“No!” he said warmly. “Sometimes I think everyone’s just a little
different from what the Stasis expects. It isn’t ‘awful’ to be a little
different.” And his subconscious, instead of objecting, dropped its prim
jaw in astonishment.

V

The Family Room was the heart of their house, as such rooms were to
every house on Earth. A chair—virtually a throne—dominated one wall. It
held the video controls and the audio beams which came to audible focus
in their proper places in the room—the miniature of the throne at the
right wall, which was the place of the son of the house; the wooden
bench at the left, which was the daughter’s; and the small stool at the
throne’s foot, where the mother sat.

The room, because of its beams and its padded floor and acoustically
dead walls and ceiling, was a silent one and it was the custom for each
family to convene there for two hours at the end of the day. There were
stylized prayers, such reading as the Private chose, whatever
conversation he dictated and, when he was so moved, transmitted
entertainment of his choice for the clan.

When Roan and Valerie entered, the original silence was compounded by
towering disapproval. The Private’s hand lay on the video control, which
he had just switched off. The Mam’s head had bobbed once, sidewise, so
engrossed had she been in the program; it was as if a prop had been
snatched away.

Son and daughter separated and went to their places. Roan felt the old
hovering terror as the Private’s gaze flicked across his withers like a
rowel. He sat down and glanced quickly at his sister. She huddled on her
bench so oppressed, so indrawn, that even her wrinkle-free, foldless
garments could not conceal her crushed look. Roan, with hands properly
folded, swallowed apprehensively.

“Late,” said the Private. “_Both_ of you. This sort of thing can hardly
help in my recommendations, Valerie, you unwanted creature.” This was an
idiom used in chastising all Mays and passed Valerie by. Then, to Roan,
“One would assume that my generosity and forgiveness”—that would be a
hint about the partnership—“would result in at least a minimal effort
not to repeat the offense. You are thirty years of age—old enough to
know the difference between Stasis and chaos. You will be confined, by
my personal lock, to your cubicle for forty-eight hours, where you may
reflect on the consequences of disorganization. _Valerie!_”

She twitched and gave the proper response, which was to meet his eyes.
Roan said nothing. In such occasions, there was no appeal.

“Valerie, were you and your brother together in whatever escapade it was
that led you to flout the organization of this house?”

“Yes, Private, but it was really my—”

“Then you must bear the same punishment—not primarily for being tardy,
which is not one of your habitual defects, but for your failure to use
your influence on your irresponsible sibling. I assume you failed to
try, since it would be too painful for me to conclude that both my
offspring lacked the basic elements of decency.”

Another massive silence followed. The mother, sitting at his feet,
rolled her eyes upward to the cushions, where his gloved hand lay. With
a slight, unconscious movement, her ear sought the focal point of the
currently nonexistent audio beam. The Private’s beard bulged as he
dropped his glare upon her.

“And since I must cling to a single shred of satisfaction,” he said,
“let it be my faith in _your_ knowledge of correct behavior, Mam.
Assuming that this knowledge exists, the circumstance clearly indicates
that you too have not properly applied it. There will therefore be no
video for you tonight.” He unleashed a semi-circular glare in which his
beard smote across their presences like the back of a hand. “Leave me.”

They rose and shuffled out. The panel slid shut behind them. “I’m
sorry.” Val barely breathed the apology.

_“Silence!”_ roared the grille over the door.

They hung their heads and waited. Walshmam tiptoed away and returned in
a moment with two small cubes. She led Valerie to her cubicle and stood
aside. Valerie glanced once at Roan, who twitched a dismal smile at her.
Then the panel slid shut on her and Walshmam pressed one of the cubes
into its socket, effectively sealing the door until removed again from
this side. True to custom, Roan waited until she passed him and then
shuffled along behind her to his own cubicle.

“And furthermore,” enounced the grille over the door, “I herewith refuse
to consider the merits of the suggestion you made this morning. For, if
good, it issues from an unworthy source and is tainted—if bad, it
deserves no consideration.”

Walshmam seemed very sad, but then few Mams were anything else. Their
lives alternated between silent patience and silent regret, with only an
occasional flicker of preventive action. He grimaced in an effort to
convey a certain camaraderie, but she misunderstood and looked away, and
he knew she had taken it as a rebellious or unrepentant expression.

He wondered, as he dropped the dressing shield over his head, what would
happen if he got up and hauled on the Private’s beard.

Reaching for his brief nightshirt and sleeping shorts and bedshoes, he
told himself, “I bet he hasn’t even got anything in his rule-book to
cover that. And he never was so good with a new idea.”

That reminded him of what Granny had said—the Private “never did
understand how anything works. He just rides it.” He sure rides his
family, Roan thought.

So he himself would be a Private some day, have a family and get it all
back again, he thought sleepily, and let himself sink down and down into
a place where he sat on a monstrous throne with a beard to his knees,
and watched his father, who sat on the boy’s chair, weeping. At his feet
was—well, for heaven’s sake, _it was Granny!_

At some point, it must have turned into a nightmare—a dreadful fragment
involving being lost in the flicker of final black that one experienced
on the transplat. Here, however, he was immersed in it, with
dimensionless space at his freezing back and the unyielding “inner”
surface of reality pressing into his face. He cried out and
struggled—and thumped his cheekbone on solid rock. He yelped and pressed
away from the rock and sat up.

Not an inch from his head was the lintel of a shimmering, rectangular
rock. Beyond it, a pale, green, alien sky which brightened by the
moment.

He glanced behind him and saw nothing but purple plain, cracked and
crevassed, from which cactuslike spears sprouted grotesquely.

He stepped through the doorway and, a few yards beyond, the desolation
abruptly ended. Before him stretched rolling parkland, then a curving
line of trees following a brook. Across the brook were fields—one brown,
one tan, one a tender green—and they seemed, at this distance, as smooth
as the surface of a cup of milk. To the right were mountains, one with a
flaming cap so brilliant, his eyes stung. He recognized it as dawnlight
on snow. To the left was a broad rolling valley. The air was warm but
sparkling-fresh.

He paused and inhaled deeply, seeking comprehension, then saw, to his
right, a boulder as big as a Private chair. On the boulder sat a girl
with golden hair and strange eyes. She wore a belted singlet that
revealed far more girl than Roan had ever seen before. She held one
delicately bronzed, bare knee in both hands. Her bare feet acknowledged
the snowfire pinkly, and they were wet with dew.

She laughed a greeting and rose and flowed over to him. “Come along,”
she said.

He clutched himself and hid his naked hands. With a swift, strong
movement, she had his hands in hers.

“Up we go,” she sang and, before he could think, she was leading him.

His cheek touched her bare shoulder. He smelled her perfume and her
sweet breath, and his eyes rolled up and his knees sagged. Her arm went
briefly round his shoulders and she laughed again.

“It’s all right, it’s only a dream,” she told him.

“A dre—” he coughed—“eam?”

“Thirsty?” She held out her hand, and he started violently when a cup
appeared in it. “Here you are.”

He took it, hesitated, then raised it. She still stood, smiling at him.
Modestly he turned his back and drank. It was bright orange, cold,
sweet-acid and delicious. He patted his lips carefully and turned back,
waving the cup helplessly.

“Throw it,” she said.

“Th—what?”

She gestured. Obediently, he tossed the cup straight up. It vanished.

“Feel better? Come on, they’re all waiting for you.”

Gaping up at the spot into which the cup had vanished, Roan said, “I
want to go home.”

“You can’t. Not until the dream’s finished.”

He put his arms straight down and fluttered his hands until the cuffs
concealed them. “I want to go home,” he said forlornly.

“Why?”

“I just …” He looked longingly over his shoulder at the doorway. When he
looked back, she was gone. And suddenly, urgently, he wanted her back.
He took a step forward.

_“Boo!”_ she said, her lips just touching the nape of his neck. He
whirled, and there she stood. “Where were you?”

“Here—anywhere.” She vanished and reappeared instantly at his right.

“Please,” he said, “don’t do that any more. And just let me stand here
quietly for a minute.”

“All right.” She wandered away, picked a snowdrop and a strange
green-and-purple flower, added a fern-frond and came back toward him,
her fingers deft and a-dance. She held out the flowers, woven into a
tiny circular wreath, and spun them on her finger. Then she set them
into her golden hair.

“Pretty?”

“Yes.” His eyes fell away from her and were dragged back again. “Why
don’t you cover your arms?” he blurted.

“We wear what we please here.”

“Where is _here?_”

“Sort of another world.” He glanced back at the gateway. “It wouldn’t do
any good,” she explained. “There isn’t anything in there now but
blackness. The way out is a time, not a place. Don’t be afraid. You’ll
go back when it’s time.”

“When?”

“How long did you have to sleep?”

“Forty-eight hours, though I’d never—”

“Maybe you can stay that long. Who’s to know?”

“You’re—sure I’ll get back in time?”

“Sure as sure. Is it all right now?”

Shyly, he smiled. “Fine. Everything’s fine.”

She took his hand, and skipped two paces, so he had to follow. He tried
politely to tug his hand free, but she held fast and seemed not to
notice. A giggle, a blush, the slightest sign of self-consciousness in
her, and he would have found the contact unbearable.

But she was so completely at ease that the revulsion would not come, and
she chattered so gaily, making him answer, keeping him busy, that, even
had he felt like asking her to let go, he had no space for the words,
nor the words with which to do it.

“You were in my cubicle,” he said breathlessly, as she hurried him down
the slope.

“Oh, yes—more than you know. I watch you sleep. You sleep nicely.
There’s a tanager.” She stopped, balancing, something flowing out of her
shining face to the blazing bird and back again. “I came to see you at
your office, too. Everything’s straight and hard there, and sort of
lonely. But all you people are lonely.”

“We’re not!”

“You wait until the dream’s finished and you won’t say that. Want to see
a magic?” She stooped, still walking, and brushed her long fingers
across a thick growth of tiny spiked leaves. They all closed up like
little green fists.

“Why’d you come?” he asked.

“Because you were ready to wonder.”

“Wonder what?”

She appeared not to consider this worth answering, but released his hand
and bounded like a deer once, twice, then high over a brook. He
floundered through it, soaking his bedshoes.

When he caught up with her, she touched his chest.

“Shh!”

On the wind floated a note, then another note and, high and sweet,
another, so that they became a chord. Then a note changed, and another,
and another, and the chorus of voices modulated softly, like the aurora,
which is the same as long as one looks, but changes if one looks away
and back.

“What’s your name?” he asked abruptly.

“What would you like it to be?”

_“Flower!”_ he cried, the strange pressures of a dream asserting
themselves; and with it he felt a liberation from the filth with which
custom had clothed the word.

“And you’re Roan, and a roan is a horse with wind in his mane and
thunder in his feet, sweet-nostriled, wild-eyed, all courage and speed.”

He thought it was a phrase from a song, yet it could have been
speech—her speech. He squished the water in his muddy shoes and almost
whinnied with delight at the thought of the thunder in his feet. She
took his hand again and they leaped together to the brow of a foothill.
Ahead, the song finished in a roar of good laughter.

“Who is it?” he wanted to know.

“You’ll see. There_—there!_”

Where the hill shouldered into the forest was a clear, deep pool. In the
forest and on the hillside, buildings nestled. Their walls were logs and
their roofs were thatch. They were low and wide, and very much part of
the hill and the woods. In the clearing between woods and slope, by the
pool, was a great trestle table and, around the table, were the people
who had been singing—you could tell by the sound of their laughter.

“I can’t—I _can’t!_” Roan croaked miserably.

“Why, what’s the matter?” asked Flower.

“They have no decency!”

“There are only two thing which are indecent—fear and excess—and you’ll
see neither here. Look again.”

“So many limbs,” he breathed. “And the colors—a green-and-red man, a
blue woman …”

“A blue dress and a harlequin suit. It’s grand to wear colors.”

“There are some things one shouldn’t even dream.”

“Oh no! There’s nothing you can’t dream. Come and see.”

They went to see. They were made very welcome.

VI

At dusk, on the second day, Flower and Roan walked a shadowed aisle in
the forest. Roan’s sleeping garments were tattered and seam-gutted, for
he would not give them up, though they had not been designed for the
brutality they had suffered. Yet he did not mind the rips and gapes, for
no one else did. His bedshoes were long gone and he felt that if he were
told he would never again feel the coolth of moss under his bare feet,
or the tumble of brook-sand, he would die. He knew the Earth as
something more than a place on which to float sealed cities. He had
worked till he hurt, laughed till he cried, slept till he was healed. He
had helped with a saw, with a stone, with a song. Wonder on wonder, and
greatest wonder of all—the children.

He had never seen any before. He did not know where children came from
except that, when they were twelve, they went to their families from the
crèches. He did not know how they were born. He did know that each child
was educated specifically for a place in his Family and in the Stasis,
and that the largest part of this education was a scrubbing and soaking
and rubbing in of the presence of the father—his voice, features,
manners of living and speaking and working. When the child emerged,
there was a place for him in the home, by then very little different
from his last place in the crèche, and he was fitted to it, not by the
accidental authority of parentage, but through the full-time labors of a
bank of specialists.

Each family had one boy, one girl—one trade, one aim. This was how an
economy could be balanced and kept balanced. This was how the community
could raise its young and still maintain the family.

But here, in this dream …

Children babbled and sang and burned their fingers. They ran howling
underfoot and swam like seals in the pool. They fought and, later,
loved. They grieved, sweated, made their music and their mistakes. It
was all very chaotic and perplexing and made for a strong, sane
settlement which knew how to laugh and how to profit from an argument.
It was barbarous and very beautiful.

And it had a power—for these people quite casually did what Roan had
seen Flower do. They seemed to have a built-in transplat and could send
and receive from anywhere to anywhere. They could reach up into
nothingness and take down bread or a hatchet or a book. They could stand
silently for a time and then know what a wife would serve for
nutrient—which they brazenly sat together to eat, though they went
privately for other functions no more disgusting—or the tune of a new
song or news of a find of berries.

They seemed willing enough to tell him how all this was done, yet his
questions got him nowhere. It was as if he needed a new language or
perhaps a new way of thinking before he could absorb the simple essence.
But for all their power, they had calluses on their hands. They burned
wood as fuel and ate the yield of the land around them. To put it most
simply, they made their bodies function at optimum because it made them
joyful. They never let the _psi_ factor turn, cancerlike, from a
convenience to a luxury.

So Roan walked quietly in the dusk, Flower at his side, thinking about
these things and trying to shake them down into a shape he could
contain. “But, of course, this isn’t real,” he said suddenly.

“Just a dream,” nodded Flower.

“I’ll wake.”

“Very soon.” She laughed then and took his hands. Don’t look so
mournful. We’re never very far away!”

He couldn’t laugh with her. “I know, but I feel that this is—I can’t say
it, Flower. I don’t know how!”

“Then don’t try for now.”

Before he knew it, his arms were around her. “Flower—please let me
stay.”

She stirred in his arms. “Don’t make me sad,” she whispered.

“Why can’t I? Why?”

“Because it’s your dream, not mine.”

“I won’t let you go! I’ll hold onto you and I won’t wake up!” He
staggered then and fell heavily. Flower stood calmly ten feet away.

“Don’t make me sad,” she said again. “It hurts me to push you away like
this.”

He climbed slowly to his feet and held out his hand. “I won’t spoil any
more of it,” he said huskily.

They walked silently in the dimness, toward the shaft of light which the
sun lay up the valley to the settlement each evening at this season.

“How soon?” he asked, because he could not help himself.

“When it’s time,” she said. She released his hand, put her arm through
his and took his hand again. They came to the light.

Roan looked slowly from one end of the clearing to the other, trying to
see it as it had been to him at first, then as it was with the
familiarity of two days. There was the kettle they used, they said, to
make sugar from the maples, and he pretended he had seen it boil, seen
the frantic dogs snapping the caramelized sweetmeat up from the snow and
running in circles frantically until it melted and they could get their
silly mouths open again. There was the buckwheat field which would
carpet the spring snow with quick emerald on a warm day. There was the
pond, there the ducks with old-ivory webs and mother-of-pearl lost in
their necks. He saw—

“There!” he yelled, and twisted away from Flower, to go racing across
the clearing. “You!” he shouted. “You! _Stop!_ You by the pool!”

But the man did not turn. He was tall, as tall as Roan; his hair was
very long, his eyes were green and, at the side of his cleft chin, was a
curl of a scar. In the water, there was a chuckle of laughter, a flash
of white.

“You with the scar,” Roan gasped. “Your name—I’ve got to know your—”

As the man turned, Roan looked past his shoulder, down at the water,
straight into the startled eyes of his sister Valerie.

And that was the end of the dream.

Only one good thing had happened since his mother had removed the block
from his cubicle door. The cubicle itself had been the most depressing
conceivable place to wake up in; its walls crushed him, its filtered air
made him cough. It had no space, no windows. The dressing shield brought
out a thudding in his temple and he hurled it to the floor, turning
violently away from it, physically and mentally. He felt that if he
itemized the symbolism of that tubular horror, he would go berserk and
tear this coffin-culture apart corpse by corpse. Breakfast was an
abhorrence. The clothes—well, he put them on, not daring to be angry
about them, or he never would have gotten to the office.

Corsonmay looked his way only long enough to identify, then stuck her
silly flaccid face in a file-drawer until he was safely in his office.
He looked at the desk, its efficient equipment, at the vise-jaws called
walls and the descending heel called a ceiling, and he shook with anger.
But he was weak with it when the heavy voice issued from the grille:
“Step in here, Roan Walsh.”

Trouble again. Out of the prison into the courtroom.

He took four great breaths, three for composure, one a sigh. He went to
the panel and it admitted him. His father sat back, his head and beard
vying texture against texture. Before him was a scattering of field
reports, and he looked as if he had nibbled the corner off one of them
and found it unexpectedly good.

“Good Stasis, Private.”

The old man nodded curtly. “Your absence made it necessary for me to
take up the threads of your work as well as my own. You will find what I
have done on reports subsequent to yours.” He stacked the cards neatly
and scattered them. “On reviewing these, I found to my surprise—my
pleasant surprise, I may add in all fairness—that you have done a
phenomenal amount of work. Kimberly, Krasniak, that warehouse tangle in
Polska. And in spite of its speed, the work is good. I investigated it
in detail.”

This, thought Roan, sounded _really_ bad. He put his hands behind him,
lowered his chin in The Stance, and set his teeth.

“The investigation brings out,” lumbered the vocal juggernaut, “that the
work was done in roughly speaking four hours, three and one-half
minutes. Very good. It seems, further, that the elapsed time involved
was five hours, forty-eight minutes and some odd seconds. Approximately,
that is.” He tapped the edges of the cards on the desk, flickered the
lightning at Roan, then snapped forward and roared, “One hour and
forty-five minutes seem to have disappeared here!”

Roan wet his lips and croaked, “There was noonrest, Private.”

The Private leaned back and stretched jovially. “Splendid, my efficient
young scoundrel. Superb! And what is the noonrest permitted us at our
present altitude in the organization?”

“Forty minutes, Private.”

“Good. Now all we have to account for is one hour and five minutes.
Sixty-five precious, irredeemable minutes, which the resources of Stasis
itself could not buy back. Over an hour unreported, yet somehow a
double-time dock from your wages is not entered here. Or perhaps it is
entered and, in my haste, I overlooked it.”

“No, Private.”

“Then either one or more transactions of company affairs were handled on
that afternoon and not reported—which is gross inefficiency—or the time
was spent on idling and personal indulgence, with every intention of
accepting payment from the firm for this time—which is stealing.”

Roan said nothing except to himself, and that was, almost detachedly, “I
think I can stand about four minutes, thirty-two and three-tenths
seconds—approximately—more of this.”

“The picture is hardly a pleasant one,” said the Private
conversationally, and smiled. “The records give me the choice of three
courses of action. First, the time owed may be made up. Second, the
value of these hours may be paid back. Third, I can turn you over to the
Central Court with a full indictment, and thereby wash my hands of you.
You might be given a bow and arrow and left to make your way in the
wilderness between segments of Stasis. You could survive a long time
with your training. Days. Weeks even.”

“Eighteen, seventeen, sixteen …” Roan counted silently.

“However, I am going to give you every opportunity to ameliorate
this—this frightful crime. Take these cards into your office. You have
between now and 1600—a punctual 1600, that is—in or out of the office,
to revise any slight miscalculations you may have made and to refresh
your memory in the event that you did useful work for the firm in any of
these lost minutes. Every alteration you make, of course, will be
checked to the tenth of a second. Until 1600—be serene.”

Roan, quite numb, tottered forward, took the cards, muttered, “Byepry,”
and awkwardly backed out.

Why, he wondered, did he stand for it?

Because there was no place to go, of course.

There was …

No, there wasn’t. That had been a dream.

He sank into a black paralysis of rage.

VII

The phone roused him. He received, ready to tear the head off the
caller, any caller. But it was Valerie.

She said, “It’s nearly noonrest.” She would not meet his eyes. “Could
you—would you mind …?”

“Same place, right away?”

“Oh, _thank_ you, Roan!”

He growled affectionately and broke off.

She was not at the Grosvenor transplat when he got there, so he stalked
straight to the park. She was waiting for him. He dropped down next to
her and put his head in his hands—and damn the passers-by. Never seen a
man’s hands before?

He sat up after a while, however; Valerie’s silence positively radiated.
He wondered if he should tell her about the man in the dream, and almost
laughed. But he could not laugh at Valerie. Not now. In the dream, there
had been love. Valerie, in her crushed, priggish way, had fallen in
love. All right, tell her you still haven’t found the guy and then
sympathize with her and get it over with. You have some real worrying to
do.

He turned to her. “I haven’t been able to—”

“His name’s Prester.” She leaned close to the partition and whispered,
“Oh, Roan, you saw me like that, in the pool. They hadn’t meant for you
to see me at all. Oh, what you must _think!_”

He said, just as softly, “I hadn’t let myself believe it.”

“I know,” she said desperately. “I’m surprised you even came here.”

“What do you mean—Oh, the pool! Do you know, it never occurred to me
until this minute that you were—that you’d be—oh, forget it, Val. I’m
just glad you found him. Prester, hm? Nice-looking fellow.”

Her face lit up like a second sun. “Roan—_really?_ I’m not a—hussy?”

“You’re grand and the only person I know in this whole sterile, starched
world who’s managed to live a little! I’m _glad_, Val! You don’t
know—you can’t—what I’ve been through. Enough to make a dozen dreams.
And it came like a dream—I mean parts and chunks of real-life
things—things Granny was maundering about, things I’d seen, a girl I met
once wrong-dialing—an accident, you little prude! I believed it was just
a dream—I had to, I guess. I had to believe Flower and she _told_ me it
was.” Lord, he’d said the word right out loud in front of his sister!

But she was quite composed, cheeks excitement-red, not disgusted-red,
eyes bright and distant. “She’s lovely, Roan, just _beautiful_. She
loves you. I _know_.”

“Think she does?” He grinned till it hurt. “Oh, Val, Val—the maplesugar
kettle.”

“Mmm—the oat-field!”

“The big table and the singing!”

“Yes, and the children—all those children!”

“What happened?” he cried. “How could such a thing happen?”

She whispered fervently, “We could both be crazy. Or the whole world
could be coming apart and we slipped in and out through a crack into—or
maybe it really was a dream, but we had it together. But I don’t care,
it was beautiful and—and if you’d said I was a—because of—you’d have
_spoiled_ it and killed me, too. Is it all right then, Roan, is it
really all right? Really?”

“You’re sort of beautiful yourself. For a sister, that is.”

_“Oooh!”_ she squeaked, blushing and enormously pleased. Then, happily,
“I’m glad I’m not you.”

“Uh—why?”

“How does it work, what makes it go, is it a dream, and, if not, what
could it be? Be like me, Roan. It happened—for the rest of my life it
has _happened!_ But—I hope there’ll be more.”

“If I find out how it works, what makes it go and so on, there _will_ be
more. So you just be glad _I’m_ like me in that respect.”

“If you found it, you—wouldn’t keep me out?”

“If I couldn’t take you,” he said warmly, “I wouldn’t go. Now do you
feel better?”

“I’m going to kiss you!”

He roared with laughter at the very idea in a place like this and, under
the stares this attracted, she cried, “Be quiet—thunderfeet!” At the
phrase from Flower’s little song, his heart twisted.

She peeped at his face and said, “I’m sorry, Roan.”

“Don’t be,” he said hoarsely. “For that second, she was right here.” He
put out his hands, made fists, stared at them, then got them out of
sight again. Flower—well, he’d have plenty of time to find her after
1600. “Val …”

“I didn’t know anyone could be so happy!” she said. “What, Roan?”

“Nothing. Just that I really am late,” he said, abruptly changing his
mind. No need to air his troubles to her now—the news services would
take care of that about 1612. Meanwhile, let her stay happy.

They walked back to the transplat.

“Roan, let’s come here every day and talk about it. I don’t know a thing
you did and you don’t know what I did. Like the time—”

“Sure I will, sure,” he said. “Take something pretty big to stop me.”

She stopped dead. “There’s something the matter.”

“Get on your ’plat. Everything’s fine. Hurry now.”

She dialed and stepped up and was gone. He stood looking at the empty
air, where her anxious face had been, until another passenger filled it.
He hoped he hadn’t worried her.

He walked slowly back to the bench and sat down, and that was where he
had his big idea.

“Whoever _is_ that?” The thin old voice was edgy.

“Me. Roan,” he said from the court.

The top panel of a door slid back and the voice floated to him, gentle
now, and firm. “You know you’re welcome here, son, but you also know
you’re to call first. Just spin that dial and clear out of here for an
hour. Then you can come and stay as long as you like.”

“Petals to that. I haven’t _got_ an hour. Come on out here or I’m coming
in.”

“Don’t you use that language on me, you leak-brained snipe, or I’ll lift
your hair with a blunt nailfile!”

The instant she began to shout, he began to roar, “Decent or not, just
get on out here. _If you’d shut off your low-fidelity mouth for twelve
lousy seconds, you’d stop wasting your own time!_”

They stopped yelling together and the silence was deafening. Suddenly,
Granny laughed, “Boy, where’d you learn that type language?”

“For years, I’ve been hearing you talk, Great Mam,” he said diffidently.
“It only just now occurred to me that I never really listened. And about
being decent—if you’re comfortable, come as you are.”

“Damfidon’t!” She came out of the room and kicked the door closed with a
flip of her heel. She wore an immense wrapper of an agonizing blue and
seemed to be barefooted. Her hair, instead of lying sleekly away from
the center part in two controlled wings, flew free like a May’s. Roan
had one frozen moment, and then she tossed the hair back on one side
with an angry twitch of her head. “Well?” she blazed. There seemed to be
nothing left of the gentle talc-on-ivory quality in her voice.

Slowly, he smiled. “Damfidon’t like you better the way you are.”

She sniffed, but she was pleased. “All you can do to keep your eyes from
rolling out onto the carpet. Ah, well, you’ve found my secret. Reckon
I’m old enough to have just one eccentricity?” she demanded
challengingly.

“You’ve lived long enough to earn your privileges.”

“Come on in here,” she said, starting down the court. “Most folks don’t
or can’t realize I’ve spent the least part of my life in that
cone-in-cone getup. Everybody else around’s practically born in it. I
just don’t _like_ it. Chest-padding the men so they won’t look different
from women!” she snorted. “I wasn’t brought up that way.” She opened the
manual door in the corner. “Here we are.”

It was an odd-shaped room, an isosceles triangle. He had never seen it
before. “What happened to your voice, Granny? You feeling all right?”

In the familiar wind-in-the-distance tones, she said, “You mean you miss
this little gasp?” Then, stridently, “Something I picked up for company.
Had to. Nobody’d take me seriously when I talked natural. They cast me
as a frail little pillar of respectability and, by the Lord, I was stuck
with it. It’s hot in here.”

He missed the hint, waited for her to sit down, and then joined her.
“Know why I’m here?”

She regarded him closely. “Sleeping well?”

“That wasn’t a dream.”

“No? What then?”

“I came to find out what it was. Where it is.”

She fluttered the lapel of the wrapper. “You got this part of my secret
life out of me, but that don’t guarantee you all of it. What makes you
so sure it wasn’t a dream?”

“You just don’t go to bed healthy and sleep for two days! Besides,
there’s Valerie. I saw her there, right at the very last second.”

She grunted. “ ‘Fraid of that. No one was sure.” She laughed. “Must’ve
been a picnic when you two got your heads together. You come here to
kill me?”

_“What?”_

“Outraged brother and all that?”

“Valerie’s happier than she’s ever been in her life and so much in love,
she can’t see straight. I’m just as happy for her as she is for
herself.”

_“Well!”_ she smiled. “This changes things. So you want to take your
sister and go live out your lives in a dreamland.”

“It’s more than that,” he said. “I need one of your telekinesis
operators. I mean _now_.”

“The best I can do for you is a little girl who can knock down a
balancing straight-edge at any distance under fifteen feet.”

He made no attempt to conceal his scorn.

She pursed her lips thoughtfully. “How’d you mix me up in this, anyway?”

“We’re wasting time,” he said. “But if you must know, it was your hints
to me last time I was here—the transplat obsolete, people appearing in
any room anywhere, communication without phones. I’d already seen
telekinesis twice, when you told me that. And since then …” he shrugged.
“You _had_ to be in it. Maybe you’d like to tell me why _I’m_ mixed up
in it.”

“Hadn’t planned to for a while. Maybe we’ll step up the schedule. Now
what’s the all-fired rush?”

“I have an appointment in—” he checked—“less than two hours that is
going to put me under the ground unless I can get help.” He told her,
rapidly, about the lost time and his father’s threat.

“You’re dead right,” she said after a moment. “He’s afraid of you. I
don’t know why he should be _that_ afraid. He’s just like his father,
the potbellied old—” She stopped, shocked, as a large hand closed over
her wrist.

“I can’t listen to that.”

“All right,” she said with surprising swiftness. “I’m sorry. Given one
of my TKs, what would you do?”

He leaned forward, put his elbows on his knees, bringing his gloved
hands into plain sight.

“Do? I’m going to take this wrinkle-free civilization and turn it out
into the woods. I’m going to clutter up the Family Rooms with the
family’s own children. I’m going to turn Stasis itself upside down and
shake it till the blood runs into its head and it finds out how to sweat
again.”

Granny’s eyes brightened. “Why?”

“I could tell you it was for the good of all the people—because you’re
Great Mam and lived through it all and had a chance to think about
things like that. But I’m not going to say anything like that to you.
No—I’ll do it because I want to live that way myself, head of a family
of hard-handed, barefoot, axe-swinging people who are glad to get up in
the morning.

“I thought of finding the dream-people again. I even thought of going
out into the wilderness between cities and living that way myself. But
if I did, I’d always be afraid that some day a resources survey crew
might find me, scoop me up and bring me back. Stasis wouldn’t let people
live like that, so let’s make Stasis live our way.”

He took a deep breath. “Now Stasis is built around the transplat. There
can’t ever be a better machine. But if I go in there today and claim
I’ve spent years secretly developing one—if I get one of your people to
start transmitting things all over his office and claim I have a new
machine to do it with—why, the Private’s got to listen. I’ll save my job
and spot your people through and through the whole culture till it falls
apart. And one day maybe I’ll be the Private at Walsh & Co.—and, Stasis,
look out!”

“You know,” she said. “I _like_ you.”

“Help me,” he said bluntly. “I’ll like you, too.”

She rose and punched his arm with sharp knuckles. “I’ll have to think.
You know, if you can fast-talk your way out of this, you’ll only stall
things a little. The old—your father—wouldn’t buy any parlor tricks.
He’d want to see that machine.”

“Then let’s stall. Can you fix me up with a telekin—telekineticist? That
what you call them?”

“TK,” she said absently. “I’ve got something a heap better than any TK.
How’d you like a stationless transplat—a matter transmitter that will
lift anything from anywhere to anywhere without centrals or depots?”

“There’s no such thing, Granny.”

“Why do you say that?”

“All my life I’ve been a transplat man, that’s why. There’s a limiting
factor on matter transmission. It must have a planetary field; it must
have a directing central; it must have platforms built of
untransmissible material and—”

“Don’t tell _me_ how a transplat works,” she snapped. “Suppose a machine
was designed on totally different principles. A force-pump instead of a
suction pump. Or an Archimedes screw.”

“There isn’t any other principle! Don’t you think I _know?_”

“I’ll show you the damn machine!” She marched to the angled wall of the
little room and bumped a scuff-plate near the floor. The entire wall
slid upward into the ceiling, swift and silent. Lights blazed.

It was quite a laboratory. Much of its equipment he had thought existed
only in factories. Most was incomprehensible to him.

Granny walked briskly down an aisle and stopped at the far wall. Ranged
against it was a glittering cluster of equipment beneath a desk-sized
control panel. The desk surface seemed to be a vision screen, though it
was hinged at the top. At the side, he saw what looked like manipulator
controls of the kind used in radiation laboratories.

“There’s a servo-robot this size on a hill about forty miles from here,”
said Granny.

She turned a switch, sat down over the screen and began to spin two
control wheels.

“Tell you what it does,” she said abstractedly as she worked, “though
this ain’t really the way it does it. Plot a straight line out from this
machine and a line from the other. Where they intersect, that’s your
transmission point. Now draw two more lines from the equipment and where
_they_ cross, that’s the arrival point. When they’re set up, you haul on
this snivvy and what was _here_ is now _there_. The stuff doesn’t travel
any more than it does with a transplat. It ceases to exist at one point
and conservation of matter makes it appear at another.

“But you’ve created just the strain in space which makes it show up.”

“Show me.”

“All right. Call it.”

“My old wallet. Top drawer, left side in the office. Drawer’s locked, by
the way,” he said.

“What’s the matrix?”

He reeled off the address coordinates. She tapped them on a keyboard and
bent over the screen. It showed a Stasis unit. She spun a wheel and the
buildings rushed closer. Her hand dropped back to a vernier and the view
slowed, seemed to press through the roof and hover over a desk.

“Right?”

“Go on,” he said. “Pretty fair spy-ray you have there.”

“You don’t know!” She reached, and from a speaker came the quiet bustle
of the office. She went back to the controls and the view sank into the
desktop. Suddenly, the contents of the drawer were there. With the
manipulators, she deftly hooked the wallet, raised it a fraction. Then
the scene disappeared as she shifted to another set of controls.

“Receiver location,” she murmured. The garbled picture cleared, became a
mass of girders and then a bird’s-eye view of the room they stood in, so
clear that Roan looked up with a start. He could see nothing. “Stick out
your stupid hand,” said Granny.

He obeyed and she brought the scene down to it until its image hung in
the center of the picture. Roan wiggled his fingers. Granny cut back to
the other view, checked it, then threw over the “snivvy” she had shown
him earlier.

The wallet dropped into his hand.

She switched off, turned and looked up at him. “Well?”

He said, “Why play around like this?”

“What do you mean?”

“This thing doesn’t do what you say it does. I got the wallet, sure, but
not with that thing.”

“Do tell. All right, how _did_ you get the wallet?”

He considered the instrument carefully. “It’s a sort of amplifier—yes,
and range-finder, too. It just gets a fix for your TK man. Right?”

“You really think I’ve got a high-powered psychic hiding around here who
does the work after I get to it with the finder?”

“_You’re_ the TK!”

She slumped resignedly at the controls. “If you can’t lick ’em, join
’em. Old Roman saying. If that’s what you say it is, boy, then that’s
what it is.”

“Why didn’t you say so in the first place?” he grumbled, looking at his
watch. “So now what do we do?”

“Wait a minute—I’ve got to get used to something.” She hung over the
console and then glanced up brightly. “I’ll break out the pilot model.
You can’t tote this thing under your arm.”

She went to a storage wall and dragged out a bin. In it was a long box.
Roan helped her open it and lift out the spindly collection of coils and
bars, setting it on a bench.

“I’ll check you through this.” She flung off her wrapper and advanced on
the machine. “Just turn it on its side for me,” she said. “what are you
gawping at? Oh!” She looked down at her shorts and halter, and laughed.
“I _told_ you it was too hot in here.”

It was not that age had left no marks on her compact body, but certainly
not two centuries’ worth. Holding a light-duty soldering iron near her
cheek, she slapped herself on the bare midriff.

“One thing you might keep in mind about women as you get to know ’em,
Roany—the parts that the decent people expose are exactly the ones that
get old first. This face of mine was gone at 75, but the tummy’s good
for another hundred yet.” She bent over the device. “Maybe it’s better
that way, maybe not—who’s to say? Hand me the millivoltmeter there.”

After a time, her work with the machine took precedence over everything
else in Roan’s cosmos. “You sure can get around in there,” he said,
awed, as he held the light for her.

“Think so?” she grunted, and went on working steadily.

VIII

At 1451, Roan Walsh arrived at the Walsh Building. His head spun with
its lopsided weight of advice, technical data and strategy. His arrival
was in the warehouse, not in the office, for he brought a long wooden
box on casters. He pushed the box himself up the long corridor to the
office wing.

“Oh, Roan Walsh, can I help?”

“No, Corsonmay. Wait—Yes, come in.” He put his hands on the end of the
box and nodded at the dithering secretary. “Grab hold here.”

She came close, tittered and let the tips of her gloves show for an
instant before she slipped them clumsily under the end of the box.

_Not that end up, you addlehead_.

Roan yelped and let go. Corsonmay, now bearing most of the not
inconsiderable weight, began to mew rapidly. Roan, sitting flat on the
floor, gasped, “Who said that?”

_“Ewp!”_ squeaked Corsonmay. “It’s heavy!”

“Let it down. My God, Corsonmay, you’re as strong as a horse!”

“That’s the nicest thing you ever said to me,” she beamed without
sarcasm.

He turned to her, found himself face to face with her withered ardency.
“What did you say about lifting up the wrong end, Corsonmay?”

“I didn’t say anything.”

_I did_.

“Byemay,” he said, and forestalling her, added, “Really—nothing more.
Byemay.”

She left and he whirled, hunting futilely in midair. “Granny! Where are
you?”

Briefly, just at eye-level, the business end of a needle-focus audio
beam projector appeared. Roan patted it happily and it disappeared.
Bless her, she’d be watching everything through her big machine, her
audio aimed for his inner ear every second.

At 1559.5, the ceiling said, “Roan Walsh, you may step in now.”

“Coming, Private.” He all but started at the sound of his own voice. How
was it that, though he seemed increasingly able to cope with anyone or
anything, his father’s voice still turned him to mush?

But that could wait. He stepped just inside the room.

“Come, come—stand close. I intend to do one of several things, but
biting is not one of them.”

Roan stayed where he was. “May I have the Private’s permission to bring
a piece of equipment in?”

“You have my permission to bring those cards in, revised or not. Nothing
more.”

“The Private deprives me of the use of evidence he himself assigned me
to bring,” Roan said stiffly.

“Do I now?” The beard, its lower end invisible under the privacy hood,
was pulled thoughtfully. “Very well. But I should warn you—you have no
leeway, young man. None!”

Roan wheeled the box through the doorway. He was shaking with
apprehension, but Granny’s voice pleaded inaudibly, _Trust me_.

Even in front of his father, he nearly smiled. He locked the casters
and, with a tremendous effort, heaved the box up on end. The right end,
this time.

“What the devil’s _that?_” demanded the beard.

“My evidence, Private.” Outwardly calm, inwardly aquiver, he drew out
the top section of the box with its two knobs and their two sets of
horns. Each horn was hollow and had a light inside. Roan turned them on.

“I asked you a question,” rumbled the Private.

“Your patience,” Roan responded.

_What patience?_ Granny’s chuckle did more good for Roan than a week’s
delay.

“Ready now, Private. May I have the use of some small object—your
stylus, perhaps, or a small book?”

“You have taken my money and you are taking my time. Is it now your
intention to take my property?”

_Whyncha spit in his eye?_

Roan threw up a glance of such extreme annoyance that the inaudible
voice apologized.

_Sorry. It’s just that I’m on your side, honey_.

Honey! He had tasted his very first honey is his “dream.” That was a
nice thing to call someone. He wondered if anyone had ever thought of it
before. To the Private, he said, “If I use my own property, there could
be some suspicion of previous preparation.”

“I suspect the previous preparation with which you are cluttering up my
office already,” growled the old man. “Here’s the old paperweight. It
dates from the time when buildings had sliding panels opening to the
outside air. If anything happens to it—”

“It will do,” said Roan levelly, taking it without thanks. The Private’s
eyebrow ridges moved briefly. “Would you kindly point out a spot on the
floor?”

With an expression of saintly patience, the Private drew out his stylus
and threw it. It fell near the far wall. Roan placed the paperweight
near the point of the stylus, on the carpet.

“And one more indulgence. A point on your desk—somewhere with enough
area to support that paperweight.”

“Damn it, no! Go get those cards and we’ll settle the matter in hand. I
fail to see—”

_Don’t let him rant. Find your own spot and ask him if it suits him_.

Like a man in a hailstorm, Roan advanced through the booming and
shrieking syllables and pointed.

“Will this do?” he shouted, just loud enough to be heard over the storm.

The Private stopped just then and Roan’s voice was like an airfoil
crashing the sound barrier. Both men recoiled violently; to his own
astonishment, Roan found that he recovered first. The old man was still
sunk deep in his chair, the base of the beard quivering. In Roan’s ear,
Granny cackled.

Roan grasped the two horns protruding from one of the spheres on his
machine and turned them so that the beam from each rested on the center
of the paperweight.

“The production model would have other means of aiming,” he explained as
he worked. “This is for demonstration only.” The other two beams were
aimed at the indicated spot on the desk. “Ready now, Private.”

“For what?” snarled the Private, then grunted as if he had swallowed a
triple ration of roughage, for when Roan touched the control, there was
a soft click and the paperweight appeared on the desk, exactly in the
small pool of light from the beams. He put out a hand, hesitated,
dropped back in his chair. “Again.”

Roan threw the lever the other way. The paperweight lay quietly on the
carpet. “For years, I have used every available minute on the research
needed for this device and in building it. If the Private feels that the
machine is of no use to this firm and the industry, that the time spent
on it was wasted or stolen, then I shall be satisfied with his
previously suggested—”

“Now come off it, son,” said the beard. He rose and approached Roan, but
kept his eyes glued on the machine in fascination. “You know the old man
was just trying to throw a scare into you.”

_Got ’im!_

“Could a large model be built?”

“Larger than a transplat,” Roan said.

“Have you built any larger than this?”

_Tell him yes!_

“Yes, Private.”

Slowly, the Private’s eyes left the machine and traveled to Roan’s face.
Roan would have liked to retreat, but his back was against the wooden
case.

_Watch out!_

“You feel this could be better than the transplat?”

_Yes. Tell ’im yes—even if it hurts, tell im!_

Roan found he could not speak. He tremblingly nodded his head.

“Hmm.” The Private walked around the machine and back, though there was
nothing to be seen. “Tell me,” he said gently, “is this machine built on
the same principle as the transplat?”

Sweat broke out on Roan’s brow. He wished he could wipe it off, but to
raise his glove would have been a rudeness. He let it trickle.

“No,” he whispered.

“You are telling me that this is a new kind of machine, better than the
transplat!” When Roan neither moved nor spoke, the Private suddenly
shouted, “Liar!”

Roan, white, dry-mouthed, with a great effort brought his eyes up to
meet those of the livid Private. “A transplat can’t do that,” he said,
nodding to the paperweight.

“You’ve got to be lying! If there was such a machine as this, you
couldn’t build it. You couldn’t even conceive it! Where did you get it?”

_Say you built it—quick!_

“I built it,” Roan breathed.

“I can’t understand it,” mumbled the Private.

Roan had never seen him so distressed and his curiosity got the better
of his own tension. “What is it that you want me to say, Private?”

The Private swung around, face to face with his son. “You’re holding
something back. What is it?”

_This is it! Now hold tight, honey. Tell him it works by PK_.

Roan shook his head and set his lips, and the Private roared at him.
“Are you refusing to answer me?”

_Tell him, tell him about the PK. Tell him!_

Roan had never felt so torn apart. There had to be more to this than he
knew about. What was pushing him? What tied his tongue, knotted his
stomach, swelled his throat?

_Trust me, Roan. Trust me, no matter what_.

It broke him. He choked out, “This is only a direction-finder. It works
by psychokinetic energy.”

“By what? What?” The Private fairly bounced with eagerness.

“It’s called PK. Mental power.”

“Then it really isn’t a machine at all!”

“Well—yes, you might say so. That’s my theory, anyway.” And where were
the tied tongue, the aching throat? Gone!

“And you believe in that psycho-stuff?”

Roan found himself smiling. “It works.”

“Why were you hiding it?”

“Would you have believed in such a thing, Private?”

“I confess I wouldn’t.”

“Well, then—I wanted to get it finished and tested, that’s all.”

“Then what?”

_Give it to him. I mean it—give it to him!_

“Why, it’s yours. Ours. The company’s. What else?”

The dry sound was the slow rubbing of gloved hands together. The other,
which only Roan heard, was Granny’s acid chuckle. _And he didn’t even
ask where the psychic operator was—notice? And he never will_.

The Private said, “Would you like to work with the Development
Department on the thing?”

_Sure, honey. I’ll never let you down_.

“Fine,” Roan said.

“You’ll never know—you can’t know what this really means,” said the
Private. For a moment, Roan was sure he was going to clap him on the
shoulder or some such unthinkable thing. “I can own up to a mistake. You
should’ve been on the nuts-and-bolts end right from the start. Instead,
I had you chasing inventories and consignments. Well, you’ve shown up
the old man. From now on, your time’s your own. You just work on
anything around here that amuses you.”

“I couldn’t do that!”

_Yes, by God, you could!_ snapped the voice in his ear. _And while he’s
soft, hit him again. Get your own home_.

His own home! With one of those PK machines, he could go anywhere,
anytime. He could take Val—and find Flower again!

IX

It was warm and windy and very dark. The village was asleep and only a
handful of people sat around the great trestle table in the clearing.
The stars watched them and the night-birds called.

“To get grim about it,” said the old lady in a voice a good deal less
than grim, “breaking up a culture isn’t something you can do on an
afternoon off. You’ve got to know where it’s been and where it is,
before you know where it’s going. That takes a good deal of time. Then
you have to decide how much it needs changing and, after that, whether
or not you were right when you decided. Then, it’s a good idea to know
for sure—but for _sure_—that you don’t push it so far, it flops over
some other gruesome way.”

“But I was right all the same, wasn’t I?” Roan insisted.

“Bless you, yes. You don’t know how right.”

“Then tell me.”

“Some of it’ll hurt.”

“Don’t hurt him,” said Flower, half-seriously. Roan took her hand in the
dark, feeling, as always, the indescribable flood within him brought by
the simple touch of living flesh.

“Have to, honey,” said Granny. “Blisters’ll hurt him too, and his joints
will ache at plowin’ time, but in the long run he’ll be all the better
for it. Who’s there?” she called.

A voice from the darkness answered, deep and happy, “Me, Granny.
Prester.”

“Hi, Granny,” said Val. They came into the dim, warm glow of the
hurricane lamp guttering on the table. Val was wearing a very short
sleeveless tunic, which looked as if a spider had spun it. She and
Prester moved arm in arm like a single being. Looking at her face, Roan
felt dazzled. He squeezed Flower’s hand and found her smiling.

“Sit down, kids. I want you to hear this, too. Roan, would you do
something for me—something hard?”

“What is it?”

“Promise to shut up until I’ve finished, no matter what?”

“That’s not hard.”

“No, huh? All right, Flower, tell us all just exactly what psi powers
you have.”

Roan closed his eyes in delight, picturing again Flower’s appearance in
his cubicle, her birdlike flitting about the gateway during his dream,
the cup she had drawn out of thin air for him. She said, “None that I
know of, Granny.”

_“What!”_ he exploded.

Granny snapped, “You have promised to shut up!” To Flower, she went on,
“And who’s got the most psi potential in the place, far as we know?”

“Annie,” said Flower.

“The fifteen-year-old I told you about,” Granny explained to Roan. “The
one who can knock over a straight-edge. Shut up! Let me finish!”

With a great effort, he subsided.

“In a way, we’ve lied to you,” said Granny, “and, in a way, we haven’t.
I once told you some of what I’ve been thinking of—the new race of
people that has to be along some day, if we let it—the next step up. I
believe in them, Roan; call that a dream if you like. And when you had
your dream those two days, we made the dream come true for a little
while. We worked that thing out like a play—I had you in the frame of
that new machine of mine all the time.

“It _is_ a new machine, Roan, built on a new principle that the
transplat boys never thought of. It’s just what I told you it was—a
stationless matter transmitter—no central, no depots, no platforms. I
used it on every psi incident you witnessed in those two days. Believe
me?”

“No!”

“Val?”

“I’d like to,” she said diffidently. “But I’ve always thought—”

“There’s no use being tactful about this,” said Granny. “For the rest of
your life, this is going to bother you, Roan, Val—and, later, a lot of
other people we’ll bring in. You’ll rationalize it or you won’t, but
you’ll never believe I have a new kind of machine. Shut _up_, Roan!

“You two and the rest of your generation are the first group to get
really efficient crèche conditioning. You don’t remember it, but ever
since you were suckling babes, you’ve been forced into one or two basic
convictions. Maybe we’ll find a way to pry ’em loose from you. One of
these convictions is that the transplat is the absolute peak of human
technology—that there’s only one way to make ’em and that there are only
certain things they can do.

“You got it more than Val did, Roan, because you males in the transplat
families were the ones who might be expected to develop such a machine.
That’s why, when this new one was built, _women_ built it. Don’t fight
so, son! We have it, whether you believe it or not. We always will have
it from now on. I’m sorry—it hurts you even to hear about it and I know
what you went through when you had to sell it to your father. You damn
near choked to death!”

Roan breathed heavily, but did not speak. Flower put her arm across his
shoulders.

“We had to do it to you, boy, we _had_ to—you’ll see why,” said Granny,
her old face pinched with worry and tenderness. “I’m coming to that part
of it. Like I said, you don’t break up a culture just all at once, boom.
I wanted to change it, not wreck it. Stasis is the end product of a lot
of history. Human beings had clobbered themselves up so much for so
long, they developed what you might call a racial phobia against
insecurity. When they finally got the chance—the transplat—they locked
themselves up tight with it. That isn’t what the transplat was for,
originally. It was supposed to disperse humanity over the globe again,
after centuries of huddling. _Hah!_

“About the time they started deep conditioning in the crèches, walling
each defenseless generation off from new thoughts, new places, new ways
of life, a few of us started to fear for humanity. Stasis was the first
human culture to try to make new ideas impossible. I think it might have
been humanity’s first eternal culture. I really do. But I think it would
also have been humanity’s worst one.

“So along came Roan—the first of the deep-conditioned transplat
executives, incapable of believing the service could be improved. There
were—are—plenty more in other industries and we’re going after ’em now,
but transplat is the keystone. Roan, believe it or not, you were a
menace. You had to be stopped. We couldn’t have you heading the firm
without introducing the new machine, yet if it weren’t introduced in
your generation, it never would be.

“Your father is the last weak link, the last with the kind of imperfect
conditioning that would let him even consider an innovation—remember
your suggestion for eliminating freight operators? Only he would be
unconditioned just enough to put our new machine into Development before
realizing that, once in use, every cubicle in the whole human structure
will suddenly be open to the sky. And it’s all right—he can be trusted
with it, because his ‘decency’ won’t let him abuse privacy. _We’ll_ take
care of that side of it!”

“I wish you wouldn’t talk like that about him,” said Roan miserably.

“I’m sorry, boy. Does it do any good to tell you that subservience and
blind respect for your father are conditioned, too? I wish I could help
you—you’ll have that particular sore toe tramped on all your life.
Anyway, enter Roan, just when we’ve perfected the new machine. There
would have been no problem if we could have broken your conditioning
against it, but the only alternatives seemed to be—either you’d see the
machine operate and think you had lost your sanity, or you’d use your
position in the firm to eliminate all trace of it.”

He objected, “But you were wrong both ways.”

“That’s because we discovered that the conditioning against any new
transplat was against any new _machine_—any new _device_,” Granny
replied. “They’d never thought of matter transmission by a method _which
was in no way a device!_

“Can you see now why your father was so upset when he was faced with you
and your pilot model? One of the props of his decent little universe was
that the conditioning would stick—that of all people on Earth, you’d be
the last to even think of a new machine, let alone build one. And when
at last you came out with that gobbledegook about psychic power, he
recognized the rationalization for what it was and felt safe again.
Stasis was secure.

“I don’t mind telling you that you made us jump the gun a bit. Our
initial plan was to recruit carefully, just the way we did you.
Dreams—unexpected and high-powered appeals to everything humanity has
that Stasis is crushing. Then when there were enough of us wilderness
people, maybe the gates would open. But ultimately we’d win—we have all
nature and God Himself on our side.

“But you came along—what a candidate! You responded right down the
line—so much that, if we’d given you your head, you’d have dynamited
Stasis and probably yourself and us along with it! And you took to that
psi idea the way you took to the steak we planted in your nutrient that
day, testing for food preference before the dream sequence. All of a
sudden, you wanted to plant our machine spang in the middle of Stasis!
It was chancy, but—well, you’ve seen what happened.”

“Can I talk now?” Roan asked uncomfortably.

“Sure, boy.”

“I’m not going to argue with you about the new machine—how it works, I
mean. All you’ve done is given Stasis a more efficient machine. You can
interfere with the new network, but you could do that anyway with the
one you already had. So what’s the big advantage?”

Granny chuckled. From a side pocket, she dug a white object and tossed
it across the table. It left a powdery spoor as it rolled. “Know what
that is?”

“Chalk?” asked Val.

“No, it isn’t,” Roan said. “It’s Lunar pumice. I’ve seen a lot of that
stuff.”

“Well, you’ll have to take my word for it,” said Granny, “though I’ll
demonstrate any time you say—but I got that at 1430 this very
afternoon—off the Moon, using only the machine you saw in the lab.”

“Off the _Moon!_”

“Yup. That’s the advantage of the new machine. The transplat operates
inside a spherical gravitic field, canceling matter at certain points
and recreating it at others—a closed system. But the new machine
operates on para-gravitic lines—straight lines of sub-spatial force
which stretch from every mass in the Universe to every other. Mass
canceled at one point on the line recurs at another point. Like the
transplat, the new machine takes no time to cross any distance, because
it doesn’t actually cover distance.

“The range seems to be infinite—there’s a limitation on range-finding,
but it’s a matter only of the distance between the two parts of the
machine. I got the Moon easily with a forty-mile baseline. Put me a
robot on the Moon and I can reach Mars. Set up a baseline between here
and Mars and I can spit on Alpha Centauri. In other words, an open
system.”

They were silent as Roan raised his eyes and, for a dazzling moment,
visualized the stars supporting a blazing network of lines stretching
from each planet, each star, to all the others—a net that pulsed with
the presence of a humanity unthinkably vast.

Prester murmured, “Anybody want to buy a good spaceship?”

“Why did you do it?” whispered Val, ever so softly, as if she were in a
cathedral.

“You mean why couldn’t I mind my own business and let the world happily
dry up and blow away?” Granny chuckled. “I guess because I’ve always
been too busy to sit still. No, I take that back. Say I did it because
of my conscience.”

“Conscience?”

“It was Granny who built the first transplat,” Flower explained.

“And _you_ were telling her what could and couldn’t be done, Roan!”
gasped Val.

“I still say—” he objected in irritation, and then he began to laugh. “I
once took a politeness-present to Granny. Knitting. Something for the
old folk to do while they watch the sun sink.”

They all laughed and Flower said, “Granny won’t knit.”

“Not for a while yet,” Granny said, and grinned up at the sky.



TO HERE AND THE EASEL


UP HERE IN THE SALT MINE I’ve got a log jam to break.

And that about expresses the whole thing. I mix pigments like I mix
metaphors; so why not? Who’s a writer?

Trouble is, maybe I’m not a painter. I was a painter, I will be a
painter, but I’m not a painter just now. “Jam every other day,” as Alice
was told in Wonderland, as through a glass darkly; “Jam yesterday and
jam tomorrow, but never jam today.” I know what I’ll do, I’ll paint for
calendars; isn’t this the ’54 boom for the 44 bust? I’ll skip the art
and do handsprings eternal on the human breast.

So quickly: grab the brush, sling the oils; _en garde!_ Easel; you’re
nothing but a square white window to _me;_ I’ll throw a wad of paint
through you so’s we can take a good long look inside. I’ll start just
_here_ with the magenta, or maybe over _here_, and—

And nothing.

So down I go on the chair, I look at the canvas, it looks back at me,
and we’re right where we started. Didn’t start.

Up here in the salt mine, as I began to say, I’ve got a log jam to
break. The salt mine is my studio, studio being a name for a furnished
room with a palette in it. The log jam is in my head. Why is it I can’t
work just because my brains are tied in a knot? “Giles,” the maestro,
the old horse’s tail of a maestro used to say to me, “Giles, don’t paint
with your brains. Paint with your glands,” he used to say, “your blood.
Sweat is a pigment. Dip your brush in—”

Shucks, Maestro! Get me a job in a sign shop. I’ll sell everything else.
Ad in the paper: for sale cheap, one set sable-tipped vesicles. One
heart: ventricle, sinister; auricle, Delphic. Nine yards plumbing with
hot and cold running commentaries, and a bucket of used carmine,
suitable for a road-company Bizet-body.

Was a painter, will be a painter, ain’t a painter. Make a song of that,
Giles, and you can die crazy yelling it like Ravel chanting the Bolero.
Ravel, unravel. Giles’s last chants.

Ain’t a painta, ain’t a painta, ain’t a painta _pow!_ Ain’t a painta,
ain’t a painta, ain’t a painta _now!_

You better shut up, Giles, you’re going to have another one of those
dreams.

Well, I’ll have it anyway, won’t I?… the dreams, that’s what’s the
matter with me. My glands I got, but my brains, they keep running off
with me, glands and all. No not running off; more like a jail. I used to
be a something, but I’m locked up in my own brains till I’m a nothing.
All I have to do is figure a way out.

Or maybe somebody’ll come and let me out. Boy, what I wouldn’t do for
somebody who’d come let me out. Anything. The way I see it, the other
guy, the one in the dream, he’s locked up too. I should figure a way out
for him. So maybe he’ll get on the ball and figure a way out for me. He
was a knight in shining armor, he will be a knight in shining armor, but
he ain’t nothing but a nothing now. There shall be no knight. He got a
prison turns night into eternal afternoon, with dancing girls yet.

I should get him out of a spot like that? What’s the matter with a
castle on a mountain with dancing girls?

On the other hand a knight who was a knight and who wants to be a knight
is just a nothing, for all his dancing girls, if you lock him up in a
magic castle on a magic mountain. I wonder if _his_ brains are working
str—

—aight because mine are sore churned. _Aiee!_ And here the echoes roll
about amongst the vaults and groinings of this enchanted place. No sword
have I, no shield, no horse, nor amulet. He has at least the things he
daubs with, ’prisoned with him. And yet if he would paint, and cannot,
is he not disarmed? Ay, ay … _aiee!_ we twain are bound, and each of us
is enchanted; bound together, too, in some strange way, and bound
nowhere. And whose the hardest lot? He has a brush; I have no sword, and
so it seems his prisoning is less. Yet I may call my jailer by a name,
and see a face, and know the hands which hold the iron key. But he, the
’prisoned painter, languishes inside himself, his scalp his fetters and
his skull his cell. And who’s to name his turnkey?

Mine I can name; he comes now, soft leather awhisper on marble, his very
stride abhorrent magic, the pressures of the unalive against the
never-living. Atlantes, hated Atlantes, of the soft eyes and stone
mouth, Atlantes who, controlling me, would alter fate itself.

“Rogero, is all well with thee? Such a cry … like a great wind tearing
the rocks.” (His beard is full, he is too wise, he has no soul.)

“Ay, all is well!” I tell him scornfully. “Would I were such a wind, to
tear and be torn on the rocks, and gladly, under the open sky; and never
again to know a slow death of silks and sweets and boredom, the like of
this … give me my sword.”

“Ay, I will. And an enchanted shield to blind thine enemies, and a steed
to master earth and air; this castle to shelter thee and all in it for
thine own, and my powers for thy convenience—and all for a word.”

Atlantes is tall; yet, rising, I may make him lift his beard to face me.
Going to him, thunder-furious, I may come close, yet unlike other men he
will not flinch. I may not strike him, nor anyone here nor any thing, so
cautiously is he bemagicked. “For a word!” My voice stirs the hangings
and sets the great stone halls athrum. “You call my faith a word, my
fealty, my every drop of blood and all my days. I will never be your
knight, Atlantes.”

And of all things, I hate his smile. “Thee will, Rogero, unless thy
choice is to languish here forever instead. My plans for thee are better
ones than fate dictated,” he says, and laughs at me. His voice booms
inside my skull as my voice boomed a moment ago within the castle. “This
is thy destiny, knight: that a maiden shall free thee, and that through
her thou shalt embrace a new faith of sobriety and humility, and spend
thy days accursed with earthbound slowness like a tortoise, dressed like
a wren-hen; swordless and somber and chained.”

I think about this, and look at the carvings, the silks, the aromatic
mounds of fabulous fruits. At last, “Maiden?” I ask.

“Just the one for such adventures,” he says laughing again, for he has
trapped me into responding. “and a just return for thy kind of
stubbornness. She shall hold her faith a greater thing than thy flesh;
she shall prefer to walk like a peasant rather than be borne like a
gentlewoman; she shall scorn satin and lace and cover herself like a
winterbound tree earth-hued and hard-barked. And worst of all, she shall
have more brains than thee.”

“Surely you speak of some afterlife, some penance for a great sin!”

“Na, lad! Thine afterlife is in other hands than mine. ’Tis all thy
destiny, lad. Thou may’st not take whatever part of it that pleases
thee, and cut the rest to fit thy fancy. The maid will not come here;
but should she come here she shall not free thee; but should she free
thee, thou wilt indeed finish thy life like a clip-winged hawk, hobbling
about amongst the sweating serfs and calling them thine equals.”

He reasons right; and fury from inside me pounds my hair-roots. And as
the anger mounts, my mind’s aswirl again; I seem to be here in this hall
with the wizard, yet there, in the dream, in that dusty box of poverty
and miracles inhabited by the painter who may not paint. I fight against
it, even clinging to this hated hall, holding to the familiar
enchantments like Atlantes’ hippogriff and unbearable shield, his castle
set in everlasting afternoon, and the silent and invisible chains by
which he holds me; these, to me, are real, for all they are magic, and
not beyond understanding like the painter’s chamber with its window
overlooking swift horseless chariots, its squat black demon-sculpture
which first shrills, then speaks with the voices of people outside the
room, its music box no bigger than my two fists, with the glowing golden
eye and the sound, sometimes, of a hundred musicians; and all the
marvels which are part of his poverty. Again I am he, myself, and he
again one, the other, then both, then neither, and again my brains churn
in transition. My mouth holds the aftertaste of grapes and mead, then
the blue smoke he sucks constantly from his little glowing white sticks;
I taste one, the other, both, neither.

I turn from Atlantes and his hated smile and throw myself across the
yielding mound of silks and furs. And far away I hear the golden clarion
of a bell, the great song of the castle’s magic gate. I hear Atlantes’
odd gasp, half surprise, half pleasure; I hear his soft feet on the hard
marble. Who comes, who comes a-ringing, challenging, and unwanted—and
unafraid of this castle and its many devils? If I am the knight, Rogero,
I will watch from the window; if I am Giles, the painter, and I think I
am, I will let the goddam doorbell ring. Whoever heard of a doorbell in
a magic castle? _What_ magic castle?

Here’s a dirty bed, and there a dirty window, and over yonder the
cleanest canvas yet; now wait, wait—Giles is my name, paint is my trade,
if I was a knight, I’d have me a blade. _Give me my sword!_

What sword? Will you for God’s sake get away from that doorbell so I can
hear myself think? I almost had it then, that business about the knight,
whoever he is—or is he _me?_—and his magic mountain, or is that really a
furnished room? Ah, _shaddap_ with that doorbell already!

“Whaddayewant?”

All it does, it rings.

“Who is it?”

_Ring, ring_.

All right, you asked for it, I’m going to snatch that door open, I’m
going to haul off, no questions asked, and punch the nose that’s ringing
my doorbell. Twist the knob, snatch the door, knock the ringer, to the
floor. _Blam_, a dead ringer.

So sometimes a tenth of a second is as long as a paragraph or your arm.
The door is open and I’m standing still and tight like a kid looking
through a knothole, being with and of the ball game but standing quiet,
watching. I watch my hand fly through the door, making a fist on the
way, I watch it reach her cheekbone and curl and compact there, pudgy
and hard. Back she goes, not falling but standing straight, across the
narrow lighted hall and against the wall, _wump-thump!_ She is a little
brown thing with hair unwonderful, beautiful lashes opening now to make
her eyes round and glazed, and that’s about all there is to her.
“Mmmmmm,” she says, and slowly slides down to the wall to sit, slowly
bends her head to one side, the hair ahang like a broken wing. “Well I
told you to get away, ringing that bell!” “Mmmm,” she breathes.

So I scoop her up, and up she comes, light as a leg o’ lamb and common
as cabbage, and I kick the door closed and I throw her on the dirty bed,
akimbo-crumpled and immodest as a dropped doll, and who cares?—not the
artist, who’s seen better and wastes no time on the likes of this; not
the man, for he is, as the saying goes, not quite himself just now.
Here’s a dry paint rag to be wet at the sink and wrung out, and pressed
against the smooth beige-brown brow over the smooth lids with the tender
row of feathers over the seal … lashes, I will admit, lashes she has.
She has damn-all else but my God! those lashes.

And the rag, coming away, leaves a stain on the brow, verdi-gris. One
can pretend she is a brazen head, skinned with old silk, and the bronze
staining through. But only until her eyes open; then there is no
pretense, but only a dowdy girl on my bed, a pallor ’pon my unpalatable
pallet. She gazes past the green-brown stain and the anger of her
brutalized cheek, and she has no fear, but a sadness. “Still nothing?”
she murmurs, and I turn and look with her, and it’s my empty canvas she
is sad for and “Still nothing,” half whispering about.

“I am going to punch your face again.” It is a faithful promise.

“All right, if you will paint.”

“I’ll paint or not, whatever I feel like,” I am saying in a way that
makes my throat hurt. Such a noise it makes, a Day-Glo fluorescent
dazzle of a noise. “Giles is my name and paint is my trade, and you keep
your nose out of it. Your nose,” I say, “looks like a piece of inner
tube and you got no more side-silhouette than a Coca-Cola bottle. What
you want to be ringing my doorbell for?”

“Can I sit up?”

By which I discover I am hanging over her close, popping and spitting as
I bellow and peal. “Get up, get out!” I touch my neck and the scarlet
welling of an artery there, I spin to the easel to strike it but cannot
touch it, so go on to the wall and drive my fist against it. It is
better than a cheekbone which hardly leaves a mark.

“Oh please, don’t hurt yourself. Don’t.” she says, her voice high and
soft-textured around the edges, like light through a hole in worn
velvet, “don’t!” all pitying, all caring, “don’t be angry …”

“Angry I am not,” I say, and hit the wall again, “angry; I’m a devil and
dangerous to boot, so don’t boot me. You,” I say, pointing at her, and
there is blood on my hand, “are a draggletail; bad lines, wrong tone,
foreground distracting—” (that would be my easel)—“background
unappetizing.” (That would be my bed). “The whole thing’s not composed,
it’s—it’s—decomposed. Where’d you get that awful dress?”

She plucks at it, looks at her hand plucking, makes a faint brief frown,
trying to remember, and she is not afraid, she is only trying to answer
my question.

“Well don’t bother; I don’t care where you got the dress. What do you
want?”

Up come the lashes. “I want you to paint again.”

_“Why?”_

“Don’t, don’t,” she whispers. “You’ll hurt your throat. I know
everything you’ve painted. You’re getting good; you’re getting great.
But you don’t paint any more.”

“I asked you why; you didn’t say why, you just said what happened.” She
looks at me, still not afraid, still puzzled. This girl, I think, is not
only homely, she is stupid. “I asked you why—why? What do _you_ care?”

“But I told you!” she cries. “You were going to be great, and you
stopped. Isn’t that enough?”

“No, not for people. People don’t want things like that, greatness,
goodness.” I begin to be more angry at people than angry at myself. Much
better, Giles—_much_ better. “People want their work done easily. People
want kisses and to feel important. People want to be amused and to be
excited safely. People want money. Do you want money? Here’s a quarter.
Here’s forty cents, even. Get out of here, people.”

“I don’t want money. I just want you to paint again.”

“Why?”

Down go the lashes, away goes the voice like a distant wind. “I saw them
clustered around your Spanish picture, _Candlelight Malaga_—two young
people, holding hands very hard, very quiet; and an old man, smiling;
and there was a little boy tugging at a woman’s sleeve: ‘Ma? Ma?’ and
when she said, ‘Yes, dear,’ she kept her eyes on the picture so he
cried. I saw a man come away from Garret’s, where your _Smoke_ was
hanging, and he laughed and said to all the strangers, ‘All I have to do
is _tell_ her: she’ll love me, it’s right there in the picture.’ ” She
spreads her square unwomanly hands to say, “That’s what I mean, it’s
proved.”

I don’t care about the people, the crying child, the man who speaks to
strangers, and all the rest of them. I never painted for them, I painted
for—for—but it wasn’t for them. So they’re all intruders, and for them
I’ve done enough, too much already. If what they have taken was really
in the pictures, they have robbed me. If what they took was not there,
they are fools. Must I paint for thieves and fools?

All this comes to me clearly, but there is no way to say it to the girl.
“It’s for those things,” she says, as if my silence means I am agreeing
with her. “So paint again.”

“Paint, how can I paint?”

“Why not? What’s the matter?”

“It’s in my head.” I hold it, hard. My elbows knock together; I speak at
her, peek at her through the wedge. “I’ll tell you,” I say painfully,
“because you don’t make any difference.” (And oh, no, she wouldn’t
wince.) “When I painted, I was Giles, Giles yesterday and Giles today,
so that where I stopped I could start, and even find the stopping place
by tomorrow. And tomorrow I’d be Giles, and knew it so well I never
thought about it. Now … now I’m Giles. Before that I was—somebody else,
and before that I was Giles again. And being Giles now doesn’t matter,
because soon I’ll be someone else again, and after that, Giles. You
don’t understand that.”

“No,” she says. “Neither do you.”

“Right, so right; the first right thing you’ve said, no compliments
intended, whatever’s-your-name.”

“Brandt.”

“Brandt. _Miss_ Brandt, surely, there being limits beyond which the most
foolish men will not go. Painting, Miss Brandt, is a thing having a
beginning, a middle, and an end; and the beginning is part of the end of
the painting before, and the end is part of the beginning of the next
picture. I am Giles, and being Giles I suppose I could paint; but
before—an hour or a while ago—say when you were ringing my doorbell, you
and your fat nerve—I was somebody else. And soon my brains will scramble
and words will mean two things or three, and yonder is either a naked
canvas or a far granite wall, and under me a dirty bed or a mound of
silks and furs, and what I want will be to paint or to regain my sword;
I will be Rogero and Giles, one, the other, both neither; until suddenly
Giles is gone, the easel, the painting—no, not gone, but like a dream,
not really remembered because not really real.”

“Let Rogero paint,” says the fool girl as if she believes me.

There’s a noise like one-third of a scream, one-half of a howl, and it’s
mine. “Rogero paint? He can’t paint! He couldn’t believe in it, couldn’t
think of it, wouldn’t know a tint from a T square. Listen, you; listen
to me: can you imagine me as a knight, imprisoned on a magic mountain,
surrounded by spells I not only believe in—I _must_ because they’re
real—jailed by a magician who rides a hippogriff? A hippogriff, Miss
Unimportant Q. Brandt, you hear? A shining hippogriff whose dam was a
brood mare and whose sire was a gryphon—a gryphon whose mother was a
lion and whose father was an eagle. This hippogriff is real, real as the
spells, real as the magic mountain, real as the knight that you, Miss
Interfering W. Brandt, can’t imagine me being.” (Have I been climbing,
running? I am out of breath.) “To that knight,” I say when I can, “my
telephone and my radio are laughable wonders without foundation in fact,
my inability to paint is of no importance except to give me his
sympathy; he too is captured and fettered. He can do as little with my
brushes as I might do with his sword. And you, Miss Unbeautiful Brandt,
could only be the most piddling of small nastinesses intruding into his
unbelievable fantasy. Now you know; now I’ve told you. There’s nothing
you can do, nothing you can believe, and your coming here or not coming
means nothing. If you came to help, you’ve failed. If you came to fight
something, you’re beaten.”

There is a time for wondering, wondering what someone will say, and this
is it, and it is good. Good as anything could be now, where _that_ is
real or _this_ is real, never both. For I lie under a weight and I
cannot move it, and when it disappears I am no longer myself, and it is
good to defeat someone, something, even an unimportant, unlovely girl;
even when in the defeat there can be no victory for me, nor a lessening
of the weight. So I wait, wondering in which of several possible ways
she will acknowledge her defeat; and here it comes from the usual lips
and the eyes behind the unusual lashes; here:

“May I use your phone?”

Because I said she doesn’t matter, I may not let this matter either; I
step away from the phone and turn my back, and soft footsteps pass me
and soft fingers take up the hard phone; there’s a chorus of clicks,
composed in syncopes, seven measures long. And a ring, and a ring.

What portals open to this lady’s ringing, this Brandt for the burning?
What dilates to this dialing, this braw, bricht, moonlicht nictitation?
My God, my God, here it comes again, the words like lyings in their
layers, and I am he, and he is—either or, both, neither. Of these, “or”
is king; I wear a coat d’or, that dry, exclusive little word. For we are
desiccated to the preposition that all men are created sequels. The “or”
is golden but my heart has been read, my mind has been lead; read, lead;
just the color of Floradora orange-youth.

“Hello,” says the telephone tinily because it can speak two syllables
without moving its open mouth; “Giles,” says Miss Brandt, “just Giles,”
and the telephone laughs and says, “Okay.”

Soft footsteps on the wooden, or is it marble floor, and the ring has
been answered with a shout of laughter; and soft-footed, swift, Atlantes
strides to the casement and the curtains of cloud leave the court, the
mist melts away from the meadow below, the great golden gate is agleam
in the sun, and gone is the gloaming. “Rogero!” he cries (but am I not
Giles, imprisoned in a dream, who says he is where a felon needs a
friend? _Aiee!_ Sharper than a serpent’s truth is an ungrateful Giles!)
“Rogero, come and see thy destiny!” and in Atlantes’ laugh lies such a
triumph, such a scorn, I can only come and see. I go to stand beside
him.

To either hand are buttresses of weather-hammered stele; before me the
castellated wall like a cliff, like a sea becalmed and stood on edge,
falls to the courtyard. Away and down and away rolls the magic meadow to
its lower margin, mighty walls patrolled by poisoned gnomes. And when I
see the gate I am myself again; Rogero, ‘prisoned knight, hungering for
that craggy path beyond the gate.

“Thy destiny, knight—you see it?”

I look again; and there like a mole under a monument is a small brown
person, dun and dowdy. In one hand is a crooked staff changed from its
soil-sprung origins, and it is this which now again strikes the golden
bell and sends its clang and hum to shake the shining air. “My destiny?”

He laughs again; there is battle in such laughter. “Look again!” With
thumb and finger he makes a circle, and thrusts the hand before my face,
and through that circle I see the gate—but not from the mountaintop, but
as if I stood but twenty paces away. And though his magic is despicable
to me, I yet must look.

Silently, for a long time I gaze. At last I say, “Of all you have told
me of my destiny, magician, I see but one thing to bear you out, and
that is, that yonder mudball is a maiden, for it is unthinkable that
such a one could be anything else. As to the rest, it is not possible
that fate should have stored for me anything so … unadorned.”

“Ah, then thee need only swear fealty to me, and we will squash this
beetle together.” The bell rings again. “If not, I must do it myself,
and keep thee bound as thou art. But one or the other must be done, for
that rude clanging is indeed the voice of thy fate, and that barefoot
damsel has come as fate dictates, to challenge me and set thee free.”

“She challenges _you!_”

“Ay, lad, with nothing but that crooked staff and the homespun cassock
beneath which she generously hides her uninteresting limbs. Oh, and a
piddling faith in some unimportant system of gods.”

“The staff is enchanted, then.”

“No.”

“She’s mad!”

“She is.” He laughs. “So tell me, good fool: wouldst go to her and spend
thy days with her, swordless, horseless, tending the plaguey brats of
peasants and slaves? Or wouldst thou ride with me and turn her into a
damp spot on the meadow, and after, own the earth?”

“I’ll choose, wizard, but a choice of mine own devising. I’ll not go to
her nor ride with you. I shall stay here and watch thy bravery and thine
historic victory over that little brown she-monk, with her dried
tree-branch arrayed against nothing but thy magic steed, thy mighty
armaments, and thine army of gnomes. And when she is vanquished—”

“Thee would see her vanquished?” he mocks. “Thy last chance to be free?
Thy destiny contains no other savior.”

“When she is vanquished, come back to me that I may spit in thy face and
tell thee that of my three possible hells, I choose the one which can
give thee no pleasure.”

He shrugs and turns away from me. At the door he gives me his evil
smile. “I knew that one day thee’d call me ‘thou,’ Rogero.”

I snatch up a heavy censer and hurl it. With a crash it stops in mid-air
before him and, broken, falls at his feet. His smile is a laugh now. “Be
certain, wizard, that I use not the ‘thou’ of an intimate, but that of
an animal,” I roar, and he laughs again; and surely one day, when I find
a way, I shall kill this clever creature. I go to the casement.

Far below, I can still see the gate and the shining wall. The gnomes
file away and down out of sight; and there, one fragile hand on the
golden bars, the other holding the staff, the girl clings peering. Her
courage is too foolhardy to be admired and her strength too small to be
considered at all; surely Atlantes need only laugh once (that thunder of
evil) or raise his brows, to shrivel up this audacious sparrow.

There on the brow of the flying buttress stands Atlantes, the wind
whipping his figured mantle, the sun all startled by his jewels.

He raises a hand and turns it, and the gate, so far below, so far away,
stands open. Nothing as massive as those golden bars should move so
swiftly and noiselessly; the tiny figure at the entrance nearly falls.
The girl stands in emptiness, the gate looming about her, the rocky hill
behind her, and high and massive over her, Atlantes’ castle crowned by
the glittering magician himself. She is very small and very alone as she
begins to mount the slope.

Atlantes, laughing, claps his hands twice—

And from a copse in the meadow comes a thunder of wings, and a glory.
There with an eagle’s cruel head and the foreclaws of the mightiest of
lions; with the splendid haunches of a stallion and golden hooves—there
rises, there floats, there hurtles the hippogriff. His cry ripples the
grass; it is a clarion, a roar, and a scream, and through it and through
it is a thing which makes my heart melt as never a woman could do, and
mine eyes are scalded with pity and fellowship. For he, even he, the
hippogriff is enthralled; and with all his soul he hates his master!

I am glad there is no one by, for I weep like a child. I am a knight,
and I know my merits; yet everything splendid is behind me. My shackles
may not be broken, and my very destiny is without beauty. Yet here
before me is beauty crystallized, shaking the world with its piteous,
powerful protest … crystallized? Nay, alive, alive as a man could never
be. See the sun on his golden plumes, oh see his purple flanks … he is
more than I can bear to look on, to think on … I shall have him, mount
him!

But if he sees me, knows my heart, I know not, for he sweeps past and
hovers, and the top of the buttress takes him like a cupped palm. From
the parapet Atlantes takes a curious shield, with its cover of soft bat
skins cleverly pieced. He buckles it to the hippogriff’s harness, then
with a hand on the parapet and a hand on the shield, he climbs to the
great beast’s back; and oh! I am proud that the steed kneels not for
him.

Atlantes leans forward and speaks, and what his word is I may not hear,
but the animal’s sweet, strong pinions spread and flick the stone but
once, and skyward they ride.

In a great circle the hippogriff wheels, with Atlantes leaning from the
saddle. His piercing eyes, and all his magic to aid him, must discover
any invisible armament she might have; and she must have none, for I
hear his distant laughter as he leans over his steed’s neck to speak
another secret command. The wings go up together and hold like a great
wedge, and down they drop just to the height of her head, and with a
single thrust and the sound of soft thunder, their speed is checked and
they are meadow-borne. Fifty paces away, the girl drops her staff and
waits, weaponless.

Tiny and evil, Atlantes’ mirth comes to me on the wind. He swings down
from the beast’s broad back, unbuckles his shield, and with a deft twist
casts off its cover.

Now, he stands between me and the girl so that the shield faces away
from me. Were it any other way, I should have seen nothing; this I knew
when I saw the blaze of light which fanned out and down; when I saw
birds swing and flutter and fall, and a stag turn away and blunder into
a tree trunk. I had heard of this shield, but until now I had not seen
it. In unspeakable ways, its gilded surface had been polished until it
struck blind any who saw it. This, then, and the hippogriff, are what
Atlantes brings to bear against one girl’s fragile madness. Ah, a mighty
magician he, and confident.

Beaten and dazzled, she stands frozen, waiting for—no, not mercy; she
cannot expect that. Waiting then, for him.

The work of the shield is done. He covers it and confidently he strides
down the slope to her. If he speaks, I cannot hear; I doubt he does, for
he knows I am watching, and he will want me to understand. He stoops to
pick up the useless staff she has dropped, and thrusts it into her hand;
he takes her by the shoulders and turns her about to face the gate; he
steps back, then throws up his shaggy head and bellows with laughter.
Such dismissal of the blind thing might have been predicted; instant
death would have been, for him, too gentle a thing. And so he stands,
laughing, impregnable even to such strength as mine, with the invisible
wall his spells have built about him; cruel and victorious—ah, a mighty
magician indeed!

So, defeated, she moves toward the door … door? the gate of gold … but
no, it is no longer a meadow, but a room where I keep my easel and
my … and now I see them both, the room and the meadow, as if one were
painted upon glass and through it I saw the other; and which? which the
painting? _Aiee!_ my brains are mixed and muddled again, I am one, the
other, both, neither. I see a curtain of sky with mountains for its
ragged hem … a dirty wall, with one small bright spatter of my blood
where I struck it, and the dazed dun maiden raising her staff, which is
a small blue book with gold letters on it. “But you’re blind!”

Miss Brandt has a twisted smile. Her teeth are no better and no worse
than the rest of her, and not to be compared with her lashes. “I’ve been
told that before, but I don’t think I am. This is for you—here!” and she
gives me the book.

Before or behind my eyes there’s a flash, too bright; I think it’s a
hippogriff. Up here in the salt mines I stand and shiver until the crazy
thing passes; I open my eyes slowly and secretively so that I can snatch
a reality and make it real. And Miss Brandt is here (or still here, I
forget which) and the meadow and the hippogriff become a memory again
(or maybe a dream).

“Are you all right?” Her voice and her hand touch me together.

“Stay away from me! I’m crazy, don’t you know that?” (Her lashes are
up.) “You better get out of here. I’m liable to do practically anything.
Look, you’re already getting a black eye.” I’m yelling again. “Aren’t
you afraid? Damn you, be afraid!”

“No.”

It’s a very puzzling thing, the way she should be dressed like a monk,
and be holding a crooked stick; but that was a small blue book—that’s
right. I’m shaking my head, or is it a shudder; the girl and the wall
and the door blur by me and my teeth are side-sliding, making a
switch-frog sound. It can be halted by holding the heels of the hands on
the halves of the head very hard … and slowly saliva is
swallowed … libation, libration, liberation, and quiet at last. In that
moment of stillness, when at last I am _here_ altogether, I know that
my … dream, the Rogero thing, whatever it is … takes no time at all. For
she was at the phone when it began, that last time, and all those things
happened to Rogero while she hung up and took two steps behind me … yes,
and I heard the steps. So when I become Rogero again, no matter what
happens here, how many hours it takes, I shall see Atlantes and the
vanquished maid, down and away below, and she fumbling the dry rough
stick, blind, defeated destiny of mine.

So open your eyes to here and the easel and Miss Brandt who is not
afraid. Hold out the hand with the book. “What’s this?”

“Money.”

It’s a checkbook, sky-green and very disciplined and trackless inside,
and sturdy and blue outside. “Blank checks.”

_“Cartes blanches,”_ she smiles; and this is no place for smiling. So
just wait, and the smile will go away. Ah. Unsmiling, she says, “It’s
money; all you want. Just fill in a check and sign it.”

“You’re crazy.” But she shakes her head gravely.

So: “Why bring me money?”

“You can do whatever you want now.”

“I can’t paint. Do you think you can make me paint by giving me money?”

When her tongue touches her lips, they are the same color. No one, no
woman, should be like that. Such a mouth could taste nothing, take
nothing. It says, “Not if you don’t want to. But you can do all the
other things you want to do—all you have ever wanted to do.”

What else have I ever wanted to do but paint? There must be something.
Oh, there is, there is; I never had a chance to—to—and then my hand is
crushing the book, the book of excellent quality which yields only
slightly and, when my hand opens, is bland again. “It’s just paper.”

“It’s money. Don’t you believe me? Come with me. Come to the bank. Write
out a check and see.”

“Money. How much money?”

Again: “All you want.” She is so very certain.

“What for?”

“Whatever you like. Anything.”

“I didn’t mean that.” Things are becoming real as real now. “When you
take money or you give something; you always give something, a painting
or a promise or—”

Her head turns briefly, a little, right, left, right, her eyes steady on
me, so sliding between the lashes. “Not this money.”

“Why are you giving me money?” (You know, Giles, you’re frightened?)
“What can I do for money mostly is pant. But not now. Not now.”

“You don’t have to paint. Not unless you want to, and then not for me.
Giles, maybe you can’t paint because you want to do other things. Well,
_do_ them. Do them all; finish them until they’re all done and there’s
only one thing left. Maybe then you can work again.”

“Then the money’s for painting!”

Oh, she is so patient; oh, how I hate anyone as patient as that. “No.
It’s just for you. Do whatever you want. I don’t want the money and I
don’t ever want it back. It isn’t mine to begin with, so why should I
care about it?”

“But you’d care if I didn’t paint again.”

The fringes fall, the lashes hide the ordinary eyes. “I care about that
now. I’ll always care.” And now she has the door open. “Come to the
bank. Come get your money. Then you’ll believe me.”

“The bank, yes, and then what? Go with you, I suppose, and you’ll tell
me what to buy and where to go and how to—”

“It’s yours to do as you please. Now will you come? I’ll leave you at
the bank if you like.”

“I like.”

But no, this doesn’t hurt her, and no, she is not angry; there’s only
one thing that touches her, and that one thing reaches through the
closed door as we walk in the corridor, stretches down the stairs and
past the lintels and the newels and the curbs and cabs and garbage all
the way down to the bank; and that one thing is my white, clean, blind
square eye of canvas.

I wonder if she knows; I wonder. Wondering under the polyglot columns
corralling the bank (Doric they are, with Corinthian capitals, yes but
the door is not Doric but arched and Byzantine, closed with a fanlight.
I’d say from Virginia). “I wonder if you know.”

“If I know what?” she says, still patient.

“Why I can’t paint.”

“Oh yes,” she says, “I know.”

“Well I don’t, Miss Brandt. I really don’t.”

“It’s because you don’t know why you _can_ paint,” she says, and her
eyes are no longer patient, but waiting. It is very different.

And when I shake my head (because that is no answer) her eyes are
patient again. “Come,” she says; and in we go from the portico, and
wouldn’t you know the ceiling is red with ropes of gilded plaster draped
in altogether Moorish squares.

And here in a low wall made of glazed marble, and flat-topped with
marbleized glass, is a little black gate that swings both ways. On the
other side is a polished desk and a polished pate bearing polished
glasses. “Mr. Saffron,” says Miss Brandt; “Mr. Saffron” says the
chock-shaped sign on his desk, gold on black.

Mr. Saffron’s glittering glasses tilt up; then straight and slowly he
rises, like the Lady of the Lake. When he stands, his glasses lose some
high lights, and I can see his eyes. They are blue and shiny—not
polished, but wet; turned to Miss Brandt they are so round they go pale;
turned to me they are slits gone all dark, with a little eave of pink
flesh all the way across over both of them. And here is a man who is
astonished by Miss Brandt and repelled by me; what a wonderful way he
has of showing it, over and over again; round-pale, slit-dark, the whole
time.

“This is Giles.”

Mr. Saffron gives his slits to my brush-wipe khaki pants, and to my
yellow shirt with russet cuffs which is really the top of my
ski-pajamas, and to my face. “You’re quite sure, Miss Brandt?”

“Of course!”

“If you say so,” says Mr. Saffron, and sits. “We’re quite ready. Will
you sign this, Mr. Ahhh?” I hear a drawer move but I am sure he pulls
the white card from his spotless stomach. With the shiny pen from his
desk-set I write _Giles_.

“First name?” says Mr. Saffron to the card, another shiny pen in hand.

“Yes.”

“Last name?”

“Yes,” I say again; and up come the glasses. “That’s his name, just
Giles,” Miss Brandt says quickly. And then she recites my address. Mr.
Saffron writes it, putting no more of his boiled-veal fingers on the
card than he has to.

Miss Brandt says, “You want to cash a check now?”

“Oh sure.” I fumbled around and get the book. Miss Brandt comes close
with a finger. “You write the date there, and the—” But I just sit there
looking up at her until she goes away. What’s the matter, does she think
I don’t know how to write a check? I write the check.

Mr. Saffron takes the check by its two ends and it flips softly like a
little trampolin. He turns it over with a brittle snap and does a
squiggle with his pen. “Sixty-eight dollars. All right, the cashier will
give you your money.” From his drawer he takes a yellow, ruled pad and
curls down over it as if there were sudden fire in his watch pocket. Out
we go through the little black gate, and when I look back he is not busy
with his paper at all, but staring after us the round-pale way.

“Is that all you want—sixty-eight dollars?”

I look at her. “What would I do with more than sixty-eight dollars?”

Patient, patient she says, “Anything, Giles. _Anything_.”

So we go to a cage and a fierce face says in a sweet voice, “How do you
want it?”

“Cash.”

“Any way at all,” says Miss Brandt.

So he gives me the money and we go to a marble table in the middle of
the bank while I look at it. Miss Brandt says, “Is that right?”

“What?”

“Is it all there? Weren’t you counting it?”

“Oh no. I was just looking at it. It really is real money.”

“I told you.”

“Is there more?”

Again she says, “All you want.”

“Okay, good. Well, Miss Brandt, you can stay here or go do whatever you
want.”

“All right.”

I walk away and when I get to the big door with the fanlight I look
back. Miss Brandt is standing there by the table, not exactly looking my
way. I come walking back. I have a feeling inside that makes the base of
my nose hurt. I stop by her and look at her while I wet my lips. She has
a real sunset of a shiner by now but the lashes are all right. So I tell
her, “You just don’t care what happens to me now.”

“You know I do.”

“Well, why didn’t you try to stop me if you cared so much?”

She says, “You’re not going to do anything important just now.”

“With all this money? How do you know?”

She doesn’t say.

“I guess you want me to come running back to you so you can take care of
me.”

“No, Giles, truly,” she says in that absolutely certain way. “You don’t
understand. I’m not important. I’m not trying to be important. I just
don’t matter in any of this.”

“Not to me.” Why does she make me so mad anyway? “So what _is_
important?”

“Why you could paint. Why you can’t paint. That’s all.”

“Well, the hell with that for now. Well—maybe I’ll see you around.”

She sort of shrugs. I just go. Maybe I want to turn around but I don’t.
There’s something in my head about how do I get in touch with her if I
should want to, but the hell with that too.

By all the paint pots of perdition, nobody’s ever going to make Giles
admit he’s a part of the works, like she does. People like her, all they
do is go around believing in something and trying to trap other people
into believing it too. “I just don’t matter in any of this.” What kind
of a way to get along is that, the silly bitch?

I get out of line of the bank door and then go across the street and
stand in a low areaway where I can watch her when she comes out. From
now on by God my business is _my_ business. Who does she think she’s
brushing off?

It’s getting chilly out, but who cares? I’ve got lots of time. Lots of
money. Lots of patience. Miss Brandt, now, she’s _really_ got patience.
On the other hand, all God’s chillun got patience. Will you look at that
bank, now; those big fat pillars are doing just what? Holding up a
pseudo-Parthenonic frieze, that’s what. That’s really patience. Year in,
year out they stand there holding it up and nobody knows it’s there but
the starlings. Patience—look at the work that went into carving all
those figures, that fat, baggy nude in the middle clear down to the chow
dogs or lions or whatever they are at the ends. _Stiacciato_, they call
that work, the lowest form of relief, and that fat one in the center,
she sure would be. So they in turn are patient, the hodgepodge of Hermes
and Demeters and blind Justices, holding still for the starlings. And
when it’s cold the starlings freeze on the marble stool, and when it’s
warm they stool on the marble frieze, and the meek shall inhibit the
earth.

Oh holy Pete what’s happening to my head … listen, Giles, hold on to
this area rail and keep your wall eyes on that bank and don’t go off
into no magic mountains. Watch that clock over the door. Watch it? I can
_hear_ it! Well listen to it then and keep your head in the here and now
and don’t let yourself go splitting the definitive. That, now, is a sick
clock, it must be three hours slow, and listen to it moan. Oh I know a
bank where the wild time groans … Hang on, Giles boy; think of something
else, like San Francisco where the second-story men from across the Bay
are called berkelers, and the Golden G—no! Think of the statue down the
block, the Mayor’s father on a horse, that’s in the papers every other
day should they move it or not … My father’s horse has many
mentions … and in the bank, now, Miss Brandt is leaving, see the gate is
open and agleam in the sun as she stumbles on stones; it is as if
Atlantes’ mirth alone were bending her down to be crushed like a tree in
a thunder-wind. And across the street—but meadow, meadow’s the word—the
blue-black helmets of the beastly gnomes show as they watch this … could
it be called a challenge? Ay; but a battle, no; only a defeat.

All this in a flash of stern anger, and then—yea, she is sinking,
twisting about as if to fall at his feet … then up she comes in a whirl,
her crude staff invisible, lost in speed, and with a whip’s crack, the
staff … _Aiee!_

For a moment I cling to the casement, scrabbling like a cat halffallen
from a wall; in that incredible moment I have leaned forward to shout
and have all but pitched out through the window; and what of my destiny
then?

Back at last and looking outward:

And the gate is lead, and shrunken, and the gnomes but a herd of ghosts;
I stand not on a mighty parapet, but on the roof of a byre. Gone are the
swan pools, the great gray halls, the soft-footed dancers and the
grape-girls. Atlantes, mighty Atlantes, lies on his back with his eyes
glazed and the bright blood flowing from his broken head … lying,
_aiee!_ like a goatherd after a bottle-fight on market day. And his
steed—but horror itself! has she then turned the hippogriff into a milch
cow? May the mandrake curdle her bowels if she’s harmed my hippogriff!

Ah but no; there he stands, the blazing beauty, and throws back his
eagle’s head, and hurls his joy away to the farthest mountains. I mingle
my shout with his, leap free of the wall, and run and tumble down the
meadow.

In a transport I stretch myself against the unenchanted grass, and twist
and turn in it until I can smell its sweet green ichor; and in just such
a turning mine eyes fall upon her who stands meekly by, her two hands
folded about the piece of her broken staff, her eyes downcast—but not so
far they see me not.

“But ’tis thee, my warrior-maid!” I roar. “Here to me lass, and I’ll
buss thee well for thy trouble!”

But she stands where she is, so I must go to her. That at least I can
do; has she not set me free?

(Or is she here to imprison me again? Destiny, now, is not fragile;
yonder’s a fractured magician for proof. Still—) “How do they call thee,
maid?”

“Bradamante,” says she; now, the Arabs breed a long-maned horse, and in
the distance that silken banner on their necks looks like this maid’s
lashes close to.

“Well, Bradamante, I owe thee my freedom if not my life. And should I
pay the reckoning, what would thee do with them?”

Up to me she looks, with a deep calm which destroys my reckless smile;
and up past me she looks further; and she says gently, “I would do the
Lord’s will with them.”

“Call me not Lord!” I cry; this creature embarrasses me.

“I was not.” Quiet as ever, her voice, yet somehow she chides me. “I
meant the Lord Whom I serve, Who is King of kings.”

“Is He now! And what would He have thee do with a belly-hungry,
prison-broke hellion of a swordless knight?”

“If thou wilt serve Him—”

“Hold, lass. Yon wizard told me a tale of thee and me betrothed, and
crawling the mud like worms among worms with never a jewel to our
cloaks. He said ’twas my destiny to be freed by thee, and free me thee
did. Though I can’t say how.”

“I but struck him with my staff.”

“Na, lass. Even I could never do that; he could not be touched.”

She gives me her hand; I take it and then follow her gaze to it. It
wears a simple golden ring. Gently she frees herself and removes the
ring. “The Lord sent this my way; who wears it is proof against all
enchantments. I need it no longer.” The ring flashes in the sun as she
casts it aside; with my quick thumb and forefinger I pluck it out of the
air.

“But keep it, Bradamante! Thee cannot discard such a treasure!”

“It was given me to free thee, and thou art free. As to the future—the
Lord will provide.”

I slip the ring upon my smallest finger, and though it is thick as her
thumb, the ring clasps me like mine own. (Even without it, girl, thee’d
have better fortune with an angry basilisk than thee would with me, if
thee would persuade me to join thee on thy rocky pilgrimages. But now—)
“This much of my destiny is complete, then, Bradamante, and I am in thy
debt. But surely the wizard was wrong about the rest of it.”

“It is in the hands of the Lord.”

“Thee doesn’t expect me to cast aside my brocades for a scratchy gown
like thine, and go with thee among the peasants!”

“We do as the Lord directs. We do it freely and with all our hearts, and
are saved, or we do it blindly until we end in darkness; but serve Him
we shall.”

Such confidence is more unnerving than any magic. “I cannot believe
that.”

“_Will_ not,” she corrects me calmly.

“But I’ve choice! Here we stand, Bradamante, and in the next heartbeat I
might slay thee or woo thee or bite thee or fall on the earth and gobble
grass; and which of these things I do is for me to decide!”

Slowly and so surely she shakes her head. “It is in thee to serve the
Lord, else I should not have been sent to thee. Choice thee has: Thee
may serve Him willingly or thee may serve Him blindly; and none has a
third way.”

“Thee cannot force—”

She puts up her hands. “We do not force. We do not kill. We need not.
The Lord—”

“Thy Lord let thee kill Atlantes!”

“No, Rogero. He is not dead.”

I spring to the crumpled magician; and indeed, he is but stunned. I
snatch out his own poiniard, and instantly, under its point, Bradamante
thrusts her firm brown arm. “The Lord will take him in his own time,
Rogero. Spare him.”

“Spare him! He would have killed thee!”

“But he did not. He too is a servant of God, though unwilling. Spare
him.”

I fling down the blade so violently that nought but the jewelled knob at
the hilt-top shows between the grass-blades. “Then I will; and having
done thee the one service, I shall call my debts discharged. Art
satisfied, girl?”

She makes my head bubble, this quiet creature; and I recall Atlantes’
scoffing words, that this dedicated beetle of a Bradamante shall think
more of her faith than of my flesh, and that she shall have more brains
than I.

Her lashes fall, and “Sobeit,” she says, and not another word.

I need my sword, and to get it I must turn my back on her—a good need.
So up the slope I go lightly, just as if her very presence were not like
a heat on my shoulder blades. I close my eyes as I spring up the smooth
grassway, and it does nothing to shut her out.

Patience, Rogero! Down the hill, over the rise, and she’ll be forgotten!

And in any case, one could come back if one must …

So I let my eyes come open again, and gasp; for there stands the
hippogriff, and he has never let me come so close. If I am to continue
upward I must go round him, or I must move him. For a split second I
falter, and his great head comes round to me; and oh, I’ve looks in the
wells of Kazipon which are bottomless, I’ve followed the light of my
torch in the endless caverns of Qual, and I’ve known a night when the
stars went out; and never before have I looked into such depths and such
reaches as the eyes in his eagle head. True bird’s eyes they are, fierce
in their very structure and unreadable. Through them the beast
sees—what? A soft sac of blood and bones to be a sheath for that golden
beak … or a friend … or a passing insect … I should flee. I should
stand. I should sidle about him and be wary. I should, I should—

_But I shall ride him!_

I finish my stride and go straight to him, and when my hand falls on his
purple shoulder he swings his head forward and high, and trembles so
that from his wings comes a sound like soft rain on a silken tent. My
heart leaps so that I must leap with it or lose it, and with a single
motion I am on his back and my knees have him. _Aiee!_ such a shout
comes from me, it would rival his own; it is full of the joyous taste of
terror. With it I fetch him a buffet on the withers which jars me to the
very neckbones, and before I can feel the blow as any more than a shock,
his wings are open and thrusting, and he rears and _leaps_ …

It is a leap that never will end; fast he flies and faster hurtling
higher just at the angle of his leap, and the surges of his body are
most strange to a horseman. Only the glint of the golden ring convinces
me that we are not involved in an enchantment; for flying sunward warms
nothing, curious as it may seem, and the bright air grows cold as the
hoary hinges of perdition’s door.

I think of poor sod-shackled Bradamante, and look back and down; but by
now she is lost in that indeterminate new place between haze and
horizon, and there, for all of me, she may stay. I shrug, and find that
I have not shrugged away the picture of her face, which is strange,
since it is hardly one worth remembering. Surely, Rogero, thou art not
smitten?

With her? With—_that?_

Ah no, it could not be. There must be something else, something buried
in the whole mosaic of our meeting. Of our parting … ah; that was it!

Atlantes is not dead.

That in itself is nothing. Atlantes distant is, to me, as good as
Atlantes dead. But Atlantes slowly waking in the meadow, his
enchantments all destroyed, his shield and steed gone—and the peaceful
author of his ruin doubtless helping him to his feet with her sturdy
unwomanly hands … this is another matter.

But forget it! The sly-tongued termagant could, by the time Atlantes was
fully conscious, have him so morassed in debate he would forget to be
angry. Bradamante has a most powerful helplessness; she attacks with the
irresistible weapon of being unarmed, immobilizes the enemy by
surrendering, and at last sits on his feeble form, holding by the great
weight of her passivity. I need not fear for Bradamante.

But the ring flicks a mote of light into mine eye, and I know I have
taken her last defense and left her at the mercy of the merciless, and
this is small thanks indeed for what she dared for me.

But what else would a knight, a true knight, do?

One thing a knight would do, I tell myself bitterly, is to regain his
sword if he lost it, and not pleasure himself with a hippogriff, however
beautiful. Thou art no knight, Rogero; not yet, not again. Regain thine
own holy blade, its very hilt encrusted with thy sacred promises, ere
thee call thyself knight again.

Back, then, for the sword, and decide then about the maiden; and keep
thyself armed with the thought of thy destiny—it is with her, and means
soaking in meekness until I am mushy as bread in a milk bowl … _no!_ by
the heart of the fire in the nethermost pit, I shall get my blade and
hew out a new destiny!

There are no reins, and I remember that the magician controlled the
beast with words. “Enough, my beauty!” I cry. “Back now—take me back!”
And somewhere inside a voice sniggers _Thee deludes thyself with the
matter of the sword; it’s the plight of the maid that drives thee_.
“No!” I cry, “she shall not have me! Let her King of kings save her,
she’s His ward, not mine!” And I thump the hippogriff with my
hard-tooled heels: “Back, my beauty, take me back!”

And the hippogriff tilts to the wind, and balances and sails as before,
for these are not the magic words.

“Turn! Turn!” I bellow, rowelling him. I ball my fist and sink half of
it in the feathered root of his neck just forward of the shoulder; for
by this, if rightly done, one may stagger a horse. “Mule!” I shriek.
“Turn thy spavined carcass about ere I tie a knot in thy neck!”

At this the eagle’s head turns about like an owl’s and the measureless
eyes loom over me. Slowly the beak opens that I may see the spear tip
and the scissor sides of that frightful weapon. Like a blind animal, the
gray-pink tongue shifts enough for any soldier. Fear, however, is an
assistant to safety only up to a point, and I am far past it. “Go back,
aborted monster, ere I snatch out that ugly horn and crack thine
eyeballs together! By the pleasure-bred blood of thy half-bred dam and
the—” Thus far I rant, and he strikes. And would he had killed with the
one stroke; for instead he has slipped the point of his beak between my
saddle and my hams, and I am flipped, unharmed and sore humiliated, high
in the air over him. I am spinning like a broken lance, or the earth is
circling me head to heel, chased by a blazing band of sun. I see the
glory-tinted wings below me, too small and far away; around I go and see
them again closer; and again, and this time I must touch, clutch; I claw
my hands and flex my legs, and turn again—and the hippogriff slips away
to the side to let me plunge past him.

I cover my eyes and I scream; I scream till my tendons cannot bear it,
sob and scream again fit to startle the starlings off every bank from
here to Brookline, Mass. I recant, I’ll accept my destiny and honestly
wed the little brown nun, if she’ll have me; ay, and do for her Lord
what paltry dog-tricks He’ll ask of me; only make this hippogriff, this
lovely, legitimate, honorable beauty of a hippogriff save me. _Aiee!_
and I’ll lie on my back on a scaffold and paint Thee murals, Lord, and I
swear never to punch Miss Brandt in the eye, or anywhere else again, if
thee’ll but send me a cloud or an eagle or a parachute or a
helicopter … oh holy Pete, what a spot for him to lose his mind in and
be me again. I wonder if he knows it won’t take any real time at all,
where he is. And there below me the mottled earth pursues a
sun-turned-rocket … whew. Giles, old boy, don’t you shut your eyes again
until you have to—“Hullo!”

There at the area railing stands a smut-faced urchin and a smaller but
female version of himself, all eyeballs and streaky cheeks. “Gee,
mister, you all right? You sick?” and the smaller one: “Canchasee, he’s
_dyne!_”

“Don’t mind me, kids,” I mumble. “I just fell off a hippogriff.” I find
I’m half-kneeling and try to stand, and it seems my hands are locked
around the iron uprights of the railing. I stay there stopped and
feeling very foolish while they watch me, and I concentrate from my
stone-cold marrow up and out until at last my left fingers begin to
stir. With a little more effort the hand comes free, and with it I
disengage the right, one finger at a time. I straighten up then and look
a while at my hands and wiggle them. “He ain’t dyne,” says the boy in a
robbed tone, and his cohort says defensively, “Anyway he _wuz_ dyne,”
because her ardent hopes had made it her production.

Briefly, a sun flashes past, but I ignore it; I’ll be all right now. You
get so you know the signs. “Here,” I say, “I’ll try to do better next
time,” and I give them money, I don’t know how much but it must be
enough; they beat it.

I put my elbows on the railing, keeping these spastic hands away from
it, and look across the street. The clock hands haven’t moved any that I
can see, and Miss Brandt, who was just starting out the door when my
addled brains caught up with me, is pausing on the portico, the door
just closing behind her. Two seconds, three maybe. My God, what a way to
live!

Miss Brandt looks up the street and down, descends the shallow steps and
turns right toward the old Mayor’s statue. When she has quite gone I
cross to the bank and go inside. At the island table I write a check,
and take it to the wicket where the fierce-faced man is caged. He takes
the paper and turns it over with the same snap Mr. Saffron used, and
that is a trick I must learn one day. “You’ll need to get this
initialed,” he says. So off I go to Mr. Saffron again, and stand in
front of his shiny desk until he looks up at me and makes the pink meaty
ridge across and above his narrowed eyes. The man disapproves of me to
the point of ecstasy, and I take this as a kindness; for it makes us
both feel important. I let the check fall to him, and he looks, snaps,
looks, and grunts. “All right, Mr. Ahh,” he says, and squiggles on it
with his personal pen. I take the check and stand where I am.

“Well?”

“I want to know whose money this is.”

“Yours.” He has a way of snapping off the margins of his words as if he
doesn’t want you to have a whole one.

“Yes, but—”

“The deposit is in your name; surely that’s sufficient!”

I look at the check. “Is there any more left?”

He is offended by the whole thing, but he is stuck with it. “There is,”
he says.

“Much?’

“More than you can spend today,” he says. “Or this week.”

“Well, dammit, how _much?_”

He sort of spreads his pale-pink hands, which means, I gather, that this
is not an account like other accounts, and he wishes he could do
something about the irregularity but he can’t. He says, “That is the one
and final checkbook you get. Aside from that, there doesn’t seem
to—ahh—be any upper limit. And now you’ll excuse me, I’ve a great deal
to good day Mr. Mmmm.” And down he goes to his papers.

Well, I’ve asked enough questions to know there won’t be any answers. I
go back to the wicket and slide the fierce one the check. “Half in
hundreds and the rest in small bills.” He makes a long snort or a short
sigh, clicks the bars between us down tight, lets himself out the back
with a key, and is gone for too long, but I don’t mind about that just
now. Pretty soon he’s back with a sack. He opens the wicket and starts
taking stacks out of the sack and sliding them to me. The sixty hundreds
go into my socks; they have elastic tops and pull up high enough. The
sixty fifties fan out flat enough to go between my belly and my knit
shorts, though they hump up some. Then I spend some time with the
hundred and eighty twenties and tens, cramming ’em into two side and one
back pants pocket. By now I’m lumpy as a sofa cushion just out of the
wet wash and I’ve collected quite a crowd. The fierce face flutes,
“You’re going to run into trouble, carrying all that money that way,” as
if it was a wish, and I say “No, I won’t. They all think I’m crazy, and
there’s no telling what a crazy man will do.” I say it good and loud,
and all the people watching stop their buzz-buzz and back off a little.
They make a wide empty aisle for me when I start away.

“Wait!” cries the teller, and punches some keys on his little machine.
Coins slide down the half-spiral chute and pile up in the cup at the
botttom with a cast-iron clink. “Wait! Here’s your twenty-eight cents!”

“Keep it!” I bellow from the door, and go out feeling a lot happier than
I’ve been feeling lately. All my life I’ve wanted to leave twenty-eight
cents for a bank teller, who wouldn’t put it in his pocket to save his
soul, and who hasn’t got any place for it in his books.

Down the street there’s a big men’s shop with little letters over the
door and a windowful of somber-colored suits with no creases in the
jacket-arms. I look them over until I find the one with the most pockets
and then I go inside.

It’s like a church in there, but with wall-to-wall broadloom, and the
only showcases I can see are the two little ones set into mahogany
pillars, one with tie-clasps and collar pins, one with four hand-painted
silk ties. I go look at the first one. Every velvet box has a humble
little card with “the” on it: _$200 the set. $850 the pair_. I’m on my
way to look at the ties when a tall man with a paper carnation steps out
of a potted palm and stands where I have to run him down in case I’m not
going to stop.

“What,” he says, “do you want?” The “you” is a little bigger than the
other words and the whole thing sounds like he’s pretty disgusted. I
tell him about the suit in the window.

He laughs with his mouth. “That is a three-hundred-dollar suit.”

“Well, drag it on out.”

“I’m rawtha sure we don’t carry your size,” he says, looking at my
painting pants.

“Then we’ll hack it till it fits,” I tell him. “Come on, buster, quit
stalling.”

“I’m afraid that—”

So I start yelling a little and he backs off and bleats “Mr. Triggle,
Mr. Triggle!” and from somewhere—I guess another potted palm, there’s
plenty around—comes another tall man in the same sort of funeral suit,
but this one’s got a real carnation. “Here,” he says, “Here-here-here.
What’s this, what?”

“You’re selling, I’m buying. Only he don’t think so,” I tell the real
carnation, pointing at the paper one.

The paper one says, “The gentleman—” (dirtiest word I ever heard, the
way he says it)—“The gentleman is inquiring after the von Hochmann
worsted in the window.”

The real carnation nickers. “My good man, I’m afraid you’ve come to the
wrong—” and then I put twenty dollars in his hand. He looks at it and
the other one looks at it so I give him one too. They look at each
other, so I pass out two more. “Get the suit.”

“Won’t you step into the sample room?” says the real carnation, and you
wouldn’t know it was the same man. It certainly isn’t the same voice.
“We have quite a selection in—”

“I don’t want a selection, I want that suit in the window. That very
goddam selfsame suit and not one like it.”

“Oh but we can’t get a suit out of the—” So I give them each twenty
dollars. “Yes, _sir!_” says the paper one, and dives to the front.

“Now, let’s see,” says the real carnation, pulling at his chin and
trying to imagine me with my face washed. “Once we get the suit out of
the way, we’ll look at some cravats, and perhaps an English broadcloth,
hmmm? Handmade? Rolled collar, studs? Yes indeedy.”

“No indeedy. I got a shirt.” I pluck at the yellow ski-pajama top. This
shuts him up without any money changing hands.

The other tall man comes back with the suit and we parade into the
fitting room which looks more than ever like part of a funeral home,
only bigger. The two of them stand in the middle of the room wringing or
rubbing their hands while I step into a curtained booth and put the suit
on. The pants got no cuffs yet and the coat’s too tight. I come out and
they jump all over me like Hansel and Gretel on the gingerbread house.
When they get to measuring the pants they find out I still got my old
ones on underneath. Forty dollars fixes that up too, before they can say
anything.

So when they’re finished chalking and pinning they want to know when I
want the suit. “Now!” I roar, and before either or them can so much as
“But we—” I give them money again. “How many people you got back in
there, altering?”

“Eight, sir.”

“Well, here.” I give him eight twenties. “Give ’em this and put ’em all
to work on this one suit. You’ve got nine minutes.”

“Yes, _sir_,” and off goes paper carnation, breathing hard.

The other one says, “You said you were in the movie line?”

“I did not.”

“Ahh,” he says. “Oil.”

“Nup. Ladies’ wear. I put out a line of underskirts with prints of
umbrellas and telephones on ’em. You’ve seen ’em.”

“I—ahh—don’t know that I have.”

_“What?”_ I shout, “You never heard of a Freudian slip?”

“Why, I—” and after that he shuts up. He keeps looking at me.

They don’t get the suit ready in nine minutes, but they make it in
eleven. As soon as the man shows with the suit over his arm, I tell him,
“Hey, I forgot. I want the left sleeve three-eighths of an inch shorter
than the right one.” His jaw drops, but the real carnation says, “Do it,
Hopkinson.” And the other one goes out with the suit, me diving along
right behind him. We get to a door about the same time. Inside is a real
patchy workroom with bright lights and racks of old suits, two old women
and six old men. “But sir, you can’t—”

“Shut up and give me that,” I say, and snatch the suit. “I didn’t want
the sleeve fixed, I just wanted to see these people. Listen,” I say to
the whole room, “Did he give you any money just now, this guy with the
paper flower?”

All those old people stand and blink at me till somebody says “Money?”
and then they all shrug their shoulders and wag their heads. Paper
flower, all nods and smiles, steps forward and says, “Why, I was going
to give it to them just as soon as the suit was satisfactory,” and he
takes eight twenties out of his side pocket. I bang them out of his hand
and stick them into my pants. “You were like hell, you crumb.” I go down
into my sock and haul out the pack of hundreds and go around the room
giving one each to the old people. The real carnation sticks his head in
just then and I tell him, “You better get that guy out of my sight
before something happens around here even my money won’t fix.” The paper
flower disappears.

I go back to the booth and this time I take off the old pants. I spread
the money around through all the pockets in the suit—it’s got
fourteen—and get dressed. I give the carnation three hundred dollars and
my old pants. “You keep ’em. They should fit pretty good.” I have to
admire him; I can see he’s all aquiver inside, but he still walks like a
bishop at a coronation as we go to the door, and as he walks he’s
carefully folding my old pants, which hasn’t happened since I brought
them home from Kresge’s two years ago, until they hang as flat as an
antimacassar over his forearm. He opens the door for me and by God,
_bows_. “Thank you _so_ much, and come back to us soon, Mr. Freud.”

It’s close to nighttime, eating time. Around the corner and up the
street is a restaurant I’ve heard about that used to be a stable. I’m
just pushing through the door when in front of me there grows a soft
wall made of maroon serge and brass buttons and a monstrous braided
golden silk rope. I step back and look up, and it isn’t a wall, but the
prow of a commodore-type doorman; and I swear he’s eight feet tall
before the hat starts.

“Sorry, sir; you can’t go in like that.”

The suit, it seems, gets me a “sir” but not any courtesy in the voice.
“Like what?”

He puts up a hand like a punching bag and taps himself on the Adam’s
apple. I put up my hand and touch only my yellow ski pajama top. “Oh,
the tie,” I say.

“Oh,” he says, “the tie.” Mimicking somebody like that, now that’s for
murder; that’s worse than what Rogero called the hippogriff. “Well, you
didn’t happen to notice I got no tie.”

He pushes out his chest. It looms up and over me like the business end
of a hydraulic forging press. “I did happen to notice you got no tie,”
he says, still copying my voice and you know? He’s pretty good at it.

“You did, for sure?” I say, and give him twenty dollars.

“Well, kind of one-eyed I did,” he says in a new voice which wasn’t mine
and wasn’t the “sir” voice I first heard, but one which seems to come
easiest of all to him. I give him another twenty, and he lets me go in.

A man meets me at the inner door—quite a man, boiled shirt, tailcoat,
and the magnificent head you see in college lobbies, the oil painting of
the previous Dean. With one flick of his eyes—and mind you, the light’s
not too good just there—he does with me what Mr. Saffron does with a
check; he reads me, turns me over with a snap, puts his squiggle on me
so that inside man will do what’s absolutely correct. It must be a
problem, with the new suit and the worn shoes and the dirty face and the
fact that the doorman let me in; but if it bothers him he doesn’t show
it. “Good evening, sir,” he says. His tone has the depth of one of those
console radios they built in the thirties, when the more money you had,
the more bass you bumped your belly with. “Step right this way.”

But I knock his elbow. “It bothers you I got no necktie.”

“Why—no, sir.”

“Yes it does.” I take out a hundred-dollar bill and fold it lengthwise
and pleat it good and tight, and then I take a fifty and fold it flat
and narrow, and wind it once around the middle of the hundred. Then I
take the two pleated ends and spread them so I have a bow, tied in the
middle. He stands there waiting for me as if people did this kind of
thing all the time. “Now lend me the pin off that flower of yours.” He
hands it to me, carrying it the last half inch of the way by a subtle
and courteous bow from the waist. I pin the bow to the front of my
yellow ski-pajama top. “A tie. Okay with you?”

“Quite suitable, sir.”

“I thought you’d like it.” I pull it off and hand it to him. “I want a
table for eight on the edge of the floor.”

“Yes, sir. I have just the one.” Off he goes, and me after him, and sure
enough, there’s a big round table. He plucks a subdued ivory _Reserved_
card off it and sits me down. “And when do you expect the rest of your
party?”

“I’m the rest of the party.”

“Very good, sir. And you’re drinking—”

“Brandy. Double. The kind that nobody but you knows is the best in the
place.”

“I have just the year. Water? Soda?”

“Yoghurt,” I say. “About half-and-half.”

“Right away, sir.”

So I have that and a liver and oatmeal sandwich and crepes suzettes with
a jubilee sauce made (by four men with three shiny carts) with those
little tiny wild French strawberries, and you know? It costs eighty-four
bucks to eat in that place.

I sit and I watch the show, and I watch the watchers watching the show.
And I plan the things I shall do with more money than I can spend. I
shall leave here when it is too late to hire anything and I’ll make my
money rent a powerboat. I’ll leave twice the price with the owner and
I’ll sink it, and never be seen again by him, so he’ll wonder. I’ll buy
two islands with two mansions, and on one I’ll pretend to be a prude
while through an agent I’ll lease everything but my house to nudists;
and the other island I’ll populate with prudes while I go naked. I’ll
buy Thomas Moore’s own harp from the Institute and build in a contact
microphone and a music box which will play “Red Wing” for forty minutes
at double tempo if anyone touches it. I’ll train up a man who can
fascinate as many hungry people as Huey Long and as many frightened
people as Joe McCarthy, both at the same time, and when he takes over
he’ll pull a switch on them all and be as gentle and as poor and as
strong as Jesus of Nazareth. And I’ll supply every male teen-ager with a
hand-tainted pie, and every female with a totally new orgasmic term to
apply to sundaes, convertibles, knobby-faced pop vocalists and shoes
straps. For Bradamante a transparent lipstick so she can feel like a
woman even if she doesn’t want it to show, and for Atlantes (poor little
rich man) the full realization of destiny’s indestructibility.

Look yonder: look! There by herself, with a candle on her table, sits
the most beautiful woman who ever lived. Her hair is soft sable, long,
straight, fine, and thick; her eyes and cheekbones the delicate strong
interacting Eurasian arch-sequence. Her nostrils are petal-textured,
moving as indetectably as the shift from one aurora-pattern to the next,
but sensitively in motion even from her shallow breathing as she sits
still, so still … and surely she is the saddest woman who ever lived, or
a mouth such as hers could not be sleeping so, nor the head turned and
held just that way of all ways, nor the shoulders so careless and the
hands so forgotten. Is she grieving from loneliness, in the knowledge
that never in life can she meet her like? Or has she been hurt by a
small someone, and cannot understand?

I raise a hand, and the Dean-faced obsolescent console drifts to me.
“Who is she?”

“I’ll find out for you in a moment, sir.”

“No, don’t!” It bursts from me. “Please don’t.” (Now, why not?) “You
mustn’t do that.”

“Very well, sir,” and as if he senses my distress, “really I won’t.”

“Why is she so sad?” And I don’t know I’ve spoken until he answers: “I
think she has been disappointed, sir. She has been sitting there alone
for a long while.” He bends a little closer, as if to add a great
importance to what he has to say. “I think, sir, that she is very
young.”

And somehow I understand precisely what he means; he means that she is
frightened, but will not suggest fear in the burnished security of this
moneyed place, of which he is such a piece.

Fear … there are fears and fears, depending upon one’s origins and sense
of value. Seimel, who hunts tigers with a spear, faces death without
fear, and I know a man who is struck numb at the sound of a key in a
Yale lock; who’s to say which terror is great or small, or that it’s a
small thing to be a girl who dare not leave a table because she has no
money? “Well, let her go. I’ll take her check.”

“Yes, sir.” His glossy finish emits, like an alpha particle, a brief
flash of approval. “Shall I take her your card?”

“Oh God no!” Again the thought of knowing her at all distresses me.
“Just say a hippogriff flew by.”

Unperturbed he says, “Quite, sir,” and, as a good piece of furniture
should, rolls silently and unbendingly away on his casters.

I wait, and I wait; and there coming in is a chinchilla coat which will
be flung over a chair somewhere just under a light, and yonder a fat
face laughs too loudly; the trombone, part of a chord, still gives me
two notes exactly right for a girl’s inexpressible loneliness and my
feelings about it, and the man with the shiny cart moves the heel of a
silver spoon deftly through the pure transparent heat springing bluely
from the bubbling blood of the jubilee … and as if by accident, the fine
Dean’s head bows over the girl’s table and he speaks to her.

Her face, when she looks up, blinds me for a moment. Or maybe my tears
do. She radiates no happiness—some great grief is bred too deeply into
this girl’s fine bones—but there is a change which permits hands to be
remembered and a mouth to live again. It could have been fear and its
removal, an excision which works wonders with dogs and humans, and
might, I imagine, even with nations.

And so she may turn her head away from sorrow, and when she does, the
breath catches in my throat; in the nocturnal texture of her hair lies a
single streak of silver, a hue of just the deadness, just the distance
of a winter moon. No other color could treat with such precision of an
inherent sorrow, and no other creature has been so correctly branded as
this girl.

I saw motion pictures of a lily growing; shoot to blossom in a brace of
seconds; and as it rose and burst, so she rises and shakes back her
hair. I saw a strand of spider web drift by and away, streaming; and so
she passes. I saw a bird die in the hollow of my hand, its open crystal
eyes unchanging; and so I sit now unchanged, except that something is
gone out of me.

I shall invoke Rogero, and escape from this tomb into terror; I shall
not wait for a summons to his world. Better to be falling away through a
shining sky with angry wings above me and a sudden quiet below, than to
sit here in the meshes of my several madnesses. Insanity is only wisdom
of a sort; too deeply driven for the sphincters of the mind to compass;
and this is the riddle of the sphinx. Brushless Giles, the ex-painter,
is (when you come right down to it) a far wiser person than Swordless
Rogero, ex-knight. Put me on a hippogriff without a driver’s license and
I won’t sit and bawl, “Back, sir!”; I’ll push the buttons and pull the
levers and watch what happens until I can back into anybody’s downhill
driveway. And if words are the reins, the throttle, and clutch, then
words I’ll try, until at last I have a “Gee” for him and a “Haw” for him
and above all a big fat “Whoa!” Rogero, now, he’s a fool, and rather
healthier than I and therefore more alive; his uncertainties are a
little less well-founded in fact than mine. _Whoosh!_ and is that the
hot, gentle ignition of brandy over yonder, or the sun passing my feet?
Is that polite patter halfhearted applause for the band or is it the
wind in the wings of the wheeling beast above me? Catch me, catch me,
good knight and I shall die gladly with thee, free of both these
insupportable worlds. But I am not falling; I hang here in dusk,
supported by a rushing wind, a central point for the looming earth and
hurtling sun as they rotate about me. (And if hanging thou art, why are
the crags of Earth larger each time they pass thee?) _Aiee_, could I but
die of foolhardiness, like a Bradamante challenging the powers of evil,
and not thus crotch-flung in penance for the silly vapors of my foul
mouth, not humiliated and screaming like a whipped serf. (Waiter, bring
me an orchestra playing Rampart Street, I have fallen from Grace, who is
a hippogriff.)

Shining one, can thee not forgive me my temper and my tongue? Is there
nothing in thee which recalls the swift romp on Atlantes’ mountain, and
thee dancing away from me like a playmate, sharing my joy? _That_ is
Rogero, good hippogriff, and not the furious mote who offended
thee … I’ll beg thee no more, but pray only that thee might escape thy
conscience, as I failed to do when I left my sword and my destiny with
Bradamante.

And he comes, he comes, his wings all but folded, back-bent, beating a
very buzz to fly downward faster than I can fall. And faster he is; he
looms to me, blasts himself to one side so close he tumbles me anew, so
that the sun is still above me, but below the mountains turn like clay
on a potter’s wheel. The hippogriff’s wings are wide now, and working
weightily, and again he grows in mine eye; and now I can hear him; he is
screaming, screaming … gods! What a terror-struck cry! Then the
screaming stops, and his lion’s voice rumbles with laughter—ah, he mocks
me, he mocks me, the son of … of a mighty gryphon and a blooded mare,
most beautiful of creatures. There, hippogriff: mock me, it is thy
privilege; let me die, it is thy right.

And again the thunder of his humor; he twists his wings one up, one
down, rolling like a summer swallow; and as I fall to meet him he is on
his back like a swimmer, and, blessed angel of a hippogriff, he takes
me!

I hang from his talons like a newt, mine eyes a-pop from the pressure of
his holding and the surge of his climb; and climb he must for he has
caught me in a valley, no further aloft than the height of a tall pine
tree; the mountains all about are above us. He could not have waited the
tenth part of a heartbeat and saved me still. He is confident and
beautiful and he has a most cruel sense of humor.

I am lifted now to his beak; I face his eyes, and from his open maw his
laughter rumbles, and I like a captured puppy plead to be set down. And
indeed, had I a tail I’d wag for him; I’d whimper if I felt it would
reach him.

He dips his head and turns it, and his beak’s about my waist. Now he
lifts me, turns his head back to front, lowers me, twists that my feet
may go down and my head up—and I am astride him again, perched on his
shoulders a forearm’s span away from the saddle. He nudges me back, and
I bump my way to the saddle like a babe on a fence-prop, bottom foremost
and clumsy with fright. Not until I am firm in the saddle does he
release me; indeed, for a moment it occurs to me that, purely in jest,
he might bit me in twain once I think I am safe. Through my thighs I
sense another thunderous chuckle at my expense. I bite my lip and cast
mine eyes down, but there is no escaping his mirth.

Now the mountains are behind. The sea is a haze and the sky sea-colored,
and where they meet there is no longer a line, by a twist of my mind I
may imagine naught but sky around us in an Earthless universe, and a
twist again, and it is the sea all about, up and over, my hippogriff and
I the sole population of an empty bubble in a universe of water.

And it comes to me then, like a sending—words, odd and small: “Gee,” and
“Haw,” and “Whoa!” and each carries the nostriled flavor of Giles and
the smoke in his mouth. So “Gee!” I murmur—and my hippogriff wheels:
“Haw,” say I, and the other way he turns … I can ride him, fly him! He
is mine, he is mine!

But mine too is the humiliation, and the lesson of his laughter,
cackling like a conscience. Ahead is the sea, across it adventure and
freedom. Behind are the hills, and my sword, my duty, my debt, and a
weaponless wench. My steed is silent, as if waiting: “So _haw_ then, and
let me be damned to my destiny,” I cry, and he swings about to tuck the
distant shore under his golden chin; to take me back to my grubby fate.
And grubby or not, I preen; I am a knight who will not be swayed or
turned aside; straight to my sword I will fly, to mine honor, to—

But below, a clot of white on the rock takes mine eye, and “_Whoa!_” I
cry with all my heart; and the hippogriff’s bellow of laughter fairly
puts whitecaps on the waves below. And down we drop, and down, the roar
and crash of beastly laughter in the van, the flanks, the trailing wind
of our descent. There is a peal of it for knights without swords, for
true courses set and forsaken; there’s a rumbling gust of it for
gratitude confessed but unpaid, and one for the man who would plan an
escape for himself if he were on time to rescue a maiden in peril, or
who would plant a bluebell for her if he were late, if he happened to
pass that way. But the shrillest laughter, the one having the most cold
gold eagle in it, was for a knight who claimed to value his sword for
the vows it carried.

I have a moment of shame and one of fury, and then a tortured time of
both together. All I need to do to cut off this obscene bellowing—ay,
and gain the beast’s respect, I wouldn’t doubt—is to press my heels to
his flanks, and straight to Atlantes’ mountain we’d go; to Bradamante;
to my sword; to the completion of my promises and the payment of my
debts.

And it is in the muscles of my legs to dray back those heels; it is in
my heart to be humble and accept the beast’s deafening censure and
cleanse myself; it is, it is, but once again I look below, and am lost;
for chained to the rock is a naked woman of such unearthly beauty she
can be compared only with the hooded shield I carry … with this
difference: that whosoever looks upon this shield is blinded, but who
looks upon this woman sees so clearly that he cannot live.

Down comes my steed and hovers, searching for a foothold on the
windswept rock; and finding it, settles in. Before he is fully
earth-borne I am away from him and his subsiding chuckles, slipping and
scrambling to the seaward slope. Braced against the iron loops to which
she is chained, I cower down close to her, cover mine eyes against that
blaze, not of light, but of beauty; and when I can, I peer quickly
through my fingers and drink the vision in small and frightened sips.

Her ankles are cruelly bound by a single hoop, hinged, hasped by the
double chain which anchors it below. A smaller version of the same
device was given each slender wrist, and there she lies, stretched tight
against the cold rock, wet with spray, and the wind tugging her hair.

I touch the shackles, the chains. Anchored as they are, it seems the
rock itself would lift from the sea bottom before those loops could be
drawn. Turning hopelessly from this examination, I meet her eyes and the
impact melts me; I fall to my knees and bow my head.

“Who art thou?” she whispers into the shouting wind.

“Rogero, a knight, come to save thee. Who has done this to thee,
princess?… surely thou art princess …?

“Ay,” she breathes, “Angelica of Cathay, shipwrecked here on the very
day the oracle at Ebuda demanded the most beautiful Ebudan maid as a
sacrifice to some wrathful god. But since they had me …”

“Ebuda is that village yonder?”

“Ay.” Ah, but she is weary; her voice may be heard at all only because
its sound is so very different; it differs, almost, from sound itself.
“But go not to the village, good knight; they are barbarians and would
tear thee to pieces rather than replace me with one of their own. Best
go whence thee came, and my blessing goes with thee; but I am doomed.”

“To die of cold and the pecks of sea eagles? I’ll die here with thee
rather!”

“Nay, it will be quicker than that,” she murmurs. “Knowest the monster
Orc?” Her eyes are calm, seaward now. As the wind tumbles her hair, I
see that it is mystically marked with a stripe of cold silver; there has
never been anything so lovely and far away as that swath of starshine.

“Orc? Oh, ay; a legend, a tale to frighten children. He is big as an
island and has scales of iron and the tusks of a boar. And thou art
chained here for Orc? The eagles will have thee before such a fable
comes.”

“But he comes now,” she says calmly; and two things happen to me which
will leave their mark for all my days; one, that as she speaks, grave
and quite contained, her tears flow and I know that I saw a strength
here as wondrous as her beauty; but for the tears, she might have been
in her garden, half dreaming and at peace, for all her face showed it.
And I turn away from her and see the second thing, the monster Orc.

With a shout I spin to Angelica, take her prisoned hand and on it slip
my golden ring. “This will guard thee, Princess!” I cry, and my heart
cries with it, _only from my shield_, and I stumble to the hippogriff.

He is ready, flexed, spread, trembling to be off; I have but one foot in
the stirrup as he launches himself. The monster comes, and we fly out to
meet it; and when we have flown what seemed far enough at first, there
is yet another mile to go. It looms over us like a thundercloud; it
rises higher and higher from the water, and there is more and still more
of it, shapeless, immeasurable, and blind.

_Blind!_ Swordless, lacking pike or halberd, axe or hook, mine only
weapon is a giver of blindness; against this, the monster brings the
only possible defense; “Blind, it is blind,” I cry, and my mount utters
a shriek, part despair, but a fine part challenge, and mounts to the sky
to get above the creature and be sure.

And still it rises until we are but a wasp at a bull’s shoulder, until
the black rock below is but a steppingstone to this great living hulk.

And the hippogriff, unbidden, folds his wings and we drop, down and down
past the upright acres of filthy, streaming iron. I am past thought,
incapable of anything except keeping my saddle in the weightless drop.
Even my first long fall from the beast’s back had seemed not so long as
this. Then out comes the wings, and I groan against the pressure inside
my doublet. Down we go still, the hippogriff battling the wind of our
fall, and checking us at last.

We are in a roaring, stinking stream of water and evil fumes, somewhere
between Orc’s looming bulk and the black rock. Across, and turn, and
back, and turn; steamed and spumed and soaked and splattered with stiff
salt slime. And for the second time that day I face death despised by
the hippogriff …

I see his face again, I think for the last time. And had I years of life
to give for the ability to read those bright implacable eyes, I would do
it, and gladly; but I’ve but a few weary minutes. I gaze up hopelessly,
and he brings his shining head closer to me, touches my head with a
rough gentleness. With his eyes on mine, he makes a single soft sound,
and then it is time to turn again. It seems for a moment he cannot and
then he does, bravely, and labors back again. Belatedly I see that his
wings are wet, and like Pegasus near death in dragon’s blood, he cannot
remain aloft much longer. Ah, to know what it was he tried to tell me!
Who would know? Giles? Ah, but I hate what I was, and what I am …

Together we scream a challenge, and the hippogriff finds strength,
somehow, to drive up twice, three times the height of a man and,
descending, flutter away a great weight of water from his wings. He
passes close to the widening mouth, drives down near the hinge of the
jaw just as it emerges. What appears at first as a bony projection from
the hinge is suddenly a slimy opal, alight and alive—Orc’s eye, set like
a whale’s. The hippogriff must have known, he must have known!

His small downward drive gives us speed—almost too much. As if alive,
however, the shield trembles under my hands, turns to the sun for a
bright beam, and hurls it across and back, on, and into the eye. And
then we are past and tilting steeply; once more the hippogriff shivers
away a mist of heavy water and fights to rise, and back we come the
long, long distance around that mountain of a snout, past and past the
yawning great arch of the open mouth, to the eye on the other side.

It must be only now that the mighty mass of dim-nerved flesh feels the
pain of his dazzle-tattered eye. Something unspeakable moves inside the
arch, and a gout of water and ichor shoots skyward. I see it rise, I see
it curl; our wings will not survive this, so _“Gee!”_ I cry, the sum
total of terror and self-hate, of love for the hippogriff and the
enchantment of Angelica; of anger, regret, remorse. His response is
instant and beyond his control, and he wheels shoreward as I stand on
the saddle, fall toward the monster, and kick back at that purple flank
with both legs and all my strength. Even as I fall I look back under one
arm, for a flash of Angelica’s body and the sight of my hippogriff
flailing down into the water, short of the shore line. One wet
wing-elbow rises like a sail and sinks as slowly; his neck, so
pathetically thin without the dry golden ruff of feathers, is stretched
toward the rock, but not far enough: he has died for me, and his
laughter is dead with him; does thee know now, fool knight, what it was
he told thee with that touch of his beak? Only that for all his jibes
and hurtful scorn, he was ready to die with thee … And dying, Rogero,
thy steed could not know thee heard, or would ever understand.

All this, in the instant of catapult, stretched achingly from my kick,
with speed my only wings, my brain racing and my heart wrenched; and
before me the magic shield of Atlantes. The shield strikes the water
first, and my arrowing body slips under the thundering waterspout as it
descends. Like a flat stone the shield skips on its curved face, and my
forehead rings it like a gong. It tries to skip again, but my body plops
in stingingly at the same instant, and stays it.

And at last I squat in the corner of that beastly smile, and all the
hate I have ever known pours out of my arms and into the flailing of the
shield. Edge and edge, flat and edge again, I belabor that viscid mound
just back of my perch. It yields slowly, and at first I must work with
my face but an arrow-length away; I feel it is burning me, filling me
with a brutal and primitive madness that surely must turn my brain into
what one finds in a dryrotted chestnut. But then it ceases to be, and is
no more, and surely no less horrid than any part of the beast.

How long this pounding? I know not … but at length pain reaches it, and
a convulsion such as should be impossible to anything so ponderous. My
handhold disappears; there is a moment of strangling and a moment of
crushing weight, a blow precisely where, earlier, my forehead struck the
shield. And then I am thrashing in shallows on black rock, my legs
tangled with the limp neck of the hippogriff.

The anchor of the Princess’s leg-shackle grinds my small ribs; I shift
away from it, clutch it between arm and side, and lock my legs about the
neck of the hippogriff, lest his body be swept out to sea. Water runs
and runs, tugs and cascades off the rock, and for a long time my sky is
full of black specks shifting and twinkling. But I will not let go.

When the tugging stops, I raise my head. The water is back to something
like normal. More than half the hippogriff’s body is aground. The rock
is completely free of litter—the last cascade having swept it clear. Out
at sea stands a new mountain: I think it is dead now. It is sinking,
ever so slowly, or sliding down some age-old chute it has worn in the
ocean floor.

“Rogero—”

I kick free of the hippogriff’s heavy neck and head, and crawl to her.

“Princess!”

“Thou art bravest of knights.”

“Nay, Angelica,” I mumble. “I am neither brave, nor a knight. I must
free thee.”

“A simple matter.”

“Ay, had I his strength,” and I nod to the dead hippogriff.

“Mourn him not, Rogero,” says the Princess. “Thee stayed by him as he
died, and thee will be rewarded.”

“Then must we wait on another hippogriff to strike thy chains?”

“No. The ring, Rogero; take off the ring.”

I stumble up the slope to her shackled hand, and take the ring, while
she says, “It is a greater amulet, possibly, than thee knows. I was
seeking it when I was shipwrecked here; I never thought to see it again;
to have it brought to me makes thee part of a miracle.”

“See it again? It is thine?”

“It was stolen from my treasure house long ago, and has been on many
hands. Its last use, so I was told in the north, was to be by a maiden
who wished to free some dolt stupid enough to be entrapped by a magician
and too stupid to break free. How came thee by it?”

“It was … cast aside as worthless.” My ears burn. “Princess, I must free
thee.”

In her chains, she stretches lazily. “Whenever we like. These bonds mean
nothing. Rogero, I am in thy debt.”

“No, Princess, for I have seen thee. It is enough.”

“Prettily said, and I believe thee.” And it seems she is amused. “Then
do as I ask, and thee shall see a new power of the ring. Put the ring in
my mouth.”

I held it to her parted lips. “Thou art a sweet and somewhat slow-witted
man,” she whispers. “Goodbye, Rogero.” She takes the ring.

The shackles lie empty, and I crouch there over the black rock which
pillowed her, my one hand extended, my mind awhirl at the nearness.…

Nearness? She is gone!

Ah, she might have told me of this magic before demonstrating it! Is the
world and all its magics leagued against me? Has the universe itself
been designed to make me out a fool? “Thou art a sweet and somewhat
slow-witted man.” _Aiee!_ I shall have that carved on my tomb!

Slowly I mount the rock, and face the rocky spine leading to the
mainland, to and through the barbarians; through mountains and hunger
and poverty and illness; to aid and be aided along the way, until at
last I have won what was given me and what, unearned, was cast aside;
afoot, acrawl—to my destiny.

“Are you quite all right, sir?”

Now that, old Dean-head, is a question. The music is surf and feathers
in all its upbeats, strictly society on the down: scherzophrenic. A hot,
transparent, blue flame whuffs out, and suddenly that is a matter of
supreme importance, though I can’t think why. Slowly I look up at him.
“Me?”

“It seemed for a second or two that you weren’t quite—with us, sir.”

“A second or two,” I say, “that’s all it takes.” Now I remember: that
blue flame on the jubilee tray is the one I was looking at when I went
under, or other, or wherever Rogero keeps his world. Surely I know where
that is! I look up again. Deans read books. “Listen, what do you know
about Atlantes?”

“Atlantis, sir?” This guy, you couldn’t ruffle him with a williwaw. “As
I recall, it sank under the sea.”

“No, Atlant_es_—a magician.”

“Ah. I believe there was a necromancer of that name in Ariosto,
somewhere.”

I put an accurate forefinger on his second stud and push it
triumphantly. “_Orlando Furioso!_ So _that’s_ it! Hey, do you remember
what ever happened to Bradamante?”

He puts his hands behind his back and looks at the wall meeting the
ceiling. Good head on that man; splendid. “As I remember, sir, she
married a knight—”

“Ex-knight,” I say, and it hurts. “Also, good night.” I give him a whole
heap of money and head out.

“Good night, sir,” says the doorman.

“Oh,” I say, “You. Hey, a girl about so high and so wide with a silver
streak in her hair, she left here. How long ago?”

He says he doesn’t recall so I give him some money. “About four
minutes,” he says. “That way,” and points.

“Only four?” I have something in me like a pain. “That way, you’re
sure?”

“You should be able to catch her,” he says. He closes his eyes and
smiles. “Pretty.”

“The Grand Canyon,” I say, “it’s cute too.” I run the way he points.
It’s to the river.

So it’s _Orlando_ all this time, I think, and something has kept me from
recognizing it. Atlantes and Bradamante, Angelica, princess of Cathay,
the hippogriff and the Orc, all there. And what am I doing, acting it
out? Atlantes kept Rogero from being a knight; some sort of magic keeps
me from being a painter. Only nowadays they call it a neurosis.

So where am I going in such a hurry?

Got to save the Princess from the Orc. Orc, variant of urp, a real
nauseating beast. Better I should go right back to the studio and mind
my own business. Yes, that’s what Rogero kept telling himself. And he
landed by the Princess anyway, no matter how his hippogriff laughed.
Well laugh then, hippogriff. You’re not long for this world anyway.

There she is!

Walk now. Get your wind. See what happens to her. She’s chained naked on
no rock yet. Or maybe she is … analogies being what they are …

Now cut it out, Giles! You’re all right now. It’s all just a story you
read and mooned over when you were a kid. There were others; but did you
really live it up with “The Little Lame Prince”; did you referee that go
between the firedrake and the remora in Andrew Lang’s book; did you feel
the icicle pierce your heart in “Back of the North Wind”? So maybe your
subconscious is trying to tell you something with Arisoto. Tell you
what? To get religion? Or (and this is the idea that feels like pain)
that you’re no more a painter than Rogero is a knight, in the long
run … in spite of some initial successes?

Go home, go home, and paint the way Miss Brandt wants you to. Go home
now and your hippogriff will love you for it; yes, and live, whatever
that might mean.

But wait; Miss Brandt wants you to be a painter and Bradamante didn’t
want Rogero to be a knight. My story doesn’t coincide with his; it just
sort of resonates. All the more reason to get of here, Giles; go home.
You’ve got all the money in the world; all the freedom, all the time to
go anywhere and do anything. _Paint anything_. You know what happened to
Rogero, his hippogriff, and his magic ring—yes, and his shield too, when
he let his bumbling chivalry override his derisive conscience.
(Conscience? Since when can a conscience be as beautiful as a
hippogriff?)

So, go home. But look; look there, she has stopped at the River Road,
and stands under a light, her gray silk gone all silver and the margins
of her hair sinking a little over her slender shoulders as she raises
her face to the sky. What is in that face? I can’t see, I can’t see … an
appeal, a submission rather; such sadness as hers is past hope and
therefore past appealing to anything.

Princess, what is your rock, what your Orc? What comes, and you
helpless; what shows itself without form, grows to fill the sky; what is
impregnable, ironclad, and filthy, unspeakable? What fills your world
and your short future, and proves at the same time that it shows only
its slimy skull, and there is measurelessly more below?

You don’t scream, Princess?

You are only calm; but I have seen your tears.

She crosses the road to the trees, and takes a path toward the water; so
laugh, hippogriff. I’ll go to her.

But she’s gone in the shadows: hurry, hurry—

And there in a quiet place I come on her and, like Rogero on the black
rock, I sip the vision; for to gulp it would be more than I could bear.

There is a hole in the grove, an empty place by the water to let the
night in. Part of a moon floats a train across the water to her as she
sinks to a bench. Her head turns and tilts a little, as if to a footfall
(does she hear me? Does she know there is more than her sadness in the
world?) and she is completely in silhouette except for the single beam
cupping a cheekbone, and the silver streak in her hair; with that small
shard of cold white, the path on the water has a part of a moon at each
end!

And still more, just a little, her head turns, so her perfect profile
lies in liquid moon; and now, if she turns only her eyes, she may see
me. She does.

“I knew you’d be around.” Her voice … a bell, a bird, a
sound-unlike-sound … no. A voice, just a voice. Think about that, Giles;
but not now.

“May I … I mean …”

“Sure,” she says, indicating the bench. “Why not?”

I sit timidly at the other end of the bench, watching her as she stares
out over the water. Her eyes are hooded and her face a chalice of
sadness, brimming. And suddenly I know her Orc.

Poverty can be the Orc. Poverty can be the monster visible and nearing,
which comes slimy and stinking out of the pit to fill the sky and yet be
showing only its smallest part. Poverty can come to one chained,
disregard one’s station and one’s virtues, and take one at its leisure.

Then I might be Rogero yet, for there is money in my pocket, neat,
obedient, omnipotent money. Should I challenge her monster?

She might be angry. (Angelica? Angry? No; she bade the knight leave her
and save himself.)

I look at her, and the sadness in her is greater than the money in my
pocket. I see abruptly that my gesture would not anger her after all.
She would simply pity me. My effort would be lost in her great need.

Then I’ll share what I have. Half what I have is still, effectively, all
the money there is.

She is looking at the moon, so distant and so dead; she has the mark of
distance and death upon her. Rogero offered no part of himself to his
princess; he offered it all.

All of it? I touch the lapel of the most expensive suit I have ever
owned; good new money whispers under my hand of miles and years of color
and startlement, tastes and textures and toys; all the things, the
thrills I’ve never had because it took too much time to just be Giles.

“I wish you wouldn’t stare like that.”

“I’m sorry,” I whisper. “Sorry.”

“What’s on your mind?”

Only that when tomorrow’s sun comes to you, you might give back to it as
much gladness as a daffodil. Just that by giving you all I ever owned,
so new that my own hands have not touched it, you might never be afraid
again. “Just that I’d like to … borrow your pen.”

“My—well, I suppose.” She has it in her handbag; finds it and gives it
to me.

I take my elegant, one and final blue book, and crouching close in the
moonlight, _Giles_, I write, _Giles_, and _Giles_, and _Giles_, until
I’ve written on the bottom line of every perforated page.

I hold it out to her with the pen. Here (I would say, but I cannot
speak) here is all the magic I own, since I lost my shield. Here are my
hooves and my talons. Here are my wings.

“What’s this?”

“Yours,” I croak. “I don’t want it. Any of it.”

“God,” she says.

She rises like the lily—but now, in the moonlight, more like a
cereus—and looks at me. “You’re sure, now.”

“Never more sure.”

“I thought,” she says, “that you’d turn out to be a lot more fun than
this.” And she throws the book into the river.

I sit in a dream by the corpse of a dream. It grows cold. Loneliness
lives in my very pores as sadness lives in her face. She is gone, the
moon is gone, and something else has gone, too. I do not know its name
but it once kept me warm.

When she left, her leaving a completion of the absent gesture of
throwing the book, I said nothing and I did not move; I am not sure that
I really saw her leave.

Rogero, I think, I need you. I wish I could have a word with you.

For when you were stripped and alone, somewhere in yourself you found a
way to travel, through wild countries, through poverty and sickness and
hardship, certain that they would refine you for your destiny. You see,
dear dopple, the twentieth-century man has no destiny; at least, he has
no magicians to read it off for him, so he can never quite be sure. But
take his amulets away, his spells and cantrips graven with the faces of
dead presidents—and he’ll look over no mountains toward an unshakable
faith. He’ll stare at nothing but his own terror.

Rogero, the universe is indeed leagued together to make fools of us.

I leave the bench and the river, not to be a pilgrim, but just to take
my misery to familiar surroundings and wrap it up in weariness. And
tomorrow I shall wake with the comfort—if such it is—that I am Giles and
will continue to be Giles without the intrusion of Signor Ariosto’s
parables. It had better be a comfort; I may even turn my staring white
canvas to the wall, now that I think of it; I wouldn’t be able to bring
myself to touch it.

So I walk and I walk. And then up the long steps and down the long hall,
fling open the door which unveils the dirty—

But it isn’t a dirty bed, and I have one mad moment of childish panic; I
have burst into the wrong place; and then I see the easel, the bright
clean easel, and I know I am home.

“I hope you don’t mind; the door was open, and I thought … so to keep
myself busy while I waited, I—” She makes a smile, and tries harder and
makes another, but smiles over hands which rapidly clasp and unclasp are
unconvincing. “I’ll go,” says Miss Brandt, “but I wanted to tell you I
think you did a splendid thing.”

I look at the clean, shelved dishes and the drum-tight bedclothes, and
my paints and brushes sensibly left untouched. But what impresses me is
the unthinkable statement that I have done a splendid thing. I sit on
the bed and look at her.

“How did you ever find out?” she asks. “You weren’t to know, ever.”

“I know a lot now,” I tell her. “What specially do you mean?”

“About the money. Giving it back.”

“I gave it away,” I admit. And, because it’s the truth, “I don’t call
that so splendid.”

“It was, if …” And then, as if she’s had the question held down tight
and can’t control it any longer, she flashes a glance at the easel, and
asks, “Does it mean you’ll paint again?”

My eye follows hers and I shudder. She turns pale as the new light at
the window. “Oh,” she says in a very small voice. “I—guess I’ve done the
wrong thing.” She snatches up a shiny black pocketbook and runs to the
door. But there’s a Giles standing there first, who pushes her back hard
so she sits down—_plump!_—on the bed.

I am tired and hurt and disappointed and I want no more wonderments.
“You tell me all the things you’ve done, wrong and otherwise, right from
the beginning.”

“Oh, how it began. Well, I’m her secretary, you know, and we had a sort
of quarrel about you. She’s a mean, small, stupid sort of person, Giles,
for all her money and the way she looks—she is lovely, isn’t she? In
case you want to know (everybody does) that streak of silver is real.
Anyway, I—”

“You’re _her_ secretary?”

“Yes. Well I got so terribly distressed about—” She waves at the easel
again, and the miraculous lashes point away, “—you, you know, that I
suppose I got on her nerves. She said some mean things about you and I
sort of blew up. I said if I had her money I’d see to it that you
started painting again.”

“Just like that.”

“I’m sorry. It was—so important; I couldn’t bear to have you just—”

“Go on with the story.”

“She said if I had her money and tried to use it that way I’d just make
a fool of myself. Well, maybe she was right, but … it went like that
until she swore at me and said if I was so positive, go ahead. Take all
the money I wanted and just see how far I’d get.” All the while she
talks she is pleading, underneath. I don’t listen to that part of it.
“So I came here yesterday and I was to phone her the way you sign your
name, and she would call the bank and fix it up.”

“Nice of her.”

“No, it wasn’t. She did it because she thought it would be amusing. She
has so much money that it wouldn’t cost her anything. Anything she’d
notice. And then you found out about it, I don’t know how, and gave her
the checkbook. When she came back last night she was wild. It wasn’t
half the fun she thought. All you did was to be amusing in a restaurant
for a couple of hours. Please don’t look at me like that. I just did
what I could. I—had to. Please—I had to.”

I keep on looking at her, thinking. Finally, “Miss Brandt, you said a
thing yesterday—my God, was it only yesterday?—about my not being able
to paint now because I don’t know why I painted before. Do you know what
you were talking about?”

“I—” and the lashes go down, the hands busy themselves, “—I only know
sort of generally. I mean, if you can do a thing and know how you do it
and—and especially _why_, and then something stops you, I think it’s
easy to see the thing that stops you.”

So I lean against the door and look at her in the way that makes her
squirm (I’m sorry but that’s the way I look when I’m thinking) and I
think:

Does anyone ask a painter—even the painter himself_—why_ he paints? Now
me, I painted … used to … whatever I saw that was beautiful. It had to
be beautiful to me, through and through, before I would paint it. And I
used to be a pretty simple fellow, and found many completely beautiful
things to paint.

But the older you get the fewer completely beautiful things you see.
Every flower has a brown spot somewhere, and a hippogriff has evil
laughter. So at some point in his development an artist has to paint,
not what he sees (which is what I’ve always done) but the beauty in what
he sees. Most painters, I think, cross this line early; I’m crossing it
late.

And the simple—child?—artist paints for himself … but when he grows up
he sees through the eyes of the beholder, and feels through his
fingertips, and helps him to see that which the artist is gifted to see.
Those who had wept over my work up to now, I used to say, had stolen
meaning out of it, against my will. When I grow up, perhaps they will
accept what I willingly give them. And because Miss Brandt feels this is
worth giving, she has tried to get more of it for people.

So I had stopped painting because I had become too discerning, and could
find nothing perfect enough to paint. But now it occurs to me that the
girl with the silver in her hair can be painted for the beauty she has,
regardless of her other ugliness. Atlantes had a magic, and in it one
walked the battlements of a bastion—which was only, in truth, a byre.
Miss Brandt can paint me, in her mind, as a man who turned back all the
money in the world, and for her, this is a real nobility.

The only key to the complexity of living is to understand that this
world contains two-and-a-half-billion worlds, each built in a person’s
eyes and all different, and all susceptible to beauty and hungry for it.

I ran out of things to paint … and now, now, there’ll never be enough
time to paint beauty! Rogero did a knightly thing on the black rock,
because he was not a good knight. I did a manly thing about the money
because I was a fool. All successes are accidents in someone’s
world … so: “You tell her it worked, Miss Brandt. I’m going to paint,
Miss Brandt; I’m going to paint _you_, Miss Brandt, because you’re
beautiful.”

And I paint, and she is, because I paint, because she is.



WHEN YOU’RE SMILING


_Never tell the truth to humans_.

I can’t recall having formulated that precept; I do know I’ve lived
under it all my life.

But _Henry?_

It couldn’t matter with Henry.

You might say Henry didn’t count.

And who would blame me? Being me, I’d found, was a lonely job. Doing
better things than other people—and doing them better to boot—is its own
reward, up to a point. But to find out about those murders, those dozens
and dozens of beautiful scot-free murders, and then not to be able to
tell anyone … well, I act like a human being in so many other ways—

And besides, it’s only Henry.

When I was a kid in school, I had three miles to go and used roller
skates except when it was snowing. Sometimes it got pretty cold,
occasionally too hot, and often wet; but rain or shine, Henry was there
when I got to the building. That was twenty years ago, but all I have to
do is close my eyes to bring it all back, him and his homely, doggy
face, his odd flexible mouth atwist with laughter and welcome. He’d take
my books and set them by the wall and rub one of my hands between his
two if it was cold, or toss me a locker-room towel if it was wet or very
hot.

I never could figure out why he did it. It was more than just plain
hero-worship, yet Lord knows he got little enough from me.

That went on for years, until he graduated. I didn’t do so well and it
took me longer to get out. I don’t think I really tried to graduate
until after Henry did; the school suddenly seemed pretty bleak, so I did
some work and got clear of it.

After that, I kicked around a whole lot looking for a regular income
without specializing in anything, and found it writing features for the
Sunday supplement of one of those newspapers whose editorial policies
are abhorrent to decent people, but it’s all right; no decent person
reads them.

I write about floods, convincingly describing America’s certain watery
grave, and I write about drought and the vanishing water table,
visualizing our grandchildren expiring on barren plains that are as dry
as a potato-chip. Then there’s the perennial collision with a wandering
planet, and features about nuts who predict the end of the world, and
biographies of great patriots cut to size so they won’t conflict with
the editorial page. It’s a living, and when you can compartment it away
from what you think, none of it bothers you.

So a lot of things happened and twenty years went by, and all of a
sudden I ran into Henry.

The first thing about him was that he hadn’t changed. I don’t think he
had even grown much. He still had the coarse hair and the ugly wide
mouth and the hot happy eyes. The second funny thing was the way he was
dressed, like always, in hand-me-downs: a collar four sizes too large, a
baggy suit, a raveled sweater that would have fought bitterly with his
old herringbone if both weren’t so faded.

He came wagging and panting up to me this early fall day when everyone
in sight but Henry was already wearing a topcoat. I knew him right away
and I couldn’t help myself; I just stood there and laughed at him. He
laughed, too, glad to the groveling point, not caring why I was
laughing, but simply welcoming laughter for its own sake. He said my
name indistinctly, again and again; Henry almost always spoke
indistinctly because of that grin he wore half around his head

“Well, come on!” I bellowed at him, and then cussed at him. It always
made him wince, and it did now. “I’ll buy you a drink. I’ll buy you nine
drinks!”

“No,” he said, smiling, backing away a little, bobbing his head in that
funny way, as if he was about to duck. “I can’t right now.”

It seemed to me he was looking at my sharp-creased dacron suit, or maybe
the pearl homburg. Or maybe he just caught my eye on his old set of
threads. He waggled his hands aimlessly in front of him, like an old
woman caught naked and not knowing what to cover up. “I don’t drink.”

“You’ll drink,” I said.

I took him by the wrist and marched him down to the corner and into
Molson’s, while he tugged ineffectually at me and mumbled things from
between his solid, crooked teeth. I wanted a drink and I needed a laugh,
right _now_, and I wasn’t going to drag all the way down to Skid Row
just to keep him from feeling conspicuous.

Somebody was sitting in a back booth—someone I especially didn’t want to
see. Be seen by. I don’t think I broke stride when I saw her, though.
Hell, the day won’t come when I can’t handle the likes of her …

“Siddown,” I said, and Henry had to; I pushed him and the edge of the
seat hit the backs of his knees. I sat down, too, giving him the hip
hard enough to slide those worn old tweeds of his back into the corner
where he wouldn’t be able to get out unless I moved first. “Steve!” I
roared, just as though I didn’t care if anyone in the place knew I was
there. Steve was on his way, but I always yelled like that; it bothered
him. Steve’s also sort of a funny guy.

“Awright, awright,” he complained. “What’ll you have?”

“What are you drinking, Henry?”

“Oh, nothing—nothing for me.”

I snorted at him and said to Steve, “Two sour-mash an’ soda on the
side.”

Steve grunted and went away.

“Really,” Henry said, with his maybe-I-better-duck wobble, “I don’t want
any. I don’t drink.”

“Yes, you do,” I told him. “Now what’s with you? Come on, right from the
beginning. From school. I want the story of your life—trials and
triumphs, toils ’n’ tragedies.”

“My life?” he asked, and I think he was genuinely puzzled. “Oh, I
haven’t done anything. I work in a store,” he added. When I just sat
there shaking my head at him, he looked down at his hands and pulled
them abruptly down into his lap as if he was ashamed of his nails. “I
know, I know, it’s nothing much.” He looked at me with that peculiar hot
gaze. “Not like you, with a piece in the paper every week and all.”

“Steve came with the bourbon. I shut up until he’d gone. With Steve, I
like to pretend I have big business and don’t trust him to listen in. I
swear sometimes you can hear him grinding his teeth. He never says
anything, though. A good customer’s got just a little more rights than
just anybody else, so there’s nothing he can do about it. He just works
there.

When he’d gone, I said, “Here’s to the twist that don’t exist, and her
claim there’s a game that can’t be played. Here’s to the wise old lies
we use—”

“Honest, I don’t want any,” said Henry.

“If I’m going to be hospitable, you’re going to be housebroke,” I told
him, and picked up his glass and shoved it at his face.

He got his lips on it just in time to keep it from falling into that
oversize collar. He didn’t take but a sip, and that great big mouth
snapped down to button-size as if it had a drawstring on it. His eyes
got round and filled with tears; he tried to hold the liquor on his
tongue, but he sneezed through his nostrils and swallowed and started to
cough.

Laugh? I got my breath back just this side of hernia. Some day I’ll
plant a sound camera and do that again and make an immortal out of old
Henry.

“Gosh!” he gasped when he could.

He wiped his eyes with his frayed sleeves. I guess he didn’t have a
handkerchief. “That _hurt_.” But he was grinning the old grin all the
same. “You drink that all the time?” he half whispered.

“All the time, like so,” I said, and drank the rest of his, “And like
so,” and drank mine down. “Steve!” Steve already had the refills on a
tray and I knew it, which is why I yelled at him. “Now, about what you
started to say—” and I broke off while Steve got to the table and put
down the drinks and picked up the empties and went away again—“the story
of your life. You sit there and tell me ‘Oh, nothing,’ and you say you
work in a store, period. Now _I_ am going to tell _you_ the story of
your life. First of all, I’m going to tell you who you are. You’re
Henry. Nobody else in God’s great gray-green Universe was ever this
particular Henry. We start with that. No—”

Henry said, “But I—”

“No mountain,” I went on, “no supernova, no collapsing, alpha-spitting
nucleus was ever more remarkable than the simple fact of you, Henry,
just being Henry. Name me an earthquake, an oak tree, a racehorse or a
Ph.D. thesis and I will, by God, name you one just like it that happened
before. You,” I said, leaning forward and jamming my forefinger into his
collarbone, “you, Henry, are unique and unprecedented on this planet in
this galaxy.”

“No, I’m not,” he laughed, backing off from the finger, which did him no
good once I had him pinned to the wall behind him.

“No supernova,” I said again, having just discovered that the phrase is
a delightful way of sending the flavor of good bourbon through the
nostrils. “That’s what we only begin with,” I went on. “Just being,
you’re a miracle, aside from everything you’ve ever said or done or
dreamed about.” I took away the finger and sat back to beam at him.

“Ah,” he said; I swear he blushed. “Ah, there’s plenty more like me.”

“Not a single one.” I tipped up my glass, found it was empty already, so
I drank his because I had my mouth all set for it. “Steve!” I sat
silently watching Henry aimlessly rubbing his collarbone while the
drinks arrived and the empties left. “So we start with a miracle. Where
do we go from there? How do you cap that?”

He made a sort of giggle. It meant, “I don’t know.”

“You never heard anybody talk like this about you before, did you?”

“No.”

“All right.” I put out the forefinger again, but did not touch him with
it because he expected I would.

Over his shoulder, in the wall mirror, I could see that woman sitting
alone in the back booth, crying. Always a great one for crying, she was.

“I’ll tell you why I talk like this, Henry,” I said. “It’s for your own
good, because you don’t know what you are. Here you walk around this
place telling people ‘Oh, nothing’ when they ask for the story of your
life, and you’re a walking miracle just to start with. Now what do we go
on with?”

He shrugged.

“You feel better, now you know what you are?”

“I don’t … I never thought about it.” He looked up at me swiftly, as if
to find out what I wanted him to say. “I guess I do.”

“All right then. That makes it better. That makes it easier on you,
because I am now going to tell you what you are, Henry. Henry, what are
you?”

“Well, you said—” he swallowed—“a miracle.”

I brought down my fist with a bang that made everybody jump, even her in
the mirror, but especially Henry. “No! I’ll tell you what you are. You
are a nowhere type, a _nudnick_ type _nothing!_” I quickly bent forward.
He shrank from the finger like a snail from salt. “And now you’re going
to tell me that’s a paradox. You’re going to say I contradicted myself.”

“I’m not.” His mouth trembled and then he was smiling again.

“Well, all right, but it’s what you’re thinking. Drink up.” I raised my
glass. “Here’s to the eyes, blue brown and brindle, and here’s to the
fires that those eyes don’t kindle; I don’t mean the fires that burn
down shanties, I mean the fires that pull down—”

“Gee, no, thanks,” he said.

I drank my drink. “But I mean,” I said aloud to myself, “really a
nothing.” I took his drink and held it and glared at him. “You will, by
God, stop stepping on my punchlines.”

“I’m sorry. I didn’t even notice.” He pointed vaguely. “I didn’t know
anyone could handle so much of that—that whiskey.”

“I got news for you, boy,” I said, and winked at him. “Here it is past
quitting time and this whiskey is all I had for lunch, and it’s what I
had for a snack—high tea, wot?—and it’s what I’m having for dinner, and
well should you envy this mighty capacity. Among other things. Now I
will show you why I have uttered no paradox in describing you as a
miracle and a simultaneous, coexistent, concurrent nothing.

I smelled his drink and lowered it. “You started out being everything I
described—unique, unprecedented. If you thought about it at all, which I
doubt, you thought of yourself as having been born naked and
defenseless, and having gained constantly since—the power of speech, the
ability to read, an education of sorts (you can see by my calling it
that I’m in a generous mood) and, lately, some sort of a job in some
sort of a store, the right to vote, and that … well, unusual suit you’re
wearing. No matter how modest you are about these achievements—are you
are, you really are—they seem to add up to more than you started with.

“Well, they don’t. Since the day you were born, you’ve lost. What the
hell is it that you keep looking at?”

“That girl. She’s crying. But I’m listening to what you’re saying.”

“You better listen. I’m doing this for you, for your own good. Just let
her cry. If she cries long enough, she’ll find out crying doesn’t help.
Then she’ll quit.”

“You know why she’s crying?”

Did I! “Yes, and it’s a pretty useless procedure. Where was I?”

“I’ve been losing since I was born,” Henry obediently reminded me.

“Yeah, yeah. What you’ve lost is potential, Henry. You started out with
the capability of doing almost anything and you’ve come to a point where
you can do almost nothing. On the other hand, I started out being able
to do practically nothing and now I can do almost anything.”

“That’s wonderful!” he said warmly.

“You just don’t know,” I told him. “Now, mind you, we’re still talking
about you. You’ll see the connection. I just want to illustrate a
point … These days, everybody specializes or doesn’t make it, one or the
other. If you’re lucky enough to have a talent and find work where you
use it, you go far. If your work is outside your talent, you can still
make out. If you have no talent, hard work in one single line makes for
a pretty fair substitute. But in each case, how good you are depends on
how closely you specialize and how hard you work inside a specialty. Me,
now, I’m different. _Steve!_”

“None for me,” Henry insisted plaintively.

“Do it again, Steve. Henry, stop interrupting me when I’m doing you a
favor. What _I_ am, I’m what you might call a specializing
non-specialist. We’re few and far between, Henry—guys like me, I mean.
Far as work’s concerned, I got a big bright red light in here—” I tapped
my forehead—“that lights up if I accidentally stay in one line too long.
Any time that happens, I quick wind up what I’m doing and go do
something else instead. And far as talents are concerned, talents I got,
I guess. Only I don’t use ’em. I avoid ’em. They’re the only thing that
could ever trap me into specializing and I just won’t be trapped, not by
anybody or anything. Not me!”

“You have a real talent for writing,” Henry said diffidently.

“Well, thanks, Henry, but you’re wrong. Writing isn’t a talent. It’s a
skill. Certain kinds of thinking, ways of thinking—you might call them
based on talent; but writing’s just a verbalization, a knack of putting
into an accepted code what’s already there in your head. Learning to
write is like learning to type, a transformation of a sort of energy
into a symbol. It’s what you write that counts, not how you do it.
What’s the matter, did I lose you?”

He was looking out into the room over my shoulder and smiling. “She’s
still crying.”

“Forget it. Every day, women lose their husbands. They get over it.”

“Lose—Her husband’s dead?”

“Altogether.”

He looked again and I watched his wide mouth, the show of strong, uneven
teeth. I couldn’t blame him. She’s a very unusual-looking girl and here
the coast was clear. I wondered next what you’d ever say to Henry so he
wouldn’t smile.

Then he was looking at me again. “You were talking about your writing,”
he said.

“Oh. Now suppose, Henry, you had the assignment to write a piece every
week and you wrote every single piece so the man who reads it believes
it. And suppose one piece says: ‘The world will end.’ And another one
says: ‘The world will not end.’ One says: ‘No man is good. He can only
struggle against his natural evil.’ And another says, ‘No amount of evil
can alter the basic goodness of human beings.’ See what I mean? Yet
every single word of every piece comes out like a revelation. The whole
series just stinks of truth. Would you say that you, the writer of all
of this crud, believes or does not believe in what he writes?”

“Well, I guess … I don’t know. I mean I—” He looked into my eyes
swiftly, trying again to discover what I wanted him to say. “Well,” he
said clumsily, when I just sat and wouldn’t help, “if you, I mean I,
writing that way, if I said white was white and then it was blue … well,
I guess I couldn’t believe ’em both?” His voice put the question mark
shyly at the end and he pretended to duck.

“You mean to say that kind of writer doesn’t believe anything he writes.
Well, I knew you were going to say that, and you’re one hundred and
three per cent _wrong_.” And I leaned forward and glared at him.

He looked into his lap. “I’m sorry.” Then, “He believes some of it?”

“No!”

“Oh,” Henry said. Miserably, he moved his glass an inch to the left. I
took it away from him.

I said, “A writer like that learns to believe _everything_ he writes
about. Sure, white is white. But look: go down as far as you can into
the microscopic, and still down, and what do you find? Measurements that
can only be approximated; particles that aren’t particles at all, but
only places where there is the greatest probability of an electric
charge … in other words, an area where nothing is fact, where nothing
behaves according to the rules we set up for the proper behavior of
facts.

“Now go up in the other direction, out into space, farther than our
biggest telescopes can reach, and what do you find? Same thing! The
incommensurable, the area of possibility and probability, where the
theoretical computation (that’s scientese for ‘wild guess’) is
acceptable mathematics. So okay: all these years, we’ve been living as
if white was white and a neat _a_ plus _b_ equals a respectable _c_.

“There might be an excuse for that before we knew that in the microcosm
and in the macrocosm all the micrometers are made of rubber and the
tape-measures are printed on wet macaroni. But we do know that now; so
by what right do we assume that everything’s vague up there and muzzy
down yonder, but everything _here_ is all neat as a pin and dusted every
day? I maintain that nothing is altogether anything; that nothing proves
anything, nothing follows from anything; nothing is really real, and
that the idea we live in a tidy filling of a mixed-up sandwich is a
delusion.

“But you can’t go around not believing in reality and at the same time
do your work and get your pay. So the only alternative is to believe
_everything_ you run into, everything you hear, and especially
everything you think.”

Henry said, “But I—”

“Shut up. Now, belief—faith, if you like—is a peculiar thing. Knowledge
helps it along, but at the same time it can only exist in the presence
of ignorance. I hold as an axiom that complete—_really_
complete—information on any given subject would destroy belief in it.
It’s only the gaps between the steppingstones of logic that leave room
for the kind of ignorance called intuition, without which the mind can’t
move. So back we come to where we started: by not specializing in
anything. I am guarding my ignorance, and as long as I keep that
ignorance at a certain critical level, I can say anything or hear
anything and believe it. So living is a lot of fun and I have more fun
than anybody.”

Henry smiled broadly and shook his head in deep admiration. “I’m glad if
it’s so, I mean, you’re happy.”

“What do you mean, _if?_ I get what I want, Henry; I always get what I
want. If that isn’t being happy, what is?”

“I wouldn’t know.” Henry closed his eyes a moment and then said again,
“I wouldn’t know … Let me out, would you?”

“You going some place? I’m not through with you, Henry, me boy. I don’t
_begin_ to be through with you.”

He looked wistfully at the door and, without moving, seemed to sigh.
Then he smiled again. “I just want to, uh, you know.”

“Oh, that. The used beer department is down those steps over there.” I
got up and let him by. There was no way out of Molson’s except past me;
he wouldn’t get away.

Why shouldn’t he get away?

Because he made me feel good, that’s why. There was something about
Henry, a sort of hair-trigger dazzle effect, that was pretty engaging.
Recite the alphabet to him and I swear he’d look dazzled. Not that the
line I’d been slinging wouldn’t dazzle anyone.

It was just then I decided to tell him about the murderer.

The room tilted suddenly and I hung on to the edges of the table and
stopped it. I recognized the symptom. Better get something to eat before
soaking up any more of that sour-mash. I didn’t want to get offensive.

Just then I felt, rather than heard, a sort of commotion. I looked up.
Henry, that damn fool, was leaning with his palms of the table where
what’s-her-name sat, the one who cried all the time. I saw her glance up
and then her face went all twisted. She sprang up and fetched him one
across the chops that half spun him around. Next thing you know, she was
through the door, with Henry staring after her and grinning and slowly
rubbing his face.

“Henry!”

Turning my way, Henry looked again at the door, then came shambling
over.

“Henry, you ol’ wolf, you’ve been holding out on me,” I said. “Since
when have you been chasing tomatoes?”

He just sat down heavily and fondled his cheek. “Gosh!”

“Whyn’t you tell me you wanted to make a pass? I’d have saved you the
trouble. She won’t be good for anything for weeks yet. She can’t think
of anything but—”

“It wasn’t anything like that. I just asked her if there was anything I
could do. She didn’t seem to hear me, so I asked her again. Then she got
mad and hit me. That’s all.”

I laughed at him. “Well, you probably did her a favor. She’s better off
mad at something than sitting there tearing herself apart. What made you
think you could get to first base with her, anyway?”

He grinned and shook his head. “I told you, honest I didn’t want
anything, only to see if I could help.” He shrugged. “She was crying,”
he said, as if that explained something.

“So what’s in it for you?”

He shook his head.

“I thought so!” I banged him on the shoulder. “That’s where we’ll start,
Henry. We’re going to make you over, that’s what we’re going to do.
We’re going to get you out of oversize second-hand shirts and undersize
Boy Scouts ideas. We’re going to find out what you really want and then
we’re going to see that you learn how to get it.”

“But I’m all—I mean I don’t really—”

“Shut up! And the first and rock-bottom basic and important thing you’ll
learn till you’re blue in the face is, never do nothing for nothing. In
other words, always ask ‘What’s in it for me?’ and do nothing about
anything until the answer comes up ‘Plenty!’ _Steve! The check!_ That
way you’ll always have a new wallet to put in your new suit and nobody,
especially girls, is going to clobber you in a filthy joint like this.”

Actually it wasn’t a filthy joint, but Steve came up just then and I
wanted him to hear me say it. I gave him what the check said, to the
penny, and told him to keep the change. Once in a while I’d tip
Steve—not often—and then I’d make it a twenty or better. What he didn’t
know was, if you total all the bills and all the tips, the tips came out
to exactly nine per cent. Either he’d find that out for himself some day
or I’d tell him; one way or the other, it would be fun. The secret of
having fun is to pay attention to the details.

Out on the street, Henry stopped and shuffled his feet. “Well, good-by.”

“Good-by nothing. You’re coming home with me.”

“Oh,” he said, “I can’t. I got to—”

“You got to what? Come on now, Henry—whether you know it or not, you
need help; whether you like it or not, you’re going to get it. Didn’t I
say I was going to tear you down and make you over?”

He stepped to the right and he stepped to the left. “I can’t be taking
up your time. I’ll go on home.”

I suddenly saw that if I couldn’t change his mind, the only way I’d get
him to come along would be to carry him. I could do it, but I didn’t
feel like it. There’s always a better way than hard work.

“Henry,” I said, and paused.

He waited, not quite jittering, not exactly standing still. Guys like
Henry, they can’t fight and they can’t run; you can do whatever you want
with them.

So—think. Think of the right thing to say. I did, and I said it.

“Henry,” I said, real sudden, real soft, sincere, and the change must
have hit him harder than a yell, “I’m in terrible trouble and you’re
about the only man in the world I can trust.”

“Gosh.” He came a little closer and peered up at me in the thickening
twilight. “Why didn’t you say so?”

Sticking out of the marrow of his soul, every man has an eye-bolt. All
you have to do is find it and drop your hook in. This was Henry’s. I
almost laughed, but I didn’t. I turned away and sighed. “It’s a long
story … but I shouldn’t bother you with it. Maybe you’d better—”

“No. Oh, no. I’ll come.”

“You’re a pal, Henry,” I whispered, and swallowed as noisily as I could.

We walked down to the park and started across it. I walked slowly and
kept my eyes on the middle distance, like a hired mourner, while Henry
trotted alongside, looking anxiously up into my face every once in a
while.

“Is it about that girl?” he asked after a while.

“No,” I said. “She’s no trouble.”

“Her husband. What happened to him?”

“Same thing that happened to the ram who didn’t see the ewe turn.” I hit
him with my elbow. “U-turn, get it? Anyway, he drove over a cliff.” We
were passing under a street light at the time and I saw Henry’s face.
“Some day you’re going to split your head in two just by grinning. What
do you go around showing your teeth for all the time, anyway?”

He said, “I’m sorry.” And when we were almost through the park, “Why?”

“Why what?” I asked vacantly.

“The husband … over the cliff.”

“Oh. Well, she had a sort of a roll in the hay with somebody, and when
she told him, he up and knocked himself off. Some people take themselves
pretty seriously. Here we are.” I led him up the walk and through the
herculite doors. In the elevator, he gulped around at the satinwood
paneling. “This is nice.”

“Keeps the rain off,” I said modestly. The doors slid open and I led the
way down the hall and kicked open my door. “Come on in.”

In we went and there, of course, stood Loretta with The Look on her
face, the damned anger always expressed as hurt. So I pushed Henry ahead
of me and watched The Look be replaced by tight Company Manners.

“My wife,” I told Henry.

He stepped back and I pushed him forward again. He grinned and bobbed
his head and wagged his figurative tail. “Huh-huh-huh—” he said,
swallowed, and tried again. “Huh-how do?”

“It’s Henry, my old school pal Henry that I told you about, Loretta.”
I’d never told her a thing. “He’s hungry. I’m hungry. How’s for some
food?” Before she could answer, I asked, “A couple paper plates in the
den would be less trouble than setting the table, hm?” and at this she
must nod, so I shoved Henry toward the den and said, “Fine, and thanks,
oh, best of good women,” which made her nod a promise. We went in and I
closed the double doors and leaned against them, laughing.

“Gosh,” said Henry, his eyes heating up. “You never told me you had
a—uh—were married.” The smile flickered, then blazed.

“Guess I didn’t. One of those things, Henry. The air you breathe, a
post-nasal drip, the way you walk from here to the office—same thing.
Part of the picture. Why talk about it?”

“Yes, but maybe she … maybe it’s trouble for her. Why are you laughing?”

I was laughing because of the change in Loretta’s face as we had come
in. I was late and dinner was ruined, and I’d been drinking to boot; and
primed as she was to parade hurt feelings all over the apartment, she
hadn’t expected me to bring anyone home. Ah, Loretta; so mannered, so
polite! She’d have died rather than show her feelings before a stranger,
and to see her change from hostility to hospitality in three point five
seconds was, to me, very funny. There’s always a way of getting out from
under. All you have to do is think of it. In time.

“I’m laughing,” I told Henry, “at the idea of Loretta’s having trouble.”

“You mean I’m no bother?”

“I mean you make everything all right. Sit down.”

He did. “She’s pretty.”

“Wh—oh. Loretta. Yep, nothing but the best. Henry, I am a man different
from all other men.”

He fumbled with some facial expressions and came up with a slow grinning
puzzlement. “Isn’t everybody?” he asked timidly.

“Yes, you idiot. But by different, I mean _really_ different. Not
necessarily better,” I added modestly. “Just different.”

“How do you mean, different?” Good old Henry. What a straight man!

By way of answering him, I took out my key-case, zipped it open, thumbed
out the flat brass key of my filing drawer and dangled it. “I’ll show
you, soon as we have something in our stomachs and no interruptions.”

“Is this the … the trouble you said you were in, you wanted my help?”

“It is, but it’s strictly private and confidential that I don’t want you
even thinking about it until I can lock that door and go into detail.”

“Oh,” he said. “All right.” Visibly, he cast about for something else to
talk about. “Can I ask you something about the girl who was … whose
husband …”

“Fire away,” I said. “Not that it matters. You have the damnedest knack,
Henry, of combining the gruesome with the trivial.”

“I’m sorry. She seemed so, well, sad. What was it you said, I don’t
think I understood it?” His voice supplied the question mark to his odd
phrasing. “She and somebody …” His words trailed off and he went pink.
“And her husband found out—”

“She sure did. And he didn’t exactly find out; she _told_ him. She was
mixed up in some research, see. Field-test of a new drug, a so-called
hypnotic. So there she was, awake and aware and absolutely subject to
any and all suggestions. And as you saw for yourself, she’s not a
bad-looking chick, not bad at all. So nature just took its course.
_Carpe diem_, as the Romans used to say, which means drill not and ye
strike no oil.”

He looked at me foggily, but smiling broadly, too. “The researcher, the
one who gave her the drug. But that wasn’t exactly her fault. I mean her
husband didn’t have to—”

“Her husband did have to,” I mimicked, “being what he was. One of those
idealistic, love-is-sacred characters, who, besides all of this, was
sensitive about the side of his face he left in Korea. “Love,” I said,
harpooning Henry’s collarbone with my finger again, “is cornflakes.”

I leaned back. “Besides, he had no way of knowing how it happened. This
drug, it’s something like sodium amytal, though chemically unrelated.
You know, ‘truth serum’! Only it doesn’t leave the subject groggy or
doped. She went straight home, walking and talking just like always, and
incapable of concealing what had happened. She didn’t even know she’d
been—ah—medicated. It was in her coffee. All she could say was that
such-and-such had happened to her and it was all so easy that, from now
on, she could never know when it might happen again. He chewed on it for
most of the night and then got up and got in his car and drove over the
cliff.”

Henry smiled twice, one smile right on top of the other. “Now all she
does is drink in bars?”

“She doesn’t drink. Ever read that William Irish book, _Phantom Lady_,
Henry? There’s a girl in there who cracks a character just by haunting
him—by being there, wherever he is, day and night, for weeks. This chick
in the bar, in her goofed-off ineffectual way, is trying to do the same
thing to me. She sits where I can see her and hates me. And cries.”

“You?”

I winked at him and made a _giddap_ sort of cluck-cluck with my back
teeth. “Research, Henry. A scientific project. It covers a multitude.
And covering multitudes is a happy hobby, especially if you do it one by
one. Sure, I know chemistry—told you I was a specializing
non-specialist. Now wipe that grin off your face or you won’t be able to
chew: here comes the food.”

Loretta carried in a tray. Butter-fried shrimp with piquant orange
sauce, a mixed-greens salad with shallots and grated nuts, and an
Arabian honey-cake.

“Oh!” gulped Henry, and bounced to his feet. “Oh, that’s just beautiful,
Mrs.—”

“You didn’t bring a drink first, but I guess we can have it along with
the food,” I said.

“I don’t really want any, really,” Henry said.

“He’s being polite. We don’t let our guests be polite, do we, Lorrie?”

For a moment, she had only one lip because she had sucked in the lower
one to bite on. Then she said, “I’m sorry. I’ll mix—”

“Don’t mix,” I told her. “Bring the bottle. We wouldn’t think of
troubling you any more, would we, Henry?”

“I really don’t want—”

“Right away, _dar_ling.” Two out of five times when I say darling, I
roar at her. She set the tray down on the coffee table and fairly
scurried out. I laughed. “Wonderful, wonderful. She doesn’t exactly hide
the liquor, but she sure tidies it away. Now, by God, she’ll bring it to
me.”

I could actually hear the soft sound at the corners of Henry’s mouth as
his smile stretched it.

Loretta came back and I took the bottle. “No chaser; we’re _men_ in
here. Okay _dar_ling, you can leave the dishes here for the night.”

She wouldn’t back to the door and she wouldn’t—maybe she was frightened
just then—she wouldn’t take her eyes off me, so she got out sidewise,
not forgetting to flip the crumpled fragment of a hostess’s smile to
Henry.

Henry was saying, “Well, thank you very much. Mrs.—” but by the time he
got it all stammered out, I had the door closed.

I went to the settee, rubbing my hands. “Bring the bottle, Henry.”

He brought it, and sat down by me, and we ate. It was very good, which
is the least a man can expect. I toyed with the idea of yelling for some
tabasco, but I’d had enough fun with Loretta for the time being.
Enveloping that food, my stomach felt well pleased with itself. Silent,
unsmiling and intent, Henry absorbed what was on his plate.

I poured a slug for Henry, knowing I could afford to be generous, and
one for myself. I leaned back and enjoyed a belch, which made Henry
jump, threw down the bourbon, poured another and went to the desk.

On my desk is a typewriter, and under the typewriter is a
sound-absorbing mat, and in the mat I keep a sewing-machine needle, the
best toothpick Man ever made. It’s strong and it’s sharp and it has a
base you can get a grip on without snapping it. I sat in the swivel
chair and leaned my elbows on the typewriter and picked my teeth and
watched Henry mopping the honey off his dessert plate with a piece of
bread.

“That was—your wife certainly can—”

“Like I said, Henry, nothing but the best. Sit down over here. Bring
your drink.”

He hesitated, then brought it over and put it on the desk where I could
reach it. He sat down on the edge of the easy chair. He looked like a
worrisome kitten making its first try at sitting on a fence. I laughed
in his face and he smiled right back at me.

“What I am going to do, Henry,” I told him, I told average, stupid,
fearful, dogface Henry, “I’m going to let you in on some things that no
human being on Earth knows. I’m going to tell you at the same time that
these things are known to a number of people. Not a large number, but—a
number. Could both those statements be true?”

“Well, I—” he said. Then he blushed.

“You’re sort of slow, so I’ll keep it simple and easy for you. I just
got off a paradox. But it isn’t a paradox. Don’t sit there and smile and
shake your head at me. Just listen. You’ll catch on. Now you and I—are
we different from each other?”

“Oh, yes,” he breathed.

“Right.” At the same time, all human beings are alike. And you know
what? No paradox there, either.”

“No?”

“No. And here’s why. You’re like my wife and the bartender and my city
editor and all the billions of creepers and crawlers on Earth who call
themselves human beings. And as you just so perceptively pointed out,
I’m not like you. And for your information, I’m not like Loretta or
Steve or the city editor. Now do you see why there’s no paradox?”

Henry shifted unhappily. He absolutely astonished me. How could a guy
like that, without bluff, without deftness, without, as far as I could
see, even the ability to lie a little—how could he live three
consecutive days in a world like this? Look at him, worrying away at my
question, wanting _so_ much to get the right answer.

It came like an abject apology: “No, I don’t see. No I don’t.” His eyes
flickered, the embarrassed heat stirring and waning. “Unless what you
mean is you’re not a human being.” He snickered weakly and again made
that odd warding-off, half-ducking motion.

Leaning back, I beamed at him. “Now isn’t it a relief to know you’re not
so dumb, after all?”

“Is that really what you mean? You’re not … but I thought _everybody_
was a human being!” he cried pathetically.

“Don’t get all churned up,” I told him gently.

I leaned forward very suddenly to startle him, and I did, too. I stuck
my finger in my whiskey, lifted the glass with the other hand, and drew
a wet circle on the desk-top, about eight inches in diameter.

“Let’s say, that anywhere in this circle—” I moved the glass around
inside the mark—“this glass is what you call human. When it’s here or
_here_ or a little bit forward, it’s still human; it’s just not the same
human—the same _kind_ of human. You’re different from Steve the
bartender because everything he is is here, and everything you are is
over on the other side, _here_. You’re different because you’re placed
differently in the circle, but you’re the same because you’re both
inside it. Presto—no paradox.” I moved the glass far enough to empty it
and set it aside and put my hand in the circle. The wet wood was
bleaching slowly, which was okay; Loretta would polish it up in the
morning.

“Inside the circle,” I said, “a man can be smart or stupid, musical,
aggressive, tall, effeminate, mechanically apt, Yugoslavian, a
mathematical genius or a strudel baker—but he’s still human. Now by what
Earthly conceit do we conclude that a man just _has_ to live within that
circle? What about a guy who’s born out here, on the outside edge? Why
can’t he be here, right on the line? Who’s to say he can’t live way out
here?” And I banged my hand down a foot away from the circle.

Henry said, “I—”

“Shut up. Answer: there _are_ people outside this border. Not many, but
some. And if you’re going to call the ones inside ‘human,’ the ones
outside have to be—something else.”

“Is that what you are?” Henry whispered.

“That’s me.”

“Is that what they call a moot … mute …”

“Mutation? No! Well, damn it, yes; that’s a good a name as any. But not
in the way you ever thought of. No atom-dust, no cosmic rays, nothing
like that. Just normal everyday variation. Look, you have to go farther
from one side of this circle to the other than from just inside to just
outside—right? Yet the distance across is within the permissable
variation; the difference between human beings which leaves them still
human beings together. But one small variation this way—” I slid my
finger outside the circle—“and you have something quite new.”

“How—new?”

I shrugged. “Any one of a zillion ways. Take any species. Take kittens
from the same litter. You’ll find one has sharper claws, another has
sharper eyes. Which is the best kitten?”

“Well, I guess the one with the—”

“No, you mumbling Neanderthal.” That made him smile. “Neither one is
best. They’re just different, each in a way that makes him hunt a bit
better. Now say another of the litter has functional gills and another
has mat-scales like an armadillo. There’s your …”

“Supercat?” he beamed.

“Just call it ‘uncat.’ ”

“You—you’re uh, un—”

“Unhuman.” I nodded.

“But you look—”

“Yeah, a cat with sweat-glands in its skin would look like a cat,
too—most of the time. I’m different, Henry. I’ve always known I was
different.” I poked my finger toward him and he curled from its
imaginary touch. “You, for example—you have, like nobody else I ever
met, that stuff called ‘empathy.’ ”

“I have?”

“You’re always feeling with other people’s fingertips, seeing through
other people’s eyes. Laugh with ’em, cry with ’em. Empathy.”

“Oh. Yes, I guess—”

“Now me, I have as much of that as my armadillo-cat has fur. It’s just
not in me. I have other things instead. Do you know I was never angry in
my life? That’s why I have so much fun. That’s why I can push people
around. I can make anybody do anything, just because I always have
myself under control. I can roar like a lion and beat my fists on the
wall and put up a hell of a show, yet always know exactly what I’m
doing. You knew me when, Henry. You’ve read my stuff. You’ve seen me
operate. You going to call a man like me human?”

He wet his lips, clasped his hands together, blankly made the knuckles
crack. Poor Henry! A brand-new idea and it was splitting his
skull-seams.

“Couldn’t you be,” he ventured at last, “just sort of—talented, not
really different at all?”

“Ah! Now we come to the point. Now we get the big proof. Speaking of
proof, where’s the bottle? Oh, here.” I poured. “See I’m a real modest
boy, Henry. When I figured this all out, I didn’t do the human
thing—conclude that I was the only super—uh, unhuman in captivity.
There’s just too many people born, too much variation this way and that.
Law of averages. There just _has_ to be more like me.”

“You mean just like—”

“No! I mean more unhumans—all kinds, any kind. So, because I can think
like an unhuman, I thought my way after others of my kind.”

Trying to heave up out of my chair, I quit and slumped back. “Damn it.
You know, I’m hungry as a … Imagine, a dinner like that. Why can’t she
cook up something that sticks to a man’s ribs? I swear I’m as empty as a
paper sack. Henry, check that door for me, see that it’s locked.”

He went to the door and tried it. It was locked. As he came back, I
picked up the brass key. “This will open your eyes, Henry, old boy, old
boy,” I said.

I unlocked the file drawer. It got heavier all the time, I thought.
Well, if you’re going to have fun, you’ve got to take care of the
details.

I lifted out the “Justice” file and banged it down beside the
typewriter. “So I found me another unhuman. Takes one to catch one. Just
you listen now and tell me what human being would even start this line
of thinking, let alone carry it through.” I opened the file.

“This all started,” I said, “when I did a piece on unsolved murders. You
know that no city releases figures on unsolved murders; well, not
easily, anyway. You should see ’em—69 per cent in one city, 73 in
another. Some bring it down to 40—our town got it to 38 per cent one
year. But that’s a whole lot of scot-free murderers, hm? All over the
country. Imagine!

“So what I did—for the feature story, you know—I dug up everything I
could find on a whole drawerful of these cases. What I wanted was an
angle. What’s the most obvious? Whodunit, that’s what. So throw that
out. What next? Who could have done it, but didn’t. Throw that out, too.

“So then it occurred to me to see if there wasn’t some sort of lowest
common denominator to them—here a second-string advertising man with no
enemies, there a teen-age hood with a knife in him, yonder a rich boy
found floating next to his yacht—all kinds of people get murdered, you
know.

“Mind you, I’m still just looking for an angle.

“Next, I threw out all the cases where people had a lot of enemies, and
all the cases where a lot of people had an opportunity as well as a
motive. This left a pretty strange stack. All of them were, apparently,
reasonless, purposeless murders, all done differently at different
places.

“Well, I phoned and I legged and I sat and thought, and I interviewed
God knows how many people. Couple of times, I came pretty close to
finding new stuff, too, but who cares whodunit? Not me. I wasn’t looking
for crimes with a reason behind them. I was looking for killings with no
motive. Any time the scent got hot, I threw that case out. By this time,
I had a feature shaping up—I’d call it ‘Murder for What?’ Good for a
couple spreads—maybe even a series.”

I thumped the file. “I guess I had the answer for weeks before I even
knew it. Then, one night, I sat here and read everything through. And
what do you know: in each and every one of these cases, someone was
happy because of the murder! Or, anyway, happier. And I’m _not_ talking
about people who inherited the victims’ loot, or poor persecuted wives
and children who would no longer have to put up with the old man’s
payday drunks. Reach me the bottle, Henry.

“Now not a single one of this final stack showed motive or opportunity
for the—let’s say ‘beneficiary’ of these murders. Like this one, where
the old woman, her with a constitution like a buffalo, she’d been lying
in bed for eight months pretending to be sick so her daughter wouldn’t
marry. The girl was nine miles away when someone cut the old biddy’s
throat.

“And this one here, an engineering student and a good one, working his
own way through school and then had to quit and come home because his
old man had doubled the size of the ancestral hardware store for no
reason but that it had been small enough to handle by himself. So one
warm Sunday, the kid is, no fooling, in church in front of eighty
witnesses while, down the road, somebody parts the old man’s head with a
tire iron. They never did find out who.

“And this one, this is particularly the best of all: a little old guy
for years ran a flea circus, gluing costumes on ’em and making ’em turn
little merry-go-rounds and all that kind of thing. Used to feed ’em off
his arm. One fine day, someone swipes one of his pets and replaces it
with _pulex cheopis_—a rat flea, to you—loaded to the eyeballs, or
cephalothorax, as the case may be, with bubonic plague. First and only
case of black plague in these parts in a hundred and eighty years.” I
laughed.

“Somebody was happier?” Henry asked wonderingly.

“Well, the other fleas were. And besides, the old guy used to get a
large charge out of cracking fleas in his tweezers right under the noses
of the most squeamish women in the audience. You know how they
go—_blip!_”

Henry grinned. “Blip,” he half-whispered.

“It’s hot in here,” I said uncomfortably. “Well, this is the part I was
getting to, I mean about thinking unhumanly. I said to myself, now
suppose, just for the sake of argument, that there’s this guy, see, a
sort of mutant, a slight variation to just outside the circle, and he
has this special way of thinking; he goes around killing people who
stand in other people’s way. He never kills the same way or the same
kind of person or in the same place. So how could anyone ever catch up
with him?

“Right away, I began looking into other deaths—the ‘natural causes’
ones. Why? Well, here, whoever he is, he might do some murders that look
like murders, but he’d also do some that looked like natural causes;
he’d have to; there’s only just so many ways you can kill people and
this busy, busy boy would have to try all of ’em. So I smelled around
looking not for a killer, but for happy people, innocent people, who had
benefited from these deaths.

“Whenever I found a situation like that, I checked back on the death.
Sometimes it was a perfectly genuine croak, but time and again I found
what you might find if you knew what you were looking for … scarlet
fever, for instance. People shouldn’t die of scarlet fever, but you know
what? Feed somebody just enough belladonna and a doctor will write a
scarlet fever certificate for the late lamented, nice as you please, if
he has no reason to be suspicious. And in these deaths—my busy boy’s
work, I mean—there’s never any reason to be suspicious. Where’s the—you
pour it for once, Henry.

“Hey, Henry! I’m getting tighter’n a ticklish tick with a alum stick,
haha …

“ ’Course, by this time, the feature story was up the spout; I had a
better use for the situation than a lousy feature or even a series. Yep.
For weeks now, I’ve been following the meat-wagons and morguing around.
All I do, I write ’em up when they look funny to me. I keep it to
myself; it’s all in the files here, every one of ’em. Oh, man, if the
papers or the coroner or somebody got hold of those files, what a
_hassle!_ They’d dig up the marble orchards around here like potato
patches! They’d find more little old embolisms and post-syncopes!

“Say, did you know that _Acontium Napellus_, which is wolfsbane, which
is aconite, has a root that grates up into a specially nippy kind of
horseradish for them as likes it strong for a few brief seconds? There’s
a woman just down the street who curled up and died last Tuesday and
they called it heart failure; her daughter’s already headed for
Hollywood where she won’t make anything but carhop, second class, but
anyway it’s what she wanted.

“Sooner or later, taking the notes I do the way I do at the deaths I
investigate, this boy, this busy, busy fellow who is bringing so much
sunshine into so many brutalized innocent lives, this boy will come over
to me and say, ‘Hi, chum, you looking for somebody?’ ”

“What will you do,” gasped Henry without the question mark.

“What do you think?” I prodded.

“A reward, maybe? Or a big scoop—is that what they call it in
newspapers?”

“Yes, in the movies. _Catch it_, _Hen_—hey, thanks. First time I knocked
over a bottle in nine years, so help me. Mop up the ol’ ‘Justice’ file—I
call it the ‘Justice’ file; you like that, boy? Ooo … ooh. I’m adrift,
kid, and you know what? I love it. Pour me another. Do it m’self only
I’m not myself if you see what I mmm. Good.

“So where was I? Oh, yes, you say I’d nab this busy boy and get a
reward. Well, there you go thinking like a human being. I, sir Henry,
will do no such thing. Now I don’t know exactly why this boy does this
bit and I don’t care much, long’s I can get him to do it for me. He
wants to knock off obstacles from the path of poor imprisoned souls, I
got just the chore for him. Just some justice is all.

“You see that scared rabbit came in here a while back with the tray,
that Loretta? Now that thing with Loretta, it was great while it lasted,
and it lasted too long about four months back. All the time around, oh,
please don’t drink so much, where have you been, but I was worried … you
know the routine, Henry. Now I could handle this myself, but even I
can’t think of a way which wouldn’t be either expensive or messy.

“When you come right down to it, I’d just as soon keep her around.

“Loretta’s not much trouble. She leaves me alone pretty much and comes
in here about the time I’m bottle dippy every night and gets me into
bed, talking on bright and cheery as anything, just as if I wasn’t
hooked over the desk here, green as a gherkin and just as pickled …

“The reason, the _real_ reason I’d like to introduce this other unhuman
type to my lovely wife is that I’d get more of a kick than you’d
understand, just making him do it. Humans I can handle; this boy would
be a real challenge. You can talk anybody into anything, and yourself
out of anything, if you can just think of the right thing to say—and I’m
the boy who can do it. Was your mother frightened by a keyboard?”

“What?” he asked, startled.

“That grin. What I’d like to know, I’d like to know how that busy boy
covers so much territory. First he has to find ’em, then he has to plan
how to knock ’em off, then he has to wait his chance … so _many_, Henry!
Five already this week and here it is only Thursday!”

“Maybe there’s more than one,” Henry suggested tentatively.

“Say, I never thought of that!” I exclaimed. “I guess it’s because
there’s only one of me. Gosh, what a lovely idea—squads of unhumans
thinking unhumanly, doing whatever they unhumanly want all over the lot.
But why should the likes of him or them take chances just to make some
humans happy?”

“They don’t care if anyone gets happy,” said Henry. “Why are you
whispering?”

“Must be getting pretty tight, I guess; can’t seem to do much better.
Whee-ooo! Such a gorgeous load! _What?_ What’s that you said about the
unhumans, that they don’t care about making people happy? Listen, son,
don’t go telling me about unhumans. Who’s the expert around here? I tell
you, every time they knock somebody off, someone around stops getting
mistreated. Those files there—”

“Right files, wrong conclusion. You keep worrying about what you are; we
don’t. We just _are_.”

_“We?_ Are you classifying yourself with _me?”_

“I wasn’t,” said Henry, not smiling. “Just what you are, human or not, I
don’t know and I don’t care. You’re a blowhard, though.”

I snarled and heaved myself upward. But a whispered snarl doesn’t amount
to much and you can heave all you like and get nowhere when your arms
are deadwood and your legs are about as responsive as those old inner
tubes in your neighbor’s back yard.

“What’s the matter with me?” I rasped.

“You’re about nine-tenths dead, that’s all.”

“Nine—what do you mean, Henry? What are you talking about? I’m just
drunk, not—”

“Dicoumarin,” he said. “You know what that is?”

“Sure I know what it is. Capillary poison. All the smallest blood
vessels rupture and you bleed to death internally before you even know
you’re sick. Henry, you’ve poisoned _me!_”

“Well, yes.”

I tried to struggle up, but I couldn’t. “You weren’t supposed to kill
_me_, Henry! It was Loretta! That’s why I brought you home—I guessed
that the killer would be the opposite of the likes of me and you’re
about as opposite as anybody could be. And you know I can’t stand her
and killing her would make me happier. It’s _her_ you’re supposed to
kill, Henry!”

“No,” he answered stubbornly. “It couldn’t be her. I told you we don’t
care if somebody’s made happier. It had to be you.”

“Why? _Why?_”

“To stop the noise.”

I looked at him, frowned foggily, shook my head.

“Self-defense,” he explained patiently. “I’m a—I suppose you’d call it a
telepath, though it isn’t telepathy like you’d read about. No words, no
pictures. Just a _noise_, I guess is the best word. There’s a certain
kind of mind—human or not, who cares?—it can’t get angry, and it enjoys
degrading other people and humiliating them, and when it’s enjoying
these things, it sets up … that noise. We can’t stand the noise.
You—you’re special. Hear you for miles. When we get rid of you, of
course it makes a human happy—whoever it was you were humiliating.” Then
he said again, “We can’t stand the noise.”

I whispered, “Help me, Henry. Whatever it is, I’ll stop. I promise I’ll
stop.”

“You can’t stop,” he said. “Not while you’re alive … Oh, damn you, damn
you, you’re even enjoying dying!” He put forearms over his head—not over
his ears—and rocked back and forth, and smiled and smiled.

“You smile all the time,” I hissed. “Even now. _You_ enjoy _killing_.”

“It isn’t a smile and I kill only to stop the noise.” He was breathing
hard. “How can I explain to anything like you? The noise—it’s—some
people can’t stand the screek of a fingernail on a blackboard, some hate
the scrape of a shovel on a cement sidewalk, most can’t take the rasp of
a file on metal.”

“They don’t bother me a bit,” I said.

“Here, damn you, look here!” He snatched my sewing-machine needle and
plunged it under his thumbnail. His lips spread wider. “It’s
_pain_ … pain! Only, with you, it’s agony! I can’t stand your noise! It
puts my teeth on edge, it hurts my head, it deafens me!”

I remembered all the times he had smiled since I brought him home. And
each time like the nail on the blackboard, like the shovel, like the
rasp on the file, like the needle under the nail …

I made a sort of laugh. “You’ll come with me. They’ll find the poison in
me.”

“Dicoumarin? You know better than that. And there won’t be any in the
whiskey glass, if that’s what you’re thinking. I gave it to you three
hours ago, in Molson’s, in the drink I didn’t want and you took.”

“I’ll hang on and tell Lorrie.”

“Tell me,” he jeered, leaning toward me, his smile that wasn’t a smile
as huge as a boa’s about to bite.

My tongue was thick, numb and wobbly. “Don’t!” I gasped. “Don’t … jump
me … now, Henry.”

Again he clutched his head. “Get mad! If you could get mad, it would go
away, that noise! Argh, you snakes, you freaks … all of you who enjoy
hating! The girl, remember her, in the bar? She was making that noise
until I got her angry … she’s going to get better now that you’re dead.”

I was going to say I wasn’t dead, I wasn’t yet, but my mouth wouldn’t
work.

“I’ll take these,” Henry said. I watched him stack the files right under
my nose. “Everything’s nice and tidy,” he told me. “You were due to
drink yourself to death, anyway, and here you are just like always. Only
you won’t sleep this one off … I wish I could have got you sore.”

I watched him unlock the door, saw him go, heard him talking to Lorrie
briefly. Then the outer door banged.

Loretta came into the room and stopped. She sighed. “Oh, dear, we’re in
a _special_ mess tonight, aren’t we?” she said brightly.

I tried, how I tried to yell, to scream at her, but I couldn’t, and it
was growing dark.

Loretta bent and pulled my arm around her neck. “You’ll have to help
just a little now. _Upsy_-daisy!” Strong shoulders and a practiced hip
hauled me upright, lolling. “You know, I do like your friend Henry. The
way he smiled when he left—why, it made me feel that everything’s going
to be all right.”



BULKHEAD


YOU JUST DON’T LOOK through viewports very often.

It’s terrifying at first, of course—all that spangled blackness, and the
sense of disorientation. Your guts never get used to sustained free
fall, and you feel, when you look out, that every direction is up, which
is natural, or that every direction is _down_, which is sheer horror.
But you don’t stop looking out there because it’s terrifying. You stop
because nothing ever happens out there. You’ve no sensation of speed.
You’re not going anywhere. After the weeks, and the months, there’s some
change, sure; but day to day you can’t see the difference, so after a
while you stop looking for any.

Which, of course, eliminates the viewports as an amusement device, which
is too bad. There aren’t so many things for a man to do during a Long
Haul that he can afford to eliminate anything. Getting bored with the
infinities outside is only a reminder that the same could happen with
your writing materials, and the music, with the stereo and all the rest
of it. And it’s hard to gripe, to say, “Why don’t they install a
such-and-such on these barrels?” because you’ve already got what a
thousand space men griped about long since—many of them men with more
experience, more imagination, and fewer internal resources (that is to
say, more need) than you’ll ever have. Certainly more than you have now;
this is your first trip, and you’re just making the transition from
“inside looking out” to “inside looking on.” It’s a small world. It
better be a little complicated.

A lot that has happened in worlds like these would be simple, if you
knew about it. Not knowing is all right: it keeps you wondering. Some of
it you can figure out, knowing as you do that a lot of men have died in
these things, a lot have disappeared, ship and all, and some—but you
don’t know how many—have been taken out of the ships and straight to the
laughing academy. You find out fairly soon, for example, that the manual
controls are automatically relayed out, and stay out of temptation until
you need them to land. (Whether they’ll switch in if you need them for
evasive maneuvering some time, you don’t know yet.) Who died, how many
died, because they started playing with the manuals? And was it because
they decided to quit and go home? Or because they convinced themselves
that the autoastrogator had bugs in it? Or because they just couldn’t
stand all those stationary stars?

Then there’s this: You’re alone. You crouch in this little cell in the
nose of your ship, with the curving hull to your left and the flat wall
of the midship bulkhead to your right. You know that in previous models
that bulkhead wasn’t there. You can imagine what happened to some—how
many?—ships to make it necessary, at last, to seal you away from your
shipmate. Psychodynamics has come a long way, but it hasn’t begun to
alter the fact that human beings are the most feral, vicious,
destructive, and self-destructive creatures God ever made. You called
this a world; well, reduce a world to two separate nations and see what
happens. Between two confined entities there’s no mean and no median,
and no real way of determining a majority. How many battered pilots have
come home crazed, cooped up with the shredded bodies of their shipmates?
You can’t trust two human beings together, not for long enough. If you
don’t believe it look at the bulkhead; look again. It’s there because it
has to be there.

You’re a peaceable guy. Scares you a little, to know how dangerous you
are. Makes you a little proud, too, doesn’t it?

Be proud of this, too: that they trust you to be alone so much. Sure,
there _is_ a shipmate; but by and large you’re alone, and that’s what’s
expected of you. What most people, especially earthside people, never
find out is that a man who can’t be by himself is a man who knows, away
down deep, that he’s not good company. You could probably make it by
yourself altogether … but you must admit you’re glad you don’t have to.
You have access to the other side of the bulkhead, when you need it. If
you need it. It didn’t take you too long to figure out you’d use it
sparingly. You have books and you have games, you have pictures and text
tapes and nine different euphorics (with a watchdog dispenser, so you
can never become an addict), all of which help you, when you need help,
to explore yourself. But having another human mind to explore is a
wonderful idea. The wonder is tempered by the knowledge—oh, how smart
you were to figure it out in time!—that the other mind is a last resort;
if you ever use up the potentialities it holds for you, you’ve had it,
brother.

So you squeeze it out slowly; you have endurance contests with yourself
to see how long you can leave it alone. You do pretty well.

You go back over your life, the things you’ve done. People have written
whole novels about twenty-four hours in a man’s life. That’s the way you
think it all out, slowly, piece by piece; every feature of every face,
and they way they were used; what people did, and why. Especially why.
It doesn’t take any time to remember what a man did, but you can spend
hours thinking about why he did it.

You live it again and it’s like being a little god, knowing what’s going
to happen to everyone. When you reported to Base there was a busload of
guys with you. Now you know who would go all the way through the course
and wind up out here; reliving it, you still know that, so you can put
yourself back in the bus again and say, that stranger across the aisle
is Pegg, and he isn’t going to make it. He’ll go home on furlough three
months from now and he’ll try to kill himself rather than come back. The
freckled nape in the seat ahead of you belongs to the redhead Walkinok,
who will throw his weight around during the first week and pay
expensively for it afterward. But he’ll make it. And you make friends
with the shy dark guy next to you; his name is Steih and he looks like a
big-brain; he’s easy to talk to and smart, the kind of fellow who always
goes straight to the top. And he won’t last even until the first
furlough; two weeks is all he can take, and you never see him again. But
you remember his name. You remember everything, and you go back over it
and remember the memories in between the memories. Did somebody on that
bus have shoes that squeaked? Back you go and hunt for it; if it
happened, you’ll remember it.

They say anyone can recall this way; but for you, with what the
psycho-dynamicians have done to you—or is it _for_ you?—you can do more
of this than anybody. There isn’t anything that ever happened in your
whole life that you can’t remember. You can start at the beginning and
go all the way through. You can start at the beginning and leap years in
a second, and go through an episode again … get mad again … fall in love
again. And when you get tired of the events themselves, you can run them
off again, to find out why. Why did Steih go through those years of
study and preparation, those months of competition, when all the time he
didn’t _want_ to be in the Space Service? Why did Pegg conceal from
himself that he wasn’t fit for the Space Service?

So you cast back, comb, compare and ponder, keeping busy. If you’re
careful, just remembering lasts a long time, then wondering why lasts
even longer; and in between times there are the books and stereos,
autochess and the music … until you’re ready to cast and comb in your
memories again. But sooner or later—later, if you’re especially
careful—you’ll get restless, and your life as it was played out, and the
reasons why it was played just that way, all that gets old. You’ve been
there. You can think of no new approach to any of it, and learn nothing
more from it.

That’s where the center-line bulkhead comes in handy. Its very shape is
a friendly thing to you; the hull on your left is curved, as part of the
ship’s side, but the bulkhead is a flat wall. Its ubiquitous presence is
a reminder that it has a function, like everything else in your world;
that it is by nature a partition; that the existence of a partition
presupposes another compartment; and that the other compartment is the
size and shape of this one, and designed for a similar purpose—to be a
dwelling for someone. With no sound nor sign of occupancy, the bulkhead
still attests the life behind it, just by being there. It’s a friendly
flatness, a companionable feature of your world, and its company
pervades all your thinking. You know it’s your last resort, but you know
too that it’s a rich one. When at last you’re driven to use it, you’ll
enter another kind of world, more complex and more engrossing than your
own just because of the work it takes to get from place to place and the
mystery of the fog between the places. It’s a mind, another human mind,
sharing this prison with you when at last you need sharing more than
anything in all of space.

Who is it?

You think about that. You think a whole lot about that. Back at Base, in
your last year, you and the other cadets thought about that more than
anything. If they’d ever given you the shadow of a hint … but wondering
about it was apparently part of your training. You knew only that on
your Long Haul, you would not be alone. You had a pretty good idea that
the choice of a shipmate for you would be a surprise. You looked around
you at mess, in class, in the dormitory; you lay awake at night dealing
out their faces in a sort of solitaire game; and sometimes you thought
about one and said, that’d be find, we’d get along; and sometimes you
said, that stinker? Lock me up with _him_ and that bulkhead won’t be
tough enough. I’ll kill him after the third day, so help me.

After they tapped you for your first Haul, this was the only thing you
were scared about. Everything else, you thought you could handle. You
knew your job inside out and backwards, and it wouldn’t whip you. You
were sharp-tuned, fine-honed, ready for anything that was under your
control. You were even confident about being alone; it wouldn’t get you.
Away down deep no man believes he can be driven out of his mind, just as
he cannot believe—really believe—he will ever be dead. That’s the kind
of thing that happens to someone else.

But this business of a shipmate wasn’t under your control. You didn’t
control who it would be and you wouldn’t control the guy after blastoff.
It was the only unknown, and therefore the only thing that scared you.
Leave it alone and you didn’t have to so much as know you had a shipmate
until you were good and ready. The only control you’d have would be the
intercom button on your side of that bulkhead.

Being able to shut off a voice isn’t control, though. You don’t know
what your shipmate will do. Or_—be_.

In those last tight days before blastoff there was one thing you became
overwhelmingly aware of. Esprit de corps they call it. You and the other
graduates were hammered into a mold, and hammered some more until the
resiliency was gone out of you. You were alike and you did like things
because you had grown to want to. You knew for certain that one of this
tight, trustworthy little group would be picked for you; their training
and yours, their whole lives and yours, pointed toward this ship, this
Haul. Your presence on this ship summed up your training; your training
culminated in your presence on the ship. Only a graduate cadet was fit
to man the ship; the ship existed solely for the graduate cadet. This
was something so self-evident that you never thought about it.

Not until now.

Because now, a few minutes ago, you were ready to push that button. You
weren’t sure if you’d broken all records for loneliness, for duration of
solitary confinement, but you’d tried. You’d looked through the viewport
until it ceased to mean anything; you’d read until you didn’t care any
more; you’d lived the almost-life of the stereos until you couldn’t make
believe you believed them; you’d listened to music until it didn’t
matter; and you’d gone over and over your life from its very beginnings
until you’d completely lost perspective on it or anything or anyone in
it. You’d found that you could go back to the viewport and cycle through
the whole thing again, but you’d done that too, until the whole matrix
of personal involvement was milked and sere and intolerable. Then the
flatness of the bulkhead made itself felt. It seemed to bulge toward
you, crowd you against the ship’s side, and you knew it was getting to
be time you pushed that button and started involving yourself in someone
else.

_Who?_ Pete or Krakow or that crazy redhead Walkinok? Or Wendover—you
all called him Bendover—with all those incomprehensible shaggy-dog
stories? Harris? Flacker? Beerbelly Blaustein or Cohen the Wire-haired
Terror? Or Shank—what you all called him was a shame? Or Grindes, whose
inexplicable nickname was Mickey Mouse. You’d rather hoped it would be
Grindes, not because you liked him but because he was the one classmate
you’d never known very well. He always looked on and kept his mouth
shut. He’d be much more fun to explore than say, old Shank, who was so
predictable you could practically talk in chorus with him.

So you tortured yourself, just for the sake of torture, with your thumb
over the intercom button, until even the torture dried out and blew
away.

You pushed.

You found out first of all that the intercom apparently had its own
amplifier, energized when you held the button down, and that it took
forever—well, three or four seconds—to warm up. First nothing, then a
carrier, then the beginnings of a signal; then at last the voice of your
shipmate, rushing up to full volume, as loud and as clear as if the
bulkhead did not exist. And you get off that button as if it were
suddenly white-hot, as if it had turned into a needle; and you’re
cowering against the outboard bulkhead, deep in shock, physically in
silence but with that voice going on and on and on, unbelievably in your
unbelieving brain.

It was crying.

It wept wearily, as if you had tuned in toward the end of a long session
of wild and lonesome grief. It cried quietly, exhaustedly, and as if
there was in all the universe no hope. And it cried in a voice which was
joltingly wrong for this place. It was a light, full voice, a tenor near
to contralto in timbre. Its overtones were childlike—not childish;
childlike—and it was wrong. Altogether wrong.

The wild ideas come first: _Stowaway?_

You almost laugh. For days before blastoff you were doped and drugged
and immersed in high-frequency fields; hypnotized, worked and reworked
mentally and physically. You were passively fed and passively
instructed; you don’t know now and you may never know all they did to
you. But you can be sure it was done inside six concentric rings of
“security” of one kind and another, and you can be sure that your
shipmate got the same. What it amounted to was concentrated attention
from a mob of specialists, every sleeping and waking second from the
time you beered it up at the class farewell dinner to the time the
accelerator tug lifted your ship and carried it screaming up and
outward. Nobody is in this ship but those who belong in it; that you can
absolutely bank on.

Mad idea the second: (Oh no; no! for a while you don’t even dare think
it. But with that kind of voice, that crying, you have to think of
something. So you do, and you’re scared, scared in a way you’ve never
imagined before, and to a degree you didn’t think was possible.)
_There’s a girl in there!_

You run those wordless syllables, those tired sobs, through your mind
again, seeking for vocalizations as separated from the breathy, painful
gasping that accompanied them. And you don’t know. You just can’t be
sure.

So punch the button again. Listen some more. Or—ask. But you can’t, you
can’t; the crazy idea might be true, and you couldn’t stand that. They
couldn’t, they just couldn’t put a girl on these ships with you—and then
put her behind the bulkhead.

Then you have an instant fantasy about all that; you kneel suddenly,
bumping your skull on the overhead, and flap your hands around the
bulkhead, where it meets deck plates, nose compartment, overhead, after
bulkhead; and all around, your fingers ride the bead of a weld. You sit
back, sweating a little and half laughing at yourself. Scratch one
fantasy; there’ll be no sliding partitions into no harems, this trip.

You stop laughing and think, they couldn’t be that cruel! You’re on a
test run, sure, and it isn’t the ship that’s being tested. You know that
and you accept it. But tests, tests … must you throw a glass vase on a
brick sidewalk to find out if it’s brittle? You see one of your own
hands going up and out to check for a panel, a join again. You sneer at
it, and watch it stop in embarrassment and slink home guiltily to the
deck beside you.

Well, say they weren’t that cruel. Who did they put in there?

Not Walkinok. Not Shank. Not Harris or Cohen, or any cadet. A cadet
wouldn’t lie there and cry like that, like a child, a schoolgirl, a
baby.

Some stranger, then. And now the anger comes, shouldering out all the
fear. They wouldn’t! This ship is everything a cadet was born for—made
for. That tight chain that bound you with the others, an easy thing you
all shared and never had to think about, that was a thing that didn’t
admit strangers. Aside from that, beyond that: this isn’t a matter of
desecrated esprit: it’s a matter of moral justice. Nobody but a cadet
_deserves_ a ship! What did you give your life to, and what for? Why did
you fluff off marriage, and freedom, and all the wonderful,
unpredictable trivialities called “fun” that make most human lives worth
living? Why did you hold still for Base routines, for the hazing you got
from the upper classmen? Just to have some stranger, someone who wasn’t
even a cadet, wander in without training, shaping, conditioning,
experience, and get on your ship?

Oh, it has to be a cadet. It couldn’t be anyone else. Even a cadet that
could break down and cry—that’s a more acceptable idea than its being a
woman, or a stranger.

You’re still angry, but now it’s not the kind of anger that stops you.
You push the button. You hear the carrier; then the beginnings of
something else … ah. Breathing. Difficult, broken breathing, the sound
of someone too tired to cry any more, even when crying has changed
nothing and there are more tears to come.

“What the hell are you bawling about?” you yell.

The breathing goes on, and goes on. Finally it stops for a moment, and
then a long, whispery, shuddery sigh. “Hey!” you yell. “Hey—you in
there!”

But there is no answer. The breathing is fainter, more regular. Whoever
it is, is going to sleep.

You press even harder on the button, as if that would do any good, and
you yell again, this time not even “Hey!” but a simpler, angrier
syllable. You can think only that your shipmate chooses—_chooses_, by
God—not to answer you.

You’re breathing hard now, but your shipmate isn’t. You hold your breath
and listen. You hear the deep, quiet inhalations, and then a small
catch, and a little sigh, the ghost of half a sob. “Hey!”

Nothing.

You let the button go, and in the sharp silence that replaces the
carrier’s faint hum, that wordless syllable builds and builds inside you
until it bursts free again. You can tell from the feel of your throat
and the ringing in your ears that it’s been a time, a long, long time
since you used your voice.

You’re angry and you’re hurt from these insults to yourself and to your
service, and you know what? You feel good. Some of the stereos you have
are pretty good; they take you right into battle, into the arms of
beautiful women, into danger, and from time to time you could get angry
at someone in them. You could, but you haven’t for a long time now. You
haven’t laughed or been angry since … since … well, you can’t even
remember when. You forgot how and you’ve forgotten just when it was you
forgot. And now look. The heart’s going, the sweat … this is fine.

Push the button again, take another little sip of anger. It’s been
aging; it’s vintage stuff. Go ahead. You do, and up comes the carrier.

“Please,” says the voice. “Please, please … say something else.”

Your tongue is paralyzed and you choke, suddenly, on a drop of your own
saliva. You cough violently, let go the button, and pound yourself on
the chest. For a moment you’re in bad shape. Coughing makes your
thinking go in spurts, and your thinking is bouncing up and down on the
idea that until now you didn’t really believe there was anyone in there
at all. You get your wind and push the button again. The voice says,
“Are you all right? Can I do anything?”

You become certain of something else: that isn’t a voice you recognize.
If you ever heard it before you sure don’t remember it. Then the content
of it hits you. “Can I do anything?”

You get mad again. “Yeah,” you growl, “hand me a glass of water.” You
don’t have your thumb on the button so you just say what pops into your
mind. You shake yourself like a wet bird dog, take a deep breath, and
lean on the control again.

Before you can open your mouth you’re in a hailstorm of hysterical
laughter. “Glass of water … uh-uh-uh … that’s good. You don’t know what
this means,” says the voice, suddenly sober and plaintive, “I’ve waited
so long, I’ve listened to your music and the sound from your
stereos … You never talk, you never say anything at all; I never even
heard you cough before.”

Part of your mind reacts to that: That’s unnatural, not even to cough,
or laugh aloud or hum. Must be a conditioning. But most of it explodes
at this stranger, this _intruder_, talking away like that without a word
of explanation, of apology, talking as if that voice had a right to be
here. _“Shaddap!”_

“I was beginning to think you were deaf ’n’ dumb. Or maybe even that you
weren’t there at all. That was the thing that scared me the most.”

“Shhut up,” you hiss, with all the fury, all the deadly warning you can
command.

“I knew they wouldn’t,” says the voice happily. “They’d never put a man
out here by himself. That would be too—” It stops abruptly as you
release the button.

My God, you think. The dam has boist. That charachter’ll chunter along
like that for the duration. You press the button quickly, hear “—all
alone out here, you get scared to look out the viewp—” and you cut him
off again.

That stuff like an invisible mist you see melting away is all that
conjecture, those wonderful half-formed plans of shipping out with
Walkinok or the Wire-haired Terror. You were going to review your
courses, remember? Slow and easy—take a week on spatial ballistics or
spectroscopy. Think it all over for a day between sentences. Or laugh
over the time you and the Shank got beered up at the canteen and
pretended you were going to tie up the C.O. and jet him off with
Provost, the head PD man, for a shipmate. The general would get all the
psychodynamics he needed. The general was always talking psychodynamics,
Colonel Provost was always doing psychodynamics. Ah, it seemed funny at
the time, anyway. It wasn’t so much the beer. It was knowing the
general, knowing Provost, that made it funny. How funny would it be with
a stranger?

They give you someone to talk to. They give you someone you haven’t
anything to talk to _about!_ The idea of shipping a girl behind the
bulkhead, now, that was a real horrible idea. That was torture. Well,
so’s this. Only much more refined.

A thought keeps knocking, and you finally back off and let it in.
Something to do with the button. You push it and you can hear your
shipmate. You release it and … shut off the intercom? No, by the Lord
you don’t. When you were coughing, you were off that button. _“Can I do
anything?”_

Now what the hell kind of business is this? (That detached part of your
mind reaches hungrily for the pulses of fury: ah, it feels good!) Do you
mean to sit there and tell me, you rage silently at the PD men who
designed this ship, that unless I push that button my shipmate can hear
everything that goes on with me? The intercom’s open on the other side
all the time, open on this side only when I push the button, is that it?

You turn and glare out the viewport, staring down the cold distant eye
of infinity, and _Where the hell_, you rage silently, _where the hell’s
my privacy?_

This won’t do. This won’t do at all. You figured right from the start
that you and your shipmate would be pretty equal, sure, but on a ship,
even a little two-passenger can like this, someone’s got to be in
command. Given that the other compartment has the same stereos, the same
dispensers, the same food and water and everything else, and the only
difference between these living quarters is that button—who’s
privileged? Me, because I get to push the button? Or my shipmate, who
gets to listen in on me when I so much as belch?

Oh, I know, you think suddenly. That’s a PD operative in there, a
psychodynamics specialist assigned to observe me! You almost laugh out
loud; relief washes over you. PD work is naturally hush-hush. You’ll
never know how many hours during your course you were under hypnosis. It
was even rumored around that some guys had cerebral surgery done by PD
boys, and never knew it. They had to work in secret for the same reason
you don’t stir your coffee with an ink stick. PD is one field where the
tools must leave no mark.

Well, fine, fine. At last this shipmate makes some sense, you’ve got an
answer you can accept. This ship, this trip, is of and for a cadet, but
it’s PD business. The only non-cadet who’d conceivably board you would
have to be a PD tech.

So you grin and reach for the button—then, remembering the way it works,
that the intercom’s open from your side when you’re off the button, you
draw your hand back, face the bulkhead, and say easily, “Okay, PD, I’m
on to you. How’m I doing?” You wonder how many cadets tumble to the
trick this soon. You push the button and wait for the answer.

The answer is “Hah?” in a mixture of shyness and mystification.

You let go the button and laugh. “No sense stringing it out,
Lieutenant.” (This is clever. Most PD techs are looeys; one or two are
master sergeants. Right or not, you haven’t hurt his feelings.) “I know
you’re a PD man.”

There’s a silence from the other side, then, “What’s a PD man?”

You get a little sore. “Now see here, Lieutenant, you don’t have to play
any more games.”

“Gosh,” says the bulkhead, “I’m no lieutenant. I—”

You cut him off quickly. “Sergeant, then.”

“You got me all wrong,” says that damnable, shy tenor.

“Well, you’re PD anyway,” I snap.

“I’m afraid I’m not.”

You can’t take much more of this. “Well, what the hell are you? You’re a
man, aren’t you?”

A silence. And as it beats by, that anger and that fear of torture begin
to mount, hand in hand. “Well!” you roar.

“Well,” says the voice, and you can practically see it shuffle its feet.
“I’m fifteen years old …”

You drag out your senior-class snap; there’s a way of talking to fourth
and third classmen that makes ’em jump. “Mister, you give an account of
yourself, but now. What’s your name?”

“Skampi.”

“Skampi? What the hell kind of name is that?”

“It’s what they call me.”

Did you detect a whisper of defiance there? “Sir!” you rasp.

The defiance disappears. “It’s what they call me … sir.”

“And what are you doing on my ship, mister?”

A frightened gulp. “I—I’m sorry, uh, sir. They put me on.”

“They? They?”

“At the Base … sir,” he amended quickly.

“You were on Base just how long, mister?” That “mister” could be a
lead-shotted whiplash if you did it right. It was sure being done right.

“I don’t know, sir.” You have the feeling the punk’s going to burst into
tears again. “They took me to a big laboratory and there were a lot of
sort of booths with machines in them. They asked me a lot of questions
about did I want to be a space man. Well, I did, I always did ever since
I was a kid. So after a while they put me on a table and gave me a shot
and when I woke up I was here.”

“Who gave you a shot? What was his name?”

“I never … I didn’t find out, sir.” A pause. “A big man. Old. He had
gray hair, very short. He had green eyes.”

Provost, by God, you think. This is PD business, all right, but from
where I sit, it’s monkey business. “You know any spatial ballistics?”

“No, sir. Some day I—”

“Astrogation?”

“Only what I picked up myself. But I’ll—”

“Gravity mechanics? Differentials? Strength of materials? Light-metal
fission? Relativity?”

“I—I—”

“Well? Well? Speak up, mister.”

“I heard of them, sir.”

“You heard of them sir!” you mimic. “Do you know what this ship is for?”

“Oh, yes, sir! Everybody knows that. This is the Long Haul. When you
come back from this, you get your commission and they give you a star
ship!” And if the voice had shuffled feet once, now its eyes shone.

“You figure to get a star ship, mister?”

“Well, I—I—”

“You think they give commands to Boy Scouts just because the Boy Scout
wants to go to space _awful_ bad?”

No answer.

You jeer, “Have you got the slightest idea how much training a cadet has
to go through, how much he has to learn?”

“Well, no, but I guess I will.”

“Sir!”

“Sir. Well, they put me aboard, all those officers who asked me the
questions and everything. It must be all right. Hey!” he says excitedly,
all the crushed timidity disappearing, replaced by a bubbling
enthusiasm. “I know! We have all this time … maybe you’re supposed to
teach me astrogation and relativity, and all that.”

Your jaw drops at the sheer childishness of it. And then something
really ugly drifts up and smothers everything else.

For some reason your mind flashes back to the bus, the day you got to
Base. You can remember back easily to all the faces you worked with,
those who made it and those who didn’t. But your class had thirty-eight
cadets in it. That bus must’ve held fifty. What happened to the rest?
You’d always assumed they went into other sections—ground crew, computer
men, maintenance. Suppose they’d been sorted out, examined for some
special trait or talent that only the PD men knew about. Suppose they
were loaded right aboard ships, each with a graduate cadet?

And why?

Suppose these punks, greenhorns, Boy Scouts, _children_—suppose they
were the ones slated for a commission? Suppose guys like you, thinking
you were the cream of the crop, and the top cream off that, suppose all
along you’d tested out as second-grade material. Suppose you were the
one who did the sweating and cramming and took the hazing and the
demerits and the lousy mess-hall food, not to command a star ship, not
to get a commission, but just to be private tutor to a boy genius who
wanted to go to space _awful_ bad.

This wouldn’t make sense anywhere else but in this service. It barely
made sense there. But look, a star-ship commander might make two trips
in his whole career, and that would be all. Eighteen years each round
trip, with his passengers in cold packs and a cargo of serums,
refractories, machine tools, and food concentrate for the xenologists
and e-t mineralogists who were crazy enough to work out there. Training
the commander for such a ship was easy, as far as operating knowledge
was concerned, though there was a powerful lot of it. But training him
to stay conscious—awake and aware—and alone—for all those years was
something else again. Few men like that were born; they had to be made.
Most of your recluses, your hermits, all through history, were guys who
had a couple of things drastically wrong with them. There couldn’t be
anything wrong with a star-ship commander. He had to be captain and deck
crew, and know his black hole as well (though most of the drive
machinery down there was automatic), and stay alert and sane in a black,
mad, weightless emptiness God never made him for. You could give him
more books and pictures, games and music than even he would have time
for, and still not be sure he’d stay sane unless he had some very
special inner resources. These—and one other thing—were what a cadet was
screened for, and what he was trained in. They packed him full of
technical knowledge, psyched him to a fare-thee-well, and when they
figured he was machine-finished and carrying a high gloss, they sealed
him in a can and threw it out for the Long Haul. The course was preset.
It might last fourteen months, and it might last three years, and after
a guy got back—if he got back—he would be fit to take out a star ship or
he would not. As for the shipmate—well, you’d always assumed that PD was
looking for a way to shake down two guys at once so that they would
carry eight, ten at once, and at last natural human gregariousness would
have a chance to compete with the pall of black distances. So far,
though, psychic disorientation had made everything mean and murderous in
a man explode into action; putting more than a single human being on
those boats was just asking for slaughter and shipwreck.

The other thing required of you besides technical ability and these
inner resources is _youth_. You’re only twenty-two. You’re twenty-two,
so full of high-intensity training that, as Walkinok once said, you feel
your brain convolutions are blown out smooth like a full bladder. And
you’ve compacted this knowledge, coded it, used it. You’re so full of it
that it’s bound to ooze out onto anyone around you. You’re twenty-two,
and you’re sealed up in a can with a thirsty-headed fifteen-year-old who
knows nothing but wants to go to the stars _awful_ bad. And you can
forget how stupid he seems to be, too, because you can bet your bulging
cortex that the kid as an I.Q. of nine hundred and umpteen, so he can
afford to act stupid. Cry.

What a dirty rotten lousy deal to put you through all this just to shave
seven years off the age of a star-ship commander! Next thing you know
they’ll put a diapered baby in with a work-weary sucker of a cadet, and
get three star trips out of him instead of two! And what’s become of
_you_? After you’ve done your generous stint of tutoring, they pin a
discharge emblem on your tunic and say well done, Cadet, now go raise
Brussels sprouts; and you stand at attention and salute the
downy-cheeked squirt in all the gold braid and watch him ride the gantry
to the control cabin you’ve aimed at and sweat for ever since you were
weaned!

You sprawl there in that living-space, so small you can’t stand up in
it, and you look at that bland belly of a bulkhead with its smooth round
navel of a button, and you think, well, there’s a lot of guts back of
that. You heave a deep breath (while still the detached part of your
mind looks on; now it’s saying wonderingly, aren’t you the guy who was
scared because nothing could get him excited anymore?) and you speak;
and your voice comes out sounding quite different from anything you’ve
ever heard from anyone before. Maybe you’ve never been this mad before.

_“Who told you to say that?”_

You push the button and listen.

“Say … what? Uh, sir?”

“About me teaching you. Anybody at Base?”

“Why …” He seems to be thinking. “Why, no, sir. I just thought it would
be a good idea.”

You don’t say anything. Just hold the button down.

He says diffidently, “Sort of … pass the time?” When you still don’t say
anything, he says wistfully, “I’d try. I’d try awful hard.”

You let go the button and growl, “I just bet you would. You just thought
it up all your own little self, huh?”

“Well, yes.”

“You’re a bright boy. You’re a real smart ambitious little _louse!_” You
push the button real quick but all you get is an astonished silence. You
say, real composed, almost gentle: “That ‘louse’ now, that’s not just a
figure of speech, little boy. I mean that. I mean you’re a crummy little
crawler looking to suck blood after somebody else’s done all the work.
You know what you do? You just make like you’re all alone in this can.
You don’t talk to me and you don’t listen to me and I’ll do you a favor,
I’ll forget all about you too. I’m not going to bat your eyeballs
together just yet, but don’t call me generous, little boy. It’s just
that I can’t reach in there just now.”

“No!” Now, that boy can make a real piteous noise when he wants to.
“No—no! Wait—please!”

“Well?”

“I don’t under—I mean, I’m sorry, Cadet. I’m honest-to-pete sorry, I
never meant—”

But you cut him off. You lie back and close your eyes; you’re thrumming
with fury, right down to your toenails. (This, says your internal
observer, is all right. This is living.)

The weeks pass, and so do more weeks. You shoot a star and make some
notes, and wait a while and shoot it again, and pretty soon you have
enough data to fool around with. You get your stylus and block and the
point darts around the way you want it to, and those old figures sit up
and lie down and rush around just the way you want them to. You laugh
when you do it; wouldn’t Junior just love to learn some of these tricks?
Anyway, you figure you’re just past the cusp perihelion of you parabola
and you’re starting back. You laugh again. The sound of your voice
reminds you that he can hear you, so you crawl over to the bulkhead and
push the button.

“Cadet,” he says. “Please, Cadet. Please.” And you know what? His voice
is hoarse and weak; the syllables come out as if they’re meaningless
from repetition. He’s probably been lying in there for weeks bleating.
“Cadet—please—Cadet—please,” every time you clicked the stylus against
your teeth or set the quadrant on you sun gun.

You spend a lot of time looking out the viewport, but you get sick of
that and turn to the euphorics. You see a lot of stereo shows. You are
somehow aware of the button in the bulkhead but you ignore it. You read.
You get a lot of use out of the octant; it seems you take a lot more
bearings than you have to. And when at last the button starts to be
intrusive, you make a real effort and leave it alone; you figure out
something else to do instead.

You take a careful survey of your instruments to figure which one you
need least, and finally decide on the air-speed indicator. You’ve spent
plenty of time in a mock-up and you know you can compute your air speed
by the hull temperature plus your ground-rise radar. You dismount the
instrument and take it apart, and get the diamond bearing. You go
through the games locker and the equipment chest until you put together
a nickel rod and a coil, and you hook onto your short-range radio where
the oscillations suit you. You cement the diamond to the tip of the rod,
shove the rod through the long axis of the coil. You turn on the juice
and feel rather than hear the rod humming softly. The phenomenon, dear
pupil, you say—but silently—is magnetostriction, whereby the nickel rod
contracts slightly in the magnetic field. And since the field is in
oscillation, that diamond on the tip is vibrating like crazy.

You get your stylus and after careful consideration you decide on a
triangle with round corners, just big enough to shove an arm through
comfortably; the three corners would make peepholes, so you can see
where your arm’s going. All the while you have quick fantasies about it.
You’ll knock the triangular piece out of the bulkhead and stick your
face in the hole and say, “Surprise!” And he’ll be cowering there
wondering what goes on. And you’ll say, shake and let bygones be; and
he’ll jump over, all eager, and you’ll take his hand and drag it through
the hole and get his wrist in both hands and put your back against the
bulkhead and pull till his shoulder dislocates. And maybe you could
break the arm, too. All the while he’s gasping, “Cadet, please,” until
you get tired of amusing yourself and haul the wrist around and sink
your teeth in it. Then he starts to bleed, and you just hold him there
while cadet-please gets fainter and fainter, and you explain to him all
about differential equations and mass ratios.

And while you’re thinking about this you’re going around and around the
blunted triangle with your vibrating diamond. The bulkhead is thick as
hell, and tough—it’s hull-metal, imagine that, for an inboard
bulkhead!—but that’s all right. You’ve got plenty of time. And bit by
bit, your scored lines goes deeper and deeper.

Every once in a while you take a breather. It occurs to you to wonder
what you’ll say when you’re grappled in and the colonel sees that hole
in the bulkhead. You try not to wonder about this but you do all the
same, a whole lot. You run it over in your mind and sometimes the
colonel says good, cadet, that’s real resourcefulness, the kind I like
to see. But other times it doesn’t quite come out that way, especially
with the kid dead on one side of the bulkhead and his blood all over the
place on the other side.

So maybe you won’t kill him. You’ll just scare him. Have fun with him.

Maybe he’ll talk, too. Maybe this entire Long Haul was set up by PD just
to find out if you’d cooperate with your shipmate, try to teach him what
you know, at any cost. And you know, if you thought more of the Service
than you do about your own dirty career in it, that’s just what you’d
do. Maybe if you did that they’d give you a star ship anyway, you and
the kid both.

So anyway, this cutting job is long and slow and suits you fine; no
matter what you think you go on with it, just because you started. When
it’s finished you’ll know what to do.

Funny, the result of this trip was going to be the same as some of those
you’d heard whispered about, where a ship came in with one guy dead and
the other … but that was the difference. To do a thing like that, those
guys must have been space-happy, right out of the groove. You’re doing
it, sure, but for different reasons. You’re no raving loony. You’re slow
and steady, doing a job, knowing just exactly why … Or you will, when
the time comes.

You’re real happy this whole time.

Then all that changes. Just why you can’t figure out. You turned in and
you slept, and all of a sudden you’re wide awake. You’re thinking about
some lab work you did. It was a demonstration of eddy-current effects.
There was a copper disk as thick as your arm and a meter in diameter,
swinging from a rope in the center of the gymnasium. You hauled it up to
the high ceiling at the far end and turned it loose. There was a big
electromagnet set up in the middle of the place, and as the disk reached
the bottom of its long swing it passed between the poles of the magnet,
going like hell. You threw the switch and as the disk reached the bottom
of its long swing it passed between the poles of the magnet, going like
hell. You threw the switch and the disk stopped dead right where it was,
and rang like a big gong though nothing had touched it.

Then you remembered the sixty zillion measurements you’d taken off a
synchro-cosmotron so big that it took you four minutes at a fast walk to
get from one end to the other.

You remember the mock-ups, the hours and hours of hi-G, no-G; one
instrument out, another, all of ’em, some of ’em; simulated meteorites
on collision orbit; manual landing techniques, until your brains were in
your hands and the seat of your pants, and you did the right things with
them without thinking. Even exhausted, you did it right. Even doped up.

You remember the trips down with Harris and Blaustein and the others.
Something happened to you every time you so much as walked down a street
with those guys. It was a thing you’d never told anyone. Part of it was
something that happened between the townspeople and your group. Part of
it was between your group and yourself. It all added up to being a
little different and a little better … but not in a cocky way. In a way
that made you grateful to the long heavy bulk of a star ship, and what
such ships are for.

You sit up in your bunk, with that mixed-up, wide-awake feeling,
reaching for something you can’t quite understand, some one simple thing
that would sum up the huge equipment, the thousands of measurements, the
hours of cramming and the suspense of examinations; the
seat-of-the-pants skills and the pride in town …

And suddenly you see what it is. That kid in there, he could have an
I.Q. of nine goddam thousand and never learn how to put down a rocket
with all his instruments out and the gyros on manual. Not by somebody
telling him over an intercom when he’s never even sat in a G-seat. He
might memorize twelve thousand slightly varying measurements off a
linear accelerator but he wouldn’t gain that certain important thing you
get when you make those measurements yourself. You could describe the
way the copper disk rang when the eddy current stopped it, but he would
have to see it happen before it did to him all the things it did to you.

You still don’t know who that kid is or why he’s here, but you can bet
one thing: he isn’t here to pick your brains and take your job. You
don’t have to like him and you can be mad he’s aboard instead of Harris
or Walky; but get that junk out of your head right now about his being a
menace to you. And where did that poisonous little crumb in your brain
come from? Since when are you subject to fear and jealousy and
insecurity; since when do you have to guard yourself against your own
imagination?

Come the hell off it, Cadet. You’re not that good a teacher; he’s not
that much of a monster.

Monster! God, did you hear him cry, that time?

You feel twenty pounds lighter (which is odd since you’re still in free
fall), and as if you’d just washed your face. “Hey, Krampi!”

You go push the button and wait. The carrier comes. Then you hear a
sharp, short inhalation. A sniff … no, you won’t call it that. “Skampi,
sir,” he corrects you timidly.

“Okay, whatever you say. And knock off the ‘sir.’ ”

“Yessir. Yes.”

“What were you crying about?”

“When, s—”

“Okay,” you say gently. “You don’t have to talk about it.”

“Oh, nonono. No. I wasn’t trying to deny it. I … cried twice. I’m sorry
you heard me. You must think …”

“I don’t think,” you say sincerely. “Not enough.”

He thinks that over and apparently drops it. “I cried right after
blastoff.”

“Scared?”

“No … yes, I was, but that wasn’t why. I just …”

“Take your time.”

“Th-thanks. It was just that I—I’d always wanted to be in space. I
thought about it in the daytime and dreamed about it at night. And all
of a sudden there it was, happening to me for real. I … thought I ought
to say something, and I opened my mouth to do it and all of a sudden I
was crying. I couldn’t help it. I guess I—Crazy, I guess.”

“I wouldn’t say so. You can hear talk and see pictures and get yourself
all ready, but there’s nothing like doing it. _I_ know.”

“You, you’re used to it.” He seems to want to say something else; you
hold the button down. Finally, with difficulty, he says, “You … you’re
big, aren’t you? I mean, you’re … you know. Big.”

“Well, yes.”

“I wish I was. I wish I was good for … well, something.”

“Everybody push you around?”

“Mm.”

“Listen,” you say, “You know those star ships. You take a single human
being and put him down next to a star ship. They’re not the same size
and they’re not the same shape, and one of ’em’s pretty insignificant.
But you can say _this_ built _this_.”

“Y-e-eah.” It is a whisper.

“Well, you’re that human being, that selfsame one. Ever think of that?”

“No.”

“Well, neither did I till now,” you say rapidly. “It’s the truth,
though.”

He says, “I wish I was a cadet.”

“Where do you come from, kid?”

“Masolo. It’s no-place. Jerk town. I like big places with big stuff
going on. Like the Base.”

“Awful lot of people charging around.”

“Yeah,” he says. “I don’t like crowds much, but the Base—it’s worth it.”

You sit and look at the bulkhead. It’s companionable suddenly, and sort
of changed, as if it were suddenly warm, or quilted. You get a splinter
of light off the bright metal where you’ve scored it. It’s down pretty
deep. A man could stand up to it and knock that piece out with a maul,
if a man could stand up, if he had a maul. You say, suddenly and very
fast as if you’re afraid something’s going to stop you, “Ever do
anything you were really ashamed of? I did when I talked to you the way
I did. I shouldn’t’ve done it like that. I don’t know what got into me.
Yes, I do and I’ll tell you. I was afraid you were a boy genius planted
on me to strip my brains and take my command. I got scared.” It all
comes out like that. You feel much better and at the same time you’re
glad Walkinok and Shank aren’t around to hear you spout like that.

The kid’s very quiet for a while. Then he says, “One time my mother sent
me to the market and something was a special. I forget what. But anyway
I had forty cents’ change and I forgot about it. I found it in my pants
in school the next day and bought a star-ship magazine with it, and
never told her about it. I used to get every issue that way after that.
She never missed it. Or maybe she did but didn’t say anything. We were
pretty hard up.”

You understand that the kid is trying to give you something, because you
apologized to him. You don’t say anything more about that. Right here a
wonder starts to grow. You don’t know what it is but you know that
stand-off-and-watch part of your mind is working on it. you say, “Where
is this Masolo?”

“Upstate. Not far from the Base. Ever since I was a baby the axi-tugs
were shaking the house when they took off. There’s a big tree outside
the house and all the leaves shiver, with the tugs, you know. I used to
climb out a limb and get on the roof and lie down on my back. Sometimes
you could see the star ships orbiting. Just after the sun goes down,
sometimes you can …” He swallows; you can hear it plainly. “I used to
put out my hand. It was like a firefly, up there.”

“Some firefly,” you say.

“Yeah. Some firefly.”

Inside you the wonder is turning to a large and luminous astonishment.
It’s still inexpressible so you leave it alone.

The kid is saying, “I was with two other kids out by the high school one
time. I was just a kid, eleven I think. Well, some gorillas from the
high school, they chased us. We ran and they caught up with us. The
other kids started to fight them. I got over to one side and when I had
a chance I ran. I ran all the way home. I wish I’d stayed there with
those other two kids. They got the tar kicked out of them and I guess it
hurt, but I guess it stopped hurting after some teacher came along and
broke up the fight. But I get hurt every time I think about it, running
away like that. Boy, did those two give me a razzing when they saw me
next day. Boy. So what I wanted to ask you, you don’t think a kid who
would run away like that could be a cadet.” He ends it like that, flat.
No question.

You think about it. You’ve been in some fine brawls as a cadet. You’re
in a bar and someone cracks wise, and your blood bubbles up, and you
wade in, feeling fine. But maybe that’s just because of the corps, the
business of belonging. You say carefully, “I think if I was in a fight
I’d rather have a guy on my side who knew what cowardice felt like. I
think it would be like having two guys on my side, instead of one. One
of the guys wouldn’t care if he got hurt and the other guy would never
want to be hurt that way again. I think a fellow like that would be a
pretty good cadet.”

“Well, all right,” says the kid, in that funny whisper.

Suddenly the inner astonishment bursts into sight and you recognize what
it is about this kid. At first you were scared of him, but even when
that went away you didn’t like him. There was no question of liking him
or not liking him; he was a different species of being that you couldn’t
have anything to do with. And the more you talked with him the more you
began to feel that you didn’t have to set yourself apart from him, that
he had a whole lot you didn’t have and that you could use it. The way he
talked, honest and unabashed, you don’t know how to do that. You nearly
choked to death apologizing to him.

Suddenly it’s very important to get along with this kid. It isn’t
because the kid is important; it’s because if you can get along with
somebody so weak, so wet behind the ears, and yet in his particular way
so rich, why, you can get along with anybody, even your own lousy self.
You realize that this thing of getting along with him has extension
after extension. Somehow, if you can find more ways to get along with
this kid, if you can see more things the way he sees them with no
intolerance and no altitude, you’ll tap something in yourself that’s
been dried up a long time now.

You find all this pretty amazing, and you settle down and talk to the
kid. You don’t eke it out. You know he’ll last all the way back to the
Base and have plenty left over. You know, too, that by the time you get
there this kid will know a cadet can be a louse too. You can give him
that much. The way you treated him, he was hurt, but you know, he wasn’t
mad? He doesn’t think he’s good enough to get mad at a cadet. Well,
we’re going to fix that.

The time goes by and the time comes; the acceleration tug reaches out
and grabs you high up, so after all that manual-control drill you don’t
have a thing to do but sit there and ride it down. The tug hovers over
the compound right near the administration building, which disappears in
a cloud of yellow dust. You sink down and down in the dust cloud until
you think they must be lowering you into a hole in the ground; then at
last there’s a slight thump and an inhuman amount of racket as the tug
blasts away free. After that there’s only the faint whisper of the air
circulator, the settling dust, and a profoundly unpleasant feeling in
calves and buttocks as the blood gets used to circulating in a 1-G
environment.

“Now don’t you forget, Skampi,” you say. You find it difficult to talk;
you’ve got a wide grin plastered across your face and you can’t cast it
adrift. “Just as soon as ever they’re through with you, you come looking
for me, hear? I’ll buy you a soda.”

You lean back in your G-chair and hold the button. “I can drink beer,”
he says manfully.

“We’ll compromise. We’ll make your soda with beer. Listen, kid. I can’t
promise, but I know they’re fooling with the idea of a two-man crew for
starships. How’d you like to go with me, one trip anyhow? Course, you’ll
have to be conditioned six ways from the middle, double-time, and it’ll
be real tough. But—what do you say?”

And you know, he doesn’t say anything?

He laughs, though.

Now here comes Provost, the big brass of Psychodynamics, and a young
M.P. That’s all the welcoming committee you’ll get. The compound’s
walled and locked, and no windows look out on it. They must have
unloaded some pretty sorry objects from these cans from time to time.

They open the hatch from the outside and you immediately start coughing
like hell. Your eyes say the dust has settled but your lungs say no. By
the time you have your eyes wiped the M.P. is inside, and squatting on
the deck, crossed-legged. He says cheerfully, “Hi-kay dee. This here’s a
stun gun and if you so much as look wall-eyed at me or the colonel you
get flaked out like a heaving-line.”

“Don’t worry about me,” you say from behind that silly grin. “I got no
quarrel with anybody and I like it here. Good morning, Colonel.”

“Look out for this one,” said the M.P. “Likes it here. He’s sick.”

“Shat up, wheelhead,” says the colonel cheerfully. He has his gray
crewcut and barrel torso shoved into the hatch and it’s real crowded in
that little cabin. “Well, Cadet, how are we?”

“We’re fine,” you say. The M.P. cocks his head a little to one side and
gets bright-eyed; he thinks you’re sassing the colonel, but you’re not;
when you say “we” you mean you and your shipmate.

“Anything special happen?”

The answer to that is a big fat yes, but it would take forever to tell.
It’s all recorded anyway; PD doesn’t miss a trick. But that’s from then
till now, and done with. I’m concerned with from now on. “Colonel, sir,
I want to talk to you, right now. It’s about my shipmate.”

The colonel leans a little further in and slaps the M.P.’s gun hand.
He’s in front of the guy so I can’t see his face. “Beat it, wheelhead.”

The M.P. clears out. You stagger up out of the G-seat and climb through
the hatch. The colonel catches your biceps as you stagger. After a long
time in free fall your knees won’t lock as you walk; you have to stiffen
each one as your weight comes on it, and you have to concentrate. So you
concentrate but that doesn’t stop you from talking. You skim over the
whole business, from your long solo to being reduced to meeting the
shipmate, and the fight you had with yourself over that, and then this
thing that happened with the kid—weeks of it, and here you feel you’ve
only just begun. “You can pick ’em, sir,” you pant as you hobble along.
“Do you always use a little know-nothing kid? Where do you find ’em?
Does it always work this well?

“We get a commander on every ship,” he says.

“Hey, that’s great, sir.”

“We don’t have very many ships,” he says, just as cheerfully.

“Oh,” you say. Suddenly you stop. “Wait, sir, what about Skampi? He’s
still locked in his side.”

“You first,” says the colonel. We go on into the PD lab.

“Up you go,” he says, waving. You look at the big chair with its straps
and electrodes and big metal hood. “You know, they used chairs like
these in the French Revolution,” you say, showing off. You’re just
busting with cheerfulness today. You _never_ felt like this. You sit in
the big chair. “Look, sir, I want to get started on a project right
away. This kid, now, I tell you he’s got a lot on the ball. He’s space
man right to the marrow-bones. He comes right from around here, that
little place up the pike, Masolo. You know. He got shook out of his
bassinet by the axi-tugs; he spent his childhood lying on his back on
the roof looking for the star ships in orbit. He’s—”

“You talk all the time,” says the colonel mildly. “Sum up, will you? You
made out with your shipmate. You think you could do it again in a star
ship. That it?”

“Think we can try it? Hey, really? Look, can I be the one to tell him,
Colonel?”

“Shut your mouth and sit still.”

Those are orders. You sit still. The colonel gets you strapped in and
connected up. He puts his hand on the switch. “Where did you say you
came from?”

You didn’t say, and you don’t, because the hood swings down and you’re
surrounded by a sudden dissonant chord of audio at tremendous amplitude.
If you had been allowed to say, though, you wouldn’t have known. The
colonel doesn’t even give you time to be surprised at this. You sink
into blackness.

It gets light again. You have no idea how much time has passed, but it
must be a good deal, because the sunlight from outside has a different
color and slants a different way through the venetian blinds. On a bench
nearby is a stack of minicans with your case number painted on each
one—that’s the tape record of your Long Haul. There’s some stuff in
there you’re not proud of but you wouldn’t swap the whole story for
anything. “Hello, Colonel.”

“You with us again? Good.” He looks at an enlarged film strip and back
at me. He shows me. It’s a picture of the bulkhead with the triangular
score in it. “Magnetostriction vibrator, with a diamond bearing for a
drill bit, hm? Not bad. You guys scare me. You really do. I’d have sworn
that bulkhead couldn’t be cut and that there was nothing in the ship
that could cut it. You must’ve been real eager.”

“I wanted to kill him. You know that now,” you say happily.

“You damn near did.”

“Aw, now, Colonel, I wouldn’t have gone through with it.”

“Come on,” he says, opening the buckles.

“Where, sir?”

“To your space can. Wouldn’t you like to have a look at it from the
outside?”

“Cadets aren’t permitted—”

“You qualify,” says the old man shortly.

So out you go to the compound. The can still stands where it was landed.
“Where’s Skampi?”

The colonel just passes you an odd look and walks on. You follow him up
to the can. “Here, around the front.”

You walk around to the bow and look up at it. It’s just the shape it
ought to be from the way it looked from inside, except it looks a little
like a picture of a whale caught winking at you … Winking? One-eyed!

“Do you mean to tell me you had that kid in a blind compartment, without
so much as a viewport?” you rage.

The colonel pushes you. He does it again. “Sit. Over there. On the
hatch. You returning heroes and your manic moods … _siddown!_”

You sit on the edge of the open hatch. “Sometimes they fall down when I
tell ’em,” he says gruffly. “Now, what was bothering you?”

“Locking that kid up in a dark—”

“There isn’t a kid. There isn’t a dark cabin. There’s no viewport on
that side of the can because it’s a hydrazine tank.”

“But I—but we—but the—”

“Where do you come from?”

“Masolo, but what’s that to—”

“What did your mother and all the kids call you when you were a
space-struck teener?”

“Scampy. They’re all—_Scampy?_”

“That’s right.”

You cover your face. “By God. By God. I can remember now—thinking back
in detail over my life—but it started _in the bus_ that day I passed the
entrance exams. What is it? Please—what is it?”

“Well, if you want me to be technical they call it Dell’s hypothesis. It
was promulgated ’way back in the 1960’s by a lay analyst named Dudley
Dell, who was, as I remember, the editor of a love-story magazine. He—”

“Please, Colonel,” you say. You’re in trouble.

“Okay, okay,” he says soothingly. “Well, up to that time psychologists,
particularly analysts, were banging their heads against a stone wall in
certain cases, and sometimes banging up the patient in the process.
These were cases where infantile behavior, or infantile impulses, were
running counter to adult environment and conditioning. Some of these
primitive head-shrinkers got close to the real difficulty when they
tried to have the patient act out this childish stuff. If a patient had
eight-year-old wishes, the doc would say, “All right, say it—or do
it—_as if you_ were eight. This was—”

“Are you, sir, Colonel sir, going to tell me please the hell what’s with
_me?_”

“I am,” he says calmly. “This was worse than useless in most cases
because the ‘as if’ idea made the patient disbelieve in this active
eight-year-old within him—a very viable, hard-fighting eight-year-old it
was, too. So when behavior got more infantile, the doc would pull his
beard, or his chin, and say, ‘Hm_-hm_, schizophrenia,’ thereby scaring
the liverwurst out of the patient. Dell stopped all that.”

“Dell stopped all that,” you say, suffering.

“It was a little thing, like E=MC² or Newton’s apple, but oh, my, what
happened!”

“Oh, my,” you say. “What happened?”

“Dell began directing his therapy to the infantile segment, treating it
as a living, conscious organism. It responded excellently; it changed
the face of psychoanalysis. Those who suffered from childish acts had
the child who was acting that way contacted and controlled. Now, in your
case—you’re not going to interrupt? Good. In your case, an extension of
Dell’s hypothesis was used. The sum total of your life up until you took
your entrance examinations for Service training was arrested at age
fifteen. A hypnotic barrier was erected so that you could have no access
to any of this. You—all you cadets—literally start a new life here, with
no references whatever to an earlier one. Your technical education has
no referral factor to anything but itself. It makes you learn quickly
and with uncluttered minds. You never miss your past because you carry a
powerful hypnotic command not to think of it.

“When this was first tried, our men were left with memories including
only their training, and permitted to go on indefinitely. Well, it
didn’t work. They were inhuman and un-sane. The conditioning of infants
is far too important to the total human being to be wiped out that way.
So we developed this new system, which has been used on you.

“But we discovered a peculiar thing. Even untrained adults—as opposed to
the sharp division of pre- and post-entrance that you have—even
untrained adults suffer to greater or less degree from an internal
strife between childhood acceptances and the adult matrix. An
exaggerated example would be a child’s implicit belief in Santa Claus
and the Easter Bunny, existing at the same time with the adult’s total
discrediting of the legends. The child (according to Dell, and to me)
still exists and will fight like the very devil for survival, beliefs
and all.

“The schism between you and Scampy was extreme; you were, in effect,
born on different planets. To be a complete human being, you had to be
rejoined; but to be rejoined successfully, you and Scampy had to make
peace with one another. For Scampy it was not difficult—you, even in
injustice and cruelty—were a real live heroimage. But you had a rather
more stony path. But somewhere within yourself, somehow, you found an
element of tolerance and empathy, and used it to bridge the gap. I may
say,” the colonel adds severely, “that it takes a particularly fine kind
of person to negotiate this difficult merger. You are not usual, Cadet;
not usual at all.”

“Scampy,” you murmur. Impulsively you pull your shirt away from your
chest and look down as if there were something hiding there. You look
up. “But he—_talked_ to me! Don’t tell me you’ve quietly invented a
telepathic converter with band-pass filters.”

“Of course not. When the barrier was erected between you and Scampy,
Scampy was conditioned to speak subvocally—that is, back in the throat
and virtually without lip movement. You have a subminiature transmitter
deposited surgically in your pharynx. The button on your bulkhead
induced it to turn on. There had to be a button, you see; we couldn’t
have you two speaking at the same time, as people in the same room
invariably do.”

“I can’t get used to it. I can’t. I practically _saw_ the boy! Listen,
Colonel, can I keep my transmitter where it is, and have the same rig on
my star ship?

“Who said you’re getting a star ship?” growls the colonel.

“Well, I thought—”

“Of _course_ you’re getting a star ship.” He smiles, although I think it
hurts his face. “You really want that transceiver set-up?”

“He’s a good kid.”

“Very well, Cadet. Commander. Dismissed.” He marches away. You look
after him, shaking your head. Then you duck into the space can. You look
at the bulkhead and at the button and at the scoring on the plate where
you came _that_ close to filling your hydrazine supply. You shudder.

“Hey,” you call softly. “Scamp!”

You push the button. You hear the carrier, then “I’m thirsty,” says
Scampy.

You cut out of there and go down to the rec area and into the
short-order bar. “A beer,” you say. “And put a lump of vanilla ice-cream
in it. And straws.”

“You crazy?” says the man.

“No,” you say. “Oh, no.”



THE RIDDLE OF RAGNAROK


JOY WAS NOT JOY in Asgard, for all the ale and the heady mead, the
singing and the wild hard laughter. Clink and clatter and clash rang the
arms; whip and whicker and thud the arrows. Sinews were tuned and toned
and honed and hardened, and speech was mighty, and much of the
measureless night belonged to the unearthly yielding of the Aesir
goddesses, whose limbs were magic.

Here were the heroes of Earth, here the dazzle-winged Valkyrs; here in
the halls of not-quite-forever they feasted and fought and found that
which mortality is too brief and too fragile to grant.

The Aesir were made for joy, and the heroes had earned it, and their
joys were builded of battle, and to battle they built. The battle they
faced was the battle of Ragnarok; they would fight the Giants at
Ragnarok; they would dare death at Ragnarok, and there they would die.

There was woe in the winds about Asgard. It was there like a bitterness
in the drinking horns and it cut like cold. Hope lay frozen in the iron
ground, moon-silver mantled the battlements like a winding-sheet, and
against the stars the eagles floated, crying a harsh despair.

Heroes new-come to Valhalla heard of it, after their feast of honor,
after they settled into the halls of the brave and looked about them and
called this cold and mighty land their own. Sooner or later they asked
and were told:

In the spring of the world when the mountains were new and the sea not
salt, and Yggdrasil, tree of trees, but a blooming shrub, good Odin the
sky-father, seeker of wisdom, descended a Well where dwelt Mimir the
Wise. For a terrible price, the least part of which was one of his eyes,
he was given knowledge unthinkable.

Odin learned the Runes, and the way to take from the Giants the skaldic
mead which makes him who tastes it a poet. He learned the ways of wild
things and the tricks of the halflings issuing from unspeakable unions
between the Giants and the elf folk. But of all he learned, the greatest
and most terrible was the doom of Asgard: the certain victory of the
Giants at Ragnarok.

Ever after, Odin was dedicated to forestalling that Day. Never again did
he laugh, and only his silent wife Frigga knew completely his torment,
and would silently brood over it and weep as she spun threads of gold.
At the feasts, Odin presided but would not eat; two great wolves who lay
at his feet had his share. He seemed never to join altogether in the
company, though he always attended.

He would sit at the board in his golden palace Gladsheim with his wolves
and his two ravens—Hugin, who was Thought, and Munin, who was Memory—who
used to fly the world and return to him with news of all that happened
in it; and he would ponder. And sometimes in his kirtle of gray and his
dazzling blue hood he would walk the battlements or stand searching the
sky.

Then he might call Tyr, war’s god, or Thor, mightiest of them all, and
give them tasks and duties, the purpose of which only he could know;
these were the means of strengthening Asgard and delaying Ragnarok; but
for what? for what? Asgard was doomed.

So it was that all colors in Asgard bore a tint of sadness, and a piece
of every voice was mourning.

A sadness such as this was a wonder, but it was not the only wonder of
Asgard. There was once a greater wonder than the wisdom of Odin or the
strength of Thor: it was a thing more beautiful even than the one part
of Asgard visible to mortal eyes, the rainbow bridge of Heimdall. The
god Freyr, of the fruits of Earth, never served the world so well, the
songs of Freyr herself lent less glory to the world than did the young
god Balder.

In this atmosphere of awe and strangeness, of power and of powers,
Balder moved with the confidence of a child in a loving home. His
quality was a brightness—not like that of gold, or steel, but that of
summer mornings, clean hair, first love, or high new notes from some
seasoned lute. He was goodness and all kindness, and he was loved as no
man nor no thing was ever loved before or since.

Balder was loved by god and hero alike, by Giant and elf and halfling,
by the beasts, by the rocks and the very sky. It was said, in Balder’s
time, that only he could keep life in doomed Asgard; only such light as
his could cancel the dark shadow of Ragnarok.

He shed his light wherever he went, and he went everywhere. There lay in
him no evil. He was welcomed, not only in Asgard, but in Jotunheim where
the Giants dwelt. Hela, who ruled over the dead, found a smile—even
she—for Balder, and in the blackest heart of the wilderness the bears
sat like kittens and watched him pass.

As all things must somehow be matched and balanced, and since one of the
Aesir could move freely in all realms, so there was the son of a Giant
who drank and sang in Valhalla and Gladsheim when he willed; he was the
laughing devil Loki. His eyes saw more than did the ravens of Odin, and
his heart was a catacomb in which his loyalties and his loves could be
led and lost.

Yet so quick was his wit and so hilarious his mischief that he might
have been tolerated in doomed Asgard for these alone. But least of all
things did he need to earn a place at the feasts of Gladsheim; he was
sworn blood-brother to Odin in payment of an old partnership in the dawn
of the world, and he could not be challenged.

So he went his way, careless; and about him was no fidelity nor anything
which could be predicted, save his love for Balder: this, in the world,
was as inescapable as sun, as frost, or any other pervading natural
force.

Now on a terrible morning bright Balder woke wondering; he felt
something which was, for him, most strange. He went to Frigga, his
mother, and told her of it, and she listened and questioned him, and
listened again, until she could tell him that what he felt was fear.

“Fear, Mother?” he said.

“Ay,” she said; “a kind of warning, a foreboding of danger.”

“I like it not, Mother.”

“Nor do I; I shall take it from thee.”

And take it she did.

What has never been done before or since, Frigga did; and if it were not
that time is counted differently in Asgard than elsewhere, she would
never have had time enough. All about Asgard she went, and among the
Vanir, their neighbors; even through Jotunheim she walked, her mission
opening gates before her like a magic key. She went also to the world of
men, where, they say, she walked in the season between flower and frost,
so that to this day Earth turns glorious for a time in memory of her,
and then the leaves fall and the trees feign death in memory of what
followed.

And she went to places where dwelt neither gods nor men, nor Giants:
places with names better not recalled.

And to everyone and every thing she met—to stones and sky and all who
lived between them; to roots however deep and to high air-sucking
blossoms; to the blood-bearers, warm and cold; to all with fangs,
feathers or fins, hands or hooves; and to the wind, and to ice, and the
sea; to all these she spoke, saying, “I bring tidings of evil: the
unthinkable has happened, and Balder is touched by fear. Give me thy
promise that, from thee, harm shall never come to him! That is all I ask
of thee.”

Gladly then, gladly the high and the tall, the ancient, the once-living
and the never-alive—all gave their bond; and not from them could harm
come to Balder.

Back then to Asgard went Frigga, wearily. She noticed as she entered
that high by the gate grew a tumble of glossy leaves and waxen white
berries. She smiled then at the mistletoe, a green given to small and
happy magics, and let it be, asking nothing of it. She sought out Balder
and told him of what she had done, kissed his bright face and fell in a
swoon.

She slept then, for a time long even in Asgard.

II

The news blew through stark Asgard like a warm wind, and the Aesir
rejoiced. It was almost as if Ragnarok itself was removed from their
thoughts—indeed, might not this be an inroad on their doom? For was not
Balder of the Aesir? And were not the Aesir to die at Ragnarok? Yet now
it was also true that no harm could come to Balder …

Ragnarok receded, and even Odin nearly smiled. He had, however, the
habit of pondering, and it was a trouble to him that Ragnarok could be,
or that Balder might live through it, but not both. He buried this
problem in a silent place within him and there worked on it mightily.

Balder was given a feast at Gladsheim, with such singing, such tries of
arms, such mountains of succulent food and oceans of mead as were
memorable even in Asgard.

And it came about that Balder found himself standing in the courtyard,
laughing, while all about him the warriors of Gladsheim and of Valhalla
rushed at him with sword and mace, nocked and aimed their arrows,
plunged and lunged at him with sword and lance.

The lances bent away from his shining body and the swords met a stony
nothingness about him and bounced away ringing. The arrows rose to pass
him, or slipped aside.

Above on her throne, Frigga sat watching. She was pale still from her
ordeal and perhaps overwrought because of it. She kept touching her lips
as if to stop their trembling, or perhaps to check some warning she knew
was unneeded. This was Balder’s pleasure and that of the gods and heroes
about him; should she then call caution as if he were still her golden
babe?

At length her eye fell upon Loki, who stood to the side, where Balder’s
blind brother Hodar sat, stony eyes wide and an eager smile on his
mouth, trying with all his heart to know the details of Balder’s joy.
Summoning Loki, the god-queen waved her ladies back, and met the
mischief-maker’s bold gaze with a great pleading.

“I say this to thee myself, good Loki,” she said quietly, “rather than
send the message, that you may know it pains me. But I fear a mischief,
and to think of mischief is to think of thee. No one loves Balder better
than thee, and I believe it—yet I were happier with you gone from this
hall. Indulge me, then …”

Something indescribable and ugly moved in Loki’s bright eyes, yet he
smiled. “Since you ask, lady,” he said and turned away, adding
arrogantly over his shoulder, “but do not command me, I shall go.”

He sprang down the steps and out into the night.

Frigga drew her shawl of tiny feathers close about her and shivered. Her
ladies, cooing like a cote, closed about her. For long moments they
whispered to her and to each other, until her great kindness asserted
itself and she began, in turn, to soothe them in their concern.

“I am weary and foolish,” she said; “none knows better than I how safe
he is. Yet …” She paused while the laughing god turned his back to a
black-armored hero swinging a knobbed mace, and paled until the weapon
slipped from the mailed hand in midstroke and crashed into the wall.
“Yet will I be happier when this noisy childishness is done.”

“But Lady Frigga—you missed nothing. Did not all the world promise not
to harm him?”

“Whatever I missed matters not,” Frigga said.

“Was there something, then?” asked a soft voice.

Frigga widened her eyes and turned to the woman, a stranger to her—but
the halls were populous and this a great festival; folk had come from
afar.

“Only the mistletoe,” said Frigga comfortingly, and the other ladies
laughed at the idea of the gentle mistletoe as a danger.

Later, the woman was gone from her side, and was seen kneeling by blind
Hoder, to help him, with her words, see the action, it seemed. And
Frigga was pleased, for she saw the blind god’s head come up, and heard
him laugh and cry out, “Balder! May I cast at thee?”

“Ay; I am fair game tonight!” cried Balder, and went to stand before his
brother. “Here I am before thee; may fortune favor thy aim!” he said
mockingly.

Then Hoder rose, and raised his arm. The woman was seen to turn him a
little, better to face Balder squarely. Then Hoder hurled the sprig of
mistletoe that he held, and it pierced Balder’s heart. Balder uttered
one great cry, all astonishment and no fear, and he fell, and he died.

Dark Hela, ruler of the underworld Niflheim, took the murdered god
hungrily, as one who had waited long aeons; and indeed she had. And when
Balder’s second brother Hermod came there at Frigga’s bidding, to ransom
Balder back, Hela yielded to this degree: that if every living thing
would weep for him, she would surrender him, but if a single one would
not mourn, then forever he would be Hela’s.

Back Hermod came with the word, and indeed it seemed a simple matter,
for already all creation wept, the midges keened, and great splashes of
color dripped from the rainbow bridge.

Yet in Jotunheim dwelt a Giantess, a strange, ageless creature steeped
in sorcery and locked away from the world. All around her was weeping,
even the Giants finding the death of this one enemy more than they could
bear. Yet she would not weep for him nor anyone.

“Balder? Balder? Let the dead stay dead. Only dry tears will ye get from
me. I had no good from this Balder, nor will I give him good.” And no
other word would she say; and so was Balder’s death sealed.

And who killed him? Who killed the bright one who had no enemies, who
had done no ill? Who was capable of an act so monstrous, so useless and
cruel?

The heartsick Hoder testified that the mistletoe, which he examined
afterward, smelt of Giant.

Who, being part Giant, had access to Gladsheim?

The woman who had given the mistletoe to Hoder and urged him to throw it
had disappeared. Who was she? Or—was it a woman? Who was the greatest of
all adepts at disguise; who had once fought a battle with the god
Herindal in the shape of a seal?

The answer to all these questions was the same: _Loki, Loki Loki_.

And Loki was found outside, not impossibly far from the gate whence the
mysterious woman-thing had fled, still sparkling with anger at having
been asked to leave the hall. No one had seen him nor knew what he had
done since he left.

So he was brought in, and chained. He said he was innocent and no more
than that. Since the blood-brother of Odin could not be slain, he was
lowered into a foul pit; and above him was suspended a frightful serpent
in such wise that its venom dripped on him. And he was doomed to hang
there until Ragnarok.

Then a pall settled over Asgard. Frigga, when she could, spun her golden
threads and was silent. Great Odin brooded, Tyr and Thor, without
guidance or orders, cast war and thunder about the earth as the casual
spirit moved them.

Odin’s twin ravens, Hugin, who was Thought, and Munin, who was Memory,
quarreled bitterly over the fact that Munin had taken unto himself the
duty of reporting to Odin the events of that evil night, while Hugin
felt it was his privilege.

They went their separate ways, and though they might have been recalled
by a word from Odin, he had not the word, for he cared no longer what
happened in the world of men, or indeed in his own house.

So indeed it seemed true that Balder was needed in Asgard, lest the mere
shadow of Ragnarok settle over the Aesir and crush them before there
could be a battle at all.

This is the story which was told and retold for more than seven thousand
years, as men count time. This, for all that while, was the complexion
of Asgard. There, for a million moments measured by drops of scalding
venom, hung Loki. And this is the prelude to the prelude of Ragnarok.

III

Munin flew high, and higher, turning one bright eye and then the other
to the frozen land below. He flew because he must seek, he sought
because he could not forget: his name was Memory.

He remembered the days when he perched on Odin’s shoulder, waiting to be
sent to the world of men, waiting for the long, companionable flight
back during which he reported to his fellow all he had observed. He
remembered the pleasant homecomings, the rasp of Hugin’s voice as the
other raven told Odin of what they had seen.

And he remembered the night of Balder’s death, and Hugin’s infuriating
silence, and his own croakings and bleatings as he reported what had
happened in and around the fateful hall.

He remembered Hugin’s brilliant black stare as he spoke on and on, and
the total anger of that insulted bird. He remembered the countless years
of loneliness and idleness since, and he had had enough.

Between two crags he saw a dark fir, and in its lower branches he
discerned a swaying lump just different enough in shape from a pine-cone
to be what he was looking for.

He folded his wings and dropped closer. Ay: no pine-cone had moldy
feathers aquiver in the wind, an ivory beak pressed to a moulted breast
too sparse to hide it.

He fluttered to the branch, worked his claws about amongst the close-set
needles until he found comfort, and settled.

“Hugin,” he said. “Hugin.”

Slowly the scaly eyelid on his side opened, just far enough to identify
the speaker. It closed immediately.

“Parrot!” spat Hugin; it was his first word in seven thousand years, as
men count time.

“Hugin, old comrade …” Munin paused to collect himself, to remind
himself that he had come here to renew his partnership with Hugin, and
that he must under no circumstance let Hugin make him angry. “What has
thee been doing?”

“What thee sees,” said Hugin shortly, still not deigning to open his
eyes.

“Ah, Hugin. Remember the times we’ve had, the—”

Hugin raised a warning claw.

“I remember nothing. I am not a foolscap, a storage shelf, a … a macaw
like thee. I am Hugin and my name is Thought.”

“Ahh. And what has thee been thinking for seven thousand years, as men
count time?”

“Of thine inexcusable perfidy, lovebird. What else?”

“But surely … thought thee not of the old days, of the great flights
we—”

“I’ve no truck with memories, as thee should know. There were more
important things with which to concern myself.”

“The death of Balder.”

“I told thee,” said Hugin in some irritation, and at last opening his
eyes, “what it was I thought about.”

“About _me?_ About what I did that night, when thee closed thine eyes
and had nought to say, with the very world cracking about our heads?”

“I had to _think!_”

Munin recognized, slowly, that Thought without Memory had indeed done
nothing but turn over and over that last insult. For the first time he
felt a great welling pity for his comrade.

“All those years … thinking about me,” he said. “Ah, Hugin!”

“It was a great evil thee did me, Munin,” said the other plaintively.

“Ay, it was,” said Munin with some hypocrisy, which he immediately
compounded with “I am a simple soul, friend Hugin, and do not understand
exactly what the evil was, though I grant thee it was enormous.”

“Thee conveyed those events … whatever they were … out of Memory,
without Thought! This was never our way, Munin!”

“Ah, that I know. That I knew then, but never understood. Before that
night, we had long hours of flight for your thinking. In the press of
circumstance, when Balder died, there was time to speak only as things
occurred. Tell me, Hugin, is not the relation of things exactly as
seen—is that not speaking the truth? That is all I did.”

“Ay, it is the truth, just as a mound of bricks is a mansion. Truths
must be arranged, Munin.”

“And arranged, they are a different thing?”

“They can be used for a different purpose.”

“I am a simple soul,” Munin said again. “Could thee demonstrate the
point for me, in such a way that I will understand and not insult thee
again?—for I miss thee sore, Hugin,” he added with a rush.

He saw Hugin softening visibly, and pressed his advantage. “I’ll tell
thee exactly what I reported to Odin that night. If thought can make of
these events a total different from what memory itself yields, I shall
believe thee truly, and never insult thee again.”

“Agreed. And will thee then fly back with me to Odin and behave thyself
properly, henceforth leaving the final reports to me?”

“Gladly.”

“Then tell me these events from the beginning. You understand that I
have been without memory for some while now.”

“But never again!” said Munin heartily, and launched into an account of
the events surrounding the death of Balder, from the god’s awakening
with the strange fear, to the imprisonment of Loki. “Thus are the guilty
found and justly punished!” he finished triumphantly. “What has Thought
to say on this?”

“Only that Loki is not guilty.”

Munin stared at him in amazement. “I don’t see that!”

“Don’t see! Don’t see!” jeered Hugin. “Know, parakeet, that thy two eyes
are petty instruments which, at their best, are purblind. I have in
here,” he croaked loudly, overcoming Munin’s approaching interruption,
“a third eye which sees what you do not. _That_ is what thought is for!”

“It cannot make me see what it sees,” said Munin ruefully.

“It can in time,” said Hugin. He sounded alive and in inexplicably high
humor. “Come!” and before the puzzled Munin knew what was happening, he
flapped skyward.

“Where are we going?”

“To Jotunheim.”

“But Loki’s in Gladsheim—or under it.”

“Ay, but if he’s innocent, some Giant is guilty, and Jotunheim’s the
place for Giants.”

“But-but-but … thee don’t _know_ Loki’s not guilty!”

“The ways of thought,” said Hugin didactically, “are not those of
observation and reporting. Thought is not limited to facts; facts are,
thee will remember, but the bricks used to fill in a thinker’s design.”

And until they reached Jotunheim, he would say no more.

IV

As they sailed over the low, wide, forbidding city, Hugin asked, “The
Giantess—she who refused to weep for Balder. Does thee know her name,
and where she dwells?”

“Of course. She is Borga, a recluse and a small sorceress, and she
dwells in yonder spire. But there is no connection, Hugin, between her
and Balder or even Loki. I think—”

“_I_ think,” said Hugin loftily, and led the way to the spire. They
alighted on the roof, and Hugin said,” Ravens are great mimics, and
among ravens, thee has special talent, no? Can thee imitate the voice of
Loki?”

“That I can, to frighten Loki himself if I choose,” said Munin, most
startlingly in Loki’s exact tone.

Hugin cocked his weather-beaten head to one side and said, also in
Loki’s voice, “This is but a poor imitation of thy talent, friend, but
would it serve to baffle a Giant?”

“It baffles me,” said Munin, awed.

“I thank thee for the lesson, then,” said Hugin. His eyes sparkled in a
way new to his fellow. “Now lead the way in some secret fashion which
you, oh, Mimir among birds, surely know in this place, so that we may
come upon the lady in her chamber unobserved.”

Speechless with astounded pleasure, Munin crept to the crooked eave and
along it to an odorous smoke-hole. Cautiously he put his head inside,
and finding the firebed cold, gestured to Hugin.

Hugin passed him, whispering _“Silence!”_ and inched into the room.

It was an almost circular turret room, fitted out as a combination
bedroom and alchemical laboratory. Around it ran shelves filled with an
inconceivable clutter of bins, bottles and bags, boxes, books and
basins.

On the bed lay Borga, and Hugin croaked—but silently—in surprise. For by
human standards she was exquisite; even among the Aesir she would have
passed as attractive. Nay, as wondrously fair.

She was hardly the withered crone Hugin had expected. Turning from her,
he edged along the shelf to which he had hopped. Coming to a large,
long-necked flask which lay on its side, empty, he considered it
critically, shifted it slightly so that its open mouth and neck almost
paralleled the smooth wall. Then he thrust his beak into the flask,
finding that there was just room for his jaws to open comfortably.

To do this, he had to lie almost on his side. He gestured with one claw
for Munin to do likewise. Then, with an effect that made Munin’s
feathers all stand on end, he uttered a protracted and horrible groan,
in an exact mimicry of Loki’s voice. The sound of it as it emerged from
the flask was most extraordinary. The wall’s curvature made it seem to
come from everywhere at once.

Borga left her bed in a way which challenged description. Levitation,
the power of which she certainly possessed, seemed to play no part in
it, but she came straight upward while still flat on her back. She rose
in the air, fell back, bounced once, and landed cowering at the far side
of the chamber. Her head whipped from side to side, as if she were
afraid to leave it facing in one direction for more than the smallest
part of a second.

“Wh-who … wh-what’s that?” she quavered.

Hugin moaned again, and the Giantess seemed to shrink into herself.

Again she cast about wildly. “Where—Art here?”

“Nay; in Gladsheim,” Hugin intoned. He then made a spattering-hissing
sound, which was like hot fat dropping into a fire, followed by an
agonized gasp. “Ai-ee, it burns … _it burns_ …”

“By what magic—”

“How do I speak to thee? Largely through the holes in thy conscience,
little sorceress. _Very_ little sorceress,” Hugin added scornfully. “I
cannot come to thee; would that I could.”

From that she seemed to take great courage. She rose and composed
herself, and said in a voice more clear, “I have heard of thy torment,
Loki, and I am sorry it is so extensive. But thee cannot deny that thee
led thyself into it.”

“But I am innocent!”

“To a degree,” said Borga, and Munin, his awe renewed, nodded at Hugin.
“But considering thy manifold sins, and the many that went unpunished,
thee cannot claim complete injustice. And no one will believe thee! Tell
me, whose fault is that, friend liar?” Her tone became increasingly
confident and mocking. “Thee has interrupted my rest, good Loki. Why?”

“To … to tell thee …” Again that shocking hiss, and the gasp. “Did thee
never love me, Borga?”

Now she laughed. It was not pleasant. “Well thee knows! I spurned thee
always! Thee wanted not me. Thee wanted an amusement, something
different—a sorceress who was a daughter of the Giant vizier.”

Loki’s voice said, slyly, _“Always?”_

She began to speak, then stopped, pale. “What do thee mean?”

Hugin laughed. It was chilling. “Did thee enjoy Balder?”

“How dare …” and then she was overcome by what seemed to be curiosity.
“How did you know?”

“What let thee think Balder would notice such as thee?” Hugin jeered
harshly. “Stupid! to lull thyself into believing Balder would court and
cozen and bargain for such coarse flesh as thine! The veriest sparrow
could have told thee about guileless Balder, were it not for thy
blinding conceit!”

“But he did! He did!” she wailed. “And he made my head swim so … and he
came so close, and then put me by and asked that of me that no Giant
must ever share with the Aesir … and I refused, and closer again he
came … and he said he loved … and I, I was lost, and I told him the
Great Secret of Mimir, and then he took me, laughing …”

She burst into a wild weeping, which was drowned out by a cascade of
coarse laughter, echoing round and round the room.

While it still echoed, Hugin snatched out his beak and whispered to
Munin, “Can thee mimic Balder?”

“Ay,” said Munin, “but ’twould be a desecration!”

“Desecrate away, friend parrot. We have this pullet’s neck on the
block.”

“What must I say?”

“Some Aesir love-making nonsense.”

Munin put his beak into the jar, and Balder’s voice, hollowed by the
resonant glass, rang out: “Beloved, thy limbs glow, nay, they dazzle me.
Hide thyself in mine arms quickly. I die, I wither away standing so near
the sun.…”

_“Balder!”_ she shrieked.

On the second syllable Hugin had pulled Munin’s beak out and thrust in
his own, and was again making that jarring, jeering laughter. “Na, na,
not Balder; Loki, who swore to have thee whether thee’d have him or not.
Loki, who fought Herindal in the shape of a seal. Loki, who can take any
shape he chooses—ay, and any sorceress! It was I, I, Loki ye bedded
with, thinking it was Balder—ay, and ye enjoyed it, crone!

“It was I who stole thy Secret of Secrets, not Balder. And when next
thee saw Balder, thee went to him mouthing and simpering, and thee took
his honest innocence as a spurning. And for that thee killed him, that
and for fear that he’d tell your Secret! Do you see what thee’ve done,
thou thick-witted slut? Thee killed bright Balder for bedding thee when
he did not; for spurning thee which he did not; and for possessing a
Secret which thee never told him!”

She stumbled across to the bed and crouched on the edge of it, gasping
as if she had been whipped. Slowly, then, she looked up, and she had a
crooked smile on her face. She forced words out between her teeth:

“Then, Loki, for the crime I have done, I am free, and thee hang in the
pit. For what thee led me to do, all the world accuses thee. Hang there,
then; thy punishment is just!”

Hugin pulled out his beak and almost comically scratched his head with
his claw.

Munin whispered, “What is this Secret?”

“I don’t know. I don’t know. I must think.” He closed his eyes tight.

Munin was painfully reminded of the night Balder was killed, when Hugin
went into this kind of trance and would say nothing until he had thought
it all out. He glanced down. Borga the sorceress was waiting, breathing
heavily.

Abruptly Hugin slid his beak into the jar again, and Loki’s ghostly
tones emerged. “The Secret …”

For a moment Borga was absolutely still. Then she flung her head up.
“What of the Secret?”

Hugin said nothing.

Borga whimpered, “Thee … thee haven’t told the Aesir?”

Hugin intoned, “Think thee I have?”

“No,” she whispered, “No, we … we would know. This is very … brave,” she
said with difficulty. “If thee told, they’d free thee.”

“And come for thee,” Hugin hazarded.

“Ay.” She shivered. “If the Giants leave anything of me.”

“So which is it to be, Borga?”

“I don’t … understand.”

Munin saw Hugin’s eyes squeeze tight shut for a moment. Then he said,
“I’ll draw thee a problem, and thee may tell me if it is correctly
stated. Stay in thy chamber for as long as thy safety lasts, and I shall
assuredly tell the Aesir all I know. When the Giants hear of it they
will kill thee. Or—”

“No!” she cried.

“Or,” he went on relentlessly, “come to Gladsheim and confess to Odin
that thee murdered Balder. I shall be freed and banished and thee will
die.”

“Either way, I die!”

“Ay. But there is this difference. Free me, and the Aesir never know the
Secret. They will be content with their murderer. At least thee can make
amends for thy stupidity without damage to the Giants.”

She was silent a long time. Then she said, “Devil!” in a way which must
have hurt her throat. After that, “When … when must I—”

“It will take thee three days to reach Gladsheim. On the fourth dawn
from tomorrow’s, I shall tell Odin the Secret or I shall greet thee.
Choose.”

She clutched her hands tight against her face for a moment, and then
lowered them. She said calmly, “I will go, then.”

She is brave, thought Munin. She is foolish and in some ways stupid, but
she is brave.

But the Secret—the Secret; what of that? Munin looked anxiously at
Hugin.

Hugin’s eyes were screwed shut again. At length he said, in Loki’s
voice, “And when I am free, how can thee be sure I will not tell the
Aesir our little Secret after all?”

“Thee wouldn’t! Thy fealty’s with us! Thee’s a Giant!”

“Only half, Borga. Thee’ll just have to trust me.”

“Ay,” she said, her expression cloaked, but her eyes hot, “we’ll trust
thee.”

“Then farewell, Borga.” And suddenly, in a strained tone, _“I have
suffered enough!”_

Ay, thought Munin, that would be Loki’s way. Always a flash of drama. He
drew Hugin close. “What of the Secret? Can we learn it?”

In answer, Hugin pointed. Borga had moved to a table; she was drawing
out a sheet of foolscap, a quill, ink. She sat down to write.

“To Omir, her father the Giant vizier,” Munin whispered. With a bird’s
eye and more memories than the human race, he could read it easily.
_“ ‘This is goodbye, father, and a wish that I could be mourned, but I
cannot. Know then that I was tricked by Loki in ways I am too ashamed to
write here; that through this I, yes, I, father, killed Balder; and that
I have done the greatest evil of all in revealing to Loki the Secret of
Mimir. I go now to Gladsheim to die for the useless murder, and Loki
will be freed. See that he dies, for he cannot be trusted. Do not pursue
me nor change this plan in any particular, lest the Giants lose the
field at Ragnarok.’ ”_

“Shall we take the paper?” whispered Munin when she had done.

“We need it not. Come.” Hugin seemed about to burst with joy.

V

Silently they crept along the shelf to the fire hole and squirmed
through it to the brooding night of Jotunheim. Together they took wing.

_Ah, like the old days; to Odin, together!_ thought Munin joyfully.

“Thee have made thy point, good Hugin,” he said, when they were over
halfling country. “The facts I had never added up to the yield of your
thought. How? How could you do it?”

“By flights above fact,” said Hugin, “and the gathering of the facts
below … Now, when first thee told me the story of Balder’s death,
thought took me to a path wherein Loki, though an instrument, was not
actually guilty. Following this, I could assume that if Loki were
innocent, the strange woman at the feast was not Loki disguised, but a
stranger.

“What kind of stranger? A Giant, bearing some small charm to keep us
from detecting her. You will, friend Munin, of course remember that she
did not appear at the feast until Loki was cast out. He would have
detected her, spell or no spell, half-Giant that he is. She stayed
hidden, probably in the crowd.

“And we know, too, that she arrived to find Balder apparently
invulnerable, and that she skilfully pressed Frigga to reveal her
oversight with the mistletoe. The rest of this woman’s work was seen by
all.”

“But,” Munin objected, “how did thee conclude it was truly a woman?”

“Because at the outset it seemed a woman’s crime. If a man is killed and
has no known enemies, and especially if there is no obvious gain from
his death, then the heart is involved somewhere.

“Balder, however, was not as other men, other gods. If he spurned
anyone, it was in innocence and without intent, and the whole world knew
that. Hence his death had to be for two reasons—because of a woman’s
scorn, and because of something else. It is easy to visualize a smitten
lady killing herself over Balder; it is inconceivable that she would
kill Balder unless something else were involved.”

“What led thee to Borga?”

“The noisiest clue of all, Munin. It was she alone who would not weep
for him. This is one thing all Asgard overlooked because suspicion of
Loki was so strong—just as all Asgard has forgotten that Loki wept.

“So once we were led to Borga, we had merely to let her conscience work
in our favor. The voice of Loki in her room spoke never from knowledge,
save what she supplied. And so we forced her to confess, and further, to
give herself up.”

“Thee, not we,” said Munin reverently. “And what of the Secret?”

“We do not know it completely, but we know enough. Borga wrote, … _lest
the Giants lose at Ragnarok_. And that is sufficient, from what thee’ve
told me—it is word straight from the heart of the Giant domain that such
a thing is possible, the first since Odin entered the Well of Mimir the
Wise, in the dawn of time.”

“Mimir … he is a Giant!” cried Munin, fluttering excitedly. “And it must
be one false seed he slipped amongst the treasures he gave Odin! And
Odin—good Odin—never doubted it!”

“As was said by our false Loki,” chuckled Hugin, “ ‘_I have suffered
enough!’_ We shall take a weight from the sky-father, friend Munin.
Perhaps he will wish to confront Mimir with the lie—that great tragic
lie that the Giants must win the field at Ragnarok. But thought tells me
he need not: Fate never dictated the doom of Asgard.”

“Will Asgard be victorious then?”

“The Aesir will win if they fight best, and that is all they would ever
wish.”

Before them spread the frontiers of Asgard. Happily they flew—Munin, who
bore seven thousand years of doom and mourning, seeing now a return to
the great days, and Hugin, who bothered himself not with memories,
content that hereafter he would be the one to speak to the sky-father.

*   *   *

Joy is now joy in Asgard, with its ale and its heady mead, the singing
and the wild hard laughter. Clink and clatter and clash ring the arms;
whip and whicker and thud, the arrows. Sinews are tuned and toned and
honed and hardened, and speech is mighty, and much of the measureless
night belongs to the unearthly yielding of the Aesir goddesses, whose
limbs are magic.

Here are the heroes of Earth, here the dazzle-winged Valkyrs; here in
the halls of forever they feast and fight and find that which mortality
is too brief and too fragile to grant.

The Aesir are made for joy and the heroes have earned it, and their joys
are builded of battle, and to battle they build. The battle they face is
the battle of Ragnarok. They will fight the Giants at Ragnarok. They
will dare death at Ragnarok …

 … and there _they need not die!_



TWINK


FEELING NUMB, I put the phone down. I’ve got to get out of here, I
thought. I’ve got to go ask old Frozen Face. I’ve got to get home.

But there was the old man, just that minute coming out of his office.
For the first time, I was glad he’d put my desk out there in front of
the golden-oak slab of his door, like a welcome mat. I looked up at him
and I guess I looked anxious.

He stopped beside me. “Something wrong?”

I wet my lips, but I couldn’t say anything. Stupid! Why shouldn’t I be
able to say _I’ve got to get out of here!_

“The kid?”

“Yes,” I said. “We have to take her in this afternoon.”

“Well, get out of here,” he said brusquely.

I stood up. I couldn’t look at him. “Thanks.”

“Shaddap,” he said gruffly. “Call up if you need anything.”

“I won’t need anything.” Except courage. Faith, if you like. And
whatever kind of hypocrisy it takes to conceal from a child how scared
you are.

I reached for my hat. Old Frozen Face just stood there. I looked back
from the outer door and he was still there, staring at the place where
I’d been.

I almost yelled at him some explosive, blathering series of syllables
that would in some way explain to him that I’m not a freak; look at the
creases in my blue pants; look at my shoeshine, just the same as yours;
look how my hairline’s receding—look, look, I’ve got heartburn and lumps
in my throat!

At the same time, I wanted to yell something else, something about, yes,
you were kind to me because you know what’s with me, with my kid; but
you can’t know how it is. With you, I’m once removed from anything you
could feel, like the Hundred Neediest Cases in the newspaper at
Christmas. You believe it, sure, but you can’t know how it is.

So with one inner voice saying I’m what you are and another saying You
can’t know how it is, I let them crash together and silence one another,
and said nothing, but made the frosted glass door swing shut and walked
over to the elevators.

I had to wait and that seemed wrong. I looked at the indicators, and saw
that all of the cars were running, and that seemed wrong, too.
Everything else ought to stop except one car for me and it ought to be
here now! I stood there realizing how irrational all this was, but
fuming anyway.

Behind me, I heard _thunk_-pat, _thunk_-pat, and from the corner of my
eye saw it was Bernie Pitt on his crutches. I turned very slightly so my
back was to him. Bernie is a very nice guy, but I just didn’t want to
talk to anybody. It was as if talking to somebody would slow up the
elevator.

I hoped he hadn’t noticed my turning away like that. Then I found I
could see his reflection in the polished gray-green marble of the wall
by the elevator. He was looking at me; I could see his face tilt as he
glanced down at the hat I was twisting in my hands. Then it tipped up
and back a little as he studied the tops of the doors, the way a man
does when he wants to look as if he’s absorbed in his own thoughts. So
he’s seen that hat, at ten in the morning, and that meant I was going
out, and he knew all about me and Twink and the accident, and was being
considerate.

Old Frozen Face was being considerate, too. Old Frozen Face always did
the correctly considerate thing. Like hiring Bernie, who was a cripple.

I hated myself for thinking that.

It made me hate Bernie. I glared at his reflection. Just then, one of
the elevator doors across the corridor rolled open and I jumped and
spun.

“Up!” said the operator.

Bernie stumped into it without looking at me. The door closed. I wished
I had a rock to throw at it.

I tried hard to get hold of myself. I knew what was happening. Scare a
man badly enough, and then make the thing he fears diffuse and
unreachable, and he’ll lash out indiscriminately at everything and
everyone. Well, lash away, boy, I told myself, and get it out of your
stinking small-minded system before you get home.

“Down?” the operator asked.

Shouldering into the car, I felt I had a right to be sore at the
operator for taking so long. The elevator was full of intruders and the
descent took forever, and for a moment I got so mad, I swear I could
have hunched my shoulders and sprayed them all with adrenalin. Then the
doors opened again and there was the lobby like a part of all outdoors,
and the offices upstairs no longer contained or confined me, and their
people no longer intruded.

I scurried down the steps and along the concourse to the interurban
station, trusting my feet and letting the rest of me fly along with the
eager aimlessness of a peace-dove released at a school pageant.

How can there be any unreality in your cosmos? I asked myself. The day
Twink goes to the hospital—that’s _today;_ it’s here. It’s been a real
thing all this time, for all it was in the future; it was more real than
most other things in the world. And now it’s come and you’re walking
underwater, seeing through murk.

But the whole world’s helping, too. Nothing is so unreal to the commuter
as a commuter’s station at ten in the morning. The trains, lying in
these echoing acres, look like great eviscerated larvae. The funereal
train crew, gossiping as if work were done, as if it weren’t their job
to get me home before the sawbones went to work on my little girl.

I went to them. “Baytown?”

They looked at me, a conductor, a motorman, a platform man. They were
different sizes and shapes, but their faces were all the same gray, and
contained the same damnable sense of the fitness of things. They were in
a place that belonged to them, doing the right thing at the right time
in it. They were steady and sober and absolutely at the service of
commuters-by-the-ton, but a man outbound at ten in the morning, though
tolerable, could hardly be served. He wasn’t what they were there for.

I went into the train and sat down and looked at my watch. Four minutes.
They were going to make me wait four minutes.

I sat in an empty car and looked at the glare of yellow woven plastic
pretending to be rattan, steel panels pretending to be wood, and the
advertising signs. There were three kinds of signs: the imperatives,
which said Buy and Drink and Use; the comparatives, which said Better,
Richer, Finer (and never stated what they were better and richer and
finer than); and the nominatives, which stupidly and without explanation
proclaimed a name.

I snorted at them all and reached for a paper someone had left on a
nearby seat. If its previous owner had been there, I think I’d have
punched him right in the mouth. I’ve always respected books and I’ve
always felt a paper is a sort of book. This character had put the middle
section in upside down, folded some sheets back on themselves and away
from the centerline, so that page covers skewed and flopped all around,
and he had generally churned up and mutilated the dead white body before
discarding it.

Growling, I began to put it back together again.

CHEERFUL TONY WEAKER
Doomed Child Sinking. Gifts
and Cards Pouring In for
Early Birthday

NEW YORK, June 25 (AP)—1973’s Child of the Year, five-year-old Tony
Marshall, has been placed under oxygen at Memorial Hospital, while a
staff of top cancer specialists stand a twenty-four-hour watch at his
bedside. Hope that he will live to see his sixth birthday in August has
faded.

The boy, whose famous smile made him known from coast to coast as
Cheerful Tony, is suffering from advanced leukemia.

Angrily, I hurled the paper away from me. It came to pieces in midair
and fluttered to the floor, to lie there accusingly and stare at me. I
swore and got up and gathered it together and crammed it out of sight on
the seat ahead of mine.

“Cheerful Tony,” I muttered. Some convolution of the face muscles, some
accident of the dental arch, a trick of the light and the fortuitous
presence of a news photographer as lucky as the guy who got the
flag-raising at Iwo—put ’em all together and you’ve got a national hero.
What good did it do to anyone to read about Cheerful Tony or to write
about it? What good did it do Tony?

For an ugly moment, I wished I could trade places with Tony’s father.
All he had to worry about was cancer—nice, certain cancer—and once it
was finished, that would be the end of it.

But I didn’t envy him the publicity, and for the hundred thousandth
time, I thanked the Powers that so few people knew about Twink.

The doors slid shut and the train started. I let go a sigh of relief and
hunched back in my seat, wondering how to make the time go faster. Not
the time; the train. I pushed my feet uselessly against the legs of the
next seat, made a calm and childish calculation of what I was doing
(forty pounds foot-pressure forward, forty pounds shoulder-pressure
backward—equals zero) and sat up feeling like a fool. I began to look at
the ads again.

Imperative, comparative, nominative.

Maybe my technique had been wrong all along. Maybe I should have used
nothing but advertising tactics on Twink the whole time. After all,
those were tested methods, with more than a century of proof behind them

“Relax with oxygen,” I should have told her. “Live,” I should have told
her, twelve times a minute, in the best imperative mood. “Live … live.”
And, “Don’t struggle. Let the doctor work. It will be easier.” (Than
what?) And, of course, the pervasive, institutional nominative: “Twink.
Everybody knows Twink. Everybody loves Twink.” Until she believes it
all.…

The anger, which had changed to hysteria, converted itself now into
crawling depression. It descended on me like the shadow of some great
reptile, something that moved slowly and implacably and without human
understanding. I felt utterly alone. I was different. Apart. More apart
than Bernie, who had left half a leg in Formosa. More than Sue Gaskell,
who was the only Negro in the copy department—by God, another “kindness”
of old Frozen Face.

Why couldn’t someone (besides Twink) share this with me? Even Doris
couldn’t. Doris loved me; she ate with me, slept with me, worried and
hoped with me, but this thing with Twink was something she couldn’t
share. She just wasn’t equipped for it. Sometimes I wondered how she
held still for that. This might go on for years … if Twink lived at
all … Twink and I sharing a thing that Doris could never know, even
being Twink’s mother.

Suddenly I found someone else to be mad at and the depression lifted
enough to let it in. You guys, I thought, you helpful people who put
welded track on these roadbeds, who designed pneumatic dampers and
cushioned wheels for the trains—did it ever occur to you that a man
might want something to listen to in a train in 1973? Twenty years ago,
I could have listened to the wheels and I could have made up a song to
go along with them; _blippety-clak, blippety-clak_.

Blippety-clink, poor little Twink, don’t let her die—

All right, fellows—on second thought, you can have your welded rails.

“Baytown,” said the annunciator in a cultured voice, and deceleration
helped me up out of the seat.

I went to the door and was through it before it had slid all the way
open, shot down the platform while fumbling for my commuter’s plate,
missed the scanner slot with it and skinned my knuckles, dropped the
plate, picked it up, got it into the slot, waited forever—well, three
seconds—while it scanned, punched and slid out my receipt.

I was just about to blow a fuse because there was no taxi, but there
was. I couldn’t bark my address because the driver knew it, and I
couldn’t wave bribes at him because he was paid by the development, and
anyway his turbines had a governor to keep him from speeding as fast as
I wanted. All I could do was huddle on the cushion and bite the ball of
my thumb.

The house was very quiet. For some reason, I had expected to find them
in the nursery, but there wasn’t a sound from there. I found Doris
stretched out on the settee in the den, looking drowsy.

“Doris!”

“Shh. ’Lo. Twink’s asleep.”

I ran to her. “Is she … do you … are you …”

She rumpled my hair. “Shhh,” she said again. “My goodness, it’s going to
be all right.”

I leaned very close and whispered, “Scared. I’m scared.”

“I’m scared, too,” she said reasonably, “but I’m not going to go all to
pieces.”

I knelt there, soaking up a kind of strength, a kind of peace from her.
“Sorry, darling. I’ve been—” I shuddered. “On the train, I was reading
about Cheerful Tony. I was thinking how they’d do the same thing with
us, if they knew.”

“Only more.” She half-laughed. “All that mail, all those reporters,
newsreel men. All that glory. All that—noise.”

We listened together to the morning silence. It was the first time since
she’d phoned me that I’d noticed how lovely the day was.

“Thank you,” she whispered.

“For what?”

“For not telling them. For being—well, for just being; I guess that’s
what I’m trying to say. And for Twink.”

“For _Twink_?”

“Of course. She’s my little girl. If it hadn’t been for you, I’d never
have known her.”

“I think the way motherhood makes people crazy is one of the nicest
things around,” I said.

She answered, but with her eyes. Then she said, “We have to be there at
noon.”

I looked at my watch, leaped wildly to my feet, turned left, turned
right.

Doris openly laughed at me. “How long does it take to get to the
hospital?” she asked.

“Well, ten minutes, but we have to … don’t we have to, uh?”

“No, we don’t. We have more than an hour. Sit down and help me be quiet.
Want something to eat before we go?”

“No. God, no. Shall I fix—”

“Not for me.”

“Oh,” Slowly I sat down again.

She giggled. “You’re funny.”

“Yeah.”

“Have any trouble getting away?” She was making talk, I knew, but I went
right along with it.

“Matter of fact, no,” I said. “Old Frozen Face took one look at me after
you called, and chased me out.”

“He’s so wonderful.… Honey! Don’t call him that!”

I growled something wordless. “He makes me mad.”

“After all he’s done?”

“Yes, after all he’s done,” I said irritably.

_Because_ of all he’s done, I think. All my life, I’m a misfit for one
reason or another; then, in college, they found out this thing about me
and I worked my way through being a laboratory curiosity. I got into the
papers. Not too much—just enough to keep me from getting any decent job
after I graduated. Except with Frozen Face, of course. I didn’t apply;
he wrote me. He hired all his people that way. People with half a leg.
Blind people in Personnel. Ex-cons who couldn’t get started.

At first, it looked as if his people had escaped the things that hung
over them—thanks to him. Then, after a while, you began to realize that
you wouldn’t be working there if you didn’t have something wrong with
you. It was like starving all your life until you found you could be
well fed and taken care of till the day you died—in a leprosarium.

But I said, “Sorry, Doris. Just naturally ungrateful, I guess … Twink’s
waking up.”

“Oh, dear! I thought she might sleep until—”

“Shh.”

Ever since the accident (I’d turned the car over; they say you can’t do
that with any car later than 1970, but I’m the guy), Twink had terrified
me every time she woke up. She’d come out of the normal sleep of a
normal baby and enter a frightening stillness, a cessation of everything
but life itself. It was, I suppose, coma; but I’d lived with seven weeks
of it once, and even now the momentary passage through it, from sleep to
waking, was so loaded with terror and guilt for me that it was all I
could take. And when you add to that the fact that I had to hide it,
that above all else I had to be strength to her, and comfort, as she
awoke—

Then it was over; she was awake, confused, dimly happy.

“Hi, baby. How’s my Twink?”

Doris, tense on the couch, not breathing, waiting—

“It’s all right. Twink’s all right,” I said.

“Well, of course!”

I shot Doris a look. There wasn’t a hairline crack in that enamel of
hers, but it suddenly occurred to me that it was past time for me to
stop using her as the pillar of strength around here. I bent and kissed
her and said (making it sound like a joke, because I knew she’d prefer
it that way), “Okay, honey; from here on, you can scream curses.”

“I’ll just do that,” she said gratefully.

Did the accident have anything directly to do with it or was it just me?
Champlain (yes, _the_ Champlain, who took up where Rhine left off) had a
number of theories about it. The most likely one was that when my
peculiar equipment got stirred up enough in the crash and for that awful
hour afterward, I sent such a surge of empathy at Twink that I created a
response. You can call it telepathy if you like—Champlain did—but I
don’t like the sound of that. Of course, I’m biased. You can take your
extrasensoria, all of them, and—well, just take ’em and leave me be.

It may be that I was better equipped than the next guy to adjust to
this, having lived for some eight years with the mild notoriety of being
the boy who never scored less than 88 on the Rhine cards. But
personally, constitutionally, I never was meant to be different from
other people. What I mean is that my useless ability (I don’t regard it
as a talent and I won’t call it a gift) didn’t have to make any
difference to anyone. I could be just as good a short-order cook, just
as bad a ticket-taker, as anyone else. But I was never given the chance
of living like a human being.

I could stick around the parapsychology laboratories, earning a living
like an ape in the zoo (and not much of a living at that; even in this
enlightened era, there isn’t a rich parapsychologist), or I could go out
and get a job. And the way my dark past followed me, you’d think I was
wearing a Flying Saucer for a halo. “Oh, yes—you’re the mind-reading
fellow.” You know what that can do to your prospects?

Usually I didn’t get the job. Once I was hired though they knew. Twice I
landed jobs and they found out later. Each time there was someone who
went to the boss, seniority and all, and said, “Look, it’s him or me.”
And guess who got the pink slip.

Would you work every day with somebody who could read your mind? Who
hasn’t got secrets? Whose life really is an open book? I can tell you, I
wouldn’t work next to someone like that, yet I’m about as inoffensive as
they come. And what was driving me out of my head—and I was two-thirds
out when I met Doris and then Frozen Face—was that everyone thought I
could read minds and I _can’t!_

But Doris, who had heard of me even before she met me, never mentioned
it. First she was nice to be with, and then I had to be with her, and
then I came to a big, fat, soul-searching decision and confessed All to
her one night, and she kissed me on the end of the nose and said she’d
known about it all along and it didn’t matter; and if I said I couldn’t
read minds but was only good at guessing Rhine cards, why, she believed
me; and if I ever did learn to read minds, she wished I’d hurry up and
read hers, because she was getting awfully impatient. After that, I’d
have married her if she looked like a gila monster. Actually she looked
like the Tenniel Alice-in-Wonderland, only with curly hair.

When I came up for breath from that interchange, I liked people a hell
of a lot more than I ever had before. I guess that’s another way of
saying I liked myself some, at last.

Then along came the letter from Frozen Face, and Twink came up, and the
accident happened.

And after the accident, the nightmare ability to dip down into the
living silence that was Twink now, an unstirring something that couldn’t
see or speak or hear, something that was dreadfully hurt and just
hovering, barely alive. My kid. And after about seven weeks, a movement,
a weak tensing. It was the faintest possible echo of fear, and always a
retreat from it that shoved the little thing close to dying again. Then
there would be the silence again, and the stirring, and the fear and
retreat.

Why I tried, how I thought to try, I don’t know, but I did what I could
each time to reassure her. I would tense till I ached and say, _It’s all
right, honey, don’t be afraid, it’s all over now_. And I hoped it helped
her, and then I thought it did, and then one night I knew it did,
because I saw the tension coming and stopped it, and there was a
different kind of silence, like sleeping, not like coma.

After that, she got better fast, and I took hold of the slim hope that
she might one day see and run and climb like other kids, hear music, go
to school …

She had to, she _had_ to, or I was a murderer. I was worse than that.
Your out-and-out murderer knows what he’s doing. More likely than not,
he does it to get something, for profit.

But me—want to know what I did?

We’d been out for a drive in our shiny new car—well, it was second-hand,
but the newest one I’d ever owned—and I wanted to get a couple of
cartons of cigarettes before we crossed the state line, to save—guess!—a
few cents tax. It was a six-lane road, three each way. I was in my
middle lane.

Doris pointed at a big neon sign. “There’s a place!”

I hauled the wheel over and shot straight across the right-hand lane.
The truck just nipped the rear fender and over we went.

For six cents. Come to think of it, I never did buy the cigarettes, so I
can’t even claim that.

There’s your superman, “wild talents” and all. A goddam highway boob.

Doris and Twink went to the hospital, bleeding and bleeding, then lying
for days, waxy, doll-like, and came out, back to me, saying it wasn’t my
fault it wasn’t my fault … God! And Twink as good as dead.

There was a reception committee waiting for us—two big names in
medicine, McClintock and Zein—and, of course, Champlain. Busy boy. He
wouldn’t miss this for the world. But, thank heavens, no press.

“Come on, I want to talk to you,” said Champlain, big and breezy as
ever, looking like the world’s least likely suspect as a
parapsychologist. I never did like Champlain, but he was the only person
in the world besides Doris I could really talk to. At the moment, I
wished I hadn’t ever talked to him. Especially about Twink. But he knew
and that was that.

He muscled me away from Doris and Twink.

“No!” cried Doris, and Twink was frightened.

“Now don’t you worry, little lady; he’ll be back with you before we do a
thing,” he called heartily, and there I was going one way and Doris and
Twink the other. What could I do?

He pushed me through a door and I had the choice of sitting in a big
armchair or falling down, the way he rushed me. He kicked the door shut.

“Here’s some medicine.” He got a bottle out of the top desk drawer.
“McClintock let me see where he put it, the fool.”

“I don’t want any.”

“Come on now.”

“Get away from me,” I said, and meant it. Inside myself, I turned to
admire that tone, harsh and rough and completely decisive. I’d always
thought only movie gangsters could make a speech like that sound so
real. And while I was backing off from myself, admiring. I suddenly
sobbed and swore and swore and sobbed. It was pretty disgusting.

“Wow,” said Champlain. He put the bottle down and got some pills. He
filled a paper cup with ice-water and came over to me. “Take these.”

“I don’t want any.”

“You’ll take’m or I’ll hold your nose and ram ’em down your neck with a
stick!”

I took them and the water. As I keep saying, I’m no superman. “What are
they?”

“Dexamyl. Brighten you up, smooth you down all at once. Now tell me
what’s the matter.”

I said it, said what I hadn’t put in words before. “Twink’s going to
die. I want her to.”

“The two best specialists in the world say no.”

“Let her die! She’s going out of here as a basket case if you don’t! I
know. I know better’n anybody. Blind. Deaf. Paralyzed. All she can do is
sort of flop. Let her die!”

“Don’t be so goddam selfish.”

A kick in the face would have shocked me a good deal less. I just gawked
at him.

“Sure, selfish,” he repeated. “You pulled a little bobble that anybody
might have done and your wife won’t blame you for it. To you, it’s
become a big, important bobble because you never were involved in
anything important before. The only way you can prove it’s important is
to suffer an important punishment. The worst thing you can think of is
to have Twink dead. The next worse is to have her go through life the
way she is now. You want one of those things.”

I called him something.

“Sure I am,” he agreed. “Absolutely. In the eyes of the guy who’s wrong,
the guy who’s right is always just what you said.”

I used another one.

“That, too,” he said, and beamed.

I put up my hands and let them fall. “What do you want me to do? What
are you picking on me for?”

He came over and sat sideways on the broad arm of the chair. “I want you
to get in there and help us. Help Twink.”

“I’d be in the way.”

He hit me on the shoulderblade. It was done as a sort of friendly
gesture, but it was done hard. “You can get through to her, can’t you?”

“Yes.”

“She’s been hurt. Badly. This is going to hurt her, too—a whole lot. She
may not want to go through with it.”

“She has a choice?”

“Every patient has a choice. Other things being equal, they live or they
don’t. If they’ve been hurt and they see more pain coming, they might
not want to go through with it.”

“I still don’t see how I—”

“Would you like to keep wondering whether you could have saved her
life?”

“She’s going to die, anyway.”

He got up and stood in front of me with his big fists on his hips,
glaring at me silently until I had to raise my face. He held me with his
eyes until I couldn’t stand it and then he said, rough and gentle like a
tiger purring, “You damn near killed her once and now you want to finish
the job. That it?”

“All right, all _right!”_ I shouted. “I’ll do _anything!”_

“Good!” And suddenly he dropped on one knee and took both of my hands in
both of his. It was a very surprising thing for him to do and strangely
effective. I could feel currents of his immense vitality from those big
hands; it was as if my ego, wrinkled like a prune, was swelling up sleek
and healthy.

He said, softly and with deep earnestness, “All you’ve got to do is make
her want to live. You’ve got to be with her and wait for her and help
her along and keep her convinced that no matter what happens, no matter
how it hurts, it’s worth it because she’s going to live.”

“All right,” I whispered.

“She’s only a little girl. She takes things just the way she finds them
and she doesn’t make allowances. If something looks like fear to her, or
anger, it is that. If something looks like love, or wisdom, or strength,
that’s just how she’ll take it. Be strong and wise for her.”

“Me?”

He got up. “You.” He went to the desk and got the bottle and poured a
paper cup full. He held it out to me.

I wiped my eyes with the backs of my hands and stood up. “No thanks. I
don’t need it,” I told him.

He twitched his eyebrows and drank the liquor himself and we went out.

They put me through the scrub room just as if I’d been a surgeon—gloves,
mask and all—and then we went into the operating theater. Doris was
already there, all fixed up, too. I went and kissed her right through
the mask and she smiled.

I said, “You look lovely in white,” and wondered where that had come
from; and “Hi-i, Twink.”

Somewhere in the blindness, in the confines of paralysis, there was a
shadow of fear and, down inside that, a warm little response. And the
fear evaporated. I looked up and met Champlain’s eyes. That unnatural
feeling under my mask was, to my complete astonishment, a grin. I nodded
and he winked back and said, “I guess you can go ahead, Mac.”

Now listen, Twink, I said with all my heart, I love you and I’m here,
I’m right here with you no matter what happens. Something’s going to
happen, something big, and it’s going to change everything for you. Some
of it won’t be … won’t be nice. But they have to do it. For you, Twink.
Even when it isn’t nice, it’s for you. You’ve got to let them. You’ve
got to help them. They love you, but I love you most of all. You mustn’t
go away. If it hurts you too much, you just tell me and I’ll make them
stop.

Then something was the matter, very much the matter. Shaken, I crowded
close and tried to see what McClintock was doing. “Back off a little,”
he growled.

“Back off, my eyeball. What the hell are you winding around her head?”

Champlain barked at me, “Cut it out! The one thing you don’t get is
angry!”

Doris made a little sound. I spun to her. She was smiling. No, she
wasn’t. Her eyes were all screwed up. A tear came out.

“Doris!”

Her face relaxed instantly, as if the nerves had been cut. Then she
opened her eyes and looked at me. “I’m all right,” she said.

There was a calling, a calling, a calling.

All right, Twink, I’m here. I didn’t go away. I’m right here, honey. If
you want them to stop, you just say so.

A pause, then a tremulous questioning.

Yes, yes, I said, I’m here. Every single second. I’m not going away.
Again the pause and then, like a flicker of light, a hot, glad little
response.

Doris moaned, almost a whisper. I shot a glance at her, then at
Champlain.

“You want that stopped?” he asked.

“No,” I said. “I promised her she could.”

Doris’s hand moved. I took it. It was wet. She squeezed mine, hard.

Something from Twink, unlike anything I had ever experienced before.
Except the accident. Yes, it was like the accident—and _stop!_ STOP!

“Stop!” I gasped. “Stop it!”

McClintock went right on working as if I hadn’t made a sound. The other
specialist, Zein, said to Champlain as if I couldn’t hear, “Do we have
to stand for this?”

“You’re damn right you do,” said Champlain.

Working, McClintock asked, “Stop? What do you mean, stop?”

Zein mumbled something to him. McClintock nodded and a nurse came flying
across the room with a tray of hypodermics. McClintock used a number of
them.

Twink went quiet. For a moment, I thought I would faint from relief.

All right, honey? All right? I made them stop. Twinkie. Is it all right?

Twink!

_Twink!_

I made some sort of noise, I don’t know what. Champlain’s hands were on
my shoulders, grinding down like two oversized C-clamps. I shrugged off
one, knocked off the other with my wrist. “Twink!” I shouted. Then Doris
screamed shrilly and Twink vibrated like a gong.

“That won’t do,” I snapped, gesturing with my head.

“Want her out?”

“Don’t you dare,” said Doris.

“Yes. Now.”

McClintock began, “Who’s—” but Champlain said, “Shut up. Take her out.”

After that, it went very quickly.

Just a little more, Twink, and it’ll be all over and you’ll be warm and
comfy and you can sleep. And I’ll be near while you sleep and with you
when you wake up.

I tried to stop McClintock once more, when he took the little arm that
had been immobilized across Twink’s chest for so long and twisted it
brutally up and back. But this time Champlain was on McClintock’s side
and he was right; the pain stopped almost instantly.

And then—was it weeks later, hours? The biggest part was over and they
did things to her eyes, her mouth, while I found ways and yet new ways
to thrust aside fury, ignore fatigue, negate fear, and press on and on
and around and inside with I love you, Twink; I’m here; it’s all right.
Just a little more, a little—there, it’s stopped. Are you all right,
Twink?

She was all right. She was wonderful. When they were through with her,
she was weak and she looked like hell, but she was all right. I stared
at her and stared at her and I couldn’t believe it; I couldn’t contain
it, either. I didn’t know what to do. So I began to laugh.

“Okay, let’s get out of here.” Champlain loomed over me like a grounded
parachute.

“Yeah, wait.” I sidled around him and went to McClintock. “Thanks,” I
said. “I’m sorry.”

“It’s okay,” he said tonelessly.

Zein just turned his back.

I sat by the bed where they had put Doris, tired, and I waited.

This was a lot different from that other hospital, that other time. Then
I’d committed something and I was full of fear. Now I’d accomplished
something and I was full of hope—and liquor, but they tasted much the
same. Twink was asleep, breathing beautiful even breaths, far too weary
to be afraid.

I was glad about so many things and I mentally thumbed through them all,
one by one, with a huge and quiet delight. And I think that the one I
was happiest about was my saying to Champlain afterward, “She’d have
been perfectly all right even if I hadn’t been there.”

What I was so pleased about was that I said it, I didn’t ask it. And he
had laughed and filled my cup again.

“You’re a mind-reader,” he said, and it was the first time I had ever
heard that and thought it was funny.

“You wanted a case history of a human being born with little or no birth
trauma, you son.”

“Well, nobody ever had one before,” he admitted. “I’d have had a lot
less trouble in my young life if my dad had been able to paddle me down
that particular canal in a canoe.”

“You’re a louse and it was worth it,” I told him.

Doris turned her head impatiently.

“I’m here,” I whispered.

She looked at me out of the same composed, porcelain face. “Hi. How’s
your girl friend?”

“My _other_ girl friend. Doris, she’s beautiful! All pink. She has two
eyes. Ten toes. Eight fingers.”

“What?”

“And two thumbs. She’s all right, darling, really all right. A perfectly
normal newborn girl-baby.”

“Oh, I’m … so glad. Does she … can you still—even after the cesarean?”

I nodded and in that split second, I wished my fool head had rolled
right off. Because as I did it, I realized that I could have lied; she
_wanted_ me to.

She began to cry. She said, “You made them knock me out and you did it
all yourself. You’ve had her to talk to all this time and you always
will, as long as you both live. I’ll never ever cry about this again, I
promise, because it’s not your fault and I love you, anyway. But I’m
going to cry about it now.”

I crouched with my head on her pillow for a long, long time. Then I went
away, because she was nowhere near finished.

She’s never cried about that since, though.

Never once.

I guess there’s some way a man can make up a thing like that to a woman.

If he keeps looking.

I guess.



BRIGHT SEGMENT


HE HAD NEVER HELD a girl before. He was not terrified; he had used that
up earlier when he had carried her in and kicked the door shut behind
him and had heard the steady drip of blood from her soaked skirt, and
before that, when he had thought her dead there on the curb, and again
when she made that sound, that sigh or whispered moan. He had brought
her in and when he saw all that blood he had turned left, turned right,
put her down on the floor, his brains all clabbered and churned and his
temples athump with the unaccustomed exercise. All he could act on was
_Don’t get blood on the bedspread_. He turned on the overhead light and
stood for a moment blinking and breathing hard; suddenly he leaped for
the window to lower the blind against the streetlight staring in and all
other eyes. He saw his hands reach for the blind and checked himself;
they were red and ready to paint anything he touched. He made a sound, a
detached part of his mind recognizing it as the exact duplicate of that
agonized whisper she had uttered out there on the dark, wet street, and
leapt to the light switch, seeing the one red smudge already there,
knowing as he swept his hand over it he was leaving another. He stumbled
to the sink in the corner and washed his hands, washed them again, every
few seconds looking over his shoulder at the girl’s body and the thick
flat finger of blood which crept curling toward him over the linoleum.

He had his breath now, and moved more carefully to the window. He drew
down the blind and pulled the curtains and looked at the sides and the
bottom to see that there were no crevices. In pitch blackness he felt
his way back to the opposite wall, going around the edges of the
linoleum, and turned on the light again. The finger of blood was a
tentacle now, fumbling toward the soft, stain-starved floorboards. From
the enamel table beside the stove he snatched a plastic sponge and
dropped it on the tentacle’s seeking tip and was pleased, it was a
reaching thing no more, it was only something spilled that could be
mopped up.

He took off the bedspread and hung it over the brass headrail. From the
drawer of the china closet and from the gateleg table he took his two
plastic tablecloths. He covered the bed with them, leaving plenty of
overlap, then stood a moment rocking with worry and pulling out his
lower lip with a thumb and forefinger. _Fix it right_, he told himself
firmly. So she’ll die before you fix it, never mind, fix it, right.

He expelled air from his nostrils and got books from the shelf in the
china closet—a six-year-old World Almanac, a half-dozen paperbacked
novels, a heavy catalog of jewelry findings. He pulled the bed away from
the wall and put books one by one under two of the legs so that the bed
was tilted slightly down to the foot and slightly to one side. He got a
blanket and rolled it and slipped it under the plastic so that it formed
a sort of fence down the high side. He got a six-quart aluminum pot from
under the sink and set it on the floor by the lowest corner of the bed
and pushed the trailing end of plastic down into it. _So bleed now_, he
told the girl silently, with satisfaction.

He bent over her and grunted, lifting her by the armpits. Her head fell
back as if she had no bones in her neck and he almost dropped her. He
dragged her to the bed, leaving a wide red swath as her skirt trailed
through the scarlet puddle she had lain in. He lifted her clear of the
floor, settled his feet, and leaned over the bed with her in his arms.
It took an unexpected effort to do it. He realized only then how
drained, how tired he was, and how old. He put her down clumsily, almost
dropping her in an effort to leave the carefully arranged tablecloths
undisturbed, and he very nearly fell into the bed with her. He levered
himself away with rubbery arms and stood panting. Around the soggy hem
of her skirt blood began to gather, and as he watched, began to find its
way lazily to the low corner. _So much, so much blood in a person_, he
marveled, and _stop it, how to make it stop if it won’t stop?_

He glanced at the locked door, the blinded window, the clock. He
listened. It was raining harder now, drumming and hissing in the darkest
hours. Otherwise nothing; the house was asleep and the street, dead. He
was alone with his problem.

He pulled at his lip, then snatched his hand away as he tasted her
blood. He coughed and ran to the sink and spat, and washed his mouth and
then his hands.

_So all right, go call up.…_

Call up? Call what, the hospital they should call the cops? Might as
well call the cops altogether. _Stupid_. What could I tell them, she’s
my sister, she’s hit by a car, they going to believe me? Tell them the
truth, a block away I see somebody push her out of a car, drive off, no
lights, I bring her in out of the rain, only inside I find she is
bleeding like this, they believe me? _Stupid_. What’s the matter with
you, mind your own business why don’t you.

He thought he would pick her up now and put her back in the rain. Yes
and somebody sees you, _stupid_.

He saw that the wide, streaked patch of blood on the linoleum was losing
gloss where it lay thin, drying and soaking in. He picked up the sponge,
two-thirds red now and the rest its original baby-blue except at one end
where it looked like bread drawn with a sharp red pencil. He turned it
over so it wouldn’t drip while he carried it and took it to the sink and
rinsed it, wringing it over and over in the running water. _Stupid_,
call up somebody and get help.

Call who?

He thought of the department store where for eighteen years he had waxed
floors and vacuumed rugs at night. The neighborhood, where he knew the
grocery and the butcher. Closed up, asleep, everybody gone; names,
numbers he didn’t know and anyway, who to trust? _My God in fifty-three
years you haven’t got a friend?_

He took the clean sponge and sank to his knees on the linoleum, and just
then the band of blood creeping down the bed reached the corner and
turned to a sharp streak; _ponk_ it went into the pan, and
_pitti-pittipitti_ in a rush, then drip-drip-drip-drip, three to the
second and not stopping. He knew then with absolute and belated
certainty that this bleeding was not going to stop by itself. He
whimpered softly and then got up and went to the bed. _“Don’t be dead,”_
he said aloud, and the way his voice sounded, it frightened him. He put
out his hand to her chest, but drew it back when he saw her blouse was
torn and blood came from there too.

He swallowed hard and then began fumbling with her clothes. Flat ballet
slippers, worn, soggy, thin like paper and little silken things he had
never seen before, like just the foot of a stocking. More blood on—but
no, that was peeled and chipped enamel on her cold white toes. The skirt
had a button at the side and a zipper which baffled him for a moment,
but he got it down and tugged the skirt off in an interminable series of
jerks from the hem, one side and the other, while she rolled slightly
and limply to the motion. Small silken pants, completely soaked and so
badly cut on the left side that he snapped them apart easily between his
fingers; but the other side was surprisingly strong and he had to get
his scissors to cut them away. The blouse buttoned up the front and was
no problem; under it was a brassiere which was cut right in two near the
front. He lifted it away but had to cut one of the straps with his
scissors to free it altogether.

He ran to the sink with his sponge, washed it and wrung it out, filled a
saucepan with warm water and ran back. He sponged the body down; it
looked firm but too thin, with its shadow-ladder of ribs down each side
and the sharp protrusion of the hip-bones. Under the left breast was a
long cut, starting on the ribs in front and curving upward almost to the
nipple. It seemed deep but the blood merely welled out. The other cut,
though, in her groin, released blood brightly in regular gouts, one
after the other, eager but weakly. He had seen the like before, the time
Garber pinched his arm off in the elevator cable-room, but then the
blood squirted a foot away. Maybe this did, too, he thought suddenly,
but now it’s slowing up, now it’s going to stop, yes, and you, stupid,
you have a dead body you can tell stories to the police.

He wrung out the sponge in the water and mopped the wound. Before it
could fill up again he spread the sides of the cut and looked down into
it. He could clearly see the femoral artery, looking like an end of
spaghetti and cut almost through; and then there was nothing but blood
again.

He squatted back on his heels, pulling heedlessly at his lip with his
bloody hand and trying to think. _Pinch, shut, squeeze. Squeezers.
Tweezers!_ He ran to his toolbox and clawed it open. Years ago he had
learned to make fine chains out of square silver wire, and he used to
pass the time away by making link after tiny link, soldering each one
closed with an alcohol torch and a needle-tipped iron. He picked up the
tweezers and dropped them in favor of the small spring clamp which he
used for holding the link while he worked on it. He ran to the sink and
washed the clamp and came back to the bed. Again he sponged away the
little lake of blood, and quickly reached down and got the fine jaws of
the clamp on the artery near its cut. Immediately there was another gush
of blood. Again he sponged it away, and in a blaze of inspiration,
released the clamp, moved it to the other side of the cut, and clamped
it again.

Blood still oozed from the inside of the wound, but that terrible
pulsing gush was gone. He sat back on his heels and painfully released a
breath he must have held for two minutes. His eyes ached from the
strain, and his brain was still whirling, but with these was a feeling,
a new feeling almost like an ache or a pain, but it was nowhere and
everywhere inside him; it wanted him to laugh but at the same time his
eyes stung and hot salt squeezed out through holes too small for it.

After a time he recovered, blinking away his exhaustion, and sprang up,
overwhelmed by urgency. _Got to fix everything_. He went to the medicine
cabinet over the sink. Adhesive tape, pack of gauze pads. Maybe not big
enough; okay tape together, fix right. New tube this
sulfa-thia-dia-whatchamacall-um, fix anything, time I got vacuum-cleaner
grit in cut hand, infection. Fixed boils too.

He filled a kettle and his saucepan with clean water and put them on the
stove. Sew up, yes. He found needles, white thread, dumped them into the
water. He went back to the bed and stood musing for a long time, looking
at the oozing gash under the girl’s breast. He sponged out the femoral
wound again and stared pensively into it until the blood slowly covered
the clamped artery. He could not be positive, but he had a vague
recollection of something about tourniquets, they should be opened up
every once in a while or there is trouble; same for an artery, maybe?
Better he should sew up the artery; it was only opened, not cut through.
If he could find out how to do it and still let it be like a pipe, not
like a darned sock.

So into the pot went the tweezers, a small pair of needle-nose pliers,
and, after some more thought, a dozen silver broach-pins out of his
jewelry kit. Waiting for the water to boil, he inspected the wounds
again. He pulled on his lip, frowning, then got another fine needle,
held it with pliers in the gas flame until it was red, and with another
of his set of pliers bent it around in a small semi-circle and dropped
it into the water. From the sponge he cut a number of small flat slabs
and dropped them in too.

He glanced at the clock, and then for ten minutes he scrubbed the white
enamel tabletop with cleanser. He tipped it into the sink, rinsed it at
the faucet, and then slowly poured the contents of the kettle over it.
He took it to the stove, held it with one hand while he fished in the
boiling saucepan with a silver knife until he had the pliers resting
with their handles out of the water. He grasped them gingerly with a
clean wash-cloth and carefully, one by one, transferred everything from
saucepan to table. By the time he had found the last of the needles and
the elusive silver pins, sweat was running into his eyes and the arm
that held the tabletop threatened to drop right off. But he set his
stumpy yellow teeth and kept at it.

Carrying the tabletop, he kicked a wooden chair bit by bit across the
room until it rested by the bed, and set his burden down on its seat.
_This no hospital_, he thought, _but I fix everything_.

Hospital! Yes, in the movies—

He went to a drawer and got a clean white handkerchief and tried to tie
it over his mouth and nose like in the movies. His knobby face and
square head were too much for one handkerchief; it took three before he
got it right, with a great white tassel hanging down the back like in an
airplane picture.

He looked helplessly at his hands, then shrugged; so no rubber gloves,
what the hell. I wash good. His hands were already pink and wrinkled
from his labors, but he went back to the sink and scratched a bar of
soap until his horny nails were packed with it, then cleaned them with a
file until they hurt, and washed and cleaned them again. And at last he
knelt by the bed, holding his shriven hands up in a careful salaam.
Almost, he reached for his lip to pull it, but not quite.

He squeezed out two globs of the sulfa ointment onto the tabletop and,
with the pliers, squashed two slabs of sponge until the creamy stuff was
through and through them. He mopped out the femoral wound and placed a
medicated sponge on each side of the wound, leaving the artery exposed
at the bottom. Using tweezers and pliers, he laboriously threaded the
curved needle while quelling the urge to stick the end of the thread
into his mouth.

He managed to get four tiny stitches into the artery below the break,
out of it above the break. Each one he knotted with exquisite care so
that the thread would not cut the tissue but still would draw the
severed edges together. Then he squatted back on his heels to rest, his
shoulders afire with tension, his eyes misted. Then, taking a deep
breath, he removed the clamp.

Blood filled the wound and soaked the sponges. But it came slowly,
without spurting. He shrugged grimly. So what’s to do, use a tire patch?
He mopped the blood out once more, and quickly filled the incision with
ointment, slapping a piece of gauze over it more to hide it than to help
it.

He wiped his eyebrows first with one shoulder, then the other, and fixed
his eyes on the opposite wall the way he used to do when he worked on
his little silver chains. When the mist went away he turned his
attention to the long cut on the underside of the breast. He didn’t know
how to stitch one this size, but he could cook and he knew how to skewer
up a chicken. Biting his tongue, he stuck the first of his silver pins
into the flesh at right angles to the cut, pressing it across the wound
and out the other side. He started the next pin not quite an inch away,
and the same with the third. The fourth grated on something in the
wound; it startled him like a door slamming and he bit his tongue
painfully. He backed the pin out and probed carefully with his tweezers.
Yes, something hard in there. He probed deeper with both points of the
tweezers, feeling them enter uncut tissue with a soft crunching that
only a fearful fingertip could hear. He conquered a shudder and glanced
up at the girl’s face. He resolved not to look up there again. It was a
very dead face.

_Stupid!_ but the self-insult was lost in concentration even as it was
born. The tweezers closed on something hard, slippery and stubborn. He
worked it gently back and forth, feeling a puzzled annoyance at this
unfamiliar flesh that yielded as he moved. Gradually, very gradually, a
sharp angular corner of _something_ appeared. He kept at it until there
was enough to grasp with his fingers; then he set his tweezers aside and
gently worked it loose. Blood began to flow freely before it was half
out, but he did not stop until he could draw it free. The light glinted
on the strip of hollow-ground steel and its shattered margins; he turned
it over twice before it came to him that it was a piece of straight
razor. He set it down on his enamel table, thinking of what the police
might have said to him if he had turned her over to them with that story
about a car accident.

He stanched the blood, pulled the wound as wide apart as he could. The
nipple writhed under his fingers, its pink halo shrunken and wrinkled;
he grunted, thinking that a bug had crawled under his hand, and then
aware that whatever the thing meant, it couldn’t mean death, not yet
anyway. He had to go back and start over, stanching the cut and
spreading it, and quickly squeezing in as much ointment as it would
hold. Then he went on with his insertion of the silver pins, until there
was a little ladder of twelve of them from one end of the wound to the
other. He took his thread, doubled it, put the loop around the topmost
pin and drew the two parts of the thread underneath. Holding them both
in one hand, he gently pinched the edges of the wound together at the
pin. Then he drew the loop tight without cutting, crossed the threads
and put them under the next pin, and again closed the wound. He
continued this all the way down, lacing the cut closed around the ladder
of pins. At the bottom he tied the thread off and cut it. There was
blood and ointment all over his handiwork, but when he mopped up it
looked good to him.

He stood up and let sensation flow agonizingly into his numb feet. He
was sopping wet; he could feel perspiration searching its way down
through the hairs of his legs; like a migration of bedbugs. He looked
down at himself; wrinkles and water and blood. He looked across at the
wavery mirror, and saw a bandaged goblin with brow-ridges like a shelf
and sunken eyes with a cast to them, with grizzled hair which could be
scrubbed only to the color of grime, and with a great gout of blood
where the mouth hid behind the bandage. He snatched it down and looked
again. _More better you cover your face, no matter what_. He turned
away, not from his face, but with it, in the pained patience of a burro
with saddle sores.

Wearily he carried his enameled tabletop to the sink. He washed his
hands and forearms and took off the handkerchiefs from around his neck
and washed his face. Then he got what was left of his sponge and a pan
of warm soapy water and came back to the bed.

It took him hours. He sponged the tablecloths on which she lay, shifted
her gently so as to put no strain on the wounds, and washed and dried
where she had lain. He washed her from head to toe, going back for clean
water, and then had to dry the bed again afterward. When he lifted her
head he found her hair matted and tacky with rain and drying blood, and
fresh blood with it, so he propped up her shoulders with a big pillow
under the plastic and tipped her head back and washed and dried her
hair, and found an ugly lump and a bleeding contusion on the back of her
head. He combed the hair away from it on each side and put cold water on
it, and it stopped bleeding, but there was a lump the size of a plum. He
separated half a dozen of the gauze pads and packed them around the lump
so that it need not take the pressure off her head; he dared not turn
her over.

When her hair was wet and fouled it was only a dark mat, but cleaned and
combed, it was the darkest of auburns, perfectly straight. There was a
broad lustrous band of it on the bed on each side of her face, which was
radiant with pallor, cold as a moon. He covered her with the bedspread,
and for a long while stood over her, full of that strange
nowhere-everywhere almost-pain, not liking it but afraid to turn away
from it … maybe he would never have it again.

He sighed, a thing that came from his marrow and his years, and doggedly
set to work scrubbing the floor. When he had finished, and the needles
and thread were put away, the bit of tape which he had not used, the
wrappers of the gauze pads and the pan of blood from the end of the bed
disposed of, and all the tools cleaned and back in their box, the night
was over and daylight pressed weakly against the drawn blind. He turned
out the light and stood without breathing, listening with all his mind,
wanting to know from where he stood if she still lived. To bend close
and find out she was gone—oh no. He wanted to know from here.

But a truck went by, and a woman called a child, and someone laughed; so
he went and knelt by the bed and closed his eyes and slowly put his hand
on her throat. It was cool—please, not cold!—and quiet as a lost glove.

Then the hairs on the back of his hand stirred to her breath, and again,
the faintest of motions. The stinging came to his eyes and through and
through him came the fiery urge to do: make some soup, buy some
medicine, maybe, for her, a ribbon or a watch; clean the house, run to
the store … and while doing all these things, all at once, to shout and
shout great shaking wordless bellows to tell himself over and over
again, so he could hear for sure, that she was alive. At the very peak
of this explosion of urges, there was a funny little side-slip and he
was fast asleep.

He dreamed someone was sewing his legs together with a big curved sail
needle, and at the same time drawing the thread from his belly; he could
feel the spool inside spinning and emptying. He groaned and opened his
eyes, and knew instantly where he was and what had happened, and hated
himself for the noise he made. He lifted his hand and churned his
fingers to be sure they could feel, and lowered them gently to her
throat. It was warm—no, hot, too hot. He pushed back from the bed and
scrabbled half-across the floor on his knuckles and his numb, rubbery
legs. Cursing silently he made a long lunge and caught the wooden chair
to him, and used it to climb to his feet. He dared not let it go, so
clumped softly with it over to the corner, where he twisted and hung
gasping to the edge of the sink, while boiling acid ate downward through
his legs. When he could, he splashed cold water on his face and neck
and, still drying himself on a towel, stumbled across to the bed. He
flung the bedspread off and _stupid!_ he almost screamed as it plucked
at his fingers on the way; it had adhered to the wound in her groin and
he was sure he had ripped it to shreds, torn a whole section out of the
clumsily patched artery. And he couldn’t see; it must be getting dark
outside; how long had he crouched there? He ran to the light switch,
leaped back. Yes, bleeding, it was bleeding again—

But a little, only a very little. The gauze was turned up perhaps
halfway, and though the exposed wound was wet with blood, blood was not
running. It had, while he was asleep, but hardly enough to find its way
to the mattress. He lifted the loose corner of the gauze very gently,
and found it stuck fast. But the sponges, the little sponges to put on
the sulfa-whatchama, they were still in the wound. He’d meant to take
them out after a couple of hours, not let the whole clot form around
them!

He ran for warm water, his big sponge. Soap in it, yes. He squatted
beside the bed, though his legs still protested noisily, and began to
bathe the gauze with tiny, gentle touches.

Something made him look up. She had her eyes open, and was looking down
at him. Her face and her eyes were utterly without expression. He
watched them close slowly and slowly open again, lackluster and
uninterested. “All right, all right,” he said harshly, “I fix
everything.” She just kept on looking. He nodded violently, it was all
that soothes, all that encourages, hope for her and a total promise for
her, but it was only a rapid bobbing of his big ugly head. Annoyed as he
always was at his own speechlessness, he went back to work. He got the
gauze off and began soaking the edge of one of the sponges. When he
thought it was ready to come, he tugged gently at it.

In a high, whispery soprano, “Ho-o-o-o …?” she said; it was like a
question and a sob. Slowly she turned her head to the left. “Ho-o-o-o?”
She turned her head again and slipped back to unconsciousness.

“I,” he said loudly, excitedly, and “I—” and that was all; she wouldn’t
hear him anyway. He held still until his hands stopped trembling, and
went on with the job.

The wound looked wonderfully clean, though the skin all around it was
dry and hot.

Down inside the cut he could see the artery in a nest of wet jelly; that
was probably right—he didn’t know, but it looked all right, he wouldn’t
disturb it. He packed the opening full of ointment, pressed the edges
gently together, and put on a piece of tape. It promptly came unstuck,
so he discarded it and dried the flesh all around the wound, put on
gauze first, then the tape, and this time it held.

The other cut was quite closed, though more so where the pins were than
between them. It too was surrounded by hot, dry, red flesh.

The scrape on the back of her head had not bled, but the lump was bigger
than ever. Her face and neck were dry and very warm, though the rest of
her body seemed cool. He went for a cold cloth and put it across her
eyes and pressed it down on her cheeks, and she sighed. When he took it
away she was looking at him again.

“You all right?” he asked her, and inanely, “You all right,” he told
her. A small frown flickered for a moment and then her eyes closed. He
knew somehow that she was asleep. He touched her cheeks with the backs
of his fingers. “Very hot,” he muttered.

He turned out the light and in the dimness changed his clothes. From the
bottom of a drawer he took a child’s exercise book, and from it a piece
of paper with a telephone number in large black penciled script. “I come
back,” he said to the darkness. She didn’t say anything. He went out,
locking the door behind him.

Laboriously he called the office from the big drugstore, referring to
his paper for each digit and for each, holding the dial against the stop
for a full three or four seconds as if to be sure the number would
stick. He got the big boss Mr. Laddie first of all, which was acutely
embarrassing; he had not spoken to him in a dozen years. At the top of
his bull voice he collided with Laddie’s third impatient “Hello?” with
“Sick! I—uh, _sick!_” He heard the phone say “—in God’s name …?” and Mr.
Wismer’s laughter, and “Gimme the phone, that’s got to be that orangutan
of mine,” and right in his ear, “Hello?”

“Sick tonight,” he shouted.

“What’s the matter with you?”

He swallowed. “I can’t,” he yelled.

“That’s just old age,” said Mr. Wismer. He heard Mr. Laddie laughing
too. Mr. Wismer said, “How may nights you had off in the last fifteen
years?”

He thought about it. “No!” he roared. Anyway, it was eighteen years.

“You know, that’s right,” said Mr. Wismer, speaking to Mr. Laddie
without trying to cover his phone, “Fifteen years and never asked for a
night off before.”

“So who needs him? Give him all his nights off.”

“Not at those prices,” said Mr. Wismer, and to his phone, “Sure, dummy,
take off. Don’t work no con games.” The phone clicked off on laughter,
and he waited there in the booth until he was sure nothing else would be
said. Then he hung up his receiver and emerged into the big drugstore
where everyone all over was looking at him. Well, they always did. That
didn’t bother him. Only one thing bothered him, and that was Mr.
Laddie’s voice saying over and over in his head, “So who needs him?” He
knew he would have to stop and face those words and let them and all
that went with them go through his mind. But not now, please not now.

He kept them away by being busy; he bought tape and gauze and ointment
and a canvas cot and three icebags and, after some thought, aspirin,
because someone had told him once … and then to the supermarket where he
bought enough to feed a family of nine for nine days. And for all his
bundles, he still had a thick arm and a wide shoulder for a
twenty-five-pound cake of ice.

He got the door open and the ice in the box, and went out in the hall
and picked up the bundles and brought those in, and then went to her.
She was burning up, and her breathing was like the way seabirds fly into
the wind, a small beat, a small beat, and a long wait, balancing. He
cracked a corner off the ice-cake, wrapped it in a dish-towel and
whacked it angrily against the sink. He crowded the crushed ice into one
of the bags and put it on her head. She sighed but did not open her
eyes. He filled the other bags and put one on her breast and one on her
groin. He wrung his hands uselessly over her until it came to him _she
has to eat, losing blood like that_.

So he cooked, tremendously, watching her every second minute. He made
minestrone and baked cabbage and mashed potatoes and veal cutlets. He
cut a pie and warmed cinnamon buns, and he had hot coffee with ice cream
ready to spoon into it. She didn’t eat it, any of it, nor did she drink
a drop. She lay there and occasionally let her head fall to the side, so
he had to run and pick up the icebag and replace it. Once again she
sighed, and once he thought she opened her eyes, but couldn’t be sure.

On the second day she ate nothing and drank nothing, and her fever was
unbelievable. During the night, crouched on the floor beside her, he
awoke once with the echoes of weeping still in the room, but he may have
dreamed it.

Once he cut the tenderest, juiciest piece of veal he could find on a
cutlet, and put it between her lips. Three hours later he pressed them
apart to put in another piece, but the first one was still there. The
same thing happened with aspirin, little white crumbs on a dry tongue.

And the time soon came when he had busied himself out of things to do,
and fretted himself into a worry-reflex that operated by itself, and the
very act of thinking new thoughts trapped him into facing the old ones,
and then of course there was nothing to do but let them run on through,
with all the ache and humiliation they carried with them. He was trying
to think a new thing about what would happen if he called a doctor, and
the doctor would want to take her to a hospital; he would say, “She
needs treatment, old man, she doesn’t need you,” and there it was in his
mind, ready to run, so:

Be eleven years old, bulky and strong and shy, standing in the kitchen
doorway, holding your wooden box by its string and trying to shape your
mouth so that the reluctant words can press out properly; and there’s
Mama hunched over a gin bottle like a cat over a half-eaten bird,
peering; watch her lipless wide mouth twitch and say, “Don’t stand there
clackin’ and slurpin’! Speak up, boy! What are you tryin’ to say, you’re
leaving?”

So nod, it’s easier, and she’ll say “Leave, then, leave, who needs you?”
and you go:

And be a squat, powerful sixteen and go to the recruiting station and
watch the sergeant with the presses and creases asking “Whadda _you_
want?” and you try, you try and you can’t say it so you nod your head at
the poster with the pointing finger, UNCLE SAM NEEDS YOU; and the
sergeant glances at it and at you, and suddenly his pointing finger is
half an inch away from your nose; cross-eyed you watch it while he
barks, “Well, Uncle don’t need _you!”_ and you wait, watching the finger
that way, not moving until you understand; you understand things real
good, it’s just that you hear slowly. So there you hang cross-eyed and
they all laugh.

Or ’way back, you’re eight years old and in school, that Phyllis with
the row of springy brown sausage-curls flying when she tosses her head,
pink and clean and so pretty; you have the chocolates wrapped in gold
paper tied in goldstring mesh; you go up the aisle to her desk and put
the chocolates down and run back; she comes down the aisle and throws
them so hard the mesh breaks on your desk and she says, loud, “I don’t
need these and I don’t need you, and you know what, you got snot on your
face,” and you put up your hand and sure enough you have.

That’s all. Only every time anyone says “Who needs him?” or the like,
you have to go through all of them, every one. Sooner or later, however
much you put it off, you’ve got to do it all.

I get doctor, you don’t need me.

You die, you don’t need me.

Please …

Far back in her throat, a scraping hiss, and her lips moved. She held
his eyes with hers, and her lips moved silently, and a little late for
the lips, the hiss came again. He didn’t know how he guessed right, but
he did and brought water, dribbling it slowly on her mouth. She licked
at it greedily, lifting her head up. He put a hand under it, being
careful of the lump, and helped her. After a while she slumped back and
smiled weakly at the cup. Then she looked up into his face and though
the smile disappeared, he felt much better. He ran to the icebox and the
stove, and got glasses and straws—one each of orange juice, chocolate
milk, plain milk, consommé from a can, and ice water. He lined them up
on the chair-seat by the bed and watched them and her eagerly, like a
circus seal waiting to play “America” on the bulb-horns. She did smile
this time, faintly, briefly, but right at him, and he tried the
consommé. She drank almost half of it through the straw without stopping
and fell asleep.

Later, when he checked to see if there was any bleeding, the plastic
sheet was wet, but not with blood. _Stupid!_ he raged at himself, and
stamped out and bought a bedpan.

She slept a lot now, and ate often but lightly. She began to watch him
as he moved about; sometimes when he thought she was asleep, he would
turn and meet her eyes. Mostly, it was his hands she watched, those next
two days. He washed and ironed her clothes, and sat and mended them with
straight small stitches; he hung by his elbows to the edge of the
enameled table and worked his silver wire, making her a broach like a
flower on a fan, and a pendant on a silver chain, and a bracelet to
match them. She watched his hands while he cooked; he made his own
spaghetti—tagliatelli, really—rolling and rolling the dough until it was
a huge tough sheet, winding it up like a jelly-roll only tight, slicing
it in quick, accurate flickers of a paring-knife so it came out like
yellow-white flat shoelaces. He had hands which had never learned their
limitations, because he had never thought to limit them. Nothing else in
life cared for this man but his hands, and since they did everything,
they could do anything.

But when he changed her dressings or washed her, or helped with the
bedpan, she never looked at his hands. She would lie perfectly still and
watch his face.

She was very weak at first and could move nothing but her head. He was
glad because her stitches were healing nicely. When he withdrew the pins
it must have hurt, but she made not a sound; twelve flickers of her
smooth brow, one for each pin as it came out.

“Hurts,” he rumbled.

Faintly, she nodded. It was the first communication between them, except
for those mute, crowded eyes following him about. She smiled too, as she
nodded, and he turned his back and ground his knuckles into his eyes and
felt wonderful.

He went back to work on the sixth night, having puttered and fussed over
her all day to keep her from sleeping until he was ready to leave, then
not leaving until he was sure she was fast asleep. He would lock her in
and hurry to work, warm inside and ready to do three men’s work; and
home again in the dark early hours as fast as his bandy legs would carry
him, bringing her a present—a little radio, a scarf, something special
to eat—every single day. He would lock the door firmly and then hurry to
her, touching her forehead and cheek to see what her temperature was,
straightening the bed gently so she wouldn’t wake. Then he would go out
of her sight, away back by the sink, and undress and change to the long
drawers he slept in, and come back and curl up on the camp cot. For
perhaps an hour and a half he would sleep like a stone, but after that
the slightest rustle of her sheet, the smallest catch of breath, would
bring him to her in a bound, croaking, “You all right?” and hanging over
her tensely, frantically trying to divine what she might need, what he
might do or get for her.

And when the daylight came he would give her warm milk with an egg
beaten in it, and then he would bathe her and change her dressings and
comb her hair, and when there was nothing left to do for her he would
clean the room, scrub the floor, wash clothes and dishes and,
interminably, cook. In the afternoon he shopped, moving everywhere at a
half-trot, running home again as soon as he could to show her what he
had bought, what he had planned for her dinner. All these days, and then
these weeks, he glowed inwardly, hugging the glow while he was away from
her, fanning it with her presence when they were together.

He found her crying one afternoon late in the second week, staring at
the little radio with the tears streaking her face. He made a harsh
cooing syllable and wiped her cheeks with a dry washcloth and stood back
with torture on his animal face. She patted his hand weakly, and made a
series of faint gestures which utterly baffled him. He sat on the
bedside chair and put his face close to hers as if he could tear the
meaning out of her with his eyes. There was something different about
her; she had watched him, up to now, with the fascinated,
uncomprehending attention of a kitten watching a tankful of tropical
fish; but now there was something more in her gaze, in the way she moved
and in what she did.

“You hurt?” he rasped.

She shook her head. Her mouth moved, and she pointed to it and began to
cry again.

“Oh, you hungry. I fix, fix good.” He rose but she caught his wrist,
shaking her head and crying, but smiling too. He sat down, torn apart by
his perplexity. Again she moved her mouth, pointing to it, shaking her
head.

“No talk,” he said. She was breathing so hard it frightened him, but
when he said that she gasped and half sat up; he caught her shoulders
and put her down, but she was nodding urgently. “You can’t talk!” he
said.

_Yes, yes!_ she nodded.

He looked at her for a long time. The music on the radio stopped and
someone began to sell used cars in a crackling baritone. She glanced at
it and her eyes filled with tears again. He leaned across her and shut
the set off. After a profound effort he formed his mouth in the right
shape and released a disdainful snort: “Ha! What you want talk? Don’t
talk. I fix everything, no talk. I—” He ran out of words, so instead
slapped himself powerfully on the chest and nodded at her, the stove,
the bedpan, the tray of bandages. He said again, “What you want talk?”

She looked up at him, overwhelmed by his violence, and shrank down. He
tenderly wiped her cheeks again, mumbling, “I fix everything.”

He came home in the dark one morning, and after seeing that she was
comfortable according to his iron standards, went to bed. The smell of
bacon and fresh coffee was, of course, part of a dream; what else could
it be? And the faint sounds of movement around the room had to be his
weary imagination.

He opened his eyes on the dream and closed them again, laughing at
himself for a crazy stupid. Then he went still inside, and slowly opened
his eyes again.

Beside his cot was the bedside chair, and on it was a plate of fried
eggs and crisp bacon, a cup of strong black coffee, toast with the gold
of butter disappearing into its older gold. He stared at these things in
total disbelief, and then looked up.

She was sitting on the end of the bed, where it formed an eight-inch
corridor between itself and the cot. She wore her pressed and mended
blouse and her skirt. Her shoulders sagged with weariness and she seemed
to have some difficulty in holding her head up; her hands hung limply
between her knees. But her face was suffused with delight and
anticipation as she watched him waking up to his breakfast.

His mouth writhed and he bared his blunt yellow teeth, and ground them
together while he uttered a howl of fury. It was a strangled, rasping
sound and she scuttled away from it as if it had burned her, and
crouched in the middle of the bed with her eyes huge and her mouth
slack. He advanced on her with his arms raised and his big fists
clenched; she dropped her face on the bed and covered the back of her
neck with both hands and lay there trembling. For a long moment he hung
over her, then slowly dropped his arms. He tugged at the skirt. “Take
off,” he grated. He tugged it again, harder.

She peeped up at him and then slowly turned over. She fumbled weakly at
the button. He helped her. He pulled the skirt away and tossed it on the
cot, and gestured sternly at the blouse. She unbuttoned it and he lifted
it from her shoulders. He pulled down the sheet, taking it right out
from under her. He took her ankles gently in his powerful hands and
pulled them down until she was straightened out on the bed, and then
covered her carefully. He was breathing hard. She watched him in terror.

In a frightening quiet he turned back to his cot and the laden chair
beside it. Slowly he picked up the cup of coffee and smashed it on the
floor. Steadily as the beat of a woodman’s axe the saucer followed, the
plate of toast, the plate of eggs. China and yolk squirted and sprayed
over the floor and on the walls. When he had finished he turned back to
her. “I fix everything,” he said hoarsely. He emphasized each syllable
with a thick forefinger as he said again, “I fix everything.”

She whipped over to her stomach and buried her face in the pillow, and
began to sob so hard he could feel the bed shaking the floor through the
soles of his feet. He turned angrily away from her and got a pan and a
scrub-brush and a broom and dustpan, and laboriously, methodically,
cleaned up the mess.

Two hours later he approached her where she lay, still on her stomach,
stiff and motionless. He had had a long time to think of what to say:
“Look, you see, you _sick …_ you see?” He said it, as gently as he
could. He put his hand on her shoulder but she twitched violently,
flinging it away. Hurt and baffled, he backed away and sat down on the
couch, watching her miserably.

She wouldn’t eat any lunch.

She wouldn’t eat any dinner.

As the time approached for him to go to work, she turned over. He still
sat on the cot in his long johns, utter misery on his face and in every
line of his ugly body. She looked at him and her eyes filled with tears.
He met her gaze but did not move. She sighed suddenly and held out her
hand. He leaped to it and pulled it to his forehead, knelt, bowed over
it and began to cry. She patted his wiry hair until the storm passed,
which it did abruptly, at its height. He sprang away from her and
clattered pans on the stove, and in a few minutes brought her some bread
and gravy and a parboiled artichoke, rich with olive oil and basil. She
smiled wanly and took the plate, and slowly ate while he watched each
mouthful and radiated what could only be gratitude. Then he changed his
clothes and went to work.

He brought her a red housecoat when she began to sit up, though he would
not let her out of bed. He brought her a glass globe in which a flower
would keep, submerged in water, for a week, and two live turtles in a
plastic bowl and a pale-blue toy rabbit with a music box in it that
played “Rock-a-bye Baby” and a blinding vermilion lipstick. She remained
obedient and more watchful than ever; when his fussing and puttering
were over and he took up his crouch on the cot, waiting for whatever
need in her he could divine next, their eyes would meet, and
increasingly, his would drop. She would hold the blue rabbit tight to
her and watch him unblinkingly, or smile suddenly, parting her lips as
if something vitally important and deeply happy was about to escape
them. Sometimes she seemed inexpressibly sad, and sometimes she was so
restless that he would go to her and stroke her hair until she fell
asleep, or seemed to. It occurred to him that he had not seen her wounds
for almost two days, and that perhaps they were bothering her during one
of these restless spells, and so he pressed her gently down and
uncovered her. He touched the scar carefully and she suddenly thrust his
hand away and grasped her own flesh firmly, kneading it, slapping it
stingingly. Shocked, he looked at her face and saw she was smiling,
nodding. “Hurt?” She shook her head. He said, proudly, as he covered
her, “I fix. I fix good.” She nodded and caught his hand briefly between
her chin and her shoulder.

It was that night, after he had fallen into that heavy first sleep on
his return from the store, that he felt the warm firm length of her
tight up against him on the cot. He lay still for a moment, somnolent,
uncomprehending, while quick fingers plucked at the buttons of his long
johns. He brought his hands up and trapped her wrists. She was
immediately still, though her breath came swiftly and her heart pounded
his chest like an angry little knuckle. He made a labored, inquisitive
syllable, “Wh-wha …?” and she moved against him and then stopped,
trembling. He held her wrists for more than a minute, trying to think
this out, and at last sat up. He put one arm around her shoulders and
the other under her knees. He stood up. She clung to him and the breath
hissed in her nostrils. He moved to the side of her bed and bent slowly
and put her down. He had to reach back and detach her arms from around
his neck before he could straighten up. “You sleep,” he said. He fumbled
for the sheet and pulled it over her and tucked it around her. She lay
absolutely motionless, and he touched her hair and went back to his cot.
He lay down and after a long time fell into a troubled sleep. But
something woke him; he lay and listened, hearing nothing. He remembered
suddenly and vividly the night she had balanced between life and death,
and he had awakened to the echo of a sob which was not repeated; in
sudden fright he jumped up and went to her, bent down and touched her
head. She was lying face down. “You cry?” he whispered, and she shook
her head rapidly. He grunted and went back to bed.

It was the ninth week and it was raining; he plodded homeward through
the black, shining streets, and when he turned into his own block and
saw the dead, slick river stretching between him and the streetlight in
front of his house, he experienced a moment of fantasy, of dreamlike
disorientation; it seemed to him for a second that none of this had
happened, that in a moment the car would flash by him and dip toward the
curb momentarily while a limp body tumbled out, and he must run to it
and take it indoors, and it would bleed, it would bleed, it might die.…
He shook himself like a big dog and put his head down against the rain,
saying _Stupid!_ to his inner self. Nothing could be wrong, now. He had
found a way to live, and live that way he would, and he would abide no
change in it.

But there was a change, and he knew it before he entered the house; his
window, facing the street, had a dull orange glow which could have not
have been given it by the streetlight alone. But maybe she was reading
one of those paperback novels he had inherited with the apartment; maybe
she had to use the bedpan or was just looking at the clock … but the
thoughts did not comfort him; he was sick with an unaccountable fear as
he unlocked the hall door. His own entrance showed light through the
crack at the bottom; he dropped his keys as he fumbled with them, and at
last opened the door.

He gasped as if he had been struck in the solar plexus. The bed was
made, flat, neat, and she was not in it. He spun around; his frantic
gaze saw her and passed her before he could believe his eyes. Tall,
queenly in her red housecoat, she stood at the other end of the room, by
the sink.

He stared at her in amazement. She came to him, and as he filled his
lungs for one of his grating yells, she put a finger on her lips and,
lightly, her other hand across his mouth. Neither of these gestures,
both even, would have been enough to quiet him ordinarily, but there was
something else about her, something which did not wait for what he might
do and would not quail before him if he did it. He was instantly
confused, and silent. He stared after her as, without breaking stride,
she passed him and gently closed the door. She took his hand, but the
keys were in the way; she drew them from his fingers and tossed them on
the table and then took his hand again, firmly. She was sure, decisive;
she was one who had thought things out and weighed and discarded, and
now knew what to do. But she was triumphant in some way, too; she had
the poise of a victor and the radiance of the witness to a miracle. He
could cope with her helplessness, of any kind, to any degree, but
this—he had to think, and she gave him no time to think.

She led him to the bed and put her hands on his shoulders, turning him
and making him sit down. She sat close to him, her face alight, and when
again he filled his lungs, “Shh!” she hissed, sharply, and smilingly
covered his mouth with her hand. She took his shoulders again and looked
straight into his eyes, and said clearly, “I can talk now, I can talk!”

Numbly, he gaped at her.

“Three days already, it was a secret, it was a surprise.” Her voice was
husky, hoarse even, but very clear and deeper than her slight body
indicated. “I been practicing, to be sure. I’m all right again, I’m all
right. You fix everything!” she said, and laughed.

Hearing that laugh, seeing the pride and joy in her face, he could take
nothing away from her. “Ahh …” he said, wonderingly.

She laughed again. “I can go, I can go!” she sang. She leapt up suddenly
and pirouetted, and leaned over him laughing. He gazed up at her and her
flying hair, and squinted his eyes as he would looking into the sun.
“Go?” he blared, the pressure of his confusion forcing the syllable out
as an explosive shout.

She sobered immediately, and sat down again close to him. “Oh, honey,
don’t, _don’t_ look as if you was knifed or something. You know I can’t
camp on you, live off you, just _forever!_”

“No, no you stay,” he blurted, anguish in his face.

“Now look,” she said, speaking simply and slowly as to a child. “I’m all
well again, I can talk now. It wouldn’t be right, me staying, locked up
here, that bedpan and all. Now wait, wait,” she said quickly before he
could form a word, “I don’t mean I’m not grateful, you been … you been,
well, I just can’t tell you. Look, nobody in my life ever did anything
like this, I mean, I had to run away when I was thirteen, I done all
sorts of bad things. And I got treated … I mean, nobody else … look,
here’s what I mean, up to now I’d steal, I’d rob anybody, what the hell.
What I mean, why not, you see?” She shook him gently to make him see;
then, recognizing the blankness and misery of his expression, she wet
her lips and started over. “What I’m trying to say is, you been so kind,
all this—” She waved her hand at the blue rabbit, the turtle tank,
everything in the room—“I can’t take any more. I mean, not a thing, not
breakfast. If I could pay you back some way, no matter what, I would,
you know I would.” There was a tinge of bitterness in her husky voice.
“Nobody can pay you anything. You don’t need anything or anybody. I
can’t give you anything you need, or do anything for you that needs
doing, you do it all yourself. If there was something you wanted from
me—” She curled her hands inward and placed her fingertips between her
breasts, inclining her head with a strange submissiveness that made him
ache. “But no, you fix everything,” she mimicked. There was no mockery
in it.

“No, no, you don’t go,” he whispered harshly.

She patted his cheek, and her eyes loved him. “I do go,” she said,
smiling. Then the smile disappeared. “I got to explain to you, those
hoods who cut me, I asked for that. I goofed. I was doing something real
bad—well, I’ll tell you. I was a runner, know what I mean? I mean dope,
I was selling it.”

He looked at her blankly. He was not catching one word in ten; he was
biting and biting only on emptiness and uselessness, aloneness, and the
terrible truth of this room without her or the blue rabbit or anything
else but what it had contained all these years—linoleum with the design
scrubbed off, six novels he couldn’t read, a stove waiting for someone
to cook for, grime and regularity and who needs you?

She misunderstood his expression. “Honey, honey, don’t look at me like
that, I’ll never do it again. I only did it because I didn’t care, I
used to get glad when people hurt themselves; yeah, I mean that. I never
knew someone could be kind, like you; I always thought that was sort of
a lie, like the movies. Nice but not real, not for me.

“But I have to tell you, I swiped a cache, my God, twenty, twenty-two
G’s worth. I had it all of forty minutes, they caught up with me.” Her
eyes widened and saw things not in the room. “With a razor, he went to
hit me with it so hard he broke it on top of the car door. He hit me
here _down_ and here _up_, I guess he was going to gut me but the razor
was busted.” She expelled air from her nostrils, and her gaze came back
into the room. “I guess I got the lump on the head when they threw me
out of the car. I guess that’s why I couldn’t talk, I heard of that. Oh
_honey!_ Don’t look like that, you’re tearing me apart!”

He looked at her dolefully and wagged his big head helplessly from side
to side. She knelt before him suddenly and took both his hands. “Listen,
you _got_ to understand. I was going to slide out while you were working
but I stayed just so I could make you understand. After all you done.…
See, I’m well, I can’t stay cooped up in one room forever. If I could,
I’d get work some place near here and see you all the time, honest I
would. But my life isn’t worth a rubber dime in this town. I got to
leave here and that means I got to leave town. I’ll be all right, honey.
I’ll write to you; I’ll never forget you, how could I?”

She was far ahead of him. He had grasped that she wanted to leave him;
the next thing he understood was that she wanted to leave town too.

“You don’t go,” he choked. “You need me.”

“You don’t need me,” she said fondly, “and I don’t need you. It comes to
that, honey; it’s the way you fixed it. It’s the right way; can’t you
see that?”

Right in there was the third thing he understood.

He stood up slowly, feeling her hands slide from his, from his knees to
the floor as he stepped away from her. “Oh God!” she cried from the
floor where she knelt, “you’re killing me, taking it this way! Can’t you
be happy for me?”

He stumbled across the room and caught himself on the lower shelf of the
china closet. He looked back and forward along the dark, echoing
corridor of his years, stretching so far and drearily, and he looked at
this short bright segment slipping away from him … He heard her quick
footsteps behind him and when he turned he had the flatiron in his hand.
She never saw it. She came to him bright-faced, pleading, and he put out
his arms and she ran inside, and the iron curved around and crashed into
the back of her head.

He lowered her gently down on the linoleum and stood for a long time
over her, crying quietly.

Then he put the iron away and filled the kettle and a saucepan with
water, and in the saucepan he put needles and a clamp and thread and
little slabs of sponge and a knife and pliers. From the gateleg table
and from a drawer he got his two plastic tablecloths and began arranging
them on the bed.

“I fix everything,” he murmured as he worked, “Fix it right.”



SO NEAR THE DARKNESS


THIS IS THE STORY of a Chinese silver cigarette case, some vaseline hair
tonic, a gooseneck desk lamp, and two girls—one nearly always beautiful,
and one always nearly beautiful. It also may or may not concern a
creature called Arrara, so named because of its peculiar snarl.

The girl who was nearly always beautiful had been christened Organtina,
but when she heard a snide and subtle remark about it from one of the
long-haired gentry in Greenwich Village she determinedly omitted the
first two syllables. Tina was attractive in an almost miraculous way,
and struck such a perfect balance in the color of her hair between
blonde and brunette that one can only describe it as being the color of
hair which is soft in the shadows, and breathtakingly bright in the sun.

Tina sold seashells in Chelsea, a fact which caused her considerable
difficulty in describing her occupation whenever she became emotionally
agitated. In her colorful little shop on the fringes of the Village, she
displayed seashells and parts of seashells arranged and assembled into
dolls, turtles and comedy masks.

She also conducted a flourishing trade in geegaws and a very special
assortment of bric-a-brac and izthattas. The izthattas differed from the
geegaws and the bric-a-brac in that the latter are unfunctional but
pleasing decorative things, whereas the izthatta is a purely functional
object. She loved both the izthattas and the geegaws and she made them
as fast as she could. And so accomplished was her artistry that they
sold like hotcakes. She knew because she had received comparative
figures on hotcakes from Eddy Southworth.

The merchandising of an izthatta is very simple. You make up an object
by cementing a razor-shell to a sea-snail, crowning it with a clam and
spraying on some Paris Green. Almost certainly the next customer in the
place will ask: “Is that a napkin ring?” or “Is that a paper weight?” or
“Is that a salad-fork holder?” The correct reply should be: “I really
like to deal with customers who show both good taste and insight. But of
course it is! And this morning a lady was in—”

Your next cue is to laugh gaily while the customer reaches into her
jeans for the exorbitant price of the izthatta, Chelsea being near
enough to the Village for jeans on ladies to be _de rigeur_.

Tina’s window displays were changed weekly, and brought in a lot of
trade. Now it would be a spread of fragile coral-lace and crab-claws,
largely labelled: SKELETON ART. (No mussels). And next week the display
would be a highly abstract piece of business all made of urchin-quill
and mother-of-pearl, captivatingly captioned: UNCONCHIOUS ART, without,
of course, a conch in sight.

In the third week of a warm March, Tina was busily working with
tweezers, cement, Swiss pattern files and a set of surgical tools. She
worked in a small alcove separated from the rest of the shop by a curved
partition, with a splendid assortment of her wares spread out under a
gooseneck lamp of high voltage.

The opening in the partition between the workroom and the shop was
small—but so was Tina. Her knowledge of a customer’s advent was gained
in two ways. First, there was the photo-electric beam which crossed the
outer doorway, in such a way that its interruption would actuate a
mellow chime. Second, there was a hole cut through the partition. The
aperture was at her eye-level as she sat at work and it enabled her to
see clearly everything that went on in the shop.

Imagine, then, her astonishment when she looked up from her work and saw
through the peephole that there was a man in her shop. Eddy Southworth,
whose hobby was electronics, had assured her that no one could possibly
pass through the outer door without breaking the photo-electric beam.
Yet the chime had not rung, and indisputably there was a man in the
shop—a slender, graceful man with black hair like a carapace and heavily
knitted brows.

Tina rose quickly, straightened her hair and squeezed through the
partition. “Yes?” she inquired, confronting the intruder so abruptly
that he recoiled a step.

“Yes indeed,” said the man. He was young, and he had a voice like the
middle register of an oboe. He looked up quickly and back to the
showcase on which he had been leaning, the darting swiftness of his
glance subtracting nothing from its thoroughness. Tina felt like a
file-drawer from which inventory cards had been quite deliberately
spilled.

“Would—would you like something?” she asked faintly.

She stepped hopefully behind the showcase, but to no avail. He promptly
turned his back, to gaze up and across, down and around the shop.

“The old shell game,” he said as if in amazement to himself.

“There was a time,” she said pleasantly, “when I had only heard that
once in connection with this business, which was founded by my
grandfather. Is there anything—uh—inanimate here which appeals to you?”

“Oh yes,” he said, turning finally to face her. He had, it appeared,
disturbingly ironic eyebrows. “Where were you on the night of March
twenty-fifth, two years ago?”

She stared at him. “Are you serious?”

“I certainly am,” he said soberly, “I would really like to know. It’s
difficult for me to explain, but you must believe that it’s important to
me.”

“I don’t think I can—Wait now.” She tilted back her head and closed her
eyes. Two years ago. Of course. She had been in Rochester, and—“I do
remember!” she said. “It’s strange that you should ask me. I was staying
with an aunt in Rochester that spring, and I had a violent quarrel which
seems very silly now. I was quite the Girl Scout then. I was so angry I
got my kit and headed for the hills. I didn’t see a soul I knew for
almost two weeks.”

“No one?” He stared at her intently. “Think now. Didn’t anybody know
where you were?”

“Not a soul,” she said positively. “And where were _you_ that night, if
I’m not being too curious? Just where, precisely?”

He smiled a very white smile. His teeth seemed to be pointed. “I _am_
sorry,” he apologized. “That was very rude of me. Would you like to make
some money?”

Tina nodded energetically. “By selling seashells.”

“I mean real money.”

“How? By selling thousands of seashells?”

He sighed. “There’s one thing I’m sure of,” he said. “You are being
stupid on purpose.”

“I shall take that as a compliment,” she said, and added, “I wonder how
much more I’ll have to take.”

He laughed engagingly. “Your sense of humor seems to stay with you no
matter what the provocation. I’ve noticed your window displays, for
example. Laughing in the face of a business recession. You’d probably
remain buoyant in the face of any menace.”

“You try me,” she said without inflection. “I rather think you’d be
surprised.”

The eyebrows tensed like the wings of a gliding gull. “Perhaps I will.”

“What has my sense of humor to do with all this,” she asked, meeting his
gaze defiantly.

“More than you might suspect. I have a job to do, and I need a girl like
you to assist me.” He straightened, his long face all clear planes and
forced patience. “Cigarette?”

He took a silver cigarette case from his pocket and offered it to her
unopened.

She stopped her head in mid-shake and took the case. “What a lovely
thing!” she exclaimed.

“Is it?” said the man.

“Surely there can be no doubt about it. What a beautiful dragon!”

“There are seven dragons,” he pointed out.

“Sev—Oh, I see. Two around the edge here, all curled around each other.
Uh-huh—and one peeping around the pagoda.”

“There are a good many pagodas around Peiping, too.”

“Hey!” she laughed. “That was my line. Now, let’s see—that makes four
dragons.”

“There are two more on the back,” he murmured.

She turned the case over. “I don’t _like_ those. They look positively
ferocious.”

“They’ve been fighting again. But most dragons do look ferocious.”

She looked at him quizzically. His calm, handsome face had grown, if
anything, more sardonic. Recognizing that he was willing to let the
impossible conversation go on until closing time, she dropped her eyes
to the case.

“Where’s the seventh dragon?” she asked.

_Arrara-arrara_ said the case. It spoke softly, like a lisping child
with moist red lips. Tina gasped, and closed her eyes. The case moved
gently but firmly in her grasp, just as if someone were trying to twist
it away from her. She trembled and opened her eyes. The young man was
trying to pry it from her fingers. She raised it with a shudder of
revulsion.

_Arrara_, said the case indignantly. The man said, “Shut up, you.”

Tina said, “I didn’t say anything.”

“Not you,” he said to Tina. “I was just thinking aloud, in reference to
something else. Cigarette?”

“Thanks no,” said Tina swiftly, her eyes on the case in horrified
disbelief as it went back into the man’s pocket. She wet her lips. “The
other dragon’s inside, huh?”

“That’s right. Now, about this little job. I can make it decidedly worth
your while if you’ll come in.”

“I don’t doubt that,” said Tina, moistening her lips. “But if I should
consider it I’d like to know in advance what it is I may have to say
‘No’ to.”

“Well, it’s like this. I have a friend who wants to get married, in a
manner of speaking, and you’re the ideal—Oh, see here now. Stop shaking
your head like that.”

“I can’t help it. That ‘in a manner of speaking’ just about does it.
Good-bye.”

“Good-bye. My name is Lee Brokaw. I’m a dancer—adagio.”

He looked her up and down and smiled. “Of course I didn’t really mean
‘good-bye.’ I wish you would save both of us the trouble involved in my
becoming insistent,” he said smoothly. “How about dinner tonight?”

For reply she marched to the doorway and stood there. The photocell
chime crooned from the back of the shop. She threw up a firm thumb.
“Come along, little man. Actually, it’s past my customary closing hour.”

As if this were a cue, he nodded with feigned resignation and passed
through the door. “See you tomorrow,” he promised.

Shaking her head, Tina went back into the shop. She was sharp-witted
enough to realize that she must depend for the support of her unusual
trade on unusual people. Of these she certainly had had more than her
share, from the gentleman who would buy no ornament at which his
schnauzer would not wag its tail, to the woman who had three rooms of
her house redecorated to suit a purple tie-rack she had purchased at a
fire sale. But this Lee Brokaw character was strictly eggs in the beer.
What _was_ it he kept locked up in that cigarette case?

II

Tina had dinner with Eddy Southworth. He was an artist who lived and
worked in the Village, but unlike most artists, he put in regular hours.
He was locally well-known, and his works were considered delicate,
tasteful and distinctly on the light side. He made flapjacks in the
window of the Blue Tower Cafeteria, and anyone who watched his
ambidextrous hot-cake-tossing knew that here indeed was an artist.
Having dinner with him meant sitting across the counter, snatching
phrases between servings, and filtering romantic comments through a
mouthful of the _spécíalité de la maison_, as follows:

“Hya, cinth.”

“Lo, quacious.” This was a routine, an intimacy, and a mental exercise.
“Stack them with cherry syrup.”

“Food of the Gods! How’s it with you, Tina?” Before she could reply he
was gone to the front of the place, to fill the air with somersaulting
pancakes. On his way back with a batter-bucket, she determinedly clipped
his elbow.

“Eddy, what kind of a man could walk between a photocell and a light and
not ring an alarm?”

“A ghost,” said Eddy solemnly. “Or a vampire. Did you have one in the
shop today?”

She nodded. “That’s nice,” he said, automatically. He went to the mixer
at the back of the cafeteria and began to fill his bucket. _“What?”_ he
bellowed suddenly, and came back. “What about this guy? Did he wear a
black cloak? Did he have a widow’s peak, pointed teeth and a demon in
his pocket?”

“No—I mean, yes. And he has a dragon in his cigarette case.”

Her hotcakes arrived. Eddy sprinted to the front, tossed and stacked
eight additional cakes, rocketed to the back and tuned off the
batter-cock just as the batter was forming a reverse miniscus. Then he
peered over the edge of the bucket, and went back with it at a dead run,
the bucket describing one single arc, like a pendulum-bomb, from the
mixer to the griddles, without losing a drop. Someone up the line
applauded. Eddy squirted a dozen discs of batter onto the griddle and
came back to Tina.

“Are you kidding?”

“Ah thirtny am mot,” she said through a hotcake.

“You just mean a wolf. Not a werewolf.”

“Ath a matter of ah,” she said, and swallowed, “he isn’t. I mean, he
didn’t seem to be. He wants me for something, he says.”

He nodded eagerly. “But he’s not a wolf. You’re sure of that?”

“I think,” she twinkled—and it cost her an effort—“that he wants me for
a fate worse than a fate worse than death.”

She changed her mouth from a bow to an O, and stoked. Eddy picked up two
turners instead of one, a sign of deep thought.

“What’s with this dragon you spoke about?” he asked.

“It’s in the most gorgeous silver cigarette case you ever saw.”

“What does it do?”

“It goes _arrara.”_

Eddy jumped back. “Don’t do that,” he gasped. “For Pete’s sake—”

“I’m sorry, Eddy. Terribly sorry. But that’s exactly what it does. I—I’d
like some coffee.”

“Black with one!” Eddy bellowed. “Where does this apple tend bar? Or
does he panhandle on the Bowery?”

“He’s a dancer,” Tina said. “When he left he pointed to the Mello Club
and said, ‘Look at that.’ After I shut up the shop I looked. He’s billed
there—‘Brokaw and Rapunzel, adagio.’ ”

“I’m out of grease,” said Eddy to the waitress. “Tina, I don’t like the
sound of this guy.”

“Yes, Eddy.”

“See you tomorrow?”

“Yes, Eddy.”

“Stay away from the Mello Club.”

“Yes, Eddy.”

So Tina went to the Mello Club to catch Brokaw’s act.

The Mello Club was a cramped and crowded bistro in which the ceiling,
having heard so many customers ask “How low can you get?” seemed to have
accepted the challenge. The lighting was of a dimness to which the human
eye could not become accustomed, because of its reluctance to recognize
such atrocious color combinations.

The dimness was functional, insofar as the place had a function. It kept
the customers in obscurity, so that each customer thought his own
disgust was unshared, and therefore remained. It kept the customers’
disgust from reaching the master of ceremonies while he created it. It
suited the quality of the air, so that taint did not intrude. In short,
a fine, healthy place.

Tina fumbled her way down the steps and into the club, sighted a gleam
of brass from a trombone bell, pointed her elbow at it, closed her eyes
and walked. She was small, but she had the directness of a destroyer
escort. She brought up against a table not ten feet from the dance
floor, which was, of course, two-thirds of the way to the wall. She sat
down.

Hardly had she done so when the up-beat cacophony from the orchestra
came to a screaming stop and the master of ceremonies came out, dragging
with him a microphone with a head as polished and featureless as his
own. Into it and the glare of a ceiling spot which painfully flooded
him, he began to recite what had happened to him on the way to the club
that night.

Tina rested her elbows on the table as the most comfortable way to keep
her hands over her ears, and tried to locate Lee Brokaw in the babbling
gloom. Occasionally she lifted her hands enough to find out if the
emcee’s droning obscenities were turning into anything like an
announcement.

It was hot. Someone was breathing down her neck. She leaned forward a
little and found herself breathing in someone’s armpit. She leaned back
again. It must have been then that the announcement was made, because
suddenly, shockingly, the lights went out.

For a moment someone with the touch of a fly’s foot seemed to be
brushing a cymbal, and then there was not a sound from the tables.
Slowly a blue-green light began to glow, so faintly at first that it
could have been there for seconds before she noticed it at all.
Gradually she became aware of a figure standing in the middle of the
dance floor. The emcee? No, for he had been wearing a dinner jacket.
This was something bone-white and slender. The light increased, or her
eyes sharpened, and she suddenly saw that it was a girl, nude,
splendidly if slightly built, and wearing some sort of a tall hat or—a
crown. The light steadied, but did not become bright enough to show
anything clearly.

The girl began to dance. There was no sonorous music, only a faint,
flute-like plucking which she recognized as a melody played solely in
the harmonics of a guitar. The girl moved slowly. She took two small
steps forward, and then sank to her knees and touched her forehead to
the floor.

The music stopped, but the heartbeat drum quickened as she straightened
up again. There was a moment when it missed one beat, and the shock of
that was followed by a blaze of yellow light and a painful, discordant
blare from every brass in the orchestra.

Tina’s aching eyes caught one brief glimpse of the girl’s body as the
dancer shook her head. Her crown was hair—real spun-gold hair that
cascaded down and around her like water. She knelt there, head raised,
wide blue eyes staring, arms up and out, cloaked in shimmering
blue-green gold. And only then did Tina see Lee Brokaw.

He was standing behind the girl, looking down at her impassively. It was
he who held her white arms up, with his long fingers around her slender
wrists. Slowly he brought them together and grasped both wrists in one
hand. She turned toward him and rose. Her hair was
impossible—bewildering. It fell to the floor in a mass that was thick
and delicate at once. It was liquid fire; it was smoke. It was like no
other hair Tina had ever seen. She remembered the name of the act
then—Brokaw and Rapunzel. _“Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your golden
hair …”_

The music burst hoarsely into a travesty of the Apache dance. With slow,
feline steps they moved about the floor. Brokaw’s handsome, almost
beautiful face held the girl’s eyes. Her features were as motionless as
wax.

As they danced, he took one of her arms behind her and apparently began
to twist it. Her body stiffened and arched backward; and her head too
went back. Brokaw bared his teeth in a frightful smile, bent his head
and put his mouth to her throat. They danced that way for four slow
measures, and when he lifted his head, the marks of his teeth were easy
to see.

Abruptly he pirouetted away from her, and around her. She held her arms
over her head, her hands touching his, her eyes glassily staring. The
tempo of the music rose. Brokaw spun the girl to him and away, to him
and away, as the music sped up to its climax. He stopped her in a final
pirouette, both her arms pinioned behind her.

In a crescendo of noise and light, he raised his fist and smashed it
into her upturned face. She dropped like rag doll, and, as the cymbals
crashed three times, and with his face as calm as a sunlit cathedral, he
stamped on her head, crushing it flat.

In the silence and the blaze of light, Lee Brokaw stood up, smiled, and
bowed from the waist. Then a woman screamed, and applause broke out in
one great shout which changed to a roar of bruising palms and stamping
feet. Brokaw bowed again, scooped up the limp collection of long limbs
and golden hair, and tossed it over his shoulder. Sawdust trickled from
the flattened head, and the clever hinging of one white elbow could be
seen.

“But—she danced by herself!” Tina said aloud.

“In what kind of light?” said a man next to her, pounding the table.
“And him in black!”

The thunder rose, and rose again as the lights dimmed to toxic
obscurity. And finally Lee Brokaw came out to take a second bow.

He stepped out to meet the sudden spotlight, and as it fell on him he
turned pale and clutched his chest. Something made the ringsiders shrink
back from him. Something—the faintest of sounds.

_Arrara_ …

“He’s sick!” whispered someone.

A woman half-rose and cried, “His heart!”

“Has he got a heart on the right side?” asked the man next to Tina.

Tina said clearly, “He has a dragon in his cigarette case.” But of
course no one paid her any attention.

Brokaw bowed stiffly and went out. The chrome-plated master of
ceremonies returned with his pasty-faced microphone, and Tina rose,
dazedly made her way to the exit, handed a palm which materialized
before her the cover charge plus ten percent, and escaped up the stairs.

The outside air tasted so good it made her sneeze. She was still
shuddering inside over Brokaw’s finale. She walked briskly homeward, and
gradually the shock of that terrifying performance was replaced by
curiosity.

What manner of man _was_ Lee Brokaw? With an act like that, why wasn’t
he on Fifty-second Street? Or even on Broadway? Why, if he so casually
offered that cigarette case around to chance acquaintances was he so
profoundly affected when it growled _at him?_

How had he been so sure she would see him again? Did he have her figured
so well that he had known she would be at the performance? Most of all,
what on earth could he want with her?

Turning in at her apartment house, she fingered her cheek and jaw. Maybe
he wanted a dancing partner who would spar a little and thus add a
certain color to the climax. Of course, she had to admit that all that
hair _was_ becoming …

III

Tina undressed, went into her pajamas. She felt much better after that.
She loaded her night table with sketching materials, a book on design,
and two volumes of the _Encyclopedia Britannica_ which had plates of
shells. Two button sets and an izthatta later, she was happily asleep.

It must have been four hours afterward that she awoke. She opened her
eyes very quietly, without moving. Something urged her not to start up,
but to relax and look the situation over. The situation was Lee Brokaw’s
smooth, imperturbable face, slightly larger than life size. It floated,
apparently, in midair between her and the opposite wall. It wore a
gentle smile which ended at the cheekbones. The eyes were as steady and
as deep as ever.

She said, “Wh-wh—” and the face turned chillingly upside down, got quite
pink, then scarlet—a real blood-scarlet, as if it were looking at her
through red glass—and then slowly disappeared.

Tina blanched and dived under the covers. In a moment one arm crept out
and, feeling along the night table, turned on the lamp. She worked the
blanket over her head and face, found an edge, doubled it into a sort of
peephole, and peered out.

There was nothing to see.

She took a deep breath, held it, flung the covers off, bounded across
the room and switched on the overhead light.

Still nothing. She withdrew into the center of the room and gazed slowly
around. A movement caught the corner of her eye, and she cried out in
terror as she turned to face—her own reflection in the bathroom mirror!

“Great day in the morning! Is that me?” she muttered, staring in shocked
disbelief at the dilated pupils, the chalky countenance.

“Bad dreams,” she told her reflection reassuringly. “Some way or other,
sister, you’re not living right.”

She washed her face and went back to bed. She lay a moment in thought,
then got up again and located a pair of nub-spiked golf shoes. These she
put on the night table. Then she rolled over, tucked herself in, threw
back the covers, got up, switched off the bathroom light, the overhead
light, and, at last, the night-table lamp.

She was, by this time, much more annoyed than frightened. It had been
many a moon since she had let anything throw her into such a dither. She
fell asleep angrily, almost by an effort of will, and found herself in a
fine technicolor nightmare involving a purring dragon which wanted to
stamp on her head.

She came up out of it fighting, only to find Brokaw’s glowing face
staring at her again. This time she was prepared, and in a single fluid
movement she let fly with one of the heavy shoes. The shoe struck the
face right between the eyes. There was a loud crash and a torrent of
profanity from the street below.

Tina turned on the light, peered around her, and went timorously to the
window. She peeped out—no difficult feat since her shoe had passed
completely through the pane and apparently collided with the head of the
policeman who was standing in cold-eyed fury directly below, kneading
his skull and looking up. He fell silent the instant she appeared.

She realized much too late that he did so admiringly. There was plenty
of light behind her.

A policeman! She’d soon find out how Brokaw was pulling this little
stunt! She’d slap him in jail until he begged for mercy and the devil
called him Granddad! She’d—

Her brain raced. She’d do what? Say to the officer: “There was a face
floating in my room and I threw a shoe at it and it disappeared and I
want you to throw Lee Brokaw in the clink.”?

_Oh, no_.

She turned to her empty room and screamed, “I’ll teach you to come home
at this hour, you heel!”

“Lady,” said the policeman, “talk to him more quietly or I’ll have to
take a hand in this.”

“I’m _so_ sorry, officer,” she called down, and then even more loudly
into the room, “now see what you’ve done!”

As she left the window she thought she could hear the policeman saying
sadly, “The poor guy. I wouldn’t be in his shoes.”

The following morning she arrived at her shop a few minutes later than
usual. Not only had she overslept but she had been compelled to explain
to the superintendent of her building that he had cleaned the windows so
very clean that she had gone and stuck her silly head through one of the
panes. She felt somewhat less than rested, and probably the least
popular person in her cosmos was Lee Brokaw.

She opened the door, glanced around at her displays, and went back to
the workroom. With grim deliberation she turned on the gooseneck lamp
and the photocell, and settled down to work.

Then she saw what was inscribed on the black blotter to her right. It
had apparently been written with the silver pencil which was bundled up
with all the other colors at the back of the table. It said, simply,
“Here I am.”

It was written in a neat, possibly hurried hand, with fine lines and an
even slant. It was almost a feminine handwriting.

“All right,” she muttered. “Here I am, too.” Tight-lipped, she picked up
the blotter.

There was another blotter underneath it—a white blotter. On it, very
much less than life-size, was the same face she had seen in her bedroom.
It did not turn upside down. It simply faded slowly and disappeared.

Tina sat tensely watching the blank blotter, her hands achingly clasped.
She sat like that until the blotter began to blur. Then she closed her
eyes.

Aloud she asked herself, “Can I say it now, Tina? Can I, huh?” She
nodded in reply. “Go ahead,” she said to herself. “You’ll feel better if
you do.” A pause. Then: “All right, I will. I’m really and truly scared,
and I should never have listened to Eddy and I should never have gone to
s-see that devil last night.”

Tina realized suddenly that this couldn’t go on. Either she got away
from Lee Brokaw, Chelsea, New York itself—or she stayed. Going away was
impossible from a business point of view and unthinkable from an ethical
one. Then she must stay. But if she stayed, she couldn’t just wait for
something even more terrifying to happen. She had to smoke out the
trouble. If things got worse, at least she’d know what she was up
against. If things got better, well—that was what she wanted.

What to do, then?

Find Lee Brokaw, obviously, and get his story. Force him to talk even if
she had to pound it out of him with a conch shell.

The chime sounded. She put her face back together and went into the
shop. “Eddy!” she exclaimed, and hope he wouldn’t notice how close she
was to tears.

“Hi, falutin’.”

She forced herself to smile. “Lo, brow.”

Eddy picked up an abalone shell and began toying with it absently. “How
much were you kidding about that Lee Brokaw character last night?” he
asked.

“Not a bit,” she assured him.

“You said he was a vampire.”

“_You_ said he was,” she reminded him. “All I really know is that he
walked in here with some proposition that I couldn’t let him finish,
that he had a cigarette case which growled at me, and that he—”

“Go on.”

“Nup.”

He knew that monosyllable well enough to leave it alone. “Okay, let’s
take it as it comes. All you know is that he walked in here—_without_
the photocell noticing him. He made you some offer which you insist
wasn’t what one would assume it to be, though you don’t seem to know
why.”

“I just _know_,” said Tina defensively. “Look, Eddy, if you think that
Lee Brokaw is assuming the proportions of a deadly rival, you can think
again.”

“I’m not worried,” said Eddy in an unconvincing voice.

“Eddy,” she said thoughtfully, “what is so fascinating about Lee Brokaw
just now? I’ve never seen you fret about anything like this before.”

“I’ve never run across anything like this before,” Eddy said. “I’ll tell
you what I know, Tina. Maybe a couple of things will clear up. Last
night about half an hour before closing time, Shaw was in. You know
him—manager of that smoke-hole where Brokaw has his act. He was in a
fine froth. He wanted to know where Brokaw was. He stood up in a chair
and yammered at the customers. Seems he had a second show in a few
minutes and Brokaw was among the missing.”

“Any luck?” Tina asked.

Eddy shook his head. “None of the customers seemed to know anything. I
remembered what you said and called him over. He told me that he had
hired a ham act and that Brokaw had come up with something that wowed
the customers. He was afraid that some competitor had bought him away, I
think—though he pretended to be worried about the dear boy personally.

“I asked him what he knew about Brokaw—maybe we could locate the kind of
place he might be found in. He didn’t know a thing. Brokaw’d been in two
days before and described his act and had done a short solo. Shaw never
dreamed it was anything good.”

Tina shuddered, “It was awful.”

“Most of those acts are,” said Eddy. “Anyway, I told him—what did you
say? How do you know it was awful?”

“I saw it, Eddy.”

“You saw—Didn’t I tell you to keep away from there?”

“Yes, Eddy. You told me,” she said, and her voice was altogether too
gentle. “You didn’t _ask_ me, though.”

“I didn’t—Oh, I see. Little Miss Muscles can’t be given orders, eh? All
right, Tina. I’ll stay out of your troubles. You can take care of
yourself, and so forth. Only, when you’re in up to your neck, don’t—”

“I know, I know. I’m not to come yelling for you. Don’t worry, I won’t.”

He went to the door. “I wasn’t going to say that. I was going to say
don’t forget whom to yell for.”

The chime sounded his departure. Not loudly, but with a faint tinkling
sound that slowly died away into silence.

IV

She started after him, then stopped abruptly and dropped her arms. Why
did men have to be so pig-headed? Why did every man who got interested
in a girl appoint himself as braintrust, bodyguard, and duenna? Just to
top it, the men who liked her invariably said they liked her because she
was independent and self-sufficient. She compressed her lips and
half-snorted, half-moaned in aggravation.

The moan was answered from the back of the shop.

Tina froze.

The moan was repeated. It was not so much a moan of pain, though pain
was there. It was a moan of desolation—of utter hopelessness and
despair.

Eddy was only a half-block away. Perhaps she should—on the other hand,
Eddy was an egocentric, puffed up creature with a dictator complex who
wanted his women helpless. She’d investigate herself. She squared her
shoulders and went into the back room.

There was nothing there but the moan. She looked under the settee and in
the closet. Then she heard it again. It was outside, in the alley.

With some difficulty—the door was almost never used—she shot back the
bolts and pulled it open. She looked to right and left. The noise was
there again, faintly, almost behind her. She looked down a short flight
of cellar steps. Near the bottom was Lee Brokaw.

“M-Mr. Brokaw?”

He started violently, staggered to his feet and shrank against the wall
behind him. He was tattered and dirty, and his fine jaw was covered with
harsh stubble. But none of this subtracted one whit from his incredible
grace.

“You,” he breathed, and his voice was still the mellow tenor she had
noticed before. But now it was faint and frightened.

“What’s the matter? Are you hurt?” she asked with alarm. “Come up out of
there!”

“Will you take me inside where no one can see?”

“Come on. No one will see,” she promised.

He tiptoed up, crouching, his eyes on her face. They were full of
eagerness and hope, and a terrible fear. _He dances every minute_, she
thought.

Every single minute.

He flowed around her and into the open door like a feather borne on an
eddy of wind. “Lock it,” he said, and while she complied he went to the
partition and peered out.

“The chime will ring if anyone comes into the shop,” she said.

“Will it?” he asked, and smiled.

Remembering, she said, “Oh.” She pushed past him and sat at her work
table. “Stretch out on the settee,” she said briskly. “I can see if
anything comes in.” Why she said ‘anything’ instead of ‘anyone,’ she
didn’t know. “Are you in trouble?”

He nodded, sinking gratefully back on the settee.

She stared at him. He looked so young, so tortured. The face was so
different from the bland, cruelly smiling one she had seen in her room.
But she could not deny it was the same face.

“I saw you last night,” she told him, on sudden impulse.

“I know you did,” he said, putting his hand to his breast pocket. “I
didn’t see you, though.”

“Oh—the cigarette case! I remember. You don’t mean it growled because
_I_ was there?”

“It did.” He took the case out and tossed it carelessly into her lap.
She recoiled, staring at it. She was afraid to touch it, even to drop
it. But she had to know. She gritted her teeth, lifted it, and said,
“I’m going to open it.”

“Go ahead,” he said, as if he had much more important things on his
mind.

She looked at him sharply. His eyes were closed, and a furrow of
concentration was drawing together the inner ends of his brows. She drew
a deep breath and—touched the clasp. The case sprang open.

Of all the things she expected to find in that case—the little crawling
horrors, the amulets, the runes on parchment, even perhaps the
electronic gear that had so cleverly made the growling sound—what she
_least_ expected to find in it was what it actually contained. The shock
of it was almost more than she could stand.

What she felt was the utmost refinement of the feeling you have when, in
a dream, you mount ten steps where only nine exist. True, there was a
dragon there. It was etched on the inside of the lid, but it was no more
ugly than those on the outside, and it even wore a smile. Otherwise the
case held, of all things—cigarettes.

“This,” she said, when she could at last say anything, “is positively
the last straw. Lee Brokaw, who are you, and what makes you think you
can frighten me? Why have you done things you must know I would refuse
to believe—and bitterly resent.”

He rested on one elbow and looked at her. Again his eyes were
unfathomable. “I am a dancer,” he said. “If you tell me what you think I
have done, maybe I can explain. I want you, very desperately, to do
something for me. I want you, because you’re exactly suited to the
task.” He spread his hands, as if to say, “Could anything be simpler?”
and lay back.

“What is this task?” she demanded.

“You mean—you’ll do it?” There was sudden hope in his eyes.

Tina shook her head. “I certainly said nothing of the sort.”

“I can’t tell you about it if there’s any possibility of your _not_
doing it,” he said.

“Well, then, drop dead or something,” Tina flared. “I have a job!”

“You’ll see me everywhere if you don’t,” he said. “At your home and at
work.”

“I’ve had a couple of samples of that,” she replied acidly. “I could get
used to it.”

“It will get worse,” he said, almost pleadingly, as if he did not want
it to happen. “Other people will have my face when you speak to them.
You will feel my hands on your face and your body. You will hear my
voice when you listen to music, and later, you will hear it more and
more until the whole world is filled with my voice and my face and my
touch. You will go mad.”

“I can keep you out,” she said stoutly. “You can’t walk through walls.”

“Or through light-beams?”

Tina gulped. “I don’t care what you do, or how much of it. You’re crazy.
I’m warning you now—there’s nothing you can do to persuade me to do
anything for you.”

_Arrara_ …

“Oh, please,” gasped Brokaw. He swung off the settee and came to her,
sitting at her feet with his easy, drifting motion. He took her hands in
his long, strong, slender ones, and turned his face up to her. It was
changed now. His eyes were wide with terror, and the delicate lips
worked.

His voice was a whisper, shrill with fright. “That was the last warning.
It will be sometime today, or tonight. Please help me, Tina—please,
_please_. Only you can help me …” and he buried his face in her lap.

She looked down at his shivering shoulders, and thought of the calm
strength he had radiated; thought of his symmetrical, unshakeable
expression of objective power. Then her mind returned to the poor broken
thing before her.

She stroked his sleek black hair. “You poor thing,” she said. “I’ll help
you. You mustn’t cry, Lee, you mustn’t. I’ll help you …”

He sprang to his feet joyously, and grasped her shoulders. “You mean it,
don’t you? You really mean it?”

“My specialty,” she said through a tight throat, “is sick kittens.”

“You’re an angel,” he said hoarsely, and kissed her. It was a
surprisingly gentle kiss, just between her left temple and her eye.

“Now sit down and pull yourself together, Lee. I’ve promised. You’d
better tell me what this is all about.”

“I killed a man,” said Lee. Keeping his eyes on her face he moved
backward and sank down on the settee. “I killed him when he was asleep.
I hit him with a bronze book-end and then I opened the side of his neck
with a little knife. His skin was tough,” he added, “and the knife
wasn’t very sharp. It seemed to go on for hours.”

“I see,” said Tina, holding tight to herself. She began to force a smile
but decided against it; her cheeks might crack. “And it left you with a
psychic trauma.”

“I suppose so,” he said seriously, ignoring the weak attempt at
facetiousness. “But that wouldn’t be anything by itself. I’d be glad if
that were all. But, you see, after I did it, I had to get away, and I
couldn’t. People knew me. I was one of those noticeable individuals, I
suppose.”

“You are.”

“Am I? Well, it doesn’t matter now. I’m not what I was then. I’ve
changed. I sold my—my soul.”

“What kind of mad talk is that?” said Tina, straightening in alarm.

“Go ahead. Take it for granted that I’m a psychopath. But you’re going
to help me, and you’ll see. Don’t you know that there are more forms of
life on earth than the ones you read about in the biology books? You
deal in shells. You know the shapes and forms they take. You know the
differences in the substances shellfish feed on. You know the peculiar
variations that occur. Do you know there’s a shellfish in the Great
Lakes that makes its shell—”

“—out of strontium carbonate instead of calcium carbonate. Of course I
know. So far this is my lecture, not yours.”

“Please listen,” he said, “I don’t know how much time I have … There are
creatures which feed exclusively on cellulose, and creatures which feed
on the excreta of the cellulose-eaters.”

“You’ve got termites there,” said Tina. She was beginning to feel a
little better. She knew enough about abnormal psychology to be able to
pigeonhole some of this.

He ignored her. “There are creatures which eat granite, and lichens
which live on them. But why go on? The world is full of this symbiosis,
even in human beings. There are microbes living in us without which we
would die. And I tell you that there are creatures on earth which can’t
develop a soul any more than a termite can digest cellulose. These
creatures feed on the souls which we humans build!”

“That’s at least logical,” said Tina. “Even if it happens to be untrue.”

“We can no more understand them and their motives and methods and
hungers than can the hungers, and dark biological urges of a bass be
understood by the intestinal microbes of a minnow which it may have
swallowed.”

“Very clear reasoning,” said Tina, hoping that her mental reservation
did not show. “How do you know that such a creature wants to eat your
soul?”

“I promised it,” said Lee miserably. “You’ve heard the tales of selling
your soul to the devil. They’re poppycock, believe me. What I promised
to give up, though, must be called a soul, because there is no other
name for it. All those legends are true in essence. Heaven knows how
many people lose their essence, their vitality—whatever you want to call
it. These soul-eaters are psychic creatures. The psychic pressure of—you
may call it the ethics, if you like—of a true promise, is binding. They
give you what you want, in exchange for the promise of your soul.”

“That’s a little nonsensical,” said Tina flatly. “If they had access to
souls at all, why don’t they just gobble them up and have done with it?”

“Do you,” he asked, his voice too patient, “gobble up a steak in the
butcher store? No. You carry it home. You store it for a while. You
season it. You cook it—so much on this side, so much on the other. You
serve it. Perhaps you add a touch of salt, or sauce, or tabasco. Only
then do you eat it.”

“And what, pray tell me, are these psychic sauces?”

“Emotions,” he said. “Fear. Humor. Terror. Disgust. Pity.”

“I see. And you’re convinced that you are now basted for the last time
and ready to take out of the oven?”

“If you want to put it that way,” he said, unhappily.

“Don’t mind my flippancy,” she said with sudden gentleness.

“I know why you do it,” he answered, understandingly.

“Now,” she said, “tell me all about this thing, and skip the theory. You
killed this fellow. I imagine you had reason for it.”

“I had,” he said briefly, with such terrible emphasis that she all but
tangibly felt the wave of hatred. “After I killed him, there was nothing
I could do, no place I could go. I’d be seen leaving the house. I’d be
remembered at the depot, at the airport. Sooner or later I’d be found.

“I was pacing back and forth in the library, trying to think of a way
out, when I heard somebody cough. I was frightened out of my wits. There
was a little man standing in the corner, smiling at me and rubbing his
hands together. He looked perfectly ordinary. In fact, you see thousands
of faces like that every day, and never remember them. The only thing
unusual about him was his hair. He hadn’t much, but, in that shadowy
corner, it glowed.

“He told me not to be frightened. He said he knew what I had done, and
the position I was in. He said he could help me. I believed him. I was
desperate, frantic, ready to believe anything. He said that he could
tell me just what I could do to get out of my trouble, and be free. He
said I need never pay the legal penalty for what I had done.”

Lee paused and moistened his lips. “I begged him to tell me. He played
with me for a while, wanting to know how much I would give him. Finally
I shrieked at him to tell me what he wanted. He told me. He gave me two
years. _Two full years_. That looked like forever to me. I agreed. He
got my solemn promise, and believe me, I was sincere. Then he taught me
how to change.”

Tina waited while Lee sat brooding. She realized that he was finished.
“What sort of change?”

“I—don’t want to tell you that. You wouldn’t believe it. Nevertheless, I
changed, and he kept his promise. I got away free, and came to New York.
You know how I make my living. Of course, I don’t push my luck. I think
I could go to the top. I won’t, though, unless I can live out the two
years and beyond. I am morally certain if I can keep my—my—what it is he
wants, I’ll be safe from him and from the law for the rest of my life.”

“Quite a tale,” said Tina. “Now you’d better tell me how the silver
cigarette case enters into it.”

“I got it the night I promised,” said Lee. “I—I can’t seem to dance
without it. I’ve tried, but without it I am no good at all. It seems to
be just an ordinary cigarette case, but—”

“But indeed,” shuddered Tina. “Still—I don’t know. Lots of actors carry
around a charm or a rabbit’s foot. Tell me—what about those fantastic
threats you made a moment ago?”

“I’m glad I won’t have to do any of those things,” he said. “You see,
when the Eaters feed, they do not take all of a person’s essence. The
body dies, of course, and what they want is eaten. But there is a good
deal left over.”

“Bones and suet, kind of,” she said helpfully.

“Kind of.” He smiled, but she could see it was an outward smile solely.
“That remnant still has a life of its own. Much of it is ugly and evil.
I imagine most ‘haunts’ are exactly those left-overs, drifting around
the places where they used to live and, depending on their quality,
clinging to places where something bad has happened, or to the places
where they were happy.”

“Hm. And which would I be, if you haunted me?”

“If you had refused to help me, it would have been bad. Bad.”

“Okay, Lee. Now suppose we go back to my original question. What must I
do?”

“It’s very simple. Just go with me when the time comes. You may not know
what a remarkable person you are. You positively radiate goodness, and
courage, and humor. Perhaps I’m hypersensitive, done to a turn—” he
smiled—“but I feel it vividly. I get it from you, and I think I
re-radiate it. I think that if you were with me, with your wry wit and
your psychic strength, and if I opened myself to you, I would prove
distasteful to the Eater, and he would discard me.”

“Burn the roast, hey? Too much salt in the cabbage? Is that all I have
to do? Stay with you?”

“That’s absolutely all. And in the good clean outdoors, too, right here
in the city. At the corner of Bleecker and Commerce. No pentagrams, no
witch’s brew, no dark caverns. You heard the cigarette case a while ago.
I have until ten o’clock.”

“You want me to stay with you until then?” she asked.

“It won’t be necessary,” he assured her. “What time do you close?”

“On Tuesdays, about nine.”

“Good. I’ll drop by—”

“No,” said Tina, suddenly thinking of Eddy Southworth and the big,
strong, misunderstanding feet he would put into this if he knew about
it. Eddy would have to be stalled off. “I’ll meet you at the drug store
at the corner.”

“It’s a date,” he said.

He got quickly to his feet, looking younger than he should with his
stubble and his hollow eyes, and went into the front of the shop. She
followed him with deep concern in her eyes.

“Aren’t you afraid of whatever it was you were hiding from?” she asked.

He shook his head. “I’m not afraid of anything any more, thanks to you.”
He opened the door, and stepped gallantly aside. Urged by reflex, she
preceded him through. The chime hummed. She stood in the doorway as he
slipped past her.

“I’m not going anywhere,” she said. She realized only after he was gone
that for the second time he had been in and out of the place without
activating the chime. On both occasions she had just happened to be
standing in the beam when he went out. She shrugged and went inside.

The store seemed unusually deserted, chill and spiritless, as though in
departing he had stripped away its individuality.

V

“I think I can,” said Eddy Southworth. He called to the pancake artist
on the early shift. “Joe! Can you hang on a little longer? Tina wants to
talk something over.”

“For you, no,” said Joe, flashing a large smile. “For Tina, yes. Take
your time, Eddy.”

Eddy steered her to a booth in the back. “What is it?” he asked.

She began her reply with an apology. “Eddy, hon, I’m sorry I barked at
you this morning,” she said. “But if there’s anything I can’t stand it’s
some good-hearted bumbling _man_ being protective and laying down the
law.”

“All right, Tina. I’m sorry, too. But I happen to be fond of you—all of
you, including your neck.”

“My neck?”

“The thing you stick out.”

“Oh, that. Well, you’ll see that I am doing nothing of the kind. This
Lee Brokaw business is coming to a head tonight, and I don’t want you
messing around with it. Now sit quietly and I’ll tell you all about it
from the very start. Maybe then you’ll see it’s all right and let me
handle it my way.”

“All right. I’m listening.”

She told him everything, from the face in her bedroom up until Lee’s
departure that noon. Early in the account Eddy began to sputter. She
frowned at him until he stopped. Very soon afterward his jaw began to
swing slackly. She stopped talking and aped him until he closed it.
Finally she was through. It had been quite a recital, since her memory
was good and her language vivid.

“And just what are you going to do?” Eddy demanded.

“Exactly what he asked me to do,” was her instant reply.

“But Tina!” Eddy protested. “You’re crazy! The man’s a confessed
murderer!”

“Which would hold up in court only if supported by the evidence,” she
told him. “And if there were any evidence, he’d have been caught. You
know what passes for evidence nowadays. A trace of dust, a couple of
hairs … No, I don’t think there was any murder.”

“Then what about this fantastic business of the face in your bedroom,
and the cigarette case, and all that?”

“Those faces I saw—well, I told you about his act, Eddy. Why don’t you
jump to the conclusion that I’m a poor impressionable female when you
have the chance? I’m quite convinced that I’m seeing things.”

“I must admit it sounds like it. But why must you concern yourself with
this at all? You say that Brokaw doesn’t mean anything to you.”

“Every human being should mean something to us, Eddy. Lee’s a
dancer—better than good. He’s great. He’s a very sensitive boy. He’s
gotten a weird fixation, but fortunately there’s a very definite time
limit on it. If my not being with him means that he goes off his rocker,
perhaps permanently, I don’t want it on my conscience.”

Eddy looked at her with troubled eyes. “There is still one thing that
troubles me. Why are you telling me all this?”

“Eddy, I’ve made my own way since I was a kid, and when I marry it’s
going to be because the man I love and a girl named Tina are traveling
together in the same direction at approximately the same speed, and each
under his own power. I won’t be steered, towed, nor provided with an
icebreaker. This business with Brokaw is for the record. It wouldn’t do
any good to tell you about it afterward.”

He looked at her in awe. “Hi, tension,” he grinned. “That was a speech!”

“I’m just telling you, Eddy—if I see you at the corner of Bleecker and
Commerce Streets at ten o’clock, so help me, I’ll never see you again as
long as I live.”

“You won’t,” he promised. “It’s a quarter to nine now. Will you drop
back here around eleven?”

“Sure, Eddy.”

“Tina—”

She waited.

“Good luck.”

She smiled, put a kiss on her fingertips and brushed them across his
mouth.

When she had gone, Eddy walked to the front. “Joe,” he called.

“Huh.”

“I’ll give you five bucks if you hang on for a couple of hours.”

“Nope.”

“Ten, Joe. This is important.”

“Nope. I’ll do it for nuttin’. I know when a guy’s got trouble.”

“Gosh, Joe. You’re a real pal. If there’s ever anything I can—”

“Beat it,” growled Joe. Eddy did, clasping, in his pocket, Tina’s
keycase, which he had filched from her purse.

VI

Tina and Lee Brokaw walked down Barrow Street. They had spent most of
the past hour in a quiet bar and Lee still had not shaved. He was
reserved and apparently in excellent control of himself. He spoke in
monosyllables. As they turned into Commerce Street, Tina slipped her
hand around his arm.

“Do you feel all right?” she asked.

“I feel fine,” he assured her. But he was trembling, ever so slightly.
He walked slowly, gazing ahead, his eyes flickering over the four
corners of Commerce and Bleecker. There were a few people around, but
apparently no one was waiting on the corner.

“Maybe he’s late,” murmured Tina.

“He won’t be late,” said Lee. He looked at his watch. “Four more
minutes.”

One and a half of the minutes were used up in reaching the corner. Tina
felt as if she were carrying a bier.

“Did you hear about the nudist who went to the fancy dress ball with an
egg-beater over his shoulder?” she asked.

“No,” said Lee, smiling. “What was he masquerading as?”

“An outboard motor,” said Tina, and added wildly, “that’s the whole
thing in a shellhole. My brain is certainly working on all fours
tonight.”

“Tina, Tina, hold on to yourself. I’ll be all right. Just as soon—” He
broke off with a sharp intake of breath. Before them stood a slender
little man with a partially bald head and a very ordinary expression on
his face, who looked from one to the other of them.

“Is this the girl you were talking about?” he asked mildly.

“Here she is,” said Lee, and viciously shoved Tina forward.

_“Lee!”_ she cried, utterly shocked.

The bald man put out a hand—to stop her, to catch her, to ward her off,
she did not know. She twisted away from him, almost fell, staggered
upright. Lee Brokaw was sprinting away down Commerce Street. She started
after him.

Over her shoulder she saw the bald man coming after her, a bewildered
and anxious expression on his mild little face. She put on a burst of
speed, blessing her good sense in wearing ballet shoes, and for a brief
moment gained on Brokaw.

“Lee!” she called.

Suddenly something big and black leaped out of a doorway and shouldered
into Lee Brokaw. Caught in midstride, he caromed off into a lamp-post
with bone-shaking force. The shadow caught him up, pinioning his arms
behind his back and lifting him clear of the ground, bore him grimly
along toward Tina.

Tina tried her best to stop, but skidded past. Brokaw, dangling in that
relentless grip, lashed his body about, biting and spitting like a cat.
Suddenly he began to scream—terrible, high-pitched screams.

The man carrying him said gruffly: “This is the one you want,” and flung
Brokaw down at the panting bald man’s feet.

The bald man bent and grasped Lee’s shoulder. Lee screamed again as if
the hand were made of white-hot metal. He screamed twice more, writhing
and twisting on the ground, and then lay still.

The big man said, “Tina, are you all right?”

“Eddy! Oh, Eddy, Eddy darling!” She flew into his arms like a bird into
a large tree. He put his face in her hair. “I told you so, you idiot,”
he said, “and I promise not to say it again.”

The bald man said hesitantly, “I have a warrant here for the arrest of a
suspect in the case of Homer Sykes.”

“Never heard of him,” said Eddy.

“Take me home, Eddy.”

“I’m very sorry,” said the bald man. “You’ll have to come with me.”

Through the gathering crowd loomed a policeman. The little man rapped
out instructions about a radio car and an ambulance. Another policeman
rounded the corner. The man gave him orders about staying with Lee
Brokaw until the ambulance arrived. Both policemen saluted.

“We can walk,” said the bald man gently. “It’s only just over the block.
That man, by the way, is dead.”

Tina and Eddy looked at each other. Eddy shrugged. “You’re the doctor,”
he said to the bald man.

They went to the police station. There were a very friendly desk
sergeant and three very sour policemen and a triply sour matron. They
went to work on Tina with a great deal of efficiency. They took her
fingerprints, but not Eddy’s. They just asked Eddy questions about
himself.

Finally they were told to sit there and wait. They sat. Tina got as
close to Eddy as she could without unseating him and asked, “We murdered
someone called Sykes?”

He patted her shoulder. “No, darling. It’ll all come out all right.
Shall I tell you a story?”

“Tell me a story.”

“Once there was a big lug who liked a girl who got into some fantastic
trouble. So while she went on into her trouble, he swiped her keys and
went on a pilgrimage.”

“Tell it straight,” begged Tina.

“Okay. Well, maybe I’m just incapable of jumping to as many conclusions
as you. I don’t know. Anyway, Brokaw’s photocell beam stunt bothered me.
I kept thinking about it until I suddenly hit it. I bought a flashlight
and went to your shop. I turned on the rig. I found that anyone who
wants to look for the cell can see it, and the light-cowl across the
doorway, too, for that matter.

“Now, if you want to pass a photocell without interrupting the light
that goes into it, you shine a light into it, step through the beam, and
take away your light. The poor photocell doesn’t know the difference.
Not a simple rig like what I built, anyway.”

“I’ll be darned.”

“Then I don’t know what you’ll be when I tell you the rest of this.
Here.”

Eddy pulled something out of his pocket and dropped it into her palm. It
was a ring of transparent plastic, slightly warped and sticky on one
face. Around the edges were little curls of what looked like fused movie
film.

“This little treasure,” he said, “was stuck to the bulb of your
gooseneck lamp. Unless I am quite mistaken, it had a disc cut from a
color photo transparency mounted in it. It was aimed at the black
blotter. When you came in, you switched on the light, diddled around a
minute and then sat down. The black blotter did not show anything up.
The white one acted as a screen on which was projected a nice clear
picture of your friend’s pretty face—until the heat of the bulb ruined
it. I found jimmy-marks on the alley window.”

“But, why on earth should he—”

“Ask questions later. Listen. That projection deal woke me right up. I
didn’t even have to go to your place. That show you threw—did you hit
the face that was floating in your room?”

Tina nodded. “Right between the eyes.”

“Then what happened to the shoe?”

“It went straight out the win—oh!”

“Yes, _oh_. The face wasn’t in the room. It was on that tight meshlace
curtain you have tacked over the lower pane.” He shrugged. “So, I went
looking for some sort of a projector that could do a job like that. I
went just down the street to the Mello Club. I got hold of Shaw, the
manager. He’s a slimy little scut. I told him I had something hot on Lee
Brokaw, but I’d have to check his dressing room to be sure.”

“Shaw didn’t like the idea much, but he’s so crazy to get a line on
Brokaw that he’d give away his mother’s left leg if he had to. He showed
me the place. He crabbed about the lock on the door. Brokaw had had it
put on. It was quite a place. You should see those mannequin heads that
Lee made. I went through the drawers, and found what I was after. I
swiped it. Here.”

Out of the same capacious jacket came a specially built five-cell
electric torch. Around the lens was a spring clip. “Here’s a whole set
of slides. Colored ones, and this.” He handed her the glass disc. It was
black, except for a spot in the center, which, when held up to the
light, held a miniature transparency of Lee Brokaw’s almost beautiful
face.

“They clip right on here like this,” and Eddy snapped a black glass over
the lens. “Brokaw just aimed that thing at your window, and then,
probably, tossed a pebble or something at the glass. He held it until he
saw your light go on. After that he could probably see you.”

She blushed. “He probably could.”

“Shaw told me something else. He’s a low little scruff, as I said
before. I just stood there looking thoughtful, and he volunteered the
information that he actually had a periscope—can you imagine it?—from
his office next door, so that he could keep a dirty eye on whoever was
in the dressing room. And he found out something really choice about our
friend, Lee Brokaw.”

“What?”

“I think I’ll wait and let the sergeant over there tell you. He’s bound
to come up with it before he lets us out of here.”

“How on earth did you get that gadget out of Shaw’s hands?”

“This searchlight thing? Oh, I just said something about the back room.
Those joints always have a back room. He was very nice to me after
that.”

“Eddy! You might have gotten into some serious trouble!”

He laughed. “That—from you! Well, after that I hightailed it for
Bleecker and Commerce, and hid in a nice dark doorway. I don’t know what
would have happened if Brokaw had run up the other street. There goes
the desk phone. Listen.”

The sergeant picked up the instrument briskly. “Speaking,” he said.
“Yeah, we’ve still got ’em. You don’t say!” Then followed an infuriating
series of grunted affirmatives while he wrote. Then, “Okay. Soon’s I
write it up. There may be a couple more questions.” He hung up, and
began to write.

“Master mind,” said Tina while they waited, “can you tell me why Lee did
all those things?”

“I can guess,” said Eddy. He leaned back and caught his knee between his
palms. “Lee Brokaw, for all his skill and sensitivity, was the victim of
a very real delusion—that soul-eater business. You, my child, were a
substitute.”

“Me!”

“Yes, you. He saw in you courage and humor. He probably felt he had the
same. Perhaps he did. But he needed some more things that you had.
The—what was it?—the seasonings. Fear, terror, disgust, pity. That’s
what he was conditioning you with.”

“But how could he imagine that the soul-eater would mistake me for him?”

“For the same reason he thought the law would. He played it very cagily.
That murder, now, was apparently a perfectly genuine one. He called up
the police and tipped them off that the Sykes murderer would be at
Bleecker and Commerce Streets at ten o’clock. I think he figured that
the soul-eater, on seeing the surrender, would quickly jump at the first
seasoned meat he saw that looked like the right one—rather than break
his promise of keeping the murderer clear of the law. I imagine Brokaw
was a little surprised to find only one person there—the detective.”

“Unless that detective is also a soul-eater,” said Tina brightly. “But
Eddy, I still don’t understand how he could dream that the soul-eater
could make such a mistake.”

“Sergeant,” called Eddy, “could we be getting out of here soon? I’m
supposed to be working.”

“Oh, I guess so,” said the sergeant cheerfully. “There don’t seem to be
much more to figure out now. It all ties up.”

“Mind telling us why we were delayed?”

“I s’pose not, young feller. Seems like about two years back, this
feller Sykes got married and killed the same night. They never did find
the missus, and there wasn’t a fingerprint in the place. It must have
happened within an hour after they got to his place, and every
fingerprint was wiped clean. Sykes had brought this girl from out of
town. No one knew her. It was obvious she done it, but there wasn’t but
one clue as to who she was or anything about her. Even her license
information was false.”

“But there was one piece of evidence she didn’t know about, or she’d
have gotten to that, like as not. It seems Sykes sent a picture of her
to his sister, and in the letter he said she had a great ugly mole on
her back shaped like an angelfish. Well, now we know. She’s been
operatin’ here for the past year and a half as an actor, ventriloquist,
and dancer under the name of Lee Brokaw.”

“Lee Brokaw is a _girl?_”

“Was, ma’am. Dead now. Coroner says she apparently died of fright when
she was nabbed. What we held you for, young lady, is because you are the
spit an’ image of Mrs. Sykes, before she cut and dyed her hair according
to that picture. If it wasn’t for that mole on Brokaw-Sykes’ back, you’d
have a time proving you didn’t do it.”

“He—he needed a shave!” she said desperately.

“Phony stubble, ma’am. Got it right here in the report.”

“Mad, mad, crazy as a loon,” murmured Tina as they went out. “The poor
kid. How on earth did she ever dream up this soul-eaters thing?”

“Paranoid logic, I guess,” said Eddy, who reads books. “A persecution
complex and an absolute genius for rationalizing it.”

They walked in silence for a block. “I’m glad,” she said, “that that
soul-eater’s hypothesis is rationalized. That was a pretty
convincing—_awk!_”

“What’s the matter?”

“Someone in that doorway,” she shuddered.

It was dark there, but there seemed to be something … he pulled out
Brokaw’s flashlight and switched it on.

It gave a peculiar, dim light. Standing in the doorway was a
mild-looking little man, almost bald. He was looking at them and rubbing
his hands.

_His fringe of hair glowed a ghostly green_.

“On your way, I see,” said the little detective happily. “A most
unpleasant experience.” He came closer. Tina shrunk away from him.

“Mind if I ask you,” said Eddy faintly. “D-do you use vaseline in your
hair?”

The man touched it. “Why yes. Why?”

“Ha ha, good stuff, hey?” said Eddy, and, scooping up Tina, he all but
galloped away.

“It’s all right, Tina,” he said as they hurried. “It’s perfectly all
right. I still had that black disc on the flashlight. It’s an
ultra-violet filter. Vaseline fluoresces just fine under ultra-violet.”

What he did not tell her, and what he sincerely hoped she would never
find out, was that vaseline fluoresces blue, not green.



STORY NOTES


by Paul Williams

“CACTUS DANCE”: first published in _Luke Short’s Western_, October 1954.
Written sometime before June 1953, when Sturgeon sent a copy of the
finished manuscript to fanzine editor Redd Boggs. In the essay “Why So
Much Syzygy?” which Boggs published that year, Sturgeon described _the
different components of love, sexual and asexual_ as he’d written about
them in different stories. _In “Cactus Dance”_ (_upcoming in_ Zane
Grey’s Western), he wrote, _it is non-physical, perhaps even
non-substitute physical love, as represented in several symbiotic
relationships between humans and yucca plants_.

This was the third “western” story by TS; the first two appeared in
_Zane Grey’s Western Magazine_ in 1949. This is the only one that can be
considered to have a fantasy or science fiction element.

The portrayal in this story of the peyotl cactus as a conscious being
that can somehow inhabit or share consciousness with a human child is
similar to Carlos Castaneda’s account in his 1968 book _The Teachings of
Don Juan_ of being told by his Yaqui Indian mentor that the dog that
played with him after he ingested peyote was actually Mescalito (peyote)
itself playing with him. Professor Grantham’s account in “Cactus Dance”
of a trial where witnesses testified _about how peyotl-eaters quit
drinking, went back to their wives, and began to work hard_ is an
interesting precursor of defenses of psychedelic drugs frequently
articulated in America in the 1960s. In 1965 Sturgeon went through
intensive LSD therapy sessions under the supervision of a
psychotherapist. As far as I know, that was his only experience with
psychedelic drugs.

The paragraphs near the end of the story in which Grantham talks about a
man who _went away to a river island to carve statues_ were apparently
omitted from “Cactus Dance” in its original magazine appearance and so
have not been included in this story when previously published in
Sturgeon collections _(Aliens 4_ and _Sturgeon’s West)_. They are in the
original manuscript found among Sturgeon’s papers, and have been
restored here by my choice. The restored paragraphs begin _I said
nothing_ and end _I understood that, and had nothing to say_.

“THE GOLDEN HELIX”: first published in _Thrilling Wonder Stories_,
Summer 1954. Written in autumn 1953, when Sturgeon apparently submitted
it to _Astounding Science Fiction_, edited by John W. Campbell, Jr. On
Nov. 23, 1953, Campbell wrote in a letter to Sturgeon: “Dear Ted—No can
use, I’m afraid. The thesis has point, but the thing won’t work this
way. The Golden Helix is perfectly valid—but you see the counter-current
of the helix exists simultaneously with the direct current. Your helix
is actually a Moebian [sic] strip, which has only one side, and only one
edge, and feeds on itself. There is _both_ increasing complexity _and_
increasing simplicity, and the two currents progress simultaneously. The
trouble with Viridis is that it causes the a retrogression of both
currents. That’s not the way to do it. We can live only by going back to
simplicity, and starting again—but it’s done via the ovum and the sperm.
And while the physical form is very simple, the philosophical
formulation of the fertile ovum is far more complex than that of the
adult human being! … The Golden Helix is valid—but not in quite the form
you’ve got it here.”

Introducing this story in his 1979 collection _The Golden Helix_,
Sturgeon wrote: _Far more remarkable, to me, than any other aspect of
the intricate plot of this story is the fact that it was written in
1953, a good span of years before the double spiral of the DNA molecule
was discovered, with its astonishing role in evolutionary structures.
This makes the story a sort of quasi-mystical precognition—something I
was not and could not be aware of when I wrote it. This is by no means
the only time this has happened. Well after the fact, readers have
unearthed in my work devices, events, or phenomena that I couldn’t
possibly have known of at the time I wrote them: Velcro, illuminated
watch-dials, certain breakthroughs in cancer research, automobile smog
devices, and a good many other things. The average gap between these
appearances in my typewriter and the emergence of them in the real world
seems to be about fifteen years. I claim no special superiority for
this, and admit to a good deal of humility. There are times when I feel
like no more than a length of pipe, through which Something pours these
things into my manuscripts_.

As it happens, Watson and Crick first published their double helix
theory of DNA in 1953. It’s fair to assume that the notion came to TS
independently and almost simultaneously … and that he wasn’t aware of
their work when he wrote this story.

In section IV, when Tod recalls _an old, old tale … from the ancient
Amerenglish, by Hynlen (Henlyne, was it? no matter)_, the story he’s
referring to is “Goldfish Bowl” by Robert A. Heinlein, which appeared in
_Astounding Science-Fiction_ in 1941.

Later in section IV, _They called the moons Wynken, Blynken, and Nod_ is
a reference to Eugene Field’s well-known late-19th-century children’s
poem, “Dutch Lullaby”: “Wynken, Blynken, and Nod one night sailed off in
a wooden shoe … All night long their nets they threw to the stars in the
twinkling foam; then down from the skies came the wooden shoe, bringing
the fishermen home.”

David Pringle wrote in his introduction to the 1987 collection _A Touch
of Sturgeon_: “What are the ‘obsessive’ themes that make this author’s
stories so interesting? The most frequently remarked is the theme of
union—of meeting, melding, and becoming one. This takes various forms:
love-and-togetherness, human-and-alien syzygy, the ‘bleshing’ of a
_gestalt_ consciousness (as in ‘Baby Is Three’) or a racial hive-mind
(as in ‘To Marry Medusa’). Such unions are usually portrayed as highly
desirable events, kinds of salvation, like the cosmic vision which
concludes ‘The Golden Helix.’ ”

When this story with its many births and children and
children-of-children was written, Theodore Sturgeon’s son Robin was a
year old and his wife Marion was pregnant with their second child,
Tandy.

“EXTRAPOLATION”: first published in _Fantastic Stories_, April 1954,
under the title “Beware the Fury.” Editor’s blurb from the first page of
the original magazine appearance: MEET WOLF REGER—TRAITOR. COMPARED TO
HIM BENEDICT ARNOLD WAS A NATIONAL HERO AND JUDAS ISCARIOT A PARAGON OF
VIRTUE. AT LEAST THAT’S THE WAY IT SHOWED IN THE MAJOR’S NOTES … BUT
TRAITORS AREN’T BORN THAT WAY. SOMETHING HAS TO HAPPEN TO THEM LONG
BEFORE THEY TURN AGAINST SOCIETY. THAT’S WHY, WHEN YOU DIG DEEP ENOUGH,
YOU MAY FIND THAT THE WORD _TRAITOR_ CAN BE ONE HELL OF A MISNOMER …

When Sturgeon included this story in his 1964 collection _Sturgeon in
Orbit_, he called it “Extrapolation,” apparently his original
(manuscript) title. The story-introductions TS wrote for that collection
have as their theme the magazine editors who first published the stories
and his relationship with them. In his introduction to “Extrapolation,”
he wrote: _This might be called a “forgotten” story in the sense that it
has, through the years, been overlooked by anthologists and yet (I have
it on good authority) is one of my major works. I know that when I
unearthed it for this volume and read it, I put it down with
(incredibly) real tears in my eyes. I let Groff Conklin (now_ there’s _a
good editor) see it, and he confessed it had him weeping aloud. It was
Howard Browne who bought this story, and I suddenly recall the
circumstances, because it was the only time such a thing ever happened
to me. I came in with it and said, “Look, Howard, I’d appreciate it if
you could let me know on this sort of soon because—” He interrupted me:
“You in a bind? Wait a minute.” He reached for the phone and said
“Accounting Department?” Then to me,” How long is it?” I told him.
Howard looked up at the ceiling for a moment, calculating, and then said
into the phone, “Send up a check for Theodore Sturgeon for a story
called_ Extrapolation _for (he named a figure).” “But Howard!” I cried,
“you haven’t read it yet!” He shrugged his Kodiak-bear shoulders. “I
don’t need to and you know it.” They don’t hardly make ’em like that no
more_.

“GRANNY WON’T KNIT”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, May
1954. Written winter 1954.

In his introduction to “Granny Won’t Knit” in the 1979 collection _The
Stars Are the Styx_, Sturgeon wrote: _This story had, for me, a most
unusual nascence. Usually my stories emerge from hidden convolutions of
my gut—my very own personal gut. In this case, a time arrived when
Horace Gold, having saved space for me in an upcoming issue, called to
ask, as politely as possible, “Where the hell is the novelette?” and I
answered with perfect truth that although my gut was in perfect
operation, it hadn’t taken that certain turn just yet. So he put me on
hold, and called another writer with whom he had discussed an idea, but
who had later said he had decided to do nothing with it, and asked him
if he would mind his passing the idea over to Sturgeon. The writer said
go right ahead; he’d never do anything with it himself. The basic idea
was this matter transmission thing. So I wrote Granny, hardly getting up
from the typewriter, at about the time the other writer changed his mind
and wrote_ The Stars My Destination. _I do indeed love Granny, but I
wish I’d written the superb novel Alfred Bester did_.

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:
WHEN PRIMLY STARCHED BOY MET UNPRIM AND UNSTARCHED GIRL, IT WAS REVOLT
AT FIRST SIGHT, FOR GRANNY DIDN’T KNIT—SHE WOVE!

The speech and behavior of the authoritarian father in this story are
clearly derived from Sturgeon’s childhood experiences with his
stepfather, as described in his autobiographical essay “Argyll.”

“TO HERE AND THE EASEL”: first published in _Star Short Novels_, a book
edited by Frederik Pohl and published by Ballantine Books in September
1954. In an appreciation published in the July 1985 _Science Fiction
Chronicle_, publisher Ian Ballantine recalled: “… Ted was now ready to
take on commissions. Having been brought up in Woodstock, New York, I
had an interest in the artistic creative process. I asked Ted for a
short novel that gave the reader insight into the creative process. Ted
wrote ‘To Here and the Easel,’ published in _Star Short Novels_, edited
by Fred Pohl.”

In an essay in _The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction_, September
1962, science fiction author James Blish described this as his “favorite
Sturgeon story.” In the version of this essay included in _More Issues
at Hand_, a 1970 collection of Blish’s sf criticism, published under the
pseudonym William Atheling, Jr., Blish wrote: “All of Sturgeon’s major
work is about love, sexual love emphatically included.… Directly under
this heading belongs Sturgeon’s love affair with the English language,
which has been as complicated, stormy and rewarding as any affair he has
ever written about. He is a born experimenter, capable of the most
outrageous excesses in search of precision and poetry; people who do not
like puns, for example, are likely to find much Sturgeon text almost as
offensive as late Joyce (and I am sorry for them). Nobody else in our
microcosm could possibly have produced such a stylistic explosion as ‘To
Here and the Easel,’ a novella based in language as well as in theme on
Ariosto’s 16th-Century epic _Orlando Furioso_, because in fact nobody
else would have seen that the subject couldn’t have been handled any
other way.” _Orlando Furioso_, an epic poem by Italian poet Ludovico
Ariosto, was published in 1516; _Merriam-Webster’s Encyclopedia of
Literature_ says it is “considered the finest expression of the artistic
tendencies and spiritual attributes of the Italian Renaissance.”

Damon Knight, science fiction author and critic, in his book _In Search
of Wonder_, said: “ ‘To Here and the Easel’ was written at the very top
of Sturgeon’s range, on the same level as _More Than Human_ and ‘Saucer
of Loneliness’ and a few others—a breathtaking display of sustained
brilliance, all glitter and pop, never holding still an instant, with
the velvet-covered fist hanging, hanging … here a pun with a bawdier one
on top of it, here a sudden unexpected gallop of blank verse … until
that damned fist comes down and squeezes the whole thing so tight that
there’s nothing more to say about it.”

No reader of “To Here and the Easel” will be surprised to learn that
around the time he wrote this story Sturgeon was himself suffering from
a bout of “writer’s block” comparable to the “painter’s block” suffered
by its protagonist. On June 2, 1955, Sturgeon wrote to Anthony Boucher:
_I’ve been terrified for a long time now. A year ago April I dried up,
and though I’ve done four or five shorts since, they were hard and
squeezed out with the sensation of working out a vein; every word closer
to the last I could ever do. In June_ [1954] _I accepted a very large
advance from Dell and found I couldn’t write the book it was for, not a
word of it_. Sturgeon in his 1962 Guest of Honor speech at a science
fiction convention referred to this same time period by saying, _I went
into a terrible dry spell one time. It was a desperate dry spell and an
awful lot depended on me getting writing again_. In another letter to
Boucher, Feb. 4, 1956, he said, _Fact is I’ve been battling my Beast,
the paralysis of the typewriter which has beset me often on for the past
fifteen years but ever so much worse in the last three. I still haven’t
identified this monster, but I’ve made this much progress: I know when
it’s working on me. That’s small progress, but it’s something_.

TS included “To Here and the Easel” in a 1971 collection called
_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well_ … which was otherwise completely dedicated
to eleven stories he wrote in the summer of 1969, suddenly ending
another dry spell as the result of the arrival in his life of a female
admirer of his work who traveled 6,500 miles with the intent of meeting
him and encouraging him to write. In his foreword to that collection, he
wrote, _I was living at the bottom of a mountain in Neverneverland, far
under a rock … unaware of just how far I had crawled and how immobile my
crouch. Suddenly one day there exploded a great mass of red hair
attached to a laughing face. Her name was Wina … She crawled way in
under that rock and hauled me out_. (She became the mother of his
seventh child, Andros.)

“WHEN YOU’RE SMILING”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_,
January 1955. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original
magazine appearance: YOU’VE NEVER READ SCIENCE FICTION LIKE THIS BEFORE.
IT’S A SHOCK WAVE OF TERROR—WITH A JOLTING, BLINDING CONCLUSION. IT’S
STURGEON!

Introducing this story in his 1979 collection _The Stars Are the Styx_,
Sturgeon wrote: _It must be apparent by this time that I tend to write
about nice guys. But I also believe (as you will discover later on) that
I believe in the yin and the yang, and that from time to time one must
turn the coin over and investigate what lives under the sun-warmed rock.
I also believe that although ultimate justice will be done (even if only
statistically, even if later than sooner), it is, as often as not, done
for selfish reasons and benefits the universe by accident_.

“When You’re Smiling” is the title of a song recorded by Louis Armstrong
in 1929.

Among the “maundering” pages (efforts to develop story ideas) found
among Sturgeon’s papers is one that suggests Sturgeon may have had the
opening page or two of this story long before he wrote the rest of it or
knew where it was going. The maundering page says: _Use that Henry
copy—my God, it’s the start of_ something. _Whoy! There’s the good seed
of a regeneration story in it, implicit in the News feature writer_.
Another page includes these lines: _So we meet Henry again. His key is
empathy—loads of it, more of it than he needs or should have. Somehow I
have to introduce this other character, the man with no empathy at all.…
I feel that once I get him and Henry together I’ll charge right ahead_.
Another page, that possibly precedes the writing of _that Henry copy_,
contains some of the story’s elements but with the personalities of the
characters seemingly reversed: _If Henry is happy with things as they
are, who better to elucidate the virtues of our method? He would rush to
the e-t as to a vacuum, this e-t suffering, as he does, a torture from
excess empathy; Henry’s joy derives from real egocentricity, turned on
its head and looking like altruism. So start off with reminiscences of
school and what a happy underdog Henry was, and meet him again years
later; go from joy to disgust and finally lash out at him.…_

To me, one remarkable aspect of “When You’re Smiling” is its powerful
portrayal, in the form of a first-person narrative, of the modern
archetype described in Alan Harrington’s 1972 book _Psychopaths_ and
William and Joan McCord’s 1964 book _The Psychopath_. Harrington’s book
begins: “ ‘There walk among us men and women who are in but not of our
world,’ wrote the late Robert Lindner. ‘Often the sign by which they
betray themselves is crime, crime of an explosive, impulsive, reckless
type. Sometimes the sign is ruthlessness in dealing with others
socially, even commercially.’ ” Charles Manson is one of the examples
Harrington cites. A significant passage in “When You’re Smiling”
(referred to by Sturgeon as “the empathy story” in his maunderings
before he wrote it) is this monologue: _“I’m different, Henry. I’ve
always known I was different.” I poked my finger toward him and he
curled from its imaginary touch. “You, for example—you have, like nobody
else I ever met, that stuff called ‘empathy.’ … Now me, I have as much
of that as my armadillo-cat has fur. It’s just not in me. I have other
things instead. Do you know I was never angry in my life? That’s why I
have so much fun. That’s why I can push people around. I can make
anybody do anything, just because I always have myself under
control … You’ve seen me operate. You going to call a man like me
human?”_

William Atheling, Jr., in _The Issue at Hand_ (1964), wrote: “ ‘When
You’re Smiling’ is a hate-piece, but it is never out of the author’s
control for so long as three words. Ted’s portrait of the man who enjoys
causing pain is that of a man who thoroughly deserves the author’s
loathing. But by taking the pains to tell the story from that man’s
point of view, and to convey some of the man’s enthusiasm for himself
and his researches, Ted has made sure that his evil character does not
emerge as an unbelievable caricature. The deeply subjective approach
unfolds on the page with an air of pure objectivity, as though the
author were simply presenting the character as he is, with an invitation
to the reader to pass his own judgment; the author is loading the dice,
to be sure, but entirely below the level of the reader’s attention.”

“BULKHEAD”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, March 1955,
under the title “Who?” Editor’s blurb from the first page of the
original magazine appearance: NO MAN COULD MAKE THE LONG HAUL ALONE AND
SO THERE HAD TO BE SOMEBODY BEHIND THE BULKHEAD—BUT THE ENORMOUSLY
IMPORTANT QUESTION WAS: WHO?

In a 1979 collection of three stories called _Maturity_, TS wrote in the
book’s introduction: _“Bulkhead” was written in 1954, and appeared in
Horace Gold’s_ Galaxy. _A few months before I wrote it I ran across a
statement by Philip Van Doren Stern: “Never set pen to paper until you
can state your theme in one single, simple declarative sentence.” This
really intrigued me, and I began to look for it in every story I read.
Well, it is not as simple as it seems, nor so obvious. I found few of
these ‘single, simple declarative statements’ anywhere. So I began to
look for them in my own writings, and couldn’t find them there either.
But about a year and a half after “Bulkhead” appeared in print, I reread
it, and I found that theme in the simplest words. Can you? The discovery
qualified this story for this book: a further advance in understanding
the nature of maturity. I’ll tell you this in the postscript_. In the
book’s postscript, TS wrote: _A single, simple declarative statement: A
man doesn’t grow up until he can come to terms with his early self_.

The text of this story as it appears in Judith Merril’s widely read
anthologies _SF: The Year’s Greatest Science-Fiction and Fantasy_ and
_SF: The Best of the Best_ is different from the text of this story in
Sturgeon’s own collections _A Way Home_ (1955) and _Maturity_ (1979).
This is because the Merrill books reprint the story as it ran in
_Galaxy_. Uncharacteristically, Sturgeon provided the publisher of _A
Way Home_ with the carbon of his original manuscript of this story
rather than a copy of the published story, possibly because he was not
happy with H.L. Gold’s editing of the story for _Galaxy_, but probably
also because the book (which was published in May 1955) went into
production before a copy of the printed magazine was available. The
Theodore Sturgeon papers in the Dept. of Special Collections, Spencer
Library, University of Kansas, include Sturgeon’s original manuscript
for “Bulkhead” as line-edited by Gold and sent to _Galaxy’s_ printer. An
examination of this “setting copy” shows that Gold, for example, changed
the opening words of the story’s third paragraph from _Which, of course,
eliminates_ to _Naturally, that eliminates_ and added the sentence _You
have a shipmate, but even so, you’re alone_. after the opening sentence
of the fifth paragraph _(Then there’s this: You’re alone.)_. In the
_Galaxy_ text, in this same paragraph, in the sentence that begins
_Psychodynamics has come a long way_, Gold cut the following phrases:
_it hasn’t begun to alter the fact that human beings are the most feral,
vicious, destructive, and self-destructive creatures God ever made_.
Close examination of the Spencer Library’s copy of the (marked-up by
Gold) original manuscript further reveals that Sturgeon did make some
small changes of his own (possibly in response to suggestions from the
book’s copy editor) to the story before _A Way Home_ went to press.

In her introduction to “Bulkhead” in the first volume of her annual
_Year’s Best_ anthologies, Judith Merril called Sturgeon “The Man With
The Golden Pen; for my money, the top writer among established ‘names’
in sf.” She notes that the U.S. Air Force is currently (1956) studying a
problem central to “Bulkhead” and another story in her anthology: “They
call it ‘Space Medicine’; their object is to make certain that human
minds and bodies will be able to survive the Big Jump, when we make it.”

The reference late in the story to _Dell’s hypothesis_ (_promulgated
’way back in the 1960’s by a lay analyst named Dudley Dell, who was, as
I remember, the editor of a love-story magazine_) is an in-joke. H. L.
Gold had used the pseudonym Dudley Dell on occasional features he wrote
in _Galaxy_. And Gold was certainly prone to articulating his own
psychological theories in conversations with and letters to Sturgeon and
other _Galaxy_ writers. In the original manuscript of the story and as
it appeared in _Galaxy_, Dell’s hypothesis _was formulated way back in
the middle of the 20th century by Dudley Dell, which was one of the
pseudonyms of a magazine editor. As I remember it, he later became a lay
analyst and—_

On one sheet of the “maunderings” in which Sturgeon typed notes to
himself exploring story ideas, he seems to arrive at the idea of
reviving his unpublished 1947 story “Hurricane Trio” by interpolating a
science fictional element. He did this, and the story was published in
_Galaxy_ in the April 1955 issue, and included in his 1955 collection _A
Way Home_. At the bottom of this sheet, after an asterisk, the following
note appears:

_Coexistence of older-younger entities in a person: psychiatric
treatment separates entities which would otherwise be in conflict, so
that a man has company on a space trip. He doesn’t know, of course, that
he’s talking to himself, and the similarity-conflict factor will be just
ideal to keep him alert. Title: BULKHEAD. denouement when he’s shown the
bulkhead, the too-small-for-a-passenger space behind it, then the psych
snaps fingers and commands him to remember—his own memory—some
preoccupation of the junior member_.

It is of course quite unusual, and just the sort of stunt that Sturgeon
would undertake and succeed at, for a story to be written entirely in a
second person narrative voice (“You’re alone. You crouch in this little
cell in the nose of your ship”). It is possible that this aspect of this
story had a significant influence on Rod Serling’s use of a similar
narrative technique on many scripts for his popular television series
“Twilight Zone.”

The protagonist’s ruminations _Nobody but a cadet_ deserves _a
ship!… Why did you hold still for Base routines, for the hazing you got
from the upper classmen?_ derive partly from Sturgeon’s experiences at
age seventeen on a school ship, the Penn State Nautical School, which
included being “brutalized and beat up” (he told me in 1976) along with
other new cadets in routine hazings conducted by upper classmen.

“THE RIDDLE OF RAGNAROK”: first published in _Fantastic Universe_, June
1955. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine
appearance: IT WAS A WORLD OF GIANTS AND OF WOMEN WHOSE LIMBS WERE
MAGIC—AND FABULOUSLY STRANGE WERE THE WEAVING STRANDS OF ITS DESTINY.
Also on this page was another editorial note, which said: “Theodore
Sturgeon, who recently won the International Fantasy Committee Award for
the most distinguished SF novel of the year, is probably the most
versatile of the scant dozen writers who have compelled the moulders of
our literary climate to take science fiction seriously as an important
branch of imaginative fiction. We are happy to welcome him to our pages
for the first time with this glowingly fanciful saga of a realm
enchanted.”

The details of the events in this unusual Sturgeon story seem to be
consistent with the story of the death of Balder or Baldur as it is
often told in Norse mythology—particularly as recounted circa 1225 in
the _Prose Edda_ by Icelandic poet and historian Snorri Sturluson
(Saxo’s Danish account differs)—with the exception of the twist of
Loki’s possible innocence and the non-weeping giantess as a figure other
than Loki in disguise. These elements and the remarkable conversations
(and ultimate reconciliation) between Memory and Thought appear to be
Sturgeon’s inventions. (_A Guide to the Gods_ by Richard Carlyon, 1981,
and _Encyclopedia of Gods_ by Michael Jordan, 1993, were helpful to me
in this determination.)

“TWINK”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, August 1955.

In his 1984 collection _Alien Cargo_, Sturgeon said of “Twink”: _This is
the one and only time I used this particular writer’s trick in
narrative. I wonder if you can divine what it is. Otherwise, I must
express pride at the insightful look at society’s insensitivities toward
the unusual person. The disabled are unusual; special gifts are unusual;
too many people don’t know the difference. The slow learners are
unusual; psychopaths are unusual; too many people think they’re
suffering from the same thing. These_, among other things, _are what
this story’s about, so I hope you will forgive the trickery_.

Editor’s blurb above the title in the original magazine appearance: IT
WAS BAD ENOUGH BEING TREATED LIKE A FREAK—NOW THERE WAS THE HORROR OF
WHAT I HAD DONE TO …

“BRIGHT SEGMENT”: first published in _Caviar_, an anthology of short
stories by Theodore Sturgeon published by Ballantine Books in October
1955.

In his 1984 collection _Alien Cargo_, Sturgeon said of “Bright Segment”:
_Surely one of the most powerful stories I have ever written. This was
made into a 58-minute TV film in France, with Gert (Goldfinger) Frobe
cast as the old man, and doing an extraordinary piece of acting.
Further, the French shot it almost exactly the way I wrote it, and I
wrote it despairing that it could not be filmed; American TV could never
(1955) handle that much blood and that much skin. I wish you could see
it. I own the only print in North America, but can’t use it for
admission or release it to net or cable. I can, however, use it as a
lecture resource: a three-hour performance during which I read the story
up to but not including the ending; challenge the students (creative
writing, scripting, directing, cinematography, what have you) to suggest
what they would include or change or eliminate if this were their film;
then I show the film, read my ending, and launch a Q&A. It takes about
three hours, and it costs, but I understand it’s worth the nut. The
French director is Christian de Chalonge; he’s unavailable at this
writing, but he seems to be, so far, the only one in the industry
anywhere who really understands what I am all about. He’s also
unavailable at this writing_. ‘Sway, _as Lady Jayne says; it means,
“That’s the way things are.” There is, by the way, no important language
difficulty; you will see as you read it that it’s about 92%
visual—virtually without dialogue, by its very nature_.

The film was first aired on French television in 1974, under the title
_Parcelle Brillante_.

David Pringle in _A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987) calls “Bright Segment” “a
disturbing variant on the Esmeralda and Quasimodo story [in Victor
Hugo’s novel _The Hunchback of Notre Dame_].”

The similarity between the basic situation of this story and the way
Wolf Reger and his wife met in “Extrapolation” suggests that when
Sturgeon was asked to write a new piece of fiction for inclusion in his
forthcoming Ballantine collection, he took the opportunity to explore a
story-idea that had been with him since he wrote “Extrapolation,” but
that he hadn’t pursued until now because it wasn’t science fiction or
fantasy and so none of the magazine markets he’d been selling to would
be able to use it. It is interesting to note that although there is no
science fiction element here, the form of the story arises from one of
the premises that are most often used in developing a science fiction
plot: What would happen if …? Certainly the powerful portrait of the
pathos of the human need to be needed that results is unmistakably a
“Sturgeon story,” regardless of what other genre it can or cannot be
placed in.

“SO NEAR THE DARKNESS”: first published in _Fantastic Universe_,
November 1955. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original
magazine appearance: BROKAW’S GUILT AND FEAR SEEMED MORE THAN HUMAN
FLESH COULD ENDURE. BUT TINA COULD SEE THE UGLY BRIDGE-WORK BEHIND THE
DARK ONE’S FANGS. The second editorial note read: “It was Theodore
Sturgeon’s genius for combining fantasy with science fiction, in a blend
of enchantment rare in our age, which won him an International Fantasy
Committee Award in a year which saw an unprecedented display of
competitive brilliance on library shelves. We doubt, indeed, if there is
another writer of quite his stature in _both_ genres. And now, for the
second time, he appears in our pages with a tale as darkly terrifying
and as fraught with Novembral direfulness as midnight’s frightful
liaison with a demon moon.”

Tina’s “colorful little shop” where this story begins is located in the
same neighborhood as the store in Sturgeon’s 1940 story “Shottle
Bop”—Manhattan between the Chelsea District and Greenwich Village, where
Sturgeon lived in 1940 and 1946.

The possible existence of powerful “psychic creatures” who are nourished
by human souls and emotions and experiences is a recurrent Sturgeon
theme (cf. “The Perfect Host,” 1948; “The Dark Room,” 1953; “Ghost of a
Chance,” 1943).

“CLOCKWISE”: first published in _Calling All Boys_, August-September
1946. _Calling All Boys_ was a monthly magazine published by the
publishers of _Parents’ Magazine_. It included color comics along with
articles and stories. “Clockwise” ran on one page of the magazine,
illustrated by a drawing captioned, “Jemmy stood there, sweat pouring
off him, still turning the first screw.” The editorial blurb atop the
story read: WHICH WAY DOES A CLOCK HAND TURN? JEMMY DIDN’T KNOW. BACK IN
THE HILLS HERE HE LIVED, THERE WERE NO CLOCKS.

Sturgeon had lived in Jamaica in 1941 and in the next few years did
construction work for airbases in the West Indies.

“SMOKE!”: first published in _Calling All Boys_, December-January 1947.

For more than seven years your editor and other Sturgeon appreciators
have been searching the Library of Congress and university library
collections for copies of _Calling All Boys_ magazine that might contain
these two “missing” Sturgeon stories. They have finally been found and
are included here thanks to the tireless efforts of Sturgeon scholar
William F. Seabrook.

Editorial blurb atop the story: “BAIL OUT! DON’T BE CRAZY!” AN INNER
VOICE KEPT SHOUTING AT HANK CORSON AS THE MONOPLANE FILLED WITH DENSE
SMOKE.

This story is a retelling of “Watch My Smoke,” one of Sturgeon’s first
published stories, circulated by the McLure Syndicate in March 1939. See
the story notes in the first volume of this series for Sturgeon’s
recollections of being very impressed by the bush pilots of the Canadian
lake country when he visited there at age sixteen.

The previous two stories are included out of chronological sequence (of
composition) in this series because no copies of them could be found
when the 1946 volume (_Thunder and Roses_) was being prepared.

If this series were in perfect chronological sequence (not possible for
a variety of reasons), Sturgeon’s short novel “The [Widget], the
[Wadget], and Boff” would appear in this present volume just before or
after “When You’re Smiling,” as it was apparently written in autumn 1954
(based on comments by Sturgeon in a letter sent to Anthony Boucher on
May 11, 1955 when he submitted the short novel to _The Magazine of
Fantasy and Science Fiction_, which published it in two parts in its
November and December 1955 issues). The story could not be included in
this book for length reasons, but appears in _Slow Sculpture_, Volume
XII of The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon.



CLOCKWISE


“THIS IS A GOOD JOB if I say so myself,” said Sam Cobb, holding up the
carburetor float he had just soldered. He and his sidekick Jack Delaney
were working on Sam’s jalopy.

“Looks okay,” said Jack, straightening up from his valve grinding. “Say,
isn’t that your brother Henry coming up the drive?”

“Yep! Oh boy! I’m glad you’re going to get the chance to meet him, Jack.
He’s a swell guy.” He went to the garage doors and waved, and watched
his brother approach. Henry Cobb was a stocky man, a construction
engineer, just returned from an airbase job in the West Indies.

“How’s with the puddle-jumper?” he asked.

“Fine. Come on in, Henry.” They went into the garage, and after
introductions, spent a slightly greasy half-hour going over the battered
old car. Then Henry wiped his hands with a gas-soaked rag.

“Does me good to see you kids doing a job like this, “he said. “I don’t
think there’s anywhere else in the world where you’ll see youngsters
your age doing this kind of thing.” He laughed. “I remember a kid I ran
into in Jamaica. Name of Jemmy. Came from back in the bush, up in the
hills where bananas grow wild and the houses are made of packed-earth
and palm leaves. He was a waterboy, and wanted to be a mechanic the
worst way.

“Well, I gave him a break, finally—he wore me down. I had a plywood
facing I wanted screwed on to a wooden soldering table. I drilled his
guide-holes for him and gave him a screwdriver and some screws, and told
him to go ahead. Half kiddingly, I said, ‘You know which way to turn
screws, don’t you? Same way a clock goes.’ He said, ‘Yas, bahss,’ and
started for the bench.

“I came back in about twenty minutes—and there he was, sweat pouring off
him, still working away at the first screw! I watched him for a minute,
and do you know what he was doing? Turning the screw _back and forth_ in
the hole—half a turn in, half a turn out! I asked him what in blazes he
was doing. He replied in that peculiar Jamaican dialect, ‘Ah, bahss, him
cyan’t go in, sah. Ah turn lak yo’say, sah, but him cyan’t go in!’ He
looked as if he’d burst into tears. Well, I questioned him, and it
turned out he couldn’t read or write—or tell time. He’d only seen a
clock a couple times before—didn’t know _which_ way the hands went. But
he had seen a clock taken apart once, and inside there was a little
thing that went back and forth, back and forth; and for him, that was
the way a clock went!”

The boys roared with laughter. Sam said, “Gosh! Those people sure must
be dumb down there.”

“Now wait a minute,” said Henry quietly. Sam saw that the smile had
disappeared from his face. “Did you say dumb? Think a minute. What’s the
main difference between you and Jemmy? Hm? You’re American, white, and
educated. He was Jamaican, black, and illiterate. Now, be fair. Under
the same circumstances, would you be as smart as he was? Sure, I thought
it was funny; but I didn’t think he was dumb. I saw right away that he
was using his eyes and his brains—and carrying out orders the best way
he knew how.

“No, Sam; the big difference between you and Jemmy is the difference in
_opportunity_—that and no more. You have had it, and Jemmy never had it.
If it weren’t for that opportunity, we’d never have turned out thousands
of pilots and radio men and mechanics to win the kind of war we had to
fight. And we’d probably be asking some _Gestapo_ guy for our daily
bread, instead of overhauling a swell old tomato-can like this one.”

“Gosh, Henry, I never thought of it like that.” Sam thought for a
moment. “How did Jemmy make out?”

“I hired him. Know what he did with his opportunity? He was foreman of
that shop by the time I left the island!”



SMOKE!


HANK CORSON’S NARROW NOSTRILS had been twitching for some minutes before
he realized that it was smoke he was smelling. The tiny cockpit was
filling with a dense, acrid smoke. And that was bad!

Hank knew his ship. He should—he and his brother Jim had built it. It
was strictly backyard stuff—a high-wing monoplane, doped fabric over
spruce spars and a venerable, in-line four cylinder gasper that dragged
it over the sky. But it flew. And its aluminum floats made a runway of
any fair-sized puddle in the Canadian lake country. The plane wasn’t
much to look at, but it moved small freight often enough and fast enough
to make a business. Some day he and Jim would be running swift, sleek
flying boxcars, and scheduled feeder flights. Lodestars, maybe, or
DC-3’s.

“… getting worse,” muttered Hank, sneezing as the smoke filled his
nostrils. He wiped his eyes and squinted at the board. Manifold
pressure, oil pressure, okay. Charging, fuel, fine. Altitude three
thousand. The motor thrummed on, smooth as ever. No, if there was a
fire, it was back here somewhere, and not in the engine compartment.

The cargo?

He squirmed around and peered back into the fuselage. Those diesel
injectors wouldn’t be burning. The V-belts for the Horne Mines’ wood
shop? No they were rubberoid and the smoke didn’t smell like rubber.
Could the heating pipes have set fire to something? He frowned. He had
no time for detective work. He had to get out of here in a hurry.

He sneezed again and slipped one arm, then the other, through the
shoulder straps of his chute, brought the rest of the harness up from
between his legs, and clipped them all together at his chest with the
snaffle hook. Now he was ready to jump.

A touch on stick and pedal, and he was in a steep bank, circling,
peering over the coaming at the country below. Foothills—burned-over
land, a leafless forest of blackened trunks and ravelled, riotous
undergrowth. It was maybe fifty-five miles by air back to Kiskeard, and
the back-country lake where he based his crate. About forty to Lac du
Chat Noir, where his cargo was consigned. Nothing between the two but
scrub and rocks. Nothing to eat unless he could knock out a rabbit or a
chipmunk. A long haul.

He shrugged. That was better than what this smoke promised him. He’d
have to jump!

A sunbeam slanted into and through the cockpit as he circled. In it was
the ghost of a fern-frond, curled and feathery, all made of blue smoke.
He stared at it while it dispersed, and then swore bitterly. This was
fine. This was just dandy. Nothing insured but the cargo. They’d just
spent their last dollar on war-surplus radio equipment, stuff they would
still be using when they got the Lodestars … Now there wouldn’t be any
Lodestars, no Corson Brothers Air Freight. They couldn’t finance another
plane. They had a swell radio. They’d have to sit and listen to orders
from the mines all through this district, and hear other charter
airlines getting the jobs. No plane, no business!

Hank growled and punched viciously at the controls, snapping the fragile
plane back on the Lac du Chat Noir course. The smoke seemed to be
increasing slowly … If only he knew where it was coming from. What was
burning?

Once when he was a kid he had helped his father burn out wasps from
their nests under the eaves. They had waved a burning rag on the end of
a long stick under the nests, and the wasps flew into the ragged yellow
flame. There would be a little puff of fire as their wing caught, and
then they would drop. This would be the same. The seaplane would explode
into flame all at once, all over.

Maybe that would be good. Maybe that would be better than what he would
see in Jim’s eyes when he trudged up out of the bush, late tomorrow. Jim
would be glad to see him alive all right. Yeah, and then they could go
back to working for someone else, scrabbling for pennies to start up
again, while their competitors clinched all the business.

Breath rasped in Hank’s throat. He coughed and tried to spit, but his
mouth was too dry. It was getting tough to see the controls. _Get out!
Get out!_ something screamed inside his head. In the war, you could bail
out of a burning ship and they’d hand you another one …

In a desperate surge he yanked the little extinguisher from its clips
under the board, turned the handle and pumped it, aiming back into the
empennage. Nothing happened. The air got worse, and the smoke got even
thicker, that was all.

The thing in his head screamed at him again, _“Get out!”_ He opened his
eyes. He was flying with a wing down. He straightened her up, and the
effort made him realize that his mind was wandering. He shook himself,
leaned over and peered down.

A lake!

He throttled down and pressed the stick away from him. If he could … but
that lake! _That_ lake! He recognized it—Bouche du Diable, the Canucks
called it. Shaped like a smiling mouth, fanged with sharp, white,
pyritic quartz, shallow, narrow, and surrounded by wooded hills. No one
had ever set a plane down on Bouche du Diable.

_“Get out!”_ … This was foolish. He could jump. So he lost the business.
That was better than losing his life!

But knowing he should jump did not keep him from slipping down toward
the little lake. It would be crosswind. He’d tear the floats off her.
He’d tangle with the trees. He’d—

When the left float clipped a treetop, ever so swiftly and gently, he
knew he had lost his chance to jump. Too low! He snarled like an animal
and snatched his arms out of the chute harness. He wanted to call
himself something, but he couldn’t think of a name for a man as dumb as
he was. He could have jumped! And now—

Well, now he was too busy to think. He cut his gun, fishtailing wildly,
snapped on the ignition again just before the motor stopped, to rev up,
haul up her nose, stall in. The plane screamed and fluttered down to the
water, one float low, to splash and sit like a tired duck, while every
frame and member yelled for help. She yawed and dipped a wingtip, but
she came back. And before she had stopped moving, Hank had swept aside
the cowling and was out on the float, leaning back to scrabble around in
the cockpit behind the seat.

He found it, flaming now, and he hauled it up and out of the seat and
dropped it into the lake. And then he clung there, croaking, his big
shoulders shaking. Not crying. Laughing.

He hadn’t jumped. And there it was, blackened and bubbling, sinking
through the clear water—the thing that had been burning all along—his
parachute!

[]
