
PRAISE FOR THE WRITING OF THEODORE STURGEON

“One of the greatest . . . I can’t recommend his work too highly!”
—Stephen King

“I look upon Sturgeon with a secret and growing jealousy.” —Ray Bradbury

“A master storyteller certain to fascinate.” —Kurt Vonnegut Jr.

“One of the masters of modern science fiction.” —_The Washington Post
Book World_

“The Sturgeon magic does not diminish with the years. His stories have a
timeless quality and a universality which is beyond fantasy and science
fiction.” —Madeleine L’Engle

“The corpus of science fiction produced by Theodore Sturgeon is the
single most important body of science fiction by an American.” —Samuel
R. Delany

_More Than Human_

“A quantum leap in the development of science fiction as an art.” —_The
Washington Post_

“One of the best science fiction novels of the year.” —_The New York
Times_

_Godbody_

“Embodies the very best of Theodore Sturgeon . . . a master.” —_San
Francisco Chronicle_

“The capstone of Sturgeon’s art . . . Read it, enjoy it, reread it, give
it to somebody you love.” —Robert A. Heinlein

“You will do more than enjoy; you will be increased.” —Stephen King

_To Marry Medusa_

“Dazzling . . . Sturgeon swerves around cliché and dull language like a
maniac. At times, it seems like he’s working in his own personal version
of the English language. It’s like taking a road trip with an incredibly
eccentric dude: You may know the most logical or efficient route, but
the offbeat guy will know the way past the most stunning vistas. Read a
little of _Medusa_, and you’ll see what I mean.” —SF Site

“A fine example of what science fiction is supposed to be:
simultaneously plot- and character-driven and completely devoid of
fluff. . . . A fantastic classic.” —SF Signal

_The Dreaming Jewels_

“An intensely written and very moving novel of love and retribution.”
_—Washington Star_

_Venus Plus X_

“It’s interesting to read _Venus_’ sexual commentary in the wake of a
second wave of feminism, the gay liberation, and the sexual revolution
of the ’60s. Obviously, in 1960 the novel was way ahead of its time. It
has lost some of that power, but its critique of American prudence still
holds.” —_City Paper_ (Baltimore)



MORE THAN HUMAN


Theodore Sturgeon

[logo]

To His Gestaltitude

Nicholas Samstag



CONTENTS


1 The Fabulous Idiot

2 Baby Is Three

3 Morality

A Biography of Theodore Sturgeon



1



THE FABULOUS IDIOT


THE IDIOT LIVED IN a black and gray world, punctuated by the white
lightning of hunger and the flickering of fear. His clothes were old and
many-windowed. Here peeped a shinbone, sharp as a cold chisel, and there
in the torn coat were ribs like the fingers of a fist. He was tall and
flat. His eyes were calm and his face was dead.

Men turned away from him, women would not look, children stopped and
watched him. It did not seem to matter to the idiot. He expected nothing
from any of them. When the white lightning struck, he was fed. He fed
himself when he could, he went without when he could. When he could do
neither of these things he was fed by the first person who came face to
face with him. The idiot never knew why, and never wondered. He did not
beg. He would simply stand and wait. When someone met his eyes there
would be a coin in his hand, a piece of bread, a fruit. He would eat and
his benefactor would hurry away, disturbed, not understanding.
Sometimes, nervously, they would speak to him; they would speak about
him to each other. The idiot heard the sounds but they had no meaning
for him. He lived inside somewhere, apart, and the little link between
word and significance hung broken. His eyes were excellent, and could
readily distinguish between a smile and a snarl; but neither could have
any impact on a creature so lacking in sympathy, who himself had never
laughed and never snarled and so could not comprehend the feelings of
his gay or angry fellows.

He had exactly enough fear to keep his bones together and oiled. He was
incapable of anticipating anything. The stick that raised, the stone
that flew found him unaware. But at their touch he would respond. He
would escape. He would start to escape at the first blow and he would
keep on trying to escape until the blows ceased. He escaped storms this
way, rockfalls, men, dogs, traffic and hunger.

He had no preferences. It happened that where he was there was more
wilderness than town; since he lived wherever he found himself, he lived
more in the forest than anywhere else.

They had locked him up four times. It had not mattered to him any of the
times, nor had it changed him in any way. Once he had been badly beaten
by an inmate and once, even worse, by a guard. In the other two places
there had been the hunger. When there was food and he was left to
himself, he stayed. When it was time for escape, he escaped. The means
to escape were in his outer husk; the inner thing that it carried either
did not care or could not command. But when the time came, a guard or a
warden would find himself face to face with the idiot and the idiot’s
eyes whose irises seemed on the trembling point of spinning like wheels.
The gates would open and the idiot would go, and as always the
benefactor would run to do something else, anything else, deeply
troubled.

He was purely animal—a degrading thing to be among men. But most of the
time he was an animal away from men. As an animal in the woods he moved
like an animal, beautifully. He killed like an animal, without hate and
without joy. He ate like an animal, everything edible he could find, and
he ate (when he could) only enough and never more. He slept like an
animal, well and lightly, faced in the opposite direction from that of a
man; for a man going to sleep is about to escape into it while animals
are prepared to escape out of it. He had an animal’s maturity, in which
the play of kittens and puppies no longer has a function. He was without
humor and without joy. His spectrum lay between terror and contentment.

He was twenty-five years old.

Like a stone in a peach, a yolk in an egg, he carried another thing. It
was passive, it was receptive, it was awake and alive. If it was
connected in any way to the animal integument, it ignored the
connections. It drew its substance from the idiot and was otherwise
unaware of him. He was often hungry, but he rarely starved. When he did
starve, the inner thing shrank a little perhaps; but it hardly noticed
its own shrinking. It must die when the idiot died but it contained no
motivation to delay that event by one second.

It had no function specific to the idiot. A spleen, a kidney, an
adrenal—these have definite functions and an optimum level for those
functions. But this was a thing which only received and recorded. It did
this without words, without a code system of any kind; without
translation, without distortion, and without operable outgoing conduits.
It took what it took and gave out nothing.

All around it, to its special senses, was a murmur, a sending. It soaked
itself in the murmur, absorbed it as it came, all of it. Perhaps it
matched and classified, or perhaps it simply fed, taking what it needed
and discarding the rest in some intangible way. The idiot was unaware.
The thing inside….

Without words: _Warm when the wet comes for a little but not enough for
long enough._ (Sadly): _Never dark again._ A feeling of pleasure. A
sense of subtle crushing and _Take away the pink, the scratchy. Wait,
wait, you can go back, yes, you can go back. Different, but almost as
good._ (Sleep feelings): _Yes, that’s it! That’s the—oh!_ (Alarm):
_You’ve gone too far, come back, come back, come—_(A twisting, a sudden
cessation; and one less “voice.”) … _It all rushes up, faster, faster,
carrying me._ (Answer): _No, no. Nothing rushes. It’s still; something
pulls you down on to it, that’s all._ (Fury): _They don’t hear us,
stupid, stupid…. They do…. They don’t, only crying, only noises._

Without words, though. Impression, depression, dialogue. Radiations of
fear, tense fields of awareness, discontent. Murmuring, sending,
speaking, sharing, from hundreds, from thousands of voices. None,
though, for the idiot. Nothing that related to him; nothing he could
use. He was unaware of his inner ear because it was useless to him. He
was a poor example of a man, but he was a man; and these were the voices
of the children, the very young children, who had not yet learned to
stop crying to be heard. _Only crying, only noises._

Mr. Kew was a good father, the very best of fathers. He told his
daughter Alicia so, on her nineteenth birthday. He had said as much to
Alicia ever since she was four. She was four when little Evelyn had been
born and their mother had died cursing him, her indignation at last
awake and greater than her agony and her fear.

Only a good father, the very finest of fathers, could have delivered his
second child with his own hands. No ordinary father could have nursed
and nurtured the two, the baby and the infant, so tenderly and so well.
No child was ever so protected from evil as Alicia; and when she joined
forces with her father, a mighty structure of purity was created for
Evelyn. “Purity triple-distilled,” Mr. Kew said to Alicia on her
nineteenth birthday. “I know good through the study of evil, and have
taught you only the good. And that good teaching has become your good
living, and your way of life is Evelyn’s star. I know all the evil there
is and you know all the evil which must be avoided; but Evelyn knows no
evil at all.”

At nineteen, of course, Alicia was mature enough to understand these
abstracts, this “way of life” and “distillation” and the inclusive
“good” and “evil.” When she was sixteen he had explained to her how a
man went mad if he was alone with a woman, and how the poison sweat
appeared on his body, and how he would put it on her, and then it would
cause the horror on her skin. He had pictures of skin like that in his
books. When she was thirteen she had a trouble and told her father about
it and he told her with tears in his eyes that this was because she had
been thinking about her body, as indeed she had been. She confessed it
and he punished her body until she wished she had never owned one. And
she tried, she tried not to think like that again, but she did in spite
of herself; and regularly, regretfully, her father helped her in her
efforts to discipline her intrusive flesh. When she was eight he taught
her how to bathe in darkness, so she would be spared the blindness of
those white eyes of which he also had magnificent pictures. And when she
was six he had hung in her bedroom the picture of a woman, called Angel,
and the picture of a man, called Devil. The woman held her palms up and
smiled and the man had his arms out to her, his hands like hooks, and
protruding point-outward from his breastbone was a crooked knife blade
with a wetness on it.

They lived alone in a heavy house on a wooded knoll. There was no
driveway, but a path which turned and turned again, so that from the
windows no one could see where it went. It went to a wall and in the
wall was an iron gate which had not been opened in eighteen years and
beside the gate was a steel panel. Once a day Alicia’s father went down
the path to the wall and with two keys opened the two locks in the
panel. He would swing it up and take out food and letters, put money and
mail in, and lock it again.

There was a narrow road outside which Alicia and Evelyn had never seen.
The woods concealed the wall and the wall concealed the road. The wall
ran by the road for two hundred yards, east and west; it mounted the
hill then until it bracketed the house. Here it met iron pickets,
fifteen feet high and so close together a man could hardly press a fist
between them. The tops of the pickets curved out and down, and between
them was cement, and in the cement was broken glass. The pickets ran
east and west, connecting the house to the wall; and where they joined,
more pickets ran back and back into the woods in a circle. The wall and
the house, then, were a rectangle and that was forbidden territory. And
behind the house were the two square miles of fenced woodland, and that
belonged to Evelyn, with Alicia to watch. There was a brook there; wild
flowers and a little pond; friendly oaks and little hidden glades. The
sky above was fresh and near and the pickets could not be seen for the
shouldering masses of holly which grew next to them, all the way around,
blocking the view, breaking the breeze. This closed circle was all the
world to Evelyn, all the world she knew, and all in the world she loved
lay in it.

On Alicia’s nineteenth birthday Evelyn was alone by her pond. She could
not see the house, she could not see the holly hedge nor the pickets,
but the sky was there, up and up, and the water was there, by and by.
Alicia was in the library with her father; on birthdays he always had
special things planned for Alicia in the library. Evelyn had never been
in the library. The library was a place where her father lived, and
where Alicia went at special times. Evelyn never thought of going there,
any more than she thought of breathing water like a speckled trout. She
had not been taught to read, but only to listen and obey. She had never
learned to seek, but only to accept. Knowledge was given to her when she
was ready for it and only her father and sister knew just when that
might be.

She sat on the bank, smoothing her long skirts. She saw her ankle and
gasped and covered it as Alicia would do if she were here. She set her
back against a willow-trunk and watched the water.

It was spring, the part of spring where the bursting is done, the
held-in pressures of desiccated sap-veins and gum-sealed buds are gone,
and all the world’s in a rush to be beautiful. The air was heavy and
sweet; it lay upon lips until they parted, pressed them until they
smiled, entered boldly to beat in the throat like a second heart. It was
air with a puzzle to it, for it was still and full of the colors of
dreams, all motionless; yet it had a hurry to it. The stillness and the
hurry were alive and laced together and how could that be? That was the
puzzle.

A dazzle of bird notes stitched through the green. Evelyn’s eyes stung
and wonder misted the wood. Something tensed in her lap. She looked down
in time to see her hands attack one another, and off came her long
gloves. Her naked hands fled to the sides of her neck, not to hide
something but to share something. She bent her head and the hands
laughed at one another under the iron order of her hair. They found four
hooks and scampered down them. Her high collar eased and the enchanted
air rushed in with a soundless shout. Evelyn breathed as if she had been
running. She put out her hand hesitantly, futilely, patted the grass
beside her as if somehow the act might release the inexpressible
confusion of delight within her. It would not, and she turned and flung
herself face down in a bed of early mint and wept because the spring was
too beautiful to be borne.

He was in the wood, numbly prying the bark from a dead oak, when it
happened. His hands were still and his head came up hunting, harking. He
was as aware of the pressures of spring as an animal, and slightly more
than an animal could be. But abruptly the spring was more than heavy,
hopeful air and the shifting of earth with life. A hard hand on his
shoulder could have been no more tangible than this call.

He rose carefully, as if something around him might break if he were
clumsy. His strange eyes glowed. He began to move—he who had never
called nor been called, nor responded before. He moved toward the thing
he sensed and it was a matter of will, not of external compulsion.
Without analysis he was aware of the bursting within him of an encysted
need. It had been a part of him all his life but there was no hope in
him that he might express it. And bursting so, it flung a thread across
his internal gulf, linking his alive and independent core to the
half-dead animal around it. It was a sending straight to what was human
in him, received by an instrument which, up to now, had accepted only
the incomprehensible radiations of the new-born, and so had been
ignored. But now it spoke, as it were, in his own tongue.

He was careful and swift, careful and silent. He turned his wide
shoulders to one side and the other as he moved, slipping through the
alders, passing the pines closely as if it were intolerable to leave the
direct line between himself and his call. The sun was high; the woods
were homogeneously the woods, front, right, left; yet he followed his
course without swerving, not from knowledge, not by any compass, but
purely in conscious response.

He arrived suddenly, for the clearing was, in the forest, a sudden
thing. For fifty feet outward the earth around the close-set pickets had
been leached and all trees felled years ago, so that none might overhang
the fence. The idiot slipped out of the wood and trotted across the bare
ground to the serried iron. He put out his arms as he ran, slid his
hands between the pickets and when they caught on his starved bony
forearms, his legs kept moving, his feet sliding, as if his need
empowered him to walk through the fence and the impenetrable holly
beyond it.

The fact that the barrier would not yield came to him slowly. It was as
if his feet understood it first and stopped trying and then his hands,
which withdrew. His eyes, however, would not give up at all. From his
dead face they yearned through the iron, through the holly, ready to
burst with answering. His mouth opened and a scratching sound emerged.
He had never tried to speak before and could not now; the gesture was an
end, not a means, like the starting of tears at a crescendo of music.

He began to move along the fence walking sidewise, finding it unbearable
to turn away from the call.

It rained for a day and a night and for half the next day, and when the
sun came out it rained again, upward; it rained light from the heavy
jewels which lay on the rich new green. Some jewels shrank and some fell
and then the earth in a voice of softness, and leaves in a voice of
texture, and flowers speaking in color, were grateful.

Evelyn crouched on the window seat, elbows on the sill, her hands cupped
to the curve of her cheeks, their pressure making it easy to smile.
Softly, she sang. It was strange to hear for she did not know music; she
did not read and had never been told of music. But there were birds,
there was the bassoon of wind in the eaves sometimes; there were the
calls and cooings of small creatures in that part of the wood which was
hers and, distantly, from the part which was not. Her singing was made
of these things, with strange and effortless fluctuations in pitch from
an instrument unbound by the diatonic scale, freely phrased.

  _But I never touch the gladness_

  _May not touch the gladness_

  _Beauty, oh beauty of touchness_

  _Spread like a leaf, nothing between me and the sky but light,_

  _Rain touches me_

  _Wind touches me_

  _Leaves, other leaves, touch and touch me…._

She made music without words for a long moment and was silent, making
music without sound, watching the raindrops fall in the glowing noon.

Harshly, “What are you doing?”

Evelyn started and turned. Alicia stood behind her, her face strangely
tight. “What are you doing?” she repeated.

Evelyn made a vague gesture toward the window, tried to speak.

“Well?”

Evelyn made the gesture again. “Out there,” she said. “I—I—” She slipped
off the window seat and stood. She stood as tall as she could. Her face
was hot.

“Button up your collar,” said Alicia. “What is it, Evelyn? Tell me!”

“I’m trying to,” said Evelyn, soft and urgent. She buttoned her collar
and her hands fell to her waist. She pressed herself, hard. Alicia
stepped near and pushed the hands away. “Don’t do that. What was that…
what you were doing? Were you talking?”

“Talking, yes. Not you, though. Not Father.”

“There isn’t anyone else.”

“There is,” said Evelyn. Suddenly breathless, she said, “Touch me,
Alicia.”

_“Touch_ you?”

“Yes, I … want you to. Just …” She held out her arms. Alicia backed
away.

“We don’t touch one another,” she said, as gently as she could through
her shock. “What is it, Evelyn? Aren’t you well?”

“Yes,” said Evelyn. “No. I don’t know.” She turned to the window. “It
isn’t raining. It’s dark here. There’s so much sun, so much—I want the
sun on me, like a bath, warm all over.”

“Silly. Then it would be all light in your bath…. We don’t talk about
bathing, dear.”

Evelyn picked up a cushion from the window seat. She put her arms around
it and with all her strength hugged it to her breast.

“Evelyn! Stop that!”

Evelyn whirled and looked at her sister in a way she had never used
before. Her mouth twisted. She squeezed her eyes tight closed and when
she opened them, tears fell. “I want to,” she cried, “I want to!”

“Evelyn!” Alicia whispered. Wide-eyed, she backed away to the door. “I
shall have to tell Father.”

Evelyn nodded, and drew her arms even tighter around the cushion.

When he came to the brook, the idiot squatted down beside it and stared.
A leaf danced past, stopped and curtsied, then made its way through the
pickets and disappeared in the low gap the holly had made for it.

He had never thought deductively before and perhaps his effort to follow
the leaf was not thought-born. Yet he did, only to find that the pickets
were set in a concrete channel here. They combed the water from one side
to the other; nothing larger than a twig or a leaf could slip through.
He wallowed in the water, pressing against the iron, beating at the
submerged cement. He swallowed water and choked and kept trying,
blindly, insistently. He put both his hands on one of the pickets and
shook it. It tore his palm. He tried another and another and suddenly
one rattled against the lower cross-member.

It was a different result from that of any other attack. It is doubtful
whether he realized that this difference meant that the iron here had
rusted and was therefore weaker; it simply gave hope because it was
different.

He sat down on the bottom of the brook and in water up to his armpits,
he placed a foot on each side of the picket which had rattled. He got
his hands on it again, took a deep breath and pulled with all his
strength. A stain of red rose in the water and whirled downstream. He
leaned forward, then back with a tremendous jerk. The rusted underwater
segment snapped. He hurtled backward, striking his head stingingly on
the edge of the channel. He went limp for a moment and his body half
rolled, half floated back to the pickets. He inhaled water, coughed
painfully, and raised his head. When the spinning world righted itself,
he fumbled under the water. He found an opening a foot high but only
about seven inches wide. He put his arm in it, right up to the shoulder,
his head submerged. He sat up again and put a leg into it.

Again he was dimly aware of the inexorable fact that will alone was not
enough: that pressure alone upon the barrier would not make it yield. He
moved to the next picket and tried to break it as he had the one before.
It would not move, nor would the one on the other side.

At last he rested. He looked up hopelessly at the fifteen-foot top of
the fence with its close-set, outcurving fangs and its hungry rows of
broken glass. Something hurt him; he moved and fumbled and found himself
with the eleven-inch piece of iron he had broken away. He sat with it in
his hands, staring stupidly at the fence.

_Touch me, touch me._ It was that, and a great swelling of emotion
behind it: it was a hunger, a demand, a flood of sweetness and of need.
The call had never ceased, but this was something different. It was as
if the call were a carrier and this a signal suddenly impressed upon it.

When it happened that thread within him, bridging his two selves,
trembled and swelled. Falteringly, it began to conduct. Fragments and
flickerings of inner power shot across, were laden with awareness and
information, shot back. The strange eyes fell to the piece of iron, the
hands turned it. His reason itself ached with disuse as it stirred; then
for the first time came into play on such a problem.

He sat in the water, close by the fence, and with the piece of iron he
began to rub against the picket just under the cross-member.

It began to rain. It rained all day and all night and half the next day.

“She _was_ here,” said Alicia. Her face was flushed.

Mr. Kew circled the room, his deepset eyes alight. He ran his whip
through his fingers. There were four lashes. Alicia said, remembering,
“And she wanted me to touch her. She asked me to.”

“She’ll be touched,” he said. “Evil, evil,” he muttered. “Evil can’t be
filtered out,” he chanted. “I thought it could, I thought it could.
You’re evil, Alicia, as you know, because a woman touched you, for years
she handled you. But not Evelyn … it’s in the blood and the blood must
be let. Where is she, do you think?”

“Perhaps outdoors … the pool, that will be it. She likes the pool. I’ll
go with you.”

He looked at her, her hot face, bright eyes. “This is for me to do. Stay
here!”

“Please …”

He whirled the heavy-handled whip. “You too, Alicia?”

She half turned from him, biting into a huge excitement. “Later,” he
growled. He ran out.

Alicia stood a moment trembling, then plunged to the window. She saw her
father outside, striding purposefully away. Her hands spread and curled
against the sash. Her lips writhed apart and she uttered a strange
wordless bleat.

When Evelyn reached the pool, she was out of breath. Something—an
invisible smoke, a magic—lay over the water. She took it in hungrily,
and was filled with a sense of nearness. Whether it was a thing which
was near or an event, she did not know; but it was near and she welcomed
it. Her nostrils arched and trembled. She ran to the water’s edge and
reached out toward it.

There was a boiling in the upstream end and up from under the holly
stems he came. He thrashed to the bank and lay there gasping, looking up
at her. He was wide and flat, covered with scratches. His hands were
puffy and water-wrinkled; he was gaunt and worn. Shreds of clothing
clung to him here and there, covering him not at all.

She leaned over him, spellbound, and from her came the call—floods of
it, loneliness and expectancy and hunger, gladness and sympathy. There
was a great amazement in her but no shock and no surprise. She had been
aware of him for days and he of her, and now their silent radiations
reached out to each other, mixed and mingled and meshed. Silently they
lived in each other and then she bent and touched him, touched his face
and shaggy hair.

He trembled violently, and kicked his way up out of the water. She sank
down beside him. They sat close together, and at last she met those
eyes. The eyes seemed to swell up and fill the air; she wept for joy and
sank forward into them, wanting to live there, perhaps to die there, but
at very least to be a part of them.

She had never spoken to a man and he had never spoken to anyone. She did
not know what a kiss was and any he might have seen had no significance
to him. But they had a better thing. They stayed close, one of her hands
on his bare shoulder, and the currents of their inner selves surged
between them. They did not hear her father’s resolute footsteps, nor his
gasp, nor his terrible bellow of outrage. They were aware of nothing but
each other until he leapt on them, caught her up, lifted her high, threw
her behind him. He did not look to see where or how she struck the
ground. He stood over the idiot, his lips white, his eyes staring. His
lips parted and again he made the terrible sound. And then he lifted the
whip.

So dazed was the idiot that the first multiple blow, and the second,
seemed not to affect him at all, though his flesh, already soaked and
cut and beaten, split and spouted. He lay staring dully at that midair
point which had contained Evelyn’s eyes and did not move.

Then the lashes whistled and clacked and buried their braided tips in
his back again and the old reflex returned to him. He pressed himself
backward trying to slide feet-first into the water. The man dropped his
whip and caught the idiot’s bony wrist in both his hands. He literally
ran a dozen steps up the bank, the idiot’s long tattered body flailing
along behind him. He kicked the creature’s head, ran back for his whip.
When he returned with it the idiot had managed to rear up on his elbows.
The man kicked him again, rolled him over on his back. He put one foot
on the idiot’s shoulder and pinned him down and slashed at the naked
belly with the whip.

There was a devil’s shriek behind him and it was as if a bullock with
tiger’s claws had attacked him. He fell heavily and twisted, to look up
into the crazed face of his younger daughter. She had bitten her lips
and she drooled and bled. She clawed at his face; one of her fingers
slipped into his left eye. He screamed in agony, sat up, twined his
fingers in the complexity of lace at her throat, and clubbed her twice
with the loaded whip-handle.

Blubbering, whining, he turned to the idiot again. But now the
implacable demands of escape had risen, flushing away everything else.
And perhaps another thing was broken as the whip-handle crushed the
consciousness from the girl. In any case there was nothing left but
escape, and there could be nothing else until it was achieved. The long
body flexed like a snap-beetle, flung itself up and over in a
half-somersault. The idiot struck the bank on all fours and sprang as he
struck. The lash caught him in midair; his flying body curled around it,
for a brief instant capturing the lashes between the lower ribs and the
hipbone. The handle slipped from the man’s grasp. He screamed and dove
after the idiot, who plunged into the arch at the holly roots. The man’s
face buried itself in the leaves and tore; he sank and surged forward
again in the water. With one hand he caught a naked foot. It kicked him
on the ear as he pulled it toward him. And then the man’s head struck
the iron pickets.

The idiot was under and through already and lay half out of the brook,
twitching feebly in an exhausted effort to bring his broken body to its
feet. He turned to look back and saw the man clinging to the bars,
raging, not understanding about the underwater gap in the fence.

The idiot clung to the earth, pink bloody water swirling away from him
and down on his pursuer. Slowly the escape reflex left him. There was a
period of blankness and then a strange new feeling came to him. It was
as new an experience as the call which had brought him here and very
nearly as strong. It was a feeling like fear but where fear was a fog to
him, clammy and blinding, this was something with a thirsty edge to it,
hard and purposeful.

He relaxed his grasp on the poisoned weeds which grew sickly in the
leached ground by the brook. He let the water help him and drifted down
again to the bars, where the insane father mouthed and yammered at him.
He brought his dead face close to the fence and widened his eyes. The
screaming stopped.

For the first time he used the eyes consciously, purposely, for
something other than a crust of bread.

When the man was gone he dragged himself out of the brook and,
faltering, crawled toward the woods.

When Alicia saw her father returning, she put the heel of her hand in
her mouth and bit down until her teeth met. It was not his clothes, wet
and torn, nor even his ruined eye. It was something else, something
which—_“Father!”_

He did not answer, but strode up to her. At the last possible instant
before being walked down like a wheat stalk, she numbly stepped aside.
He stamped past her and through the library doors, leaving them open.
“Father!”

No answer. She ran to the library. He was across the room, at the
cabinets which she had never seen open. One was open now. From it he
took a long-barreled target revolver and a small box of cartridges. This
he opened, spilling the cartridges across his desk. Methodically he
began to load.

Alicia ran to him. “What is it? What is it? You’re hurt, let me help
you, what are you…”

His one good eye was fixed and glassy. He breathed slowly, too deeply,
the air rushing in for too long, being held for too long, whistling out
and out. He snapped the cylinder into place, clicked off the safety,
looked at her and raised the gun.

She was never to forget that look. Terrible things happened then and
later, but time softened the focus, elided the details. But that look
was to be with her forever.

He fixed the one eye on her, caught and held her with it; she squirmed
on it like an impaled insect. She knew with a horrifying certainty that
he did not see her at all, but looked at some unknowable horror of his
own. Still looking through her, he put the muzzle of the gun in his
mouth and pulled the trigger.

There was not much noise. His hair fluffed upward on top. The eye still
stared, she was still pierced by it. She screamed his name. He was no
less reachable dead than he had been a moment before. He bent forward as
if to show her the ruin which had replaced his hair and the thing that
held her broke, and she ran.

Two hours, two whole hours passed before she found Evelyn. One of the
hours was simply lost; it was a blackness and a pain. The other was too
quiet, a time of wandering about the house followed by a soft little
whimpering that she made herself: “What?” she whimpered, “what’s that
you say?” trying to understand, asking and asking the quiet house for
the second hour.

She found Evelyn by the pool, lying on her back with her eyes wide open.
On the side of Evelyn’s head was a puffiness, and in the center of the
puffiness was a hollow into which she could have laid three fingers.

“Don’t,” said Evelyn softly when Alicia tried to lift her head. Alicia
set it back gently and knelt and took her hands and squeezed them
together. “Evelyn, oh, what happened?”

“Father hit me,” Evelyn said calmly. “I’m going to go to sleep.”

Alicia whimpered.

Evelyn said, “What is it called when a person needs a … person … when
you want to be touched and the … two are like one thing and there isn’t
anything else at all anywhere?”

Alicia, who had read books, thought about it. “Love,” she said at
length. She swallowed. “It’s a madness. It’s bad.”

Evelyn’s quiet face was suffused with a kind of wisdom. “It isn’t bad,”
she said. “I had it.”

“You have to get back to the house.”

“I’ll sleep here,” said Evelyn. She looked up at her sister and smiled.
“It’s all right … Alicia?”

“Yes.”

“I won’t ever wake up,” she said with that strange wisdom. “I wanted to
do something and now I can’t. Will you do it for me?”

“I’ll do it,” Alicia whispered.

“For me,” Evelyn insisted. “You won’t want to.”

“I’ll do it.”

“When the sun is bright,” Evelyn said, “take a bath in it. There’s more,
wait.” She closed her eyes. A little furrow came and went on her brow.
“Be in the sun like that. Move, run. Run and … jump high. Make a wind
with running and moving. I so wanted that. I didn’t know until now that
I wanted it and now I … oh, _Alicia!”_

“What is it, what is it?”

“There it is, there it is, can’t you see? The love, with the sun on its
body!”

The soft wise eyes were wide, looking at the darkling sky. Alicia looked
up and saw nothing. When she looked down again, she knew that Evelyn was
also seeing nothing. Not any more.

Far off, in the woods beyond the fence, there was a rush of weeping.

Alicia stayed there listening to it and at last put out her hand and
closed Evelyn’s eyes. She rose and went toward the house and the weeping
followed her and followed her, almost until she reached the door. And
even then it seemed to go on inside her.

When Mrs. Prodd heard the hoof thuds in the yard, she muttered under her
breath and peered out between the dimity kitchen curtains. By a
combination of starlight and deep familiarity with the yard itself, she
discerned the horse and stoneboat, with her husband plodding beside it,
coming through the gate. He’ll get what for, she mumbled, off to the
woods so long and letting her burn dinner.

He didn’t get what for, though. One look at his broad face precluded it.
“What is it, Prodd?” she asked, alarmed.

“Gimme a blanket.”

“Why on earth—”

“Hurry now. Feller bad hurt. Picked him up in the woods. Looks like a
bear chewed him. Got the clo’es ripped off him.”

She brought the blanket, running, and he snatched it and went out. In a
moment he was back, carrying a man. “Here,” said Mrs. Prodd. She flung
open the door to Jack’s room. When Prodd hesitated, the long limp body
dangling in his arms, she said, “Go on, go on, never mind the spread.
It’ll wash.”

“Get a rag, hot water,” he grunted. She went out and he gently lifted
off the blanket. “Oh my God.”

He stopped her at the door. “He won’t last the night. Maybe we shouldn’t
plague him with that.” He indicated the steaming basin she carried.

“We got to try.” She went in. She stopped and he deftly took the basin
from her as she stood, white-faced, her eyes closed. “Ma—”

“Come,” she said softly. She went to the bed and began to clean the
tattered body.

He lasted the night. He lasted the week too and it was only then that
the Prodds began to have hope for him. He lay motionless in the room
called Jack’s room, interested in nothing, aware of nothing except
perhaps the light as it came and went at the window. He would stare out
as he lay, perhaps seeing, perhaps watching, perhaps not. There was
little to be seen out there. A distant mountain, a few of Prodd’s sparse
acres; occasionally Prodd himself, a doll in the distance, scratching
the stubborn soil with a broken harrow, stooping for weed-shoots. His
inner self was encysted and silent in sorrow. His outer self seemed
shrunken, unreachable also. When Mrs. Prodd brought food—eggs and warm
sweet milk, home-cured ham and johnny-cake—he would eat if she urged
him, ignore both her and the food if she did not.

In the evenings, “He say anything yet?” Prodd would ask, and his wife
would shake her head. After ten days he had a thought; after two weeks
he voiced it. “You don’t suppose he’s tetched, do you, Ma?”

She was unaccountably angry. “How do you mean tetched?”

He gestured. “You know. Like feeble-minded. I mean, maybe he don’t talk
because he can’t.”

“No!” she said positively. She looked up to see the question in Prodd’s
face. She said, “You ever look in his eyes? He’s no idiot.”

He had noticed the eyes. They disturbed him; that was all he could say
of them. “Well, I wish he’d say something.”

She touched a thick coffee cup. “You know Grace.”

“Well, you told me. Your cousin that lost her little ones.”

“Yes. Well, after the fire, Grace was almost like that, lying quiet all
day. Talk to her, it was like she didn’t hear. Show her something, she
might’ve been blind. Had to spoon-feed her, wash her face.”

“Maybe it’s that then,” he allowed. “That feller, he sure walked into
something worth forgetting, up there … Grace, she got better, didn’t
she?”

“Well, she was never the same,” said his wife. “But she got over it. I
guess sometimes the world’s too much to live with and a body sort of has
to turn away from it to rest.”

The weeks went by and broken tissues knit and the wide flat body soaked
up nourishment like a cactus absorbing moisture. Never in his life had
he had rest and food and …

She sat with him, talked to him. She sang songs, “Flow Gently, Sweet
Afton” and “Home on the Range.” She was a little brown woman with
colorless hair and bleached eyes, and there was about her a hunger very
like one he had felt. She told the moveless, silent face all about the
folks back East and second grade and the time Prodd had come courting in
his boss’s Model T and him not even knowing how to drive it yet. She
told him all the little things that would never be altogether in the
past for her; the dress she wore to her confirmation, with a bow here
and little gores here and here, and the time Grace’s husband came home
drunk with his Sunday pants all tore and a live pig under his arm,
squealing to wake the dead. She read to him from the prayer book and
told him Bible stories. She chattered out everything that was in her
mind, except about Jack.

He never smiled nor answered and the only difference it made in him was
that he kept his eyes on her face when she was in the room and patiently
on the door when she was not. What a profound difference this was; she
could not know; but the flat starved body tissues were not all that were
slowly filling out.

A day came at last when the Prodds were at lunch—“dinner,” they called
it—and there was a fumbling at the inside of the door of Jack’s room.
Prodd exchanged a glance with his wife, then rose and opened it.

“Here, now, you can’t come out like that.” He called, “Ma, throw in my
other overalls.”

He was weak and very uncertain, but he was on his feet. They helped him
to the table and he slumped there, his eyes cloaked and stupid, ignoring
the food until Mrs. Prodd tantalized his nostrils with a spoonful. Then
he took the spoon in his broad fist and got his mouth on it and looked
past his hand at her. She patted his shoulder and told him it was just
wonderful, how well he did.

“Well, Ma, you don’t have to treat him like a two-year-old,” said Prodd.
Perhaps it was the eyes, but he was troubled again.

She pressed his hand warningly; he understood and said no more about it
just then. But later in the night when he thought she was asleep, she
said suddenly, “I do so have to treat him like a two-year-old, Prodd.
Maybe even younger.”

“How’s that?”

“With Grace,” she said, “it was like that. Not so bad, though. She was
like six, when she started to get better. Dolls. When she didn’t get
apple pie with the rest of us one time, she cried her heart out. It was
like growing up all over again. Faster, I mean, but like traveling the
same road again.”

“You think he’s going to be like that?”

“Isn’t he like a two-year-old?”

“First I ever saw six foot tall.”

She snorted in half-pretended annoyance. “We’ll raise him up just like a
child.”

He was quiet for a time. Then, “What’ll we call him?”

“Not Jack,” she said before she could stop herself.

He grunted an agreement. He didn’t know quite what to say then.

She said, “We’ll bide our time about that. He’s got his own name. It
wouldn’t be right to put another to him. You just wait. He’ll get back
to where he remembers it.”

He thought about it for a long time. He said, “Ma, I hope we’re doing
the right thing.” But by then she was asleep.

There were miracles.

The Prodds thought of them as achievements, as successes, but they were
miracles. There was the time when Prodd found two strong hands at the
other end of a piece of 12x12 he was snaking out of the barn. There was
the time Mrs. Prodd found her patient holding a ball of yarn, holding it
and looking at it only because it was red. There was the time he found a
full bucket by the pump and brought it inside. It was a long while,
however, before he learned to work the handle.

When he had been there a year, Mrs. Prodd remembered and baked him a
cake. Impulsively she put four candles on it. The Prodds beamed at him
as he stared at the little flames, fascinated. His strange eyes caught
and held hers, then Prodd’s. “Blow it out, son.”

Perhaps he visualized the act. Perhaps it was the result of the warmth
outflowing from the couple, the wishing for him, the warmth of caring.
He bent his head and blew. They laughed together and rose and came to
him, and Prodd thumped his shoulder and Mrs. Prodd kissed his cheek.

Something twisted inside him. His eyes rolled up until, for a moment,
only the whites showed. The frozen grief he carried slumped and flooded
him. This wasn’t the call, the contact, the exchange he had experienced
with Evelyn. It was not even like it, except in degree. But because he
could now feel to such a degree, he was aware of his loss, and he did
just what he had done when first he lost it. He cried.

It was the same shrill tortured weeping that had led Prodd to him in the
darkening wood a year ago. This room was too small to contain it. Mrs.
Prodd had never heard him make a sound before. Prodd had, that first
night. It would be hard to say whether it was worse to listen to such a
sound or to listen to it again.

Mrs. Prodd put her arms around his head and cooed small syllables to
him. Prodd balanced himself awkwardly nearby, put out a hand, changed
his mind, and finally retreated into a futile reiteration: “Aw. Aw….Aw,
now.”

In its own time, the weeping stopped. Sniffling, he looked at them each
in turn. Something new was in his face; it was as if the bronze mask
over which his facial skin was stretched had disappeared. “I’m sorry,”
Prodd said. “Reckon we did something wrong.”

“It wasn’t wrong,” said his wife. “You’ll see.”

He got a name.

The night he cried, he discovered consciously that if he wished, he
could absorb a message, a meaning, from those about him. It had happened
before, but it happened as the wind happened to blow on him, as
reflexively as a sneeze or a shiver. He began to hold and turn this
ability, as once he had held and turned the ball of yarn. The sounds
called speech still meant little to him, but he began to detect the
difference between speech directed to him and that which did not concern
him. He never really learned to hear speech; instead, ideas were
transmitted to him directly. Ideas in themselves are formless and it is
hardly surprising that he learned very slowly to give ideas the form of
speech.

“What’s your name?” Prodd asked him suddenly one day. They were filling
the horse trough from the cistern and there was that about water running
and running in the sun which tugged deeply at the idiot. Utterly
absorbed, he was jolted by the question. He looked up and found his gaze
locked with Prodd’s.

_Name._ He made a reaching, a flash of demand, and it returned to him
carrying what might be called a definition. It came, though, as pure
concept. _“Name” is the single thing which is me and what I have done
and been and learned._

It was all there, waiting for that single symbol, a name. All the
wandering, the hunger, the loss, the thing which is worse than loss,
called back. There was a dim and subtle awareness that even here, with
the Prodds, he was not a something, but a substitute for something.

_All alone._

He tried to say it. Directly from Prodd he took the concept and its
verbal coding and the way it ought to sound. But understanding and
expressing were one thing; the physical act of enunciation was something
else again. His tongue might have been a shoe sole and his larynx a
rusty whistle. His lips writhed. He said, “Ul … ul …”

“What is it, son?”

_All alone._ It was transmitted clear and clean, complete, but as a
thought only and he sensed instantly that a thought sent this way had no
impact whatever on Prodd, though the farmer strained to receive what he
was trying to convey. “Ul-ul … lone,” he gasped.

“Lone?” said Prodd.

It could be seen that the syllable meant something to Prodd, something
like the codification he offered, though far less.

But it would do.

He tried to repeat the sound, but his unaccustomed tongue became
spastic. Saliva spurted annoyingly and ran from his lips. He sent a
desperate demand for help, for some other way to express it, found it,
used it. He nodded.

“Lone,” repeated Prodd.

And again he nodded; and this was his first word and his first
conversation; another miracle.

It took him five years to learn to talk and always he preferred not to.
He never did learn to read. He was simply not equipped.

There were two boys for whom the smell of disinfectant on tile was the
smell of hate.

For Gerry Thompson it was the smell of hunger, too, and of loneliness.
All food was spiced with it, all sleep permeated with disinfectant,
hunger, cold, fear … all components of hatred. Hatred was the only
warmth in the world, the only certainty. A man clings to certainties,
especially when he has only one; most especially when he is six years
old. And at six Gerry was very largely a man—at least, he had a grown
man’s appreciation of that gray pleasure which comes merely with the
absence of pain; he had an implacable patience, found usually only in
men of purpose who must appear broken until their time of decision
arrives. One does not realize that for a six-year-old the path of memory
stretches back for just as long a lifetime as it does for anyone, and is
as full of detail and incident. Gerry had had trouble enough, loss
enough, illness enough, to make a man of anyone. At six he looked it,
too; it was then that he began to accept, to be obedient, and to wait.
His small, seamed face became just another face, and his voice no longer
protested. He lived like this for two years, until his day of decision.

Then he ran away from the state orphanage, to live by himself, to be the
color of gutters and garbage so he would not be picked up; to kill if
cornered; to hate.

For Hip there was no hunger, no cold, and no precocious maturity. There
was the smell of hate, though. It surrounded his father the doctor, the
deft and merciless hands, the somber clothes. Even Hip’s memory of
Doctor Barrows’ voice was the memory of chlorine and carbolic.

Little Hip Barrows was a brilliant and beautiful child, to whom the
world refused to be a straight, hard path of disinfected tile.
Everything came easily to him, except control of his curiosity—and
“everything” included the cold injections of rectitude administered by
his father the doctor, who was a successful man, a moral man, a man who
had made a career of being sure and of being right.

Hip rose through childhood like a rocket, burnished, swift, afire. His
gifts brought him anything a young man might want, and his conditioning
constantly chanted to him that he was a kind of thief, not entitled to
that which he had not earned; for such was the philosophy of his father
the doctor, who had worked hard for everything. So Hip’s talents brought
him friends and honors, and friendships and honors brought him
uneasiness and a sick humility of which he was quite unaware.

He was eight when he built his first radio, a crystal set for which he
even wound the coils. He suspended it from the bedsprings so it could
not be seen except by lifting the bed itself and buried an earphone
inside the mattress so he could lie awake at night and hear it. His
father the doctor discovered it and forbade his ever touching so much as
a piece of wire in the house again. He was nine when his father the
doctor located his cache of radio and electronics texts and magazines
and piled them all up in front of the fireplace and made him burn them,
one by one; they were up all night. He was twelve when he won a Science
Search engineering scholarship for his secretly designed tubeless
oscilloscope, and his father the doctor dictated his letter of refusal.
He was a brilliant fifteen when he was expelled from premedical school
for playfully cross-wiring the relays in the staff elevators and adding
some sequence switches, so that every touch of a control button was an
unappreciated adventure. At sixteen, happily disowned, he was making his
own living in a research laboratory and attending engineering school.

He was big and bright and very popular. He needed to be very popular and
this, like all his other needs, he accomplished with ease. He played the
piano with a surprisingly delicate touch and played swift and subtle
chess. He learned to lose skilfully and never too often at chess and at
tennis and once at the harassing game of being “first in the Class,
first in the School.” He always had time—time to talk and to read, time
to wonder quietly, time to listen to those who valued his listening,
time to rephrase pedantries for those who found them arduous in the
original. He even had time for ROTC and it was through this that he got
his commission.

He found the Air Force a rather different institution from any school he
had ever attended and it took him a while to learn that the Colonel
could not be softened by humility or won by a witticism like the Dean of
Men. It took him even longer to learn that in Service it is the
majority, not the minority, who tend to regard physical perfection,
conversational brilliance and easy achievement as defects rather than
assets. He found himself alone more than he liked and avoided more than
he could bear.

It was on the anti-aircraft range that he found an answer, a dream, and
a disaster….

Alicia Kew stood in the deepest shade by the edge of the meadow.
“Father, Father, forgive me!” she cried. She sank down on the grass,
blind with grief and terror, torn, shaken with conflict.

“Forgive me,” she whispered with passion. “Forgive me,” she whispered
with scorn.

She thought, Devil, why won’t you be dead? Five years ago you killed
yourself, you killed my sister, and still it’s “Father, forgive me.”
Sadist, pervert, murderer, devil … _man,_ dirty poisonous _man!_

I’ve come a long way, she thought, I’ve come no way at all. How I ran
from Jacobs, gentle Lawyer Jacobs, when he came to help with the bodies;
oh, how I ran, to keep from being alone with him, so that he might not
go mad and poison me. And when he brought his wife, how I fled from her
too, thinking women were evil and must not touch me. They had a time
with me, indeed they did; it was so long before I could understand that
I was mad, not they … it was so long before I knew how very good, how
very patient, Mother Jacobs was with me; how much she had to do with me,
for me. “But child, no one’s worn clothes like those for forty years!”
And in the cab, when I screamed and couldn’t stop, for the people, the
hurry, the _bodies,_ so many bodies, all touching and so achingly
visible; bodies on the streets, the stairs, great pictures of bodies in
the magazines, men holding women who laughed and were brazenly
unfrightened … Dr. Rothstein who explained and explained and went back
and explained again; there is no poison sweat, and there must be men and
women else there would be no people at all…. I had to learn this,
Father, dear devil Father, because of you; because of you I had never
seen an automobile or a breast or a newspaper or a railroad train or a
sanitary napkin or a kiss or a restaurant or an elevator or a bathing
suit or the hair on—oh forgive me, Father.

I’m not afraid of a whip, I’m afraid of hands and eyes, thank you
Father. One day, one day, you’ll see, Father, I shall live with people
all around me, I shall ride on their trains and drive my own motorcar; I
shall go among thousands on a beach at the edge of a sea which goes out
and out without walls, I shall step in and out among them with a tiny
strip of cloth here and there and let them see my navel, I shall meet a
man with white teeth, Father, and round strong arms, Father, and I shall
oh what will become of me, what have I become now, Father forgive me.

I live in a house you never saw, one with windows overlooking a road,
where the bright gentle cars whisper past and children play outside the
hedge. The hedge is not a wall and, twice for the drive and once for the
walk, it is open to anyone. I look through the curtains whenever I
choose, and see strangers. There is no way to make the bathroom black
dark and in the bathroom is a mirror as tall as I am; and one day,
Father, I shall leave the towel off.

But all that will come later, the moving about among strangers, the
touchings without fear. Now I must live alone, and think; I must read
and read of the world and its works, yes, and of madmen like you,
Father, and what twists them so terribly; Dr. Rothstein insists that you
were not the only one, that you were so rare, really, only because you
were so rich.

Evelyn …

Evelyn never knew her father was mad. Evelyn never saw the pictures of
the poisoned flesh. I lived in a world different from this one, but her
world was just as different, the world Father and I made for her, to
keep her pure….

I wonder, I wonder how it happened that you had the decency to blow your
rotten brains out….

The picture of her father, dead, calmed her strangely. She rose and
looked back into the woods, looked carefully around the meadow, shadow
by shadow, tree by tree. “All right, Evelyn, I will, I will ….”

She took a deep breath and held it. She shut her eyes so tight there was
red in the blackness of it. Her hands flickered over the buttons on her
dress. It fell away. She slid out of underwear and stockings with a
single movement. The air stirred and its touch on her body was
indescribable; it seemed to blow through her. She stepped forward into
the sun and with tears of terror pressing through her closed lids, she
danced naked, for Evelyn, and begged and begged her dead father’s
pardon.

When Janie was four, she hurled a paperweight at a Lieutenant because of
an unanalyzed but accurate feeling that he had no business around the
house while her father was overseas. The Lieutenant’s skull was
fractured and, as is often the case in concussion, he was forever unable
to recall the fact that Janie stood ten feet away from the object when
she threw it. Janie’s mother whaled the tar out of her for it, an
episode which Janie accepted with her usual composure. She added it,
however, to the proofs given her by similar occasions that power without
control has its demerits.

“She gives me the creeps,” her mother told her other Lieutenant later.
“I can’t stand her. You think there’s something wrong with me for
talking like that, don’t you?”

“No I don’t,” said the other Lieutenant, who did. So she invited him in
for the following afternoon, quite sure that once he had seen the child,
he would understand.

He saw her and he did understand. Not the child, nobody understood her;
it was the mother’s feelings he understood. Janie stood straight up,
with her shoulders back and her face lifted, legs apart as if they wore
jackboots, and she swung a doll by one of its feet as if it were a
swagger-stick. There was a lightness about the child which, in a child,
was wrong. She was, if anything, a little smaller than average. She was
sharp featured and narrow eyed; her eyebrows were heavy. Her proportions
were not quite those of most four-year-olds, who can bend forward from
the waist and touch their foreheads to the floor. Janie’s torso was a
little too short or her legs a little too long for that. She spoke with
a sweet clarity and a devastating lack of tact. When the other
Lieutenant squatted clumsily and said, _“Hel-_lo_,_ Janie. Are we going
to be friends?” she said, “No. You smell like Major Grenfell.” Major
Grenfell had immediately preceded the injured Lieutenant.

“Janie!” her mother shouted, too late. More quietly, she said, “You know
perfectly well the Major was only in for cocktails.” Janie accepted this
without comment, which left an appalling gap in the dialogue. The other
Lieutenant seemed to realize all in a rush that it was foolish to squat
there on the parquet and sprang to his feet so abruptly he knocked over
the coffee table. Janie achieved a wolfish smile and watched his scarlet
ears while he picked up the pieces. He left early and never came back.

Nor, for Janie’s mother, was there safety in numbers. Against the
strictest orders, Janie strode into the midst of the fourth round of
Gibsons one evening and stood at one end of the living room, flicking an
insultingly sober gray-green gaze across the flushed faces. A round
yellow-haired man who had his hand on her mother’s neck extended his
glass and bellowed, “You’re Wima’s little girl!”

Every head in the room swung at once like a bank of servo-switches,
turning off the noise, and into the silence Janie said, “You’re the one
with the—”

_“Janie!”_ her mother shouted. Someone laughed. Janie waited for it to
finish, “—big, fat—” she enunciated. The man took his hand off Wima’s
neck. Someone whooped, “Big fat what, Janie?”

Topically, for it was wartime, Janie said, “—meat market.”

Wima bared her teeth. “Run along back to your room, darling. I’ll come
and tuck you in in a minute.” Someone looked straight at the blond man
and laughed. Someone said in an echoing whisper, “There goes the Sunday
sirloin.” A drawstring could not have pulled the fat man’s mouth so
round and tight and from it his lower lip bloomed like strawberry jam
from a squeezed sandwich.

Janie walked quietly toward the door and stopped as soon as she was out
of her mother’s line of sight. A sallow young man with brilliant black
eyes leaned forward suddenly. Janie met his gaze. An expression of
bewilderment crossed the young man’s face. His hand faltered out and
upward and came to rest on his forehead. It slid down and covered the
black eyes.

Janie said, just loud enough for him to hear, “Don’t you ever do that
again.” She left the room.

“Wima,” said the young man hoarsely, “that child is telepathic.”

“Nonsense,” said Wima absently, concentrating on the fat man’s pout.
“She gets her vitamins every single day.”

The young man started to rise, looking after the child, then sank back
again. “God,” he said, and began to brood.

When Janie was five she began playing with some other little girls. It
was quite a while before they were aware of it. They were toddlers,
perhaps two and a half years old, and they looked like twins. They
conversed, if conversation it was, in high-pitched squeaks, and tumbled
about on the concrete courtyard as if it were a haymow. At first Janie
hung over her windowsill, four and a half stories above, and
contemplatively squirted saliva in and out between her tongue and her
hard palate until she had a satisfactory charge. Then she would crane
her neck and, cheeks bulging, let it go. The twins ignored the
bombardment when it merely smacked the concrete, but yielded up a most
satisfying foofaraw of chitterings and squeals when she scored a hit.
They never looked up but would race around in wild excitement,
squealing.

Then there was another game. On warm days the twins could skin out of
their rompers faster than the eye could follow. One moment they were as
decent as a deacon and in the next one or both would be fifteen feet
away from the little scrap of cloth. They would squeak and scramble and
claw back into them, casting deliriously frightened glances at the
basement door. Janie discovered that with a little concentration she
could move the rompers—that is, when they were unoccupied. She practiced
diligently, lying across the windowsill, her chest and chin on a
cushion, her eyes puckered with effort. At first the garment would
simply lie there and flutter weakly, as if a small dust-devil had
crossed it. But soon she had the rompers scuttling across the concrete
like little flat crabs. It was a marvel to watch those two little girls
move when that happened, and the noise was a pleasure. They became a
little more cautious about taking them off and sometimes Janie would lie
in wait for forty minutes before she had a chance. And sometimes, even
then, she held off and the twins, one clothed, one bare, would circle
around the romper, and stalk it like two kittens after a beetle. Then
she would strike, the romper would fly, the twins would pounce; and
sometimes they caught it immediately, and sometimes they had to chase it
until their little lungs were going like a toy steam engine.

Janie learned the reason for their preoccupation with the basement door
when one afternoon she had mastered the knack of lifting the rompers
instead of just pushing them around. She held off until the twins were
lulled into carelessness and were shucking out of their clothes,
wandering away, ambling back again, as if to challenge her. And still
she waited, until at last both rompers were lying together in a little
pink-and-white mound. Then she struck. The rompers rose from the ground
in a steep climbing turn and fluttered to the sill of a first-floor
window. Since the courtyard was slightly below street level, this put
the garments six feet high and well out of reach. There she left them.

One of the twins ran to the center of the courtyard and jumped up and
down in agitation, stretching and craning to see the rompers. The other
ran to the building under the first-floor window and reached her little
hands up as high as she could get them, patting at the bricks fully
twenty eight inches under her goal. Then they ran to each other and
twittered anxiously. After a time they tried reaching up the wall again,
side by side. More and more they threw those terrified glances at the
basement door; less and less was there any pleasure mixed with the
terror.

At last they hunkered down as far as possible away from the door, put
their arms about one another and stared numbly. They slowly quieted
down, from chatters to twitters to cooings, and at last were silent, two
tiny tuffets of terror.

It seemed hours—weeks—of fascinated anticipation before Janie heard a
thump and saw the door move. Out came the janitor, as usual a little
bottle-weary. She could see the red crescents under his sagging
yellow-whited eyes. “Bonnie!” he bellowed, “Beanie! Wha y’all?” He
lurched out into the open and peered around. “Come out yeah! Look at
_yew!_ I gwine snatch yew bald-headed! Wheah’s yo’ clo’es?” He swooped
down on them and caught them, each huge hand on a tiny biceps. He held
them high, so that each had one toe barely touching the concrete and
their little captured elbows pointed skyward. He turned around, once,
twice, seeking, and at last his eye caught the glimmer of the rompers on
the sill. “How you do dat?” he demanded. “You trine th’ow away yo’
’spensive clo’es? Oh, I gwine whop you.”

He dropped to one knee and hung the two little bodies across the other
thigh. It is probable that he had the knack of cupping his hand so that
he produced more sound than fury, but however he did it, the noise was
impressive. Janie giggled.

The janitor administered four equal swats to each twin and set them on
their feet. They stood silently side by side with their hands pressed to
their bottoms and watched him stride to the windowsill and snatch the
rompers off. He threw them down at their feet and waggled his right
forefinger at them. “Cotch you do dat once mo’, I’ll git Mr. Milton the
conductah come punch yo’ ears fulla holes. _Heah?”_ he roared. They
shrank together, their eyes round. He lurched back to the door and
slammed it shut behind him.

The twins slowly climbed into their rompers. Then they went back to the
shadows by the wall and hunkered down, supporting themselves with their
back and their feet. They whispered to one another. There was no more
fun for Janie that day.

Across the street from Janie’s apartment house was a park. It had a
bandstand, a brook, a moulting peacock in a wire enclosure and a thick
little copse of dwarf oak. In the copse was a hidden patch of bare
earth, known only to Janie and several thousand people who were wont to
use it in pairs at night. Since Janie was never there at night she felt
herself its discoverer and its proprietor.

Some four days after the spanking episode, she thought of the place. She
was bored with the twins; they never did anything interesting any more.
Her mother had gone to lunch somewhere after locking her in her room.
(One of her admirers, when she did this, had once asked, “What about the
kid? Suppose there’s a fire or something?” “Fat chance!” Wima had said
with regret.)

The door of her room was fastened with a hook-and-eye on the outside.
She walked to the door and looked up at the corresponding spot inside.
She heard the hook rise and fall. She opened the door and walked down
the hall and out to the elevators. When the self-service car arrived,
she got in and pressed the third-, second- and first-floor buttons. One
floor at a time the elevator descended, stopped, opened its gate, closed
its gate, descended, stopped, opened its gate … it amused her, it was so
stupid. At the bottom she pushed all of the buttons and slid out. Up the
stupid elevator started. Janie clucked pityingly and went outdoors.

She crossed the street carefully, looking both ways. But when she got to
the copse she was a little less ladylike. She climbed into the lower
branches of the oak and across the multiple crotches to a branch she
knew which overhung the hidden sanctuary. She thought she saw a movement
in the bushes, but she was not sure. She hung from the branch, went hand
over hand until it started to bend, waited until she had stopped
swinging, and then let go.

It was an eight-inch drop to the earthen floor—usually. This time …

The very instant her fingers left the branch, her feet were caught and
snatched violently backward. She struck the ground flat on her stomach.
Her hands happened to be together, at her midriff; the impact turned
them inward and drove her own fist into her solar plexus. For an
unbearably long time she was nothing but one tangled knot of pain. She
fought and fought and at long last sucked a tearing breath into her
lungs. It would come out through her nostrils but she could get no more
in. She fought again in a series of sucking sobs and blowing hisses,
until the pain started to leave her.

She managed to get up on her elbows. She spat out dirt, part dusty, part
muddy. She got her eyes open just enough to see one of the twins
squatting before her, inches away. “Ho-ho,” said the twin, grabbed her
wrists, and pulled hard. Down she went on her face again. Reflexively
she drew up her knees. She received a stinging blow on the rump. She
looked down past her shoulder as she flung herself sideways and saw the
other twin just in the midst of the follow-through with the stave from a
nail keg which she held in her little hands. “He-hee,” said the twin.

Janie did what she had done to the sallow, black-eyed man at the
cocktail party. “Eeep,” said the twin and disappeared, flickered out the
way a squeezed appleseed disappears from between the fingers. The little
cask stave clattered to the packed earth.

Janie caught it up, whirled, and brought it down on the head of the twin
who had pulled her arms. But the stave whooshed down to strike the
ground; there was no one there.

Janie whimpered and got slowly to her feet. She was alone in the
shadowed sanctuary. She turned and turned back. Nothing. No one.

Something plurped just on the center part of her hair. She clapped her
hand to it. Wet. She looked up and the other twin spit too. It hit her
on the forehead. “Ho-ho,” said one. “He-hee,” said the other.

Janie’s upper lip curled away from her teeth, exactly the way her
mother’s did. She still held the cask stave. She slung it upward with
all her might. One twin did not even attempt to move. The other
disappeared.

“Ho-ho.” There she was, on another branch. Both were grinning widely.

She hurled a bolt of hatred at them the like of which she had never even
imagined before.

“Ooop,” said one. The other said “Eeep.” Then they were both gone.

Clenching her teeth, she leapt for the branch and swarmed up into the
tree.

_“Ho-ho.”_

It was very distant. She looked up and around and down and back; and
something made her look across the street.

Two little figures sat like gargoyles on top of the courtyard wall. They
waved to her and were gone.

For a long time Janie clung to the tree and stared at the wall. Then she
let herself slide down into the crotch where she could put her back
against the trunk and straddle a limb. She unbuttoned her pocket and got
her handkerchief. She licked a fold of it good and wet and began wiping
the dirt off her face with little feline dabs.

_They’re only three years old,_ she told herself from the astonished
altitude of her seniority. Then, _They knew who it was all along, that
moved those rompers._

She said aloud, in admiration, “Ho-ho …” There was no anger left in her.
Four days ago the twins couldn’t even reach a six-foot sill. They
couldn’t even get away from a spanking. And now look.

She got down on the street side of the tree and stepped daintily across
the street. In the vestibule, she stretched up and pressed the shiny
brass button marked JANITOR. While waiting she stepped off the pattern
of tiles in the floor, heel and toe.

“Who push dat? You push dat?” His voice filled the whole world.

She went and stood in front of him and pushed up her lips the way her
mother did when she made her voice all croony, like sometimes on the
telephone. “Mister Widdecombe, my mother says I can play with your
little girls.”

“She say dat? _Well!”_ The janitor took off his round hat and whacked it
against his palm and put it on again. “Well. Dat’s mighty nice … little
gal,” he said sternly, “is yo’ mother to home?”

“Oh _yes,”_ said Janie, fairly radiating candor.

“You wait raht cheer,” he said, and pounded away down the cellar steps.

She had to wait more than ten minutes this time. When he came back with
the twins he was fairly out of breath. They looked very solemn.

“Now don’t you let ’em get in any mischief. And see ef you cain’t keep
them clo’es on ’em. They ain’t got no more use for clo’es than a jungle
monkey. Gwan, now, hole hands, chillun, an’ mine you don’t leave go tel
you git there.”

The twins approached guardedly. She took their hands. They watched her
face. She began to move toward the elevators, and they followed. The
janitor beamed after them.

Janie’s whole life shaped itself from that afternoon. It was a time of
belonging, of thinking alike, of transcendent sharing. For her age,
Janie had what was probably a unique vocabulary, yet she spoke hardly a
word. The twins had not yet learned to talk. Their private vocabulary of
squeaks and whimpers was incidental to another kind of communion. Janie
got a sign of it, a touch of it, a sudden opening, growing rush of it.
Her mother hated her and feared her; her father was a remote and angry
entity, always away or shouting at mother or closed sulkily about
himself. She was talked to, never spoken to.

But here was converse, detailed, fluent, fascinating, with no sound but
laughter. They would be silent; they would all squat suddenly and paw
through Janie’s beautiful books; then suddenly it was the dolls. Janie
showed them how she could get chocolates from the box in the other room
without going in there and how she could throw a pillow clear up to the
ceiling without touching it. They liked that, though the paintbox and
easel impressed them more.

It was a thing together, binding, immortal; it would always be new for
them and it would never be repeated.

The afternoon slid by, as smooth and soft and lovely as a passing gull,
and as swift. When the hall door banged open and Wima’s voice clanged
out, the twins were still there.

“All righty, all righty, come in for a drink then, who wants to stand
out there all night.” She pawed her hat off and her hair swung raggedly
over her face. The man caught her roughly and pulled her close and bit
her face. She howled. “You’re crazy, you old crazy you.” Then she saw
them, all three of them peering out. “Dear old Jesus be to God,” she
said, “she’s got the place filled with niggers.”

“They’re going home,” said Janie resolutely. “I’ll take ’em home right
now.”

“Honest to God, Pete,” she said to the man, “this is the God’s honest
first time this ever happened. You got to believe that, Pete. What kind
of a place you must think I run here, I hate to think how it looks to
you. Well get them the hell out!” she screamed at Janie. “Honest to God,
Pete, so help me, never before—”

Janie walked down the hall to the elevators. She looked at Bonnie and at
Beanie. Their eyes were round. Janie’s mouth was as dry as a carpet and
she was so embarrassed her legs cramped. She put the twins into an
elevator and pressed the bottom button. She did not say goodbye, though
she felt nothing else.

She walked slowly back to the apartment and went in and closed the door.
Her mother got up from the man’s lap and clattered across the room. Her
teeth shone and her chin was wet. She raised claws—not a hand, not a
fist, but red, pointed claws.

Something happened inside Janie like the grinding of teeth, but deeper
inside her than that. She was walking and she did not stop. She put her
hands behind her and tilted her chin up so she could meet her mother’s
eyes.

Wima’s voice ceased, snatched away. She loomed over the five-year-old,
her claws out and forward, hanging, curving over, a blood-tipped wave
about to break.

Janie walked past her and into her room, and quietly closed the door.

Wima’s arms drew back, strangely, as if they must follow the exact
trajectory of their going. She repossessed them and the dissolving
balance of her body and finally her voice. Behind her the man’s teeth
clattered swiftly against a glass.

Wima turned and crossed the room to him, using the furniture like a
series of canes and crutches. “Oh God,” she murmured, “but she gives me
the creeps ….”

He said, “You got lots going on around here.”

Janie lay in bed as stiff and smooth and contained as a round toothpick.
Nothing would get in, nothing could get out; somewhere she had found
this surface that went all the way through, and as long as she had it,
nothing was going to happen.

_But if anything happens,_ came a whisper, _you’ll break._

But if I don’t break, nothing will happen, she answered.

_But if anything_…

The dark hours came and grew black and the black hours labored by.

Her door crashed open and the light blazed. “He’s gone and baby, I’ve
got business with you. Get out here!” Wima’s bathrobe swirled against
the doorpost as she turned and went away.

Janie pushed back the covers and thumped her feet down. Without
understanding quite why, she began to get dressed. She got her good
plaid dress and the shoes with two buckles, and the knit pants and the
slip with the lace rabbits. There were little rabbits on her socks too,
and on the sweater, the buttons were rabbits’ fuzzy nubbin tails.

Wima was on the couch, pounding and pounding with her fist. “You wrecked
my cel,” she said, and drank from a square-stemmed glass, “ebration, so
you ought to know what I’m celebrating. You don’t know it but I’ve had a
big trouble and I didn’t know how to hannel it, and now it’s all done
for me. And I’ll tell you all about it right now, little baby Miss Big
Ears. Big Mouth. Smarty. Because your father, I can hannel him any time,
but what I was going to do with your big mouth going day and night? That
was my trouble, what was I going to do about your big mouth when he got
back. Well it’s all fixed, he won’t be back, the Heinies fixed it up for
me.” She waved a yellow sheet. “Smart girls know that’s a telegram, and
the telegram says, says here, ‘Regret to inform you that your husband.’
They shot your father, that’s what they regret to say, and now this is
the way it’s going to be from now on between you and me. Whatever I want
to do I do, an’ whatever you want to nose into, nose away. Now isn’t
that fair?”

She turned to be answered but there was no answer. Janie was gone.

Wima knew before she started that there wasn’t any use looking, but
something made her run to the hall closet and look in the top shelf.
There wasn’t anything up there but Christmas tree ornaments and they
hadn’t been touched in three years.

She stood in the middle of the living room, not knowing which way to go.
She whispered, “Janie?”

She put her hands on the sides of her face and lifted her hair away from
it. She turned around and around, and asked, “What’s the matter with
me?”

Prodd used to say, “There’s this about a farm: when the market’s good
there’s money, and when it’s bad there’s food.” Actually the principle
hardly operated here, for his contract with markets was slight. It was a
long haul to town and what if there’s a tooth off the hayrake? “We’ve
still got a workin’ majority.” Two off, eight, twelve? “Then make
another pass. No road will go by here, not ever. Place will never get
too big, get out of hand.” Even the war passed them by, Prodd being over
age and Lone—well, the sheriff was by once and had a look at the halfwit
working on Prodd’s, and one look was enough.

When Prodd was young the little farmhouse was there, and when he married
they built on to it—a little, not a lot, just a room. If the room had
ever been used the land wouldn’t have been enough. Lone slept in the
room of course but that wasn’t quite the same thing. That’s not what the
room was for.

Lone sensed the change before anyone else, even before Mrs. Prodd. It
was a difference in the nature of one of her silences. It was a
treasure-proud silence, and Lone felt it change as a man’s kind of pride
might change when he turned from a jewel he treasured to a green shoot
he treasured. He said nothing and concluded nothing; he just knew.

He went on with his work as before. He worked well; Prodd used to say
that whatever anyone might think, that boy was a farmer before his
accident. He said it not knowing that his own style of farming was as
available to Lone as water from his pump. So was anything else Lone
wanted to take.

So the day Prodd came down to the south meadow, where Lone was stepping
and turning tirelessly, a very part of his whispering scythe, Lone knew
what it was that he wanted to say. He caught Prodd’s gaze for half a
breath in those disturbing eyes and knew as well that saying it would
pain Prodd more than a little.

Understanding was hardly one of his troubles any more, but niceties of
expression were. He stopped mowing and went to the forest margin nearby
and let the scythe-point drop into a rotten stump. It gave him time to
rehearse his tongue, still thick and unwieldy after eight years here.

Prodd followed slowly. He was rehearsing too.

Suddenly, Lone found it. “Been thinking,” he said.

Prodd waited, glad to wait. Lone said, “I should go.” That wasn’t quite
it. “Move along,” he said, watching. That was better.

“Ah, Lone. Why?”

Lone looked at him. _Because you want me to go._

“Don’t you like it here?” said Prodd, not wanting to say that at all.

“Sure.” From Prodd’s mind, he caught, _Does he know?_ and his own
answered, _Of course I know!_ But Prodd couldn’t hear that. Lone said
slowly, “Just time to be moving along.”

“Well.” Prodd kicked a stone. He turned to look at the house and that
turned him away from Lone, and that made it easier. “When we came here,
we built Jack’s, _your_ room, the room you’re using. We call it Jack’s
room. You know why, you know who Jack is?”

_Yes,_ Lone thought. He said nothing.

“Long as you’re … long as you want to leave anyway, it won’t make no
difference to you. Jack’s our son.” He squeezed his hands together. “I
guess it sounds funny. Jack was the little guy we were so sure about, we
built that room with seed money. Jack, he—”

He looked up at the house, at its stub of a built-on wing, and around at
the rock-toothed forest rim. “—never got born,” he finished.

“Ah,” said Lone. He’d picked that up from Prodd. It was useful.

“He’s coming now, though,” said Prodd in a rush. His face was alight.
“We’re a bit old for it, but there’s a daddy or two quite a bit older,
and mothers too.” Again he looked up at the barn, the house. “Makes
sense in a sort of way, you know, Lone. Now, if he’d been along when we
planned it, the place would’ve been too small when he was growed enough
to work it with me, and me with no place else to go. But now, why, I
reckon when he’s growed we just naturally won’t be here any more, and
he’ll take him a nice little wife and start out just about like we did.
So you see it does make a kind of sense?” He seemed to be pleading. Lone
made no attempt to understand this.

“Lone, listen to me, I don’t want you to feel we’re turning you out.”

“Said I was going.” Searching, he found something and amended, “’Fore
you told me.” _That,_ he thought, _was very right._

“Look, I got to say something,” said Prodd. “I heard tell of folks who
want kids and can’t have ’em, sometimes they just give up trying and
take in somebody else’s. And sometimes, with a kid in the house, they
turn right round and have one of their own after all.”

“Ah,” said Lone.

“So what I mean is, we taken you in, didn’t we, and now look.”

Lone did not know what to say. “Ah” seemed wrong.

“We got a lot to thank you for, is what I mean, so we don’t want you to
feel we’re turning you out.”

“I already said.”

“Good then.” Prodd smiled. He had a lot of wrinkles on his face, mostly
from smiling.

“Good,” said Lone. “About Jack.” He nodded vehemently. “Good.” He picked
up the scythe. When he reached his window, he looked after Prodd. _Walks
slower than he used to,_ he thought.

Lone’s next conscious thought was, Well, that’s finished.

What’s finished? he asked himself.

He looked around. “Mowing,” he said. Only then he realized that he had
been working for more than three hours since Prodd spoke to him, and it
was as if some other person had done it. He himself had been—_gone_ in
some way.

Absently he took his whetstone and began to dress the scythe. It made a
sound like a pot boiling over when he moved it slowly, and like a shrew
dying when he moved it fast.

Where had he known this feeling of time passing, as it were, behind his
back?

He moved the stone slowly. Cooking and warmth and work. A birthday cake.
A clean bed. A sense of … “Membership” was not a word he possessed but
that was his thought.

No, obliterated time didn’t exist in those memories. He moved the stone
faster.

Death-cries in the wood. Lonely hunter and its solitary prey. The sap
falls and the bear sleeps and the birds fly south, all doing it
together, not because they are all members of the same thing, but only
because they are all solitary things hurt by the same thing.

That was where time had passed without his awareness of it. Almost
always, before he came here. That was how he had lived.

Why should it come back to him now, then?

He swept his gaze around the land, as Prodd had done, taking in the
house and its imbalancing bulge, and the land, and the woods which held
the farm like water in a basin. When I was alone, he thought, time
passed me like that. Time passes like that now, so it must be that I am
alone again.

And then he knew that he had been alone the whole time. Mrs. Prodd
hadn’t raised him up, not really. She had been raising up her Jack the
whole time.

Once in the wood, in water and agony, he had been a part of something,
and in wetness and pain it had been torn from him. And if, for eight
years now, he had thought he had found something else to belong to, then
for eight years he had been wrong.

Anger was foreign to him; he had only felt it once before. But now it
came, a wash of it that made him swell, that drained and left him weak.
And he himself was the object of it. For hadn’t he known? Hadn’t he
taken a name for himself, knowing that the name was a crystallization of
all he had ever been and done? All he had ever been and done was
_alone._ Why should he have let himself feel any other way?

Wrong. Wrong as a squirrel with feathers, or a wolf with wooden teeth;
not injustice, not unfairness—just a wrongness that, under the sky,
could not exist … the idea that such as he could belong to anything.

Hear that, _son?_ Hear, that, _man?_

Hear that, Lone?

He picked up three long fresh stalks of timothy and braided them
together. He upended the scythe and thrust the handle deep enough into
the soft earth so it would stand upright. He tied the braided grass to
one of the grips and slipped the whetstone into the loops so it would
stay. Then he walked off into the woods.

It was too late even for the copse’s nocturnal habitants. It was cold at
the hidden foot of the dwarf oak and as dark as the chambers of a dead
man’s heart.

She sat on the bare earth. As time went on, she had slid down a little
and her plaid skirt had moved up. Her legs were icy, especially when the
night air moved on them. But she didn’t pull the skirt down because it
didn’t matter. Her hand lay on one of the fuzzy buttons of her sweater
because, two hours ago, she had been fingering it and wondering what it
was like to be a bunny. Now she didn’t care whether or not the button
was a bunny tail’s or where her hand happened to be.

She had learned all she could from being there. She had learned that if
you leave your eyes open until you have to blink and you don’t blink,
they start to hurt. Then if you leave them open even longer, they hurt
worse and worse. And if you still leave them open, they suddenly stop
hurting.

It was too dark there to know whether they could still see after that.

And she had learned that if you sit absolutely still for long enough it
hurts too, and then stops. But then you mustn’t move, not the tiniest
little bit, because if you do it will hurt worse than anything.

When a top spins it stands up straight and walks around. When it slows a
little it stands in one place and wobbles. When it slows a lot it
waggles around like Major Grenfell after a cocktail party. Then it
almost stops and lies down and bumps and thumps and thrashes around.
After that it won’t move any more.

When she had the happy time with the twins she had been spinning like
that. When Mother came home the top inside didn’t walk any more, it
stood still and waggled. When Mother called her out of her bed she was
waving and weaving. When she hid here her spinner inside bumped and
kicked. Well, it wasn’t doing it any more and it wouldn’t.

She started to see how long she could hold her breath. Not with a big
deep lungful first, but just breathing quieter and quieter and missing
an _in_ and quieter and quieter still, and missing an _out._ She got to
where the misses took longer than the breathings.

The wind stirred her skirt. All she could feel was the movement and that
too was remote, as if she had a thin pillow between it and her legs.

Her spinner, with the lift gone out of it, went round and round with its
rim on the floor and went slower and slower and at last

stopped

… and began to roll back the other way, but not very far, not fast and
stopped and a little way back, it was too dark for anything to roll, and
even if it did you wouldn’t be able to see it, you couldn’t even hear
it, it was so dark.

But anyway, she rolled. She rolled over on her stomach and on her back
and pain squeezed her nostrils together and filled up her stomach like
too much soda water. She gasped with the pain and gasping was breathing
and when she breathed she remembered who she was. She rolled over again
without wanting to, and something like little animals ran on her face.
She fought them weakly. They weren’t pretend-things, she discovered;
they were real as real. They whispered and cooed. She tried to sit up
and the little animals ran behind her and helped. She dangled her head
down and felt the warmth of her breath falling into the front of her
dress. One of the little animals stroked her cheek and she put up a hand
and caught it.

“Ho-ho,” it said.

On the other side, something soft and small and strong wriggled and
snuggled tight up against her. She felt it, smooth and alive. It said
“He-hee.”

She put one arm around Bonnie and one arm around Beanie and began to
cry.

Lone came back to borrow an ax. You can do just so much with your bare
hands.

When he broke out of the woods he saw the difference in the farm. It was
as if every day it existed had been a gray day, and now the sun was on
it. All the colors were brighter by an immeasurable amount; the
barn-smells, growth-smells, stove-smoke smells were clearer and purer.
The corn stretched skyward with such intensity in its lines that it
seemed to be threatening its roots.

Prodd’s venerable stake-bed pick-up truck was grunting and howling
somewhere down the slope. Following the margins, Lone went downhill
until he could see the truck. It was in the fallow field which,
apparently, Prodd had decided to turn. The truck was hitched to a gang
plow with all the shares but one removed. The right rear wheel had run
too close to the furrow, dropped in, and buried, so that the truck
rested on its rear axle and the wheel spun almost free. Prodd was
pounding stones under it with the end of a pick-handle. When he saw Lone
he dropped it and ran toward him, his face beaming like firelight. He
took Lone’s upper arms in his hands and read his face like the page of a
book, slowly, a line at a time, moving his lips. “Man, I thought I
wouldn’t see you again, going off like you did.”

“You want help,” said Lone, meaning the truck.

Prodd misunderstood. “Now wouldn’t you know,” he said happily. “Come all
the way back to see if you could lend a hand. Oh, I been doing fine by
myself, Lone, believe me. Not that I don’t appreciate it. But I feel
like it these days. Working, I mean.”

Lone went and picked up the pick-handle. He prodded at the stones under
the wheel. “Drive,” he said.

“Wait’ll Ma sees you,” said Prodd. “Like old times.” He got in and
started the truck. Lone put the small of his back against the rear edge
of the truck-bed, clamped his hands on it, and as the clutch engaged, he
heaved. The body came up as high as the rear springs would let it, and
still higher. He leaned back. The wheel found purchase and the truck
jolted up and forward onto firm ground.

Prodd climbed out and came back to look into the hole, the irresistible
and useless act of a man who picks up broken china and puts its edges
together. “I used to say, I bet you were a farmer once,” he grinned.
“But now I know. You were a hydraulic jack.”

Lone did not smile. He never smiled. Prodd went to the plow and Lone
helped him wrestle the hitch back to the truck. “Horse dropped dead,”
Prodd explained. “Truck’s all right but sometimes I wish there was some
way to keep this from happening. Spend half my time diggin’ it out. I’d
get another horse, but you know—hold everything till after Jack gets
here. You’d think that would bother me, losing the horse.” He looked up
at the house and smiled. “Nothing bothers me now. Had breakfast?”

“Yes.”

“Well come have some more. You know Ma. Wouldn’t forgive either of us if
she wasn’t to feed you.”

They went back to the house, and when Ma saw Lone she hugged him hard.
Something stirred uncomfortably in Lone. He wanted an ax. He thought all
these other things were settled. “You sit right down there and I’ll get
you some breakfast.”

“Told you,” said Prodd, watching her, smiling. Lone watched her too. She
was heavier and happy as a kitten in a cowshed. “What you doing now,
Lone?”

Lone looked into his eyes to find some sort of an answer. “Working,” he
said. He moved his hand. “Up there.”

“In the woods?”

“Yes.”

“What you doing?” When Lone waited, Prodd asked, “You hired out? No?
Then what—trapping?”

“Trapping,” said Lone, knowing that this would be sufficient.

He ate. From where he sat he could see Jack’s room. The bed was gone.
There was a new one in there, not much longer than his forearm, all
draped with pale-blue cotton and cheesecloth with dozens of little tucks
sewn into it.

When he was finished they all sat around the table and for a time nobody
said anything. Lone looked into Prodd’s eyes and found _He’s a good boy
but not the kind to set around and visit._ He couldn’t understand the
_visit_ image, a vague and happy blur of conversation-sounds and
laughter. He recognized this as one of the many lacks he was aware of in
himself—lacks, rather than inadequacies; things he could not do and
would never be able to do. So he just asked Prodd for the ax and went
out.

“You don’t s’pose e’s mad at us?” asked Mrs. Prodd, looking anxiously
after Lone.

“Him?” said Prodd. “He wouldn’t have come back here if he was. I was
afraid of that myself until today.” He went to the door. “Don’t you lift
nothing heavy, hear?”

Janie read as slowly and carefully as she could. She didn’t have to read
aloud, but only carefully enough so the twins could understand. She had
reached the part where the woman tied the man to the pillar and then let
the other man, the “my rival, her laughing lover” one, out of the closet
where he had been hidden and gave him the whip. Janie looked up at that
point and found Bonnie gone and Beanie in the cold fireplace, pretending
there was a mouse hiding in the ashes. “Oh, you’re not listening,” she
said.

_Want the one with the pictures,_ the silent message came.

“I’m getting so tired of that one,” said Janie petulantly. But she
closed _Venus in Furs_ by von Sacher-Masoch and put it on the table.
“This’s anyway got a story to it,” she complained, going to the shelves.
She found the wanted volume between _My Gun Is Quick_ and _The
Illustrated Ivan Block,_ and hefted it back to the armchair. Bonnie
disappeared from the fireplace and reappeared by the chair. Beanie stood
on the other side; wherever she had been, she had been aware of what was
happening. If anything, she liked this book even better than Bonnie.

Janie opened the book at random. The twins leaned forward breathless,
their eyes bugging.

_Read it._

“Oh, all right,” said Janie. “‘D34556. Tieback. Double shirred. 90
inches long. Maize, burgundy, hunter green and white. $24.68. D34557.
Cottage style. Stuart or Argyll plaid, see illus. $4.92 pair. D34—’”

And they were happy again.

They had been happy ever since they got here and much of the hectic time
before that. They had learned how to open the back of a trailer-truck
and how to lie without moving under hay, and Janie could pull
clothespins off a line and the twins could appear inside a room, like a
store at night, and unlock the door from the inside when it was fastened
with some kind of lock that Janie couldn’t move, the way she could a
hook-and-eye or a tower bolt which was shot but not turned. The best
thing they had learned, though, was the way the twins could attract
attention when somebody was chasing Janie. They’d found out for sure
that to have two little girls throwing rocks from second-floor windows
and appearing under their feet to trip them and suddenly sitting on
their shoulders and wetting into their collars, made it impossible to
catch Janie, who was just ordinarily running. Ho-ho.

And this house was just the happiest thing of all. It was miles and
miles away from anything or anybody and no one ever came here. It was a
big house on a hill, in forest so thick you hardly knew it was there. It
had a big high wall around it on the road side, and a big high fence on
the woods side and a brook ran through. Bonnie had found it one day when
they had gotten tired and gone to sleep by the road. Bonnie woke up and
went exploring by herself and found the fence and went along it until
she saw the house. They’d had a terrible time finding some way to get
Janie in, though, until Beanie fell into the brook where it went through
the fence, and came up on the inside.

There were zillions of books in the biggest room and plenty of old
sheets they could wrap around themselves when it was cold. Down in the
cold dark cellar rooms they had found a half-dozen cases of canned
vegetables and some bottles of wine, which later they smashed all over
because, although it tasted bad, it smelled just wonderful. There was a
pool out back to swim in that was more fun than the bathrooms, which had
no windows. There were plenty of places for hide-and-seek. There was
even a little room with chains on the walls, and bars.

It went much faster with the ax.

He never would have found the place at all if he had not hurt himself.
In all the years he had wandered the forests, often blindly and
uncaring, he had never fallen into such a trap. One moment he was
stepping over the crest of an outcropping, and next he was twenty feet
down, in a bramble-choked, humus-floored pitfall. He hurt one of his
eyes and his left arm hurt unbearably at the elbow.

Once he had thrashed his way out, he surveyed the place. Perhaps it had
once been a pool in the slope, with the lower side thin and erosible. It
was gone, however, and what was left was a depression in the hillside,
thickly grown inside, ever more thickly screened on both sides and at
the front. The rock over which he had stepped rose out of the hill and
overhung the depression.

At one time it had not mattered in the least to Lone whether he was near
men or not. Now, he wanted only to be able to be what he knew he
was—alone. But eight years at the farm had changed his way of life. He
needed shelter. And the more he looked at this hidden place, with its
overhanging rock wall-ceiling and the two earthen wings which flanked
it, the more shelterlike it seemed.

At first his work on it was primitive. He cleared out enough brush so
that he might he down comfortably and pulled up a bush or two so that
the brambles would not flay him as he went in and out. Then it rained
and he had to channel the inside so that water would not stand inside,
and he made a rough thatch at the crest.

But as time went on he became increasingly absorbed in the place. He
pulled up more bush and pounded the earth until he had a level floor. He
removed all the rock he could find loose on the rear wall, and
discovered that some of the wall had ready-made shelves and nooks for
the few things he might want to store. He began raiding the farms that
skirted the foot of the mountain, operating at night, taking only a very
little at each place, never coming back to any one place if he could
help it. He got carrots and potatoes and tenpenny spikes and haywire, a
broken hammer and a cast-iron pot. Once he found a side of bacon that
had fallen from an abattoir truck. He stored it and when he came back he
found that a lynx had been at it. That determined him to make walls,
which was why he went back for the ax.

He felled trees, the biggest he could handle after trimming, and snaked
them up to the hillside. He buried the first three so that they bounded
the floor, and the side ones butted against the rock. He found a red
clay which, when mixed with peat moss, made a mortar that was
vermin-proof and would not wash away. He built up his walls and a door.
He did not bother with a window, but simply left out a yard of mortar
between six of the wall logs, on each side, and trimmed long
side-tapered sticks to wedge in them when he wanted them closed.

His first fireplace was Indian-style, out near the center of the
enclosure, with a hole at the top to let the smoke out. High up were
hooks embedded in rock fissures, for hanging meat where the smoke could
get to it, if he were ever fortunate enough to get some.

He was out hunting for flagstones for the fireplace when an invisible
something began to tug at him. He recoiled as if he had been burned and
shrank back against a tree and cast about him like a cornered elk.

It had been a long time since he had been aware of his inner sensitivity
to the useless (to him) communication of infants. He was losing it; he
had begun to be insensitive to it when he began to gain speech.

But someone had called to him this way—someone who “sent” like a child,
but who was not a child. And though what he felt now was faint, it was
in substance unbearably similar. It was sweet and needful, yes; but it
was also the restimulation of a stinging lash and a terror of crushing
kicks and obscene shouting, and the greatest loss he had ever known.

There was nothing to be seen. Slowly he left the tree and went back to
the slab of stone he had been pawing at to free it from the earth. For
perhaps half an hour he worked doggedly, trying to ignore the call. And
he failed.

He rose, shaken, and began to walk to the call in a world turned
dreamlike. The longer he walked, the more irresistible the call became
and the deeper his enchantment. He walked for an hour, never going
around anything if he could possibly go over it or through it, and by
the time he reached the leached clearing he was nearly somnambulant. To
permit himself any more consciousness would have been to kindle such an
inferno of conflict that he could not have gone on. Stumbling blindly,
he walked right up to and into the rusting fence which struck him
cruelly over his hurt eye. He clung to it until his vision cleared,
looked around to see where he was, and began to tremble.

He had one moment of clear, conscious determination: to get out of this
terrible place and stay out of it. And even as he felt this touch of
reason, he heard the brook and was turning toward it.

Where brook and fence met, he lowered himself in the water and made his
way to the foot of the pickets. Yes, the opening was still here.

He peered in through the fence, but the ancient holly was thicker than
ever. There was nothing to be heard, either—aurally. But the call …

Like the one he had heard before, it was a hunger, an aloneness, a
wanting. The difference was in what it wanted. It said without words
that it was a little afraid, and burdened, and was solicitous of the
burden. It said in effect _who will take care of me now?_

Perhaps the cold water helped. Lone’s mind suddenly became as clear as
it ever could. He took a deep breath and submerged. Immediately on the
other side he stopped and raised his head. He listened carefully, then
lay on his stomach with only his nostrils above the water. With
exquisite care, he inched forward on his elbows, until his head was
inside the arch and he could see through.

There was a little girl on the bank, dressed in a torn plaid dress. She
was about six. Her sharp-planed, unchildlike face was down-drawn and
worried. And if he thought his caution was effective, he was quite
wrong. She was looking directly at him.

“Bonnie!” she called sharply.

Nothing happened.

He stayed where he was. She continued to watch him, but she continued to
worry. He realized two things: that it was this worriment of hers which
was the essence of the call; and that although she was on her guard, she
did not consider him important enough to divert her from her thoughts.

For the first time in his life he felt that edged and spicy mixture of
anger and amusement called pique. This was followed by a great surge of
relief, much like what one would feel on setting down a forty-pound pack
after forty years. He had not known … he had not _known_ the size of his
burden!

And away went the restimulation. Back into the past went the whip and
the bellowing, the magic and the loss—remembered still, but back where
they belonged, with their raw-nerve tendrils severed so that never again
could they reach into his present. The call was no maelstrom of blood
and emotion, but the aimless chunterings of a hungry brat.

He sank and shot backward like a great lean crawfish, under the fence.
He slogged up out of the brook, turned his back on the call and went
back to his work.

When he got back to his shelter, streaming with perspiration, an
eighteen-inch flagstone on his shoulder, he was weary enough to forget
his usual caution. He crashed in through the underbrush to the tiny
clearing before his door, and stopped dead.

There was a small naked infant about four years old squatting in front
of his door.

She looked up at him and her eyes—her whole dark face-seemed to twinkle.
“He-hee!” she said happily.

He tipped the stone off his shoulder and let it fall. He loomed over
her, shadowed her; sky-high and full of the threats of thunder.

She seemed completely unafraid. She turned her eyes away from him and
busily began nibbling at a carrot, turning it squirrel-wise, around and
around as she ate.

A high movement caught his eye. Another carrot was emerging from the
ventilation chinks in the log wall. It fell to the ground and was
followed by still another.

“Ho-ho.” He looked down, and there were _two_ little girls.

The only advantage which Lone possessed under these circumstances was a
valuable one: he had no impulse whatever to question his sanity and
start a confusing debate with himself on the matter. He bent down and
scooped one of the children up. But when he straightened she wasn’t
there any more.

The other was. She grinned enchantingly and started on one of the new
carrots.

Lone said, “What you doing?” His voice was harsh and ill-toned, like
that of a deaf-mute. It startled the child. She stopped eating and
looked up at him open-mouthed. The open mouth was filled with carrot
chips and gave her rather the appearance of a pot-bellied stove with the
door open.

He sank down on his knees. Her eyes were fixed on his and his were eyes
which had once commanded a man to kill himself and which, many times,
violated the instincts of others who had not wanted to feed him. Without
knowing why he was careful. There was no anger in him or fear; he simply
wanted her to stay still.

When he was done, he reached for her. She exhaled noisily, blowing tiny
wet chips of raw carrot into his eyes and nostrils, and vanished.

He was filled with astonishment—a strange thing in itself, for he had
seldom been interested enough in anything to be astonished. Stranger
still, it was a respectful astonishment.

He rose and put his back against the log wall, and looked for them. They
stood side by side, hand in hand, looking up at him out of little wooden
wondering faces, waiting for him to do something else.

Once, years ago, he had run to catch a deer. Once he had reached up from
the ground to catch a bird in a treetop. Once he had plunged into a
stream after a trout.

Once.

Lone was simply not constituted to chase something he knew empirically
that he could not catch. He bent and picked up his flagstone, reached up
and slid aside the outside bar which fastened his door and shouldered
into the house.

He bedded his flagstone by the fire and swept the guttering embers over
part of it. He threw on more wood and blew it up brightly, set up his
green-stick crane and swung the iron pot on it. All the while there were
two little white-eyed knobs silhouetted in the doorway, watching him. He
ignored them.

The skinned rabbit swung on the high hook by the smoke hole. He got it
down, tore off the quarters, broke the back and dropped it all into the
pot. From a niche he took potatoes and a few grains of rock salt. The
salt went into the pot and so did the potatoes after he had split them
in two on his ax-blade. He reached for his carrots. Somebody had been at
his carrots.

He wheeled and frowned at the doorway. The two heads whipped back out of
sight. From outdoors came small soprano giggles.

Lone let the pot boil for an hour while he honed the ax and tied up a
witch’s broom like Mrs. Prodd’s. And slowly, a fraction of an inch at a
time, his visitors edged into the room. Their eyes were fixed on the
seething pot. They fairly drooled.

He went about his business without looking at them. When he came close
they retreated and when he crossed the room they entered again—that
little fraction more each time. Soon their retreats were smaller and
their advances larger until at last Lone had a chance to slam the door
shut—which he did.

In the sudden darkness, the simmer of the pot and the small hiss of the
flames sounded very loud. There was no other sound. Lone stood with his
back against the door and closed his eyes very tight to adjust them more
quickly to the darkness. When he opened them, the bars of waning
daylight at the vents and the fireglow were quite sufficient for him to
see everything in the room.

The little girls were gone.

He put on the inner bar and slowly circled the room. Nothing.

He opened the door cautiously, then flung it wide. They were not outside
either.

He shrugged. He pulled on his lower lip and wished he had more carrots.
Then he set the pot aside to cool enough so that he could eat and
finished honing the ax.

At length he ate. He had reached the point of licking his fingers by way
of having dessert, when a sharp knock on the door caused him to leap
eighteen inches higher than upright, so utterly unexpected was it.

In the doorway stood the little girl in the plaid dress. Her hair was
combed, her face scrubbed. She carried with a superb air an object which
seemed to be a handbag but which at second glance revealed itself as a
teakwood cigarette box with a piece of binder-twine fastened to it with
four-inch nails. “Good evening,” she said concisely. “I was passing by
and thought I would come to call. You _are_ at home?”

This parroting of a penurious beldame who once was in the habit of
cadging meals by this means was completely incomprehensible to Lone. He
resumed licking his fingers but he kept his eyes on the child’s face.
Behind the girl, suddenly, appeared the heads of his two previous
visitors peeping around the doorpost.

The child’s nostrils, then her eyes, found the stew pot. She wooed it
with her gaze, yearned. She yawned, too, suddenly. “I beg your pardon,”
she said demurely. She pried open the lid of the cigarette box, drew out
a white object and folded it quickly but not quickly enough to conceal
the fact that it was a large man’s sock, and patted her lips with it.

Lone rose and got a piece of wood and placed it carefully on the fire
and sat down again. The girl took another step. The other two scuttled
in and stood, one on each side of the doorway like toy soldiers. Their
faces were little knots of apprehension. And they were clothed this
time. One wore a pair of lady’s linen bloomers, the like of which has
not been seen since cars had tillers. It came up to her armpits, and was
supported by two short lengths of the same hairy binder-twine, poked
through holes torn in the waistband and acting as shoulder straps. The
other one wore a heavy cotton slip, or at least the top third of it. It
fell to her ankles where it showed a fringe of torn and unhemmed
material.

With the exact air of a lady crossing a drawing room toward the bonbons,
the white child approached the stewpot, flashed Lone a small smile,
lowered her eyelids and reached down with a thumb and forefinger,
murmuring, “May I?”

Lone stretched out one long leg and hooked the pot away from her and
into his grasp. He set it on the floor on the side away from her and
looked at her woodenly.

“You’re a real cheap stingy son of a bitch,” the child quoted.

This also missed Lone completely. Before he had learned to be aware of
what men said, such remarks had been meaningless. Since, he had not been
exposed to them. He stared at her blankly and pulled the pot
protectively closer.

The child’s eyes narrowed and her color rose. Suddenly she began to cry.
“Please,” she said. “I’m hungry. _We’re_ hungry. The stuff in the cans,
it’s all gone.” Her voice failed her but she could still whisper.
“Please,” she whispered, “please.”

Lone regarded her stonily. At length she took a timid step toward him.
He lifted the pot into his lap and hugged it defiantly. She said, “Well,
I didn’t want any of your old …” but then her voice broke. She turned
away and went to the door. The others watched her face as she came. They
radiated silent disappointment; their eloquent expressions took the
white girl to task far more than they did him. She had the status of
provider and she had failed them, and they were merciless in their
expression of it.

He sat with the warm pot in his lap and looked out the open door into
the thickening night. Unbidden, an image appeared to him—Mrs. Prodd, a
steaming platter of baked ham flanked by the orange gaze of perfect
eggs, saying, “Now you set right down and have some breakfast.” An
emotion he was unequipped to define reached up from his solar plexus and
tugged at his throat.

He snorted, reached into the pot, scooped out half a potato and opened
his mouth to receive it. His hand would not deliver. He bent his head
slowly and looked at the potato as if he could not quite recognize it or
its function.

He snorted again, flung the potato back into the pot, thumped the pot
back on the floor and leapt to his feet. He put one hand on each side of
the door and sent his flat harsh voice hurtling out: _“Wait!”_

The corn should have been husked long since. Most of it still stood but
here and there the stalks lay broken and yellowing, and soldier-ants
were prospecting them and scurrying off with rumors. Out in the fallow
field the truck lay forlornly, bogged, with the seeder behind it, tipped
forward over its hitch and the winter wheat spilling out. No smoke came
from the chimney up at the house and the half-door into the barn, askew
and perverted amid the misery, hollowly applauded.

Lone approached the house, mounted the stoop. Prodd sat on the porch
glider which now would not glide, for one set of end-chains was broken.
His eyes were not closed but they were more closed than open.

“Hi,” said Lone.

Prodd stirred, looked full into Lone’s face. There was no sign of
recognition. He dropped his gaze, pushed back to sit upright, felt
aimlessly around his chest, found a suspender strap, pulled it forward
and let it snap back. A troubled expression passed through his features
and left it. He looked up again at Lone, who could sense self-awareness
returning to the farmer like coffee soaking upward into a lump of sugar.

“Well, Lone, boy!” said Prodd. The old words were there but the tone
behind them behaved like his broken hay rake. He rose, beaming, came to
Lone, raised his fist to thump Lone’s arm but then apparently forgot it.
The fist hovered there for a moment and then gravitated downward.

“Corn’s for husking,” said Lone.

“Yeah, yeah, I know,” Prodd half said, half sighed. “I’ll get to it. I
can handle it all right. One way or ’tother, always get done by the
first frost. Ain’t missed milkin’ once,” he added with wan pride.

Lone glanced through the door pane and saw, for the very first time,
crusted dishes, heavy flies in the kitchen. “The baby come,” he said,
remembering.

“Oh, yes. Fine little feller, just like we …” Again he seemed to forget.
The words slowed and were left suspended as his fist had been. “Ma!” he
shrieked suddenly, “fix a bite for the boy, here!” He turned to Lone,
embarrassedly. “She’s yonder,” he said pointing. “Yell loud enough, I
reckon she’d hear. Maybe.”

Lone looked where Prodd pointed, but saw nothing. He caught Prodd’s gaze
and for a split second started to probe. He recoiled violently at the
very nature of what was there before he got close enough to identify it.
He turned away quickly. “Brought your ax.”

“Oh, that’s all right. You could’ve kept it.”

“Got my own. Want to get that corn in?”

Prodd gazed mistily at the corn patch. “Never missed a milking,” he
said.

Lone left him and went to the barn for a corn hook. He found one. He
also discovered that the cow was dead. He went up to the corn patch and
got to work. After a time he saw Prodd down the line, working too,
working hard.

Well past midday and just before they had the corn all cut, Prodd
disappeared into the house. Twenty minutes later he emerged with a
pitcher and a platter of sandwiches. The bread was dry and the
sandwiches were corned beef from, as Lone recalled, Mrs. Prodd’s
practically untouched “rainy day” shelf. The pitcher contained warm
lemonade and dead flies. Lone asked no questions. They perched on the
edge of the horse trough and ate.

Afterward Lone went down to the fallow field and got the truck dug out.
Prodd followed him down in time to drive it out. The rest of the day was
devoted to the seeding with Lone loading the seeder and helping four
different times to free the truck from the traps it insisted upon
digging for itself. When that was finished, Lone waved Prodd up to the
barn where he got a rope around the dead cow’s neck and hauled it as
near as the truck would go to the edge of the wood. When at last they
ran the truck into the barn for the night, Prodd said, “Sure miss that
horse.”

“You said you didn’t miss it a-tall,” Lone recalled tactlessly.

“Did I now.” Prodd turned inward and smiled, remembering. “Yeah, nothing
bothered me none, because of, you know.” Still smiling, he turned to
Lone and said, “Come back to the house.” He smiled all the way back.

They went through the kitchen. It was even worse than it had looked from
outside and the clock was stopped, too. Prodd, smiling, threw open the
door of Jack’s room. Smiling, he said, “Have a look, boy. Go right on
in, have a look.”

Lone went in and looked into the bassinet. The cheesecloth was torn and
the blue cotton was moist and reeking. The baby had eyes like upholstery
tacks and skin the color of mustard. Short blue-black horsehair covered
its skull, and it breathed noisily.

Lone did not change expression. He turned away and stood in the kitchen
looking at one of the dimity curtains, the one which lay on the floor.

Smiling, Prodd came out of Jack’s room and closed the door. “See, he’s
not Jack, that’s the one blessing,” he smiled. “Ma, she had to go off
looking for Jack, I reckon, yes; that would be it. She wouldn’t be happy
with anything less; well, you know that your own self.” He smiled twice.
“What that in there is, that’s what the doctor calls a mongoloid. Just
leave it be; it’ll grow up to maybe size three and stay so for thirty
year. Get him to a big city specialist for treatments and he’ll grow up
to maybe size ten.” He smiled as he talked. “That’s what the doctor said
anyway. Can’t shovel him into the ground now, can you? That was all
right for Ma, way she loved flowers and all.”

Too many words, some hard to hear through the wide, tight smiling. Lone
brought his eyes to bear on Prodd’s.

He found out exactly what Prodd wanted—things that Prodd himself did not
know. He did the things.

When he was finished he and Prodd cleaned up the kitchen and took the
bassinet and burned it, along with the carefully sewn diapers made out
of old sheets and piled in the linen closet and the new oval enamel bath
pan and the celluloid rattle and the blue felt booties with the white
puffballs in their clear cellophane box.

Prodd waved cheerfully to him from the porch. “Just you wait’ll Ma gets
back; she’ll stuff you full of johnny-cake till we got to scrape you off
the wall.”

“Mind you fix that barn door,” Lone rasped. “I’ll come back.”

With his burden he plodded up the hill and into the forest. He struggled
numbly with thoughts that would not be words or pictures. About those
kids, now; about the Prodds. The Prodds were one thing and when they
took him in they became something else; he knew it now. And then when he
was by himself he was one thing; but taking those kids in he was
something else. He had no business going back to Prodd’s today. But now,
the way he was, he _had_ to do it. He’d go back again too.

Alone. Lone Lone alone. Prodd was alone now and Janie was alone and the
twins, well they had each other but they were like one split person who
was alone. He himself, Lone, was still alone, it didn’t make any
difference about the kids being there.

Maybe Prodd and his wife had not been alone. He wouldn’t have any way of
knowing about that. But there was nothing like Lone anywhere in the
world except right here inside him. The whole world threw Lone away, you
know that? Even the Prodds did, when they got around to it. Janie got
thrown out, the twins too, so Janie said.

Well, in a funny way it helps to know you’re alone, thought Lone.

The night was sun-stained by the time he got home. He kneed the door
open and came in. Janie was making pictures on an old china plate with
spit and mud. The twins as usual were sitting on one of the high rock
niches, whispering to one another.

Janie jumped up. “What’s that? What’d you bring?”

Lone put it down carefully on the floor. The twins appeared, one on each
side of it. “It’s a baby,” said Janie. She looked up at Lone. “Is it a
baby?”

Lone nodded. Janie looked again. “Nastiest one I ever saw.”

Lone said, “Well never mind that. Give him something to eat.”

“What?”

“I don’t know,” said Lone. “You’re a baby, almost. You should know.”

“Where’d you get him?”

“A farm yonder.”

“You’re a kidnapper,” said Janie. “Know that?”

“What’s a kidnapper?”

“Man that steals babies, that’s what. When they find out about it the
policeman will come and shoot you dead and put you in the electric
chair.”

“Well,” said Lone, relieved, “ain’t nobody going to find out. Only man
knows about it, I fixed it so he’s forgotten. That’s the daddy. The ma,
she’s dead, but he don’t know that either. He thinks she’s back East.
He’ll hang on waiting for her. Anyway, feed him.”

He pulled off his jacket. The kids kept it too hot in here. The baby lay
still with its dull button eyes open, breathing too loudly. Janie stood
before the fire, staring thoughtfully at the stewpot. Finally she dipped
into it with a ladle and dribbled the juice into a tin can. “Milk,” she
said while she worked. “You got to start swiping milk for him, Lone.
Babies, they eat more milk’n a cat.”

“All right,” said Lone.

The twins watched, wall-eyed, as Janie slopped the broth on the baby’s
disinterested mouth.

“He’s getting some,” said Janie optimistically.

Without humor and only from visible evidence, Lone said, “Maybe through
his ears.”

Janie pulled at the baby’s shirt and half sat him up. This favored the
neck rather than the ears but still left the mouth intake in doubt.

“Oh, maybe I can!” said Janie suddenly, as if answering a comment. The
twins giggled and jumped up and down. Janie drew the tin can a few
inches away from the baby’s face and narrowed her eyes. The baby
immediately started to choke and spewed up what was unequivocally broth.

“That’s not right yet but I’ll get it,” said Janie. She spent half an
hour trying. At last the baby went to sleep.

One afternoon Lone watched for a while and then prodded Janie with his
toe. “What’s going on there?”

She looked. “He’s talking to them.”

Lone pondered. “I used to could do that. Hear babies.”

“Bonnie says all babies can do it, and you were a baby, weren’t you? I
forget if I ever did,” she added. “Except the twins.”

“What I mean,” said Lone laboriously, “when I was growed I could hear
babies.”

“You must’ve been an idiot, then,” said Janie positively. “Idiots can’t
understand people but can understand babies. Mr. Widdecombe, he’s the
man the twins lived with, he had a girl friend once who was an idiot and
Bonnie told me.”

“Baby’s s’posed to be some kind of a idiot,” Lone said.

“Yes, Beanie, she says he’s sort of different. He’s like a adding
machine.”

“What’s a adding machine?”

Janie exaggerated the supreme patience that her nursery school teacher
had affected. “It’s a thing you push buttons and it gives you the right
answer.”

Lone shook his head.

Janie essayed, “Well, if you have three cents and four cents and five
cents and seven cents and eight cents—how many you got altogether?”

Lone shrugged hopelessly.

“Well if you have a adding machine, you push a button for _two_ and a
button for _three_ and a button for all the other ones and then you pull
a handle, the machine tells you how many you got altogether. And it’s
always right.”

Lone sorted all this out slowly and finally nodded. Then he waved toward
the orange crate that was now Baby’s bassinet, and the twins hanging
spellbound over him. “He got no buttons you push.”

“That was just a finger of speech,” Janie said loftily. “Look, you tell
Baby something, and then you tell him something else. He will put the
somethings together and tell you what they come out to, just like the
adding machine does with one and two and—”

“All right, but what kind of somethings?”

“Anything.” She eyed him. “You’re sort of stoopid, you know that, Lone.
I got to tell you every little thing four times. Now listen, if you want
to know something you tell me and I’ll tell Baby and he’ll get the
answer and tell the twins and they’ll tell me and I’ll tell you, now
what do you want to know?”

Lone stared at the fire. “I don’t know anything I want to know.”

“Well, you sure think up a lot of silly things to ask me.”

Lone, not offended, sat and thought. Janie went to work on a scab on her
knee, picking it gently round and round with fingernails the color and
shape of parentheses.

“Suppose I got a truck,” Lone said a half hour later, “it gets stuck in
a field all the time, the ground’s too tore up. Suppose I want to fix it
so it won’t stick no more. Baby tell me a thing like that?”

“Anything, I told you,” said Janie sharply. She turned and looked at
Baby. Baby lay as always, staring dully upward. In a moment she looked
at the twins.

“He don’t know what is a truck. If you’re going to ask him anything you
have to explain all the pieces before he can put ’em together.”

“Well you know what a truck is,” said Lone, “and soft ground and what
stickin’ is. You tell him.”

“Oh all right,” said Janie.

She went through the routine again, sending to Baby, receiving from the
twins. Then she laughed. “He says stop driving on the field and you
won’t get stuck. You could of thought of that yourself, you dumbhead.”

Lone said, “Well suppose you got to use it there, then what?”

“You ’spect me to go on askin’ him silly questions all _night?”_

“All right, he can’t answer like you said.”

“He can too!” Her facts impugned, Janie went to the task with a will.
The next answer was, “Put great big wide wheels on it.”

“Suppose you ain’t got money nor time nor tools for that?”

This time it was, “Make it real heavy where the ground is hard and real
light where the ground is soft and anything in between.”

Janie very nearly went on strike when Lone demanded to know how this
could be accomplished and reached something of a peak of impatience when
Lone rejected the suggestion of loading and unloading rocks. She
complained that not only was this silly, but that Baby was matching
every fact she fed him with every other fact he had been fed previously
and was giving correct but unsolicited answers to situational sums of
tires plus weight plus soup plus bird’s nests, and babies plus soft dirt
plus wheel diameters plus straw. Lone doggedly clung to his basic
question and the day’s impasse was reached when it was determined that
there was such a way but it could not be expressed except by facts not
in Lone’s or Janie’s possession. Janie said it sounded to her like radio
tubes and with only that to go on, Lone proceeded by entering the next
night a radio service shop and stealing a heavy armload of literature.
He bulled along unswerving, unstoppable, until at last Janie
relinquished her opposition because she had not energy for it and for
the research as well. For days she scanned elementary electricity and
radio texts which meant nothing to her but which apparently Baby could
absorb faster than she scanned.

And at last the specifications were met: something which Lone could make
himself, which would involve only a small knob you pushed to make the
truck heavier and pulled to make it lighter, as well as an equally
simple attachment to add power to the front wheels—according to Baby a
_sine qua non._

In the half-cave, half-cabin, with the fire smoking in the center of the
room and the meat turning slowly in the updraft, with the help of two
tongue-tied infants, a mongoloid baby and a sharp-tongued child who
seemed to despise him but never failed him, Lone built the device. He
did it, not because he was particularly interested in the thing for
itself, nor because he wished to understand its principles (which were
and would always be beyond him), but only because an old man who had
taught him something he could not name was mad with bereavement and
needed to work and could not afford a horse.

He walked most of the night with it and installed it in the dim early
hours of the morning. The idea of “pleasant surprise” was far too
whimsical a thing for Lone but it amounted to the same thing. He wanted
it ready for the day’s work, without any time lost by the old man
prancing around asking questions that he couldn’t answer.

The truck stood bogged in the field. Lone unwound the device from around
his neck and shoulders and began to attach it according to the exact
instructions he had winnowed out of Baby. There wasn’t much to do. A
slender wire wrapped twice around the clutch housing outside and led to
clamps on the front spring shackles, the little brushes touching the
insides of the front wheels; and that was the front-wheel drive. Then
the little box with its four silvery cables, box clamped to steering
post, each cable leading to a corner of the frame.

He got in and pulled the knob toward him. The frame creaked as the truck
seemed to raise itself on tiptoe. He pushed the knob forward. The truck
settled its front axle and differential housing on solid ground with a
bump that made his head rock. He looked at the little box and its lever
admiringly, then returned the lever to a neutral position. He scanned
the other controls there, the ones which came with the truck: pedals and
knobs and sticks and buttons. He sighed.

He wished he had wit enough to drive a truck.

He got out and climbed the hill to the house to wake Prodd. Prodd wasn’t
there. The kitchen door swung in the breeze, the glass gone out of it
and lying on the stoop. Mud wasps were building under the sink. There
was a smell of dirty dry floorboards, mildew, and ancient sweat.
Otherwise it was fairly neat, about the way it was when he and Prodd had
cleaned up last time he was here. The only new thing there aside from
the mud wasps’ nest was a paper nailed to the wall by all four corners.
It had writing all over it. Lone detached it as carefully as he could,
and smoothed it out on the kitchen table, and turned it over twice. Then
he folded it, put it in his pocket. Again he sighed.

He wished he had sense enough to learn to read.

He left the house without looking back and plunged into the forest. He
never returned. The truck stood out in the sun, slowly deteriorating
slowly weakening its already low resistance to rust, slowly falling to
pieces around the bright, strong, strange silver cables. Powered
inexhaustibly by the slow release of atomic binding energy, the device
was the practical solution of flight without wings, the simple key to a
new era in transportation, in materials handling, and in interplanetary
travel. Made by an idiot, harnessed idiotically to replace a spavined
horse, stupidly left, numbly forgotten … Earth’s first anti-gravity
generator.

The _idiot!_

  _Dear loan I’ll nale this up wher you cant hep see it I am cleering ot
  of here I dont no why I stade as long as I did. Ma is back east
  Wmsport pennsilvana and she been gone a long time and I am tied of
  wating. And I was goin to sell the truck to hep me on the way but it
  is stuck so bad now I cant get it to town to sell it. So now I am jest
  goin to go whatever and I’ll make it some way long as I no Ma is at
  the othr end. Dont take no trouble about the place I guess I had enuf
  of it Anyway. And borrow any thing you want if you should want any
  Thing. You are a good boy you been a good frend well goodbeye until I
  see you if I ever do god Bless you your old frend E. Prodd._

Lone made Janie read him the letter four times in a three-week period,
and each reading seemed to add a fresh element to the yeasty seething
inside him. Much of this happened silently; for some of it he asked
help.

He had believed that Prodd was his only contact with anything outside
himself and that the children were merely fellow occupants of a slag
dump at the edge of mankind. The loss of Prodd—and he knew with
unshakeable certainty that he would never see the old man again—was the
loss of life itself. At the very least, it was the loss of everything
conscious, directed, cooperative; everything above and beyond what a
vegetable could do by way of living.

“Ask Baby what is a friend.”

“He says it’s somebody who goes on loving you whether he likes you or
not.”

But then, Prodd and his wife had shucked him off when he was in the way,
after all those years, and that meant they were ready to do it the first
year and the second and the fifth—all the time, any time. You can’t say
you’re a part of anything, anybody, that feels free to do that to you.
But friends … maybe they just don’t like him for a while, maybe they
loved him all the way through.

“Ask Baby can you be truly part of someone you love.”

“He says only if you love yourself.”

His bench-mark, his goal-point, had for years been that thing which
happened to him on the bank of the pool. He had to understand that. If
he could understand that, he was sure he could understand everything.
Because for a second there was this _other,_ and himself, and a flow
between them without guards or screens or barriers—no language to
stumble over, no ideas to misunderstand, nothing at all but a merging.

What had he been then? What was it Janie had said?

Idiot. An idiot.

An idiot, she had said, was a grown person who could hear only babies’
silent speech. Then—what was the creature with whom he had merged on
that terrible day?

“Ask Baby what is a grown person who can _talk_ like the babies.”

“He says, an innocent.”

He had been an idiot who could hear the soundless murmur. She had been
an innocent who, as an adult, could speak it.

“Ask Baby what if an idiot and an innocent are close together.”

“He says when they so much as touched, the innocent would stop being an
innocent and the idiot would stop being an idiot.”

He thought. An innocent is the most beautiful thing there can be.
Immediately he demanded of himself, What’s so beautiful about an
innocent? And the answer, for once almost as swift as Baby’s: It’s the
waiting that’s beautiful.

Waiting for the end of innocence. And an idiot is waiting for the end of
idiocy too, but he’s ugly doing it. So each ends himself in the meeting,
in exchange for a merging.

Lone was suddenly deep-down glad. For if this was true, he had made
something, rather than destroyed something … and when he had lost it,
the pain of the loss was justified. When he had lost the Prodds the pain
wasn’t worth it.

What am I doing? What am I doing? he thought wildly. Trying and trying
like this to find out what I am and what I belong to…. Is this another
aspect of being outcast, monstrous, _different?_

“Ask Baby what kind of people are all the time trying to find out what
they are and what they belong to.”

“He says, _every_ kind.”

“What kind,” Lone whispered, “am I, then?”

A full minute later he yelled, _“What kind?”_

“Shut up awhile. He doesn’t have a way to say it … uh … Here. He says he
is a figure-outer brain and I am a body and the twins are arms and legs
and you are the head. He says the ‘I’ is all of us.”

“I belong. I belong. Part of you, part of you and you too.”

“The head, silly.”

Lone thought his heart was going to burst. He looked at them all, every
one: arms to flex and reach, a body to care and repair, a brainless but
faultless computer and—the head to direct it.

“And we’ll grow, Baby. We just got born!”

“He says not on your life. He says not with a head like that. We can do
practically _anything_ but we most likely won’t. He says we’re a thing,
all right, but the thing is an idiot.”

So it was that Lone came to know himself; and like the handful of people
who have done so before him he found, at this pinnacle, the rugged foot
of a mountain.



2



BABY IS THREE


I FINALLY GOT IN TO see this Stern. He wasn’t an old man at all. He
looked up from his desk, flicked his eyes over me once, and picked up a
pencil. “Sit over there, Sonny.”

I stood where I was until he looked up again. Then I said, “Look, if a
midget walks in here, what do you say—sit over there, Shorty?”

He put the pencil down again and stood up. He smiled. His smile was as
quick and sharp as his eyes. “I was wrong,” he said, “but how am I
supposed to know you don’t want to be called Sonny?”

That was better, but I was still mad. “I’m fifteen and I don’t have to
like it. Don’t rub my nose in it.”

He smiled again and said okay, and I went and sat down.

“What’s your name?”

“Gerard.”

“First or last?”

“Both,” I said.

“Is that the truth?”

I said, “No. And don’t ask me where I live either.”

He put down his pencil. “We’re not going to get very far this way.”

“That’s up to you. What are you worried about? I got feelings of
hostility? Well, sure I have. I got lots more things than that wrong
with me or I wouldn’t be here. Are you going to let that stop you?”

“Well, no, but—”

“So what else is bothering you? How you’re going to get paid?” I took
out a thousand-dollar bill and laid it on the desk. “That’s so you won’t
have to bill me. _You_ keep track of it. Tell me when it’s used up and
I’ll give you more. So you don’t need my address. Wait,” I said, when he
reached toward the money. “Let it lay here. I want to be sure you and I
are going to get along.”

He folded his hands. “I don’t do business this way, Son—I mean, Gerard.”

“Gerry,” I told him. “You do, if you do business with me.”

“You make things difficult, don’t you? Where did you get a thousand
dollars?”

“I won a contest. Twenty-five words or less about how much fun it is to
do my daintier thing with Sudso.” I leaned forward. “This time it’s the
truth.”

“All right,” he said.

I was surprised. I think he knew it, but he didn’t say anything more.
Just waited for me to go ahead.

“Before we start—_if_ we start,” I said, “I got to know something. The
things I say to you—what comes out while you’re working on me—is that
just between us, like a priest or a lawyer?”

“Absolutely,” he said.

“No matter what?”

“No matter what.”

I watched him when he said it. I believed him.

“Pick up your money,” I said. “You’re on.”

He didn’t do it. He said, “As you remarked a minute ago, that is up to
me. You can’t buy these treatments like a candy bar. We have to work
together. If either one of us can’t do that, it’s useless. You can’t
walk in on the first psychotherapist you find in the phone book and make
any demand that occurs to you just because you can pay for it.”

I said tiredly, “I didn’t get you out of the phone book and I’m not just
guessing that you can help me. I winnowed through a dozen or more
head-shrinkers before I decided on you.”

“Thanks,” he said, and it looked as if he was going to laugh at me,
which I never like. “Winnowed, did you say? Just how?”

“Things you hear, things you read. You know. I’m not saying, so just
file that with my street address.”

He looked at me for a long time. It was the first time he’d used his
eyes on me for anything but a flash glance. Then he picked up the bill.

“What do I do first?” I demanded.

“What do you mean?”

“How do we start?”

“We started when you walked in here.”

So then I had to laugh. “All right, you got me. All I had was an
opening. I didn’t know where you would go from there, so I couldn’t be
there ahead of you.”

“That’s very interesting,” Stern said. “Do you usually figure everything
out in advance?”

“Always.”

“How often are you right?”

“All the time. Except—but I don’t have to tell you about no exceptions.”

He really grinned this time. “I see. One of my patients has been
talking.”

“One of your ex-patients. Your patients don’t talk.”

“I ask them not to. That applies to you, too. What did you hear?”

“That you know from what people say and do what they’re about to say and
do, and that sometimes you let’m do it and sometimes you don’t. How did
you learn to do that?”

He thought a minute. “I guess I was born with an eye for details, and
then let myself make enough mistakes with enough people until I learned
not to make too many more. How did you learn to do it?”

I said, “You answer that and I won’t have to come back here.”

“You really don’t know?”

“I wish I did. Look, this isn’t getting us anywhere, is it?”

He shrugged. “Depends on where you want to go.” He paused, and I got the
eyes full strength again. “Which thumbnail description of psychiatry do
you believe at the moment?”

“I don’t get you.”

Stern slid open a desk drawer and took out a blackened pipe. He smelled
it, turned it over while looking at me. “Psychiatry attacks the onion of
the self, removing layer after layer until it gets down to the little
sliver of unsullied ego. Or: psychiatry drills like an oil well, down
and sidewise and down again, through all the muck and rock until it
strikes a layer that yields. Or: psychiatry grabs a handful of sexual
motivations and throws them on the pin-ball machine of your life, so
they bounce on down against episodes. Want more?”

I had to laugh. “That last one was pretty good.”

“That last one was pretty bad. They are all bad. They all try to
simplify something which is complex by its very nature. The only
thumbnail you’ll get from me is this: no one knows what’s really wrong
with you but you; no one can find a cure for it but you; no one but you
can identify it as a cure; and once you find it, no one but you can do
anything about it.”

“What are _you_ here for?”

“To listen.”

“I don’t have to pay somebody no day’s wages every hour just to listen.”

“True. But you’re convinced that I listen selectively.”

“Am I?” I wondered about it. “I guess I am. Well, don’t you?”

“No, but you’ll never believe that.”

I laughed. He asked me what that was for. I said, “You’re not calling me
Sonny.”

“Not you.” He shook his head slowly. He was watching me while he did it,
so his eyes slid in their sockets as his head moved. “What is it you
want to know about yourself, that made you worried I might tell people?”

“I want to find out why I killed somebody,” I said right away.

It didn’t faze him a bit. “Lie down over there.”

I got up. “On that couch?”

He nodded.

As I stretched out self-consciously, I said, “I feel like I’m in some
damn cartoon.”

“What cartoon?”

“Guy’s built like a bunch of grapes,” I said, looking at the ceiling. It
was pale gray.

“What’s the caption?”

“‘I got trunks full of ’em.’”

“Very good,” he said quietly. I looked at him carefully. I knew then he
was the kind of guy who laughs way down deep when he laughs at all.

He said, “I’ll use that in a book of case histories some time. But it
won’t include yours. What made you throw that in?” When I didn’t answer,
he got up and moved to a chair behind me where I couldn’t see him. “You
can quit testing, Sonny. I’m good enough for your purposes.”

I clenched my jaw so hard, my back teeth hurt. Then I relaxed. I relaxed
all over. It was wonderful. “All right,” I said, “I’m sorry.” He didn’t
say anything, but I had that feeling again that he was laughing. Not at
me, though.

“How old are you?” he asked me suddenly.

“Uh—fifteen.”

“Uh—fifteen,” he repeated. “What does the ‘uh’ mean?”

“Nothing. I’m fifteen.”

“When I asked your age, you hesitated because some other number popped
up. You discarded that and substituted ‘fifteen.’”

“The hell I did! I am fifteen!”

“I didn’t say you weren’t.” His voice came patiently. “Now what was the
other number?”

I got mad again. “There wasn’t any other number! What do you want to go
pryin’ my grunts apart for, trying to plant this and that and make it
mean what you think it ought to mean?”

He was silent.

“I’m fifteen,” I said defiantly, and then, “I don’t like being only
fifteen. You know that. I’m not trying to insist I’m fifteen.”

He just waited, still not saying anything.

I felt defeated. “The number was eight.”

“So you’re eight. And your name?”

“Gerry.” I got up on one elbow, twisting my neck around so I could see
him. He had his pipe apart and was sighting through the stem at the desk
lamp. “Gerry, without no ‘uh!’”

“All right,” he said mildly, making me feel real foolish.

I leaned back and closed my eyes.

Eight, I thought. Eight.

“It’s cold in here,” I complained.

Eight. Eight, plate, state, hate. I ate from the plate of the state and
I hate. I didn’t like any of that and I snapped my eyes open. The
ceiling was still gray. It was all right. Stern was somewhere behind me
with his pipe, and he was all right. I took two deep breaths, three, and
then let my eyes close. Eight. Eight years old. Eight, hate. Years,
fears. Old, cold. _Damn_ it! I twisted and twitched on the couch, trying
to find a way to keep the cold out. I ate from the plate of the—

I grunted and with my mind I took all the eights and all the rhymes and
everything they stood for, and made it all black. But it wouldn’t stay
black. I had to put something there, so I made a great big luminous
figure eight and just let it hang there. But it turned on its side and
inside the loops it began to shimmer. It was like one of those movie
shots through binoculars. I was going to have to look through whether I
liked it or not.

Suddenly I quit fighting it and let it wash over me. The binoculars came
close, closer, and then I was there.

Eight. Eight years old, cold. Cold as a bitch in the ditch. The ditch
was by a railroad. Last year’s weeds were scratchy straw. The ground was
red, and when it wasn’t slippery, clingy mud, it was frozen hard like a
flowerpot. It was hard like that now, dusted with hoar-frost, cold as
the winter light that pushed up over the hills. At night the lights were
warm, and they were all in other people’s houses. In the daytime the sun
was in somebody else’s house too, for all the good it did me.

I was dying in that ditch. Last night it was as good a place as any to
sleep and this morning it was as good a place as any to die. Just as
well. Eight years old, the sick-sweet taste of pork fat and wet bread
from somebody’s garbage, the thrill of terror when you’re stealing a
gunnysack and you hear a footstep.

And I heard a footstep.

I’d been curled up on my side. I whipped over on my stomach because
sometimes they kick your belly. I covered my head with my arms and that
was as far as I could get.

After a while I rolled my eyes up and looked without moving. There was a
big shoe there. There was an ankle in the shoe, and another shoe close
by. I lay there waiting to get tromped. Not that I cared much any more,
but it was such a damn shame. All these months on my own, and they’d
never caught up with me, never even come close, and now this. It was
such a shame I started to cry.

The shoe took me under the armpit, but it was not a kick. It rolled me
over. I was so stiff from the cold, I went over like a plank. I just
kept my arms over my face and head and lay there with my eyes closed.
For some reason I stopped crying. I think people only cry when there’s a
chance of getting help from somewhere.

When nothing happened, I opened my eyes and shifted my forearms a little
so I could see up. There was a man standing over me and he was a mile
high. He had on faded dungarees and an old Eisenhower jacket with deep
sweat-stains under the arms. His face was shaggy, like the guys who
can’t grow what you could call a beard, but still don’t shave.

He said, “Get up.”

I looked down at his shoe, but he wasn’t going to kick me. I pushed up a
little and almost fell down again, except he put his big hand where my
back would hit it. I lay against it for a second because I had to, and
then got up to where I had one knee on the ground.

“Come on,” he said. “Let’s go.”

I swear I felt my bones creak, but I made it. I brought a round white
stone up with me as I stood. I hefted the stone. I had to look at it to
see if I was really holding it, my fingers were that cold. I told him,
“Stay away from me or I’ll bust you in the teeth with this rock.”

His hand came out and down so fast I never saw the way he got one finger
between my palm and the rock and flicked it out of my grasp. I started
to cuss at him, but he just turned his back and walked up the embankment
toward the tracks. He put his chin on his shoulder and said, “Come on,
will you?”

He didn’t chase me, so I didn’t run. He didn’t talk to me so I didn’t
argue. He didn’t hit me, so I didn’t get mad. I went along after him. He
waited for me. He put out his hand to me and I spit at it. So he went
on, up to the tracks, out of my sight. I clawed my way up. The blood was
beginning to move in my hands and feet and they felt like four
point-down porcupines. When I got up to the roadbed, the man was
standing there waiting for me.

The track was level just there, but as I turned my head to look along
it, it seemed to be a hill that was steeper and steeper and turned over
above me. And next thing you know, I was lying flat on my back looking
up at the cold sky.

The man came over and sat down on the rail near me. He didn’t try to
touch me. I gasped for breath a couple of times and suddenly felt I’d be
all right if I could sleep for a minute—just a little minute. I closed
my eyes. The man stuck his finger in my ribs, hard. It hurt.

“Don’t sleep,” he said.

I looked at him.

He said, “You’re frozen stiff and weak with hunger. I want to take you
home and get you warmed up and fed. But it’s a long haul up that way,
and you won’t make it by yourself. If I carry you, will that be the same
to you as if you walked it?”

“What are you going to do when you get me home?”

“I told you.”

“All right,” I said.

He picked me up and carried me down the track. If he’d said anything
else in the world, I’d of laid right down where I was until I froze to
death. Anyway, what did he want to ask me for, one way or the other? I
couldn’t of done anything.

I stopped thinking about it and dozed off.

I woke up once when he turned off the right of way. He dove into the
woods. There was no path, but he seemed to know where he was going. The
next time I woke from a crickling noise. He was carrying me over a
frozen pond and the ice was giving under his feet. He didn’t hurry. I
looked down and saw the white cracks raying out under his feet, and it
didn’t seem to matter a bit. I bleared off again.

He put me down at last. We were there. “There” was inside a room. It was
very warm. He put me on my feet and I snapped out of it in a hurry. The
first thing I looked for was the door. I saw it and jumped over there
and put my back against the wall beside it, in case I wanted to leave.
Then I looked around.

It was a big room. One wall was rough rock and the rest was logs with
stuff shoved between them. There was a big fire going in the rock wall,
not in a fireplace, exactly; it was a sort of hollow place. There was an
old auto battery on a shelf opposite, with two yellowing electric light
bulbs dangling by wires from it. There was a table, some boxes and a
couple of three-legged stools. The air had a haze of smoke and such a
wonderful, heartbreaking, candy-and-crackling smell of food that a
little hose squirted inside my mouth.

The man said, “What have I got here, Baby?”

And the room was full of kids. Well, three of them, but somehow they
seemed to be more than three kids. There was a girl about my age—eight,
I mean—with blue paint on the side of her face. She had an easel and a
palette with lots of paint and a fistful of brushes, but she wasn’t
using the brushes. She was smearing the paint on with her hands. Then
there was a little Negro girl about five with great big eyes who stood
gaping at me. And in a wooden crate, set up on two sawhorses to make a
kind of bassinet, was a baby. I guess about three or four months old. It
did what babies do, drooling some, making small bubbles, waving its
hands around very aimless, and kicking.

When the man spoke, the girl at the easel looked at me and then at the
baby. The baby just kicked and drooled.

The girl said, “His name’s Gerry. He’s mad.”

“What’s he mad at?” the man asked. He was looking at the baby.

“Everything,” said the girl. “Everything and everybody.”

“Where’d he come from?”

I said, “Hey, what is this?” but nobody paid any attention. The man kept
asking questions at the baby and the girl kept answering. Craziest thing
I ever saw.

“He ran away from a state school,” the girl said. “They fed him enough,
but no one bleshed with him.”

That’s what she said—“bleshed.”

I opened the door then and cold air hooted in. “You louse,” I said to
the man, “you’re from the school.”

“Close the door, Janie,” said the man. The girl at the easel didn’t
move, but the door banged shut behind me. I tried to open it and it
wouldn’t move. I let out a howl, yanking at it.

“I think you ought to stand in the corner,” said the man. “Stand him in
the corner, Janie.”

Janie looked at me. One of the three-legged stools sailed across to me.
It hung in midair and turned on its side. It nudged me with its flat
seat. I jumped back and it came after me. I dodged to the side, and that
was the corner. The stool came on. I tried to bat it down and just hurt
my hand. I ducked and it went lower than I did. I put one hand on it and
tried to vault over it, but it just fell and so did I. I got up again
and stood in the corner, trembling. The stool turned right side up and
sank to the floor in front of me.

The man said, “Thank you, Janie.” He turned to me. “Stand there and be
quiet, you. I’ll get to you later. You shouldn’ta kicked up all that
fuss.” And then, to the baby, he said, “He got anything we need?”

And again it was the little girl who answered. She said, “Sure. He’s the
one.”

“Well,” said the man. “What do you know!” He came over. “Gerry, you can
live here. I don’t come from no school. I’ll never turn you in.”

“Yeah, huh?”

“He hates you,” said Janie.

“What am I supposed to do about that?” he wanted to know.

Janie turned her head to look into the bassinet. “Feed him.” The man
nodded and began fiddling around the fire.

Meanwhile, the little Negro girl had been standing in the one spot with
her big eyes right out on her cheekbones, looking at me. Janie went back
to her painting and the baby just lay there same as always, so I stared
right back at the little Negro girl. I snapped, “What the hell are you
gawking at?”

She grinned at me. “Gerry ho-ho,” she said, and disappeared. I mean she
really disappeared, went out like a light, leaving her clothes where she
had been. Her little dress billowed in the air and fell in a heap where
she had been, and that was that. She was gone.

“Gerry hee-hee,” I heard. I looked up, and there she was, stark naked,
wedged in a space where a little outcropping on the rock wall stuck out
just below the ceiling. The second I saw her she disappeared again.

“Gerry ho-ho,” she said. Now she was on top of the row of boxes they
used as storage shelves, over on the other side of the room.

“Gerry hee-hee!” Now she was under the table. “Gerry ho-ho!” This time
she was right in the corner with me, crowding me.

I yelped and tried to get out of the way and bumped the stool. I was
afraid of it, so I shrank back again and the little girl was gone.

The man glanced over his shoulder from where he was working at the fire.
“Cut it out, you kids,” he said.

There was a silence, and then the girl came slowly out from the bottom
row of shelves. She walked across to her dress and put it on.

“How did you do, that?” I wanted to know.

“Ho-ho,” she said.

Janie said, “It’s easy. She’s really twins.”

“Oh,” I said. Then another girl, exactly the same, came from somewhere
in the shadows and stood beside the first. They were identical. They
stood side by side and stared at me. This time I let them stare.

“That’s Bonnie and Beanie,” said the painter. “This is Baby and that—”
she indicated the man—“that’s Lone. And I’m Janie.”

I couldn’t think of what to say, so I said, “Yeah.”

Lone said, “Water, Janie.” He held up a pot. I heard water trickling,
but didn’t see anything. “That’s enough,” he said, and hung the pot on a
crane. He picked up a cracked china plate and brought it over to me. It
was full of stew with great big lumps of meat in it and thick gravy and
dumplings and carrots. “Here, Gerry. Sit down.”

I looked at the stool. “On that?”

“Sure.”

“Not me,” I said. I took the plate and hunkered down against the wall.

“Hey,” he said after a time. “Take it easy. We’ve all had chow. No one’s
going to snatch it away from you. Slow down!”

I ate even faster than before. I was almost finished when I threw it all
up. Then for some reason my head hit the edge of the stool. I dropped
the plate and spoon and slumped there. I felt real bad.

Lone came over and looked at me. “Sorry, kid,” he said. “Clean up, will
you, Janie?”

Right in front of my eyes, the mess on the floor disappeared. I didn’t
care about that or anything else just then. I felt the man’s hand on the
side of my neck. Then he tousled my hair.

“Beanie, get him a blanket. Let’s all go to sleep. He ought to rest
awhile.”

I felt the blanket go around me, and I think I was asleep before he put
me down.

I don’t know how much later it was when I woke up. I didn’t know where I
was and that scared me. I raised my head and saw the dull glow of the
embers in the fireplace. Lone was stretched out on it in his clothes.
Janie’s easel stood in the reddish blackness like some great preying
insect. I saw the baby’s head pop up out of the bassinet, but I couldn’t
tell whether he was looking straight at me or away. Janie was lying on
the floor near the door and the twins were on the old table. Nothing
moved except the baby’s head, bobbing a little.

I got to my feet and looked around the room. Just a room, only the one
door. I tiptoed toward it. When I passed Janie, she opened her eyes.

“What’s the matter?” she whispered.

“None of your business,” I told her. I went to the door as if I didn’t
care, but I watched her. She didn’t do anything. The door was as solid
tight closed as when I’d tried it before.

I went back to Janie. She just looked up at me. She wasn’t scared. I
told her, “I got to go to the john.”

“Oh,” she said. “Why’n’t you say so?”

Suddenly I grunted and grabbed my guts. The feeling I had I can’t begin
to talk about. I acted as if it was a pain, but it wasn’t. It was like
nothing else that ever happened to me before. Something went _splop_ on
the snow outside.

“Okay,” Janie said. “Go on back to bed.”

“But I got to—”

“You got to what?”

“Nothing.” It was true. I didn’t have to go no place. “Next time tell me
right away. I don’t mind.” I didn’t say anything. I went back to my
blanket.

“That’s all?” said Stern. I lay on the couch and looked up at the gray
ceiling. He asked, “How old are you?”

“Fifteen,” I said dreamily. He waited until, for me, the gray ceiling
acquired walls on a floor, a rug and lamps and a desk and a chair with
Stern in it. I sat up and held my head a second, and then I looked at
him. He was fooling with his pipe and looking at me. “What did you do to
me?”

“I told you. I don’t do anything here. You do it.”

“You hypnotized me.”

“I did not.” His voice was quiet, but he really meant it.

“What was all that, then? It was … it was like it was happening for real
all over again.”

“Feel anything?”

“Everything.” I shuddered. _“Every_ damn thing. What was it?”

“Anyone doing it feels better afterward. You can go over it all again
now any time you want to, and every time you do, the hurt in it will be
less. You’ll see.”

It was the first thing to amaze me in years. I chewed on it and then
asked, “If I did it by myself, how come it never happened before?”

“It needs someone to listen.”

“Listen? Was I talking?”

“A blue streak.”

“Everything that happened?”

“How can I know? I wasn’t there. You were.”

“You don’t believe it happened, do you? Those disappearing kids and the
footstool and all?”

He shrugged. “I’m not in the business of believing or not believing. Was
it real to you?”

“Oh, hell, yes!”

“Well, then, that’s all that matters. Is that where you live, with those
people?”

I bit off a fingernail that had been bothering me. “Not for a long time.
Not since Baby was three.” I looked at him. “You remind me of Lone.”

“Why?”

“I don’t know. No, you don’t,” I added suddenly. “I don’t know what made
me say that.” I lay down abruptly.

The ceiling was gray and the lamps were dim. I heard the pipestem click
against his teeth. I lay there for a long time.

“Nothing happens,” I told him.

“What did you expect to happen?”

“Like before.”

“There’s something there that wants out. Just let it come.”

It was as if there was a revolving drum in my head, and on it were
photographed the places and things and people I was after. And it was as
if the drum was spinning very fast, so fast I couldn’t tell one picture
from another. I made it stop, and it stopped at a blank segment. I spun
it again, and stopped it again.

“Nothing happens,” I said.

“Baby is three,” he repeated.

“Oh,” I said. “That.” I closed my eyes.

That might be it. Might, sight, night, light. I might have the sight of
a light in the night. Maybe the baby. Maybe the sight of the baby at
night because of the light …

There was night after night when I lay on that blanket, and a lot of
nights I didn’t. Something was going on all the time in Lone’s house.
Sometimes I slept in the daytime. I guess the only time everybody slept
at once was when someone was sick, like me the first time I arrived
there. It was always sort of dark in the room, the same night and day,
the fire going, the two old bulbs hanging yellow by their wires from the
battery. When they got too dim, Janie fixed the battery and they got
bright again.

Janie did everything that needed doing, whatever no one else felt like
doing. Everybody else did things, too. Lone was out a lot. Sometimes he
used the twins to help him, but you never missed them, because they’d be
here and gone and back again _bing!_ like that. And Baby, he just stayed
in his bassinet.

I did things myself. I cut wood for the fire and I put up more shelves,
and then I’d go swimming with Janie and the twins sometimes. And I
talked to Lone. I didn’t do a thing that the others couldn’t do, but
they all did things I couldn’t do. I was mad, mad all the time about
that. But I wouldn’t of known what to do with myself if I wasn’t mad all
the time about something or other. It didn’t keep us from bleshing.
Bleshing, that was Janie’s word. She said Baby told it to her. She said
it meant everyone all together being something, even if they all did
different things. Two arms, two legs, one body, one head, all working
together, although a head can’t walk and arms can’t think. Lone said
maybe it was a mixture of “blending” and “meshing,” but I don’t think he
believed that himself. It was a lot more than that.

Baby talked all the time. He was like a broadcasting station that runs
twenty-four hours a day, and you can get what it’s sending any time you
tune in, but it’ll keep sending whether you tune in or not. When I say
he talked, I don’t mean exactly that. He semaphored mostly. You’d think
those wandering vague movements of his hands and arms and legs and head
were meaningless, but they weren’t. It was semaphore, only instead of a
symbol for a sound, or such like, the movements were whole thoughts.

I mean spread the left hand and shake the right high up, and thump with
the left heel, and it means, “Anyone who thinks a starling is a pest
just don’t know anything about how a starling thinks” or something like
that. Janie said she made Baby invent the semaphore business. She said
she used to be able to hear the twins thinking—that’s what she said;
hear them thinking—and they could hear Baby. So she would ask the twins
whatever she wanted to know, and they’d ask Baby, and then tell her what
he said. But then as they grew up they began to lose the knack of it.
Every young kid does. So Baby learned to understand when someone talked,
and he’d answer with this semaphore stuff.

Lone couldn’t read the stuff and neither could I. The twins didn’t give
a damn. Janie used to watch him all the time. He always knew what you
meant if you wanted to ask him something, and he’d tell Janie and she’d
say what it was. Part of it, anyway. Nobody could get it all, not even
Janie.

All I know is Janie would sit there and paint her pictures and watch
Baby, and sometimes she’d bust out laughing.

Baby never grew any. Janie did, and the twins, and so did I, but not
Baby. He just lay there. Janie kept his stomach full and cleaned him up
every two or three days. He didn’t cry and he didn’t make any trouble.
No one ever went near him.

Janie showed every picture she painted to Baby, before she cleaned the
boards and painted new ones. She had to clean them because she only had
three of them. It was a good thing, too, because I’d hate to think what
that place would of been like if she’d kept them all; she did four or
five a day. Lone and the twins were kept hopping getting turpentine for
her. She could shift the paints back into the little pots on her easel
without any trouble, just by looking at the picture one color at a time,
but turps was something else again. She told me that Baby remembered all
her pictures and that’s why she didn’t have to keep them. They were all
pictures of machines and gear-trains and mechanical linkages and what
looked like electric circuits and things like that. I never thought too
much about them.

I went out with Lone to get some turpentine and a couple picnic hams one
time. We went through the woods to the railroad track and down a couple
of miles to where we could see the glow of a town. Then the woods again,
and some alleys, and a back street.

Lone was like always, walking along, thinking, thinking.

We came to a hardware store and he went up and looked at the lock and
came back to where I was waiting, shaking his head. Then we found a
general store. Lone grunted and we went and stood in the shadows by the
door. I looked in.

All of a sudden Beanie was in there, naked like she always was when she
traveled like that. She came and opened the door from the inside. We
went in and Lone closed it and locked it.

“Get along home, Beanie,” he said, “before you catch your death.”

She grinned at me and said, “Ho-ho,” and disappeared.

We found a pair of fine hams and a two-gallon can of turpentine. I took
a bright yellow ballpoint pen and Lone cuffed me and made me put it
back.

“We only take what we need,” he told me.

After we left, Beanie came back and locked the door and went home again.
I only went with Lone a few times, when he had more to get than he could
carry easily.

I was there about three years. That’s all I can remember about it. Lone
was there or he was out, and you could hardly tell the difference. The
twins were with each other most of the time. I got to like Janie a lot,
but we never talked much. Baby talked all the time, only I don’t know
what about.

We were all busy and we bleshed.

I sat up on the couch suddenly. Stern said, “What’s the matter?”

“Nothing’s the matter. This isn’t getting me any place.”

“You said that when you’d barely started. Do you think you’ve
accomplished anything since then?”

“Oh, yeah, but—”

“Then how can you be sure you’re right this time?” When I didn’t say
anything, he asked me, “Didn’t you like this last stretch?”

I said angrily, “I didn’t like or not like. It didn’t mean nothing. It
was just—just talk.”

“So what was the difference between this last session and what happened
before?”

“My gosh, plenty! The first one, I felt everything. It was all really
happening to me. But this time—nothing.”

“Why do you suppose that was?”

“I don’t know. You tell me.”

“Suppose,” he said thoughtfully, “that there was some episode so
unpleasant to you that you wouldn’t dare relive it.”

“Unpleasant? You think freezing to death isn’t unpleasant?”

“There are all kinds of unpleasantness. Sometimes the very thing you’re
looking for—the thing that’ll clear up your trouble—is so revolting to
you that you won’t go near it. Or you try to hide it. Wait,” he said
suddenly, “maybe ‘revolting’ and ‘unpleasant’ are inaccurate words to
use. It might be something very desirable to you. It’s just that you
don’t want to get straightened out.”

“I _want_ to get straightened out.”

He waited as if he had to clear something up in his mind, and then said,
“There’s something in that ‘Baby is three’ phrase that bounces you away.
Why is that?”

“Damn if I know.”

“Who said it!”

“I dunno … uh …”

He grinned. “Uh?”

I grinned back at him. “I said it.”

“Okay. When?”

I quit grinning. He leaned forward, then got up.

“What’s the matter?” I asked.

He said, “I didn’t think anyone could be that mad.” I didn’t say
anything. He went over to his desk. “You don’t want to go on any more,
do you?”

“No.”

“Suppose I told you you want to quit because you’re right on the very
edge of finding out what you want to know?”

“Why don’t you tell me and see what I do?”

He just shook his head. “I’m not telling you anything. Go on, leave if
you want to. I’ll give you back your change.”

“How many people quit just when they’re on top of the answer?”

“Quite a few.”

“Well, I ain’t going to.” I lay down.

He didn’t laugh and he didn’t say, “Good,” and he didn’t make any fuss
about it. He just picked up his phone and said, “Cancel everything for
this afternoon,” and went back to his chair, up there out of my sight.

It was very quiet in there. He had the place sound-proofed.

I said, “Why do you suppose Lone let me live there so long when I
couldn’t do any of the things that the other kids could?”

“Maybe you could.”

“Oh, no,” I said positively. “I used to try. I was strong for a kid my
age and I knew how to keep my mouth shut, but aside from those two
things I don’t think I was any different from any kid. I don’t think I’m
any different right now, except what difference there might be from
living with Lone and his bunch.”

“Has this anything to do with ‘Baby is three’?”

I looked up at the gray ceiling. “Baby is three. Baby is three. I went
up to a big house with a winding drive that ran under a sort of
theater-marquee thing. Baby is three. Baby …”

“How old are you?”

“Thirty-three,” I said, and the next thing you know I was up off that
couch like it was hot and heading for the door.

Stern grabbed me. “Don’t be foolish. Want me to waste a whole
afternoon?”

“What’s that to me? I’m paying for it.”

“All right, it’s up to you.”

I went back. “I don’t like any part of this,” I said.

“Good. We’re getting warm then.”

“What made me say ‘Thirty-three’? I ain’t thirty-three. I’m fifteen. And
another thing …”

“Yes?”

“It’s about that ‘Baby is three.’ It’s me saying it, all right. But when
I think about it—it’s not my voice.”

“Like thirty-three’s not your age?”

“Yeah,” I whispered.

“Gerry,” he said warmly, “there’s nothing to be afraid of.”

I realized I was breathing too hard. I pulled myself together. I said,
“I don’t like remembering saying things in somebody else’s voice.”

“Look,” he told me. “This head-shrinking business, as you called it a
while back, isn’t what most people think. When I go with you into the
world of your mind—or when you go yourself, for that matter—what we find
isn’t so very different from the so-called real world. It seems so at
first, because the patient comes out with all sorts of fantasies and
irrationalities and weird experiences. But everyone lives in that kind
of world. When one of the ancients coined the phrase ‘truth is stranger
than fiction,’ he was talking about that.

“Everywhere we go, everything we do, we’re surrounded by symbols, by
things so familiar we don’t ever look at them or don’t see them if we do
look. If anyone ever could report to you exactly what we saw and thought
while walking ten feet down the street, you’d get the most twisted,
clouded, partial picture you ever ran across. And nobody ever looks at
what’s around him with any kind of attention until he gets into a place
like this. The fact that he’s looking at past events doesn’t matter;
what counts is that he’s seeing clearer than he ever could before, just
because, for once, he’s trying.

“Now—about this ‘thirty-three’ business. I don’t think a man could get a
nastier shock than to find he has some one else’s memories. The ego is
too important to let slide that way. But consider: all your thinking is
done in code and you have the key to only about a tenth of it. So you
run into a stretch of code which is abhorrent to you. Can’t you see that
the only way you’ll find the key to it is to stop avoiding it?”

“You mean I’d started to remember with … with somebody else’s mind?”

“It looked like that to you for a while, which means something. Let’s
try to find out what.”

“All right.” I felt sick. I felt tired. And I suddenly realized that
being sick and being tired was a way of trying to get out of it.

“Baby is three,” he said.

Baby is maybe. Me, three, thirty-three, me, you Kew you.

“Kew!” I yelled. Stern didn’t say anything. “Look, I don’t know why, but
I think I know how to get to this, and this isn’t the way. Do you mind
if I try something else?”

“You’re the doctor,” he said.

I had to laugh. Then I closed my eyes.

There, through the edges of the hedges, the ledges and wedges of windows
were shouldering up to the sky. The lawns were sprayed-on green, neat
and clean, and all the flowers looked as if they were afraid to let
their petals break and be untidy.

I walked up the drive in my shoes. I’d had to wear shoes and my feet
couldn’t breathe. I didn’t want to go to the house, but I had to.

I went up the steps between the big white columns and looked at the
door. I wished I could see through it, but it was too white and thick.
There was a window the shape of a fan over it, too high up though, and a
window on each side of it, but they were all crudded up with colored
glass. I hit on the door with my hand and left dirt on it.

Nothing happened so I hit it again. It got snatched open and a tall,
thin colored woman stood there. “What you want?”

I said I had to see Miss Kew.

“Well, Miss Kew don’t want to see the likes of you,” she said. She
talked too loud. “You got a dirty face.”

I started to get mad then. I was already pretty sore about having to
come here, walking around near people in the daytime and all. I said,
“My face ain’t got nothin’ to do with it. Where’s Miss Kew? Go on, find
her for me.”

She gasped. “You can’t speak to me like that!”

I said, “I didn’t want to speak to you like any way. Let me in.” I
started wishing for Janie. Janie could of moved her. But I had to handle
it by myself. I wasn’t doing so hot, either. She slammed the door before
I could so much as curse at her.

So I started kicking on the door. For that, shoes are great. After a
while, she snatched the door open again so sudden I almost went on my
can. She had a broom with her. She screamed at me, “You get away from
here, you trash, or I’ll call the police!” She pushed me and I fell.

I got up off the porch floor and went for her. She stepped back and
whupped me one with the broom as I went past, but anyhow I was inside
now. The woman was making little shrieking noises and coming for me. I
took the broom away from her and then somebody said “Miriam!” in a voice
like a grown goose.

I froze and the woman went into hysterics. “Oh, Miss Alicia, look out!
He’ll kill us all. Get the police. Get the—”

“Miriam!” came the honk, and Miriam dried up.

There at the top of the stairs was this prune-faced woman with a dress
on that had lace on it. She looked a lot older than she was, maybe
because she held her mouth so tight. I guess she was about
thirty-three—_thirty-three._ She had mean eyes and a small nose.

I asked, “Are you Miss Kew?”

“I am. What is the meaning of this invasion?”

“I got to talk to you, Miss Kew?”

“Don’t say ‘got to.’ Stand up straight and speak out.”

The maid said, “I’ll get the police.”

Miss Kew turned on her. “There’s time enough for that, Miriam. Now, you
dirty little boy, what do you want?”

“I got to speak to you by yourself,” I told her.

“Don’t you let him do it, Miss Alicia,” cried the maid.

“Be quiet, Miriam. Little boy, I told you not to say ‘got to.’ You may
say whatever you have to say in front of Miriam.”

“Like hell.” They both gasped. I said, “Lone told me not to.”

“Miss Alicia, are you goin’ to let him—”

“Be quiet, Miriam! Young man, you will keep a civil—” Then her eyes
popped up real round. _“Who_ did you say …”

“Lone said so.”

“Lone.” She stood there on the stairs looking at her hands. Then she
said, “Miriam, that will be all.” And you wouldn’t know it was the same
woman, the way she said it.

The maid opened her mouth, but Miss Kew stuck out a finger that might as
well of had a rifle-sight on the end of it. The maid beat it.

“Hey,” I said, “here’s your broom.” I was just going to throw it, but
Miss Kew got to me and took it out of my hand.

“In there,” she said.

She made me go ahead of her into a room as big as our swimming hole. It
had books all over and leather on top of the tables, with gold flowers
drawn into the corners.

She pointed to a chair. “Sit there. No, wait a moment.” She went to the
fireplace and got a newspaper out of a box and brought it over and
unfolded it on the seat of the chair. “Now sit down.”

I sat on the paper and she dragged up another chair, but didn’t put no
paper on it.

“What is it? Where is Lone?”

“He died,” I said.

She pulled in her breath and went white. She stared at me until her eyes
started to water.

“You sick?” I asked her. “Go ahead, throw up. It’ll make you feel
better.”

“Dead? Lone is dead?”

“Yeah. There was a flash flood last week and when he went out the next
night in that big wind, he walked under a old oak tree that got gullied
under by the flood. The tree come down on him.”

_“Came_ down on him,” she whispered. “Oh, no … it’s not true.”

“It’s true, all right. We planted him this morning. We couldn’t keep him
around no more. He was beginning to st—”

“Stop!” She covered her face with her hands.

“What’s the matter?”

“I’ll be all right in a moment,” she said in a low voice. She went and
stood in front of the fireplace with her back to me. I took off one of
my shoes while I was waiting for her to come back. But instead she
talked from where she was. “Are you Lone’s little boy?”

“Yeah. He told me to come to you.”

“Oh, my dear child!” She came running back and I thought for a second
she was going to pick me up or something, but she stopped short and
wrinkled up her nose a little bit. “Wh-what’s your name?”

“Gerry,” I told her.

“Well, Gerry, how would you like to live with me in this nice big house
and—and have new clean clothes—and everything?”

“Well, that’s the whole idea. Lone told me to come to you. He said you
got more dough than you know what to do with, and he said you owed him a
favor.”

“A favor?” That seemed to bother her.

“Well,” I tried to tell her, “he said he done something for you once and
you said some day you’d pay him back for it if you ever could. This is
it.”

“What did he tell you about that?” She’d got her honk back by then.

“Not a damn thing.”

“Please don’t use that word,” she said, with her eyes closed. Then she
opened them and nodded her head. “I promised and I’ll do it. You can
live here from now on. If—if you want to.”

“That’s got nothin’ to do with it. Lone _told_ me to.”

“You’ll be happy here,” she said. She gave me an up-and-down. “I’ll see
to that.”

“Okay. Shall I go get the other kids?”

_“Other_ kids—children?”

“Yeah. This ain’t for just me. For all of us—the whole gang.”

“Don’t say ‘ain’t.’” She leaned back in her chair, took out a silly
little handkerchief and dabbed her lips with it, looking at me the whole
time. “Now tell me about these—these other children.”

“Well, there’s Janie, she’s eleven like me. And Bonnie and Beanie are
eight, they’re twins, and Baby. Baby is three.”

I screamed. Stern was kneeling beside the couch in a flash, holding his
palms against my cheeks to hold my head still; I’d been whipping it back
and forth.

“Good boy,” he said. “You found it. You haven’t found out _what_ it is,
but now you know _where_ it is.”

“But for sure,” I said hoarsely. “Got water?”

He poured me some water out of a thermos flask. It was so cold it hurt.
I lay back and rested, like I’d climbed a cliff. I said, “I can’t take
anything like that again.”

“You want to call it quits for today?”

“What about you?”

“I’ll go on as long as you want me to.”

I thought about it. “I’d like to go on, but I don’t want no thumping
around. Not for a while yet.”

“If you want another of those inaccurate analogies,” Stern said,
“psychiatry is like a road map. There are always a lot of different ways
to get from one place to another place.”

“I’ll go around by the long way,” I told him. “The eight-lane highway.
Not that track over the hill. My clutch is slipping. Where do I turn
off?”

He chuckled. I liked the sound of it. “Just past that gravel driveway.”

“I been there. There’s a bridge washed out.”

“You’ve been on this whole road before,” he told me. “Start at the other
side of the bridge.”

“I never thought of that. I figured I had to do the whole thing, every
inch.”

“Maybe you won’t have to, maybe you will, but the bridge will be easy to
cross when you’ve covered everything else. Maybe there’s nothing of
value on the bridge and maybe there is, but you can’t get near it till
you’ve looked everywhere else.”

“Let’s go.” I was real eager, somehow.

“Mind a suggestion?”

“No.”

“Just talk,” he said. “Don’t try to get too far into what you’re saying.
That first stretch, when you were eight—you really lived it. The second
one, all about the kids, you just talked about. Then, the visit when you
were eleven, you felt that. Now just talk again.”

“All right.”

He waited, then said quietly, “In the library. You told her about the
other kids.”

I told her about … and then she said … and something happened, and I
screamed. She comforted me and I cussed at her.

But we’re not thinking about that now. We’re going on.

In the library. The leather, the table, and whether I’m able to do with
Miss Kew what Lone said.

What Lone said was, “There’s a woman lives up on the top of the hill in
the Heights section, name of Kew. She’ll have to take care of you. You
got to get her to do that. Do everything she tells you, only stay
together. Don’t you ever let any one of you get away from the others,
hear? Aside from that, just you keep Miss Kew happy and she’ll keep you
happy. Now you do what I say.” That’s what Lone said. Between every word
there was a link like steel cable, and the whole thing made something
that couldn’t be broken. Not by me it couldn’t.

Miss Kew said, “Where are your sisters and the baby?”

“I’ll bring ’em.”

“Is it near here?”

“Near enough.” She didn’t say anything to that, so I got up. “I’ll be
back soon.”

“Wait,” she said. “I—really, I haven’t had time to think. I mean—I’ve
got to get things ready, you know.”

I said, “You don’t need to think and you are ready. So long.” From the
door I heard her saying, louder and louder as I walked away, “Young man,
if you’re to live in this house, you’ll learn to be a good deal
better-mannered—” and a lot more of the same.

I yelled back at her, “Okay, _okay!”_ and went out.

The sun was warm and the sky was good, and pretty soon I got back to
Lone’s house. The fire was out and Baby stunk. Janie had knocked over
her easel and was sitting on the floor by the door with her head in her
hands. Bonnie and Beanie were on a stool with their arms around each
other, pulled up together as close as they could get, as if it was cold
in there, although it wasn’t.

I hit Janie in the arm to snap her out of it. She raised her head. She
had gray eyes—or maybe it was more a kind of green—but now they had a
funny look about them, like water in a glass that had some milk left in
the bottom of it.

I said, “What’s the matter around here?”

“What’s the matter with what?” she wanted to know.

“All of yez,” I said.

She said, “We don’t give a damn, that’s all.”

“Well, all right,” I said, “but we got to do what Lone said. Come on.”

“No.” I looked at the twins. They turned their backs on me. Janie said,
“They’re hungry.”

“Well, why not give ’em something?”

She just shrugged. I sat down. What did Lone have to go get himself
squashed for?

“We can’t blesh no more,” said Janie. It seemed to explain everything.

“Look,” I said, “I’ve got to be Lone now.”

Janie thought about that and Baby kicked his feet. Janie looked at him.
“You can’t,” she said.

“I know where to get the heavy food and the turpentine,” I said. “I can
find that springy moss to stuff in the logs, and cut wood, and all.”

But I couldn’t call Bonnie and Beanie from miles away to unlock doors. I
couldn’t just say a word to Janie and make her get water and blow up the
fire and fix the battery. I couldn’t make us blesh.

We all stayed like that for a long time. Then I heard the bassinet
creak. I looked up. Janie was staring into it.

“All right,” she said. “Let’s go.”

“Who says so?”

“Baby.”

“Who’s running things now?” I said, mad. “Me or Baby?”

“Baby,” Janie said.

I got up and went over to bust her one in the mouth, and then I stopped.
If Baby could make them do what Lone wanted, then it would get done. If
I started pushing them all around, it wouldn’t. So I didn’t say
anything. Janie got up and walked out the door. The twins watched her
go. Then Bonnie disappeared. Beanie picked up Bonnie’s clothes and
walked out. I got Baby out of the bassinet and draped him over my
shoulders.

It was better when we were all outside. It was getting late in the day
and the air was warm. The twins flitted in and out of the trees like a
couple of flying squirrels, and Janie and I walked along like we were
going swimming or something. Baby started to kick, and Janie looked at
him awhile and got him fed, and he was quiet again.

When we came close to town, I wanted to get everybody close together,
but I was afraid to say anything. Baby must of said it instead. The
twins came back to us and Janie gave them their clothes and they walked
ahead of us, good as you please. I don’t know how Baby did it. They sure
hated to travel that way.

We didn’t have no trouble except one guy we met on the street near Miss
Kew’s place. He stopped in his tracks and gaped at us, and Janie looked
at him and made his hat go so far down over his eyes that he like to
pull his neck apart getting it back up again.

What do you know, when we got to the house somebody had washed off all
the dirt I put on the door. I had one hand on Baby’s arm and one on his
ankle and him draped over my neck, so I kicked the door and left some
more dirt.

“There’s a woman here name of Miriam,” I told Janie. “She says anything,
tell her to go to hell.”

The door opened and there was Miriam. She took one look and jumped back
six feet. We all trailed inside. Miriam got her wind and screamed, “Miss
Kew! Miss Kew!”

“Go to hell,” said Janie, and looked at me. I didn’t know what to do. It
was the first time Janie ever did anything I told her to.

Miss Kew came down the stairs. She was wearing a different dress, but it
was just as stupid and had just as much lace. She opened her mouth and
nothing came out, so she just left it open until something happened.
Finally she said, “Dear gentle Lord preserve us!”

The twins lined up and gawked at her. Miriam sidled over to the wall and
sort of slid along it, keeping away from us, until she could get to the
door and close it. She said, “Miss Kew, if those are the children you
said were going to live here, I quit.”

Janie said, “Go to hell.”

Just then Bonnie squatted down on the rug. Miriam squawked and jumped at
her. She grabbed hold of Bonnie’s arm and went to snatch her up. Bonnie
disappeared, leaving Miriam with one small dress and the damnedest
expression on her face. Beanie grinned enough to split her head in two
and started to wave like mad. I looked where she was waving, and there
was Bonnie, naked as a jaybird, up on the banister at the top of the
stairs.

Miss Kew turned around and saw her and sat down plump on the steps.
Miriam went down, too, like she’d been slugged. Beanie picked up
Bonnie’s dress and walked up the steps past Miss Kew and handed it over.
Bonnie put it on. Miss Kew sort of lolled around and looked up. Bonnie
and Beanie came back down the stairs hand in hand to where I was. Then
they lined up and gaped at Miss Kew.

“What’s the matter with her?” Janie asked me.

“She gets sick every once in a while.”

“Let’s go back home.”

“No,” I told her.

Miss Kew grabbed the banister and pulled herself up. She stood there
hanging on to it for a while with her eyes closed. All of a sudden she
stiffened herself. She looked about four inches taller. She came
marching over to us.

“Gerard” she honked.

I think she was going to say something different. But she sort of
checked herself and pointed. “What in heaven’s name is _that?”_ And she
aimed her finger at me.

I didn’t get it right away, so I turned around to look behind me.
“What?”

“That! That!”

“Oh!” I said. “That’s Baby.”

I slung him down off my back and held him up for her to look at. She
made a sort of moaning noise and jumped over and took him away from me.
She held him out in front of her and moaned again and called him a poor
little thing, and ran and put him down on a long bench, with cushions
under the colored-glass window. She bent over him and put her knuckle in
her mouth and bit on it and moaned some more. Then she turned to me.

“How long has he been like this?”

I looked at Janie and she looked at me. I said, “He’s always been like
he is.”

She made a sort of cough and ran to where Miriam was lying flaked out on
the floor. She slapped Miriam’s face a couple of times back and forth.
Miriam sat up and looked us over. She closed her eyes and shivered and
sort of climbed up Miss Kew hand over hand until she was on her feet.

“Pull yourself together,” said Miss Kew between her teeth. “Get a basin
with some hot water and soap. Wash-cloth. Towels. Hurry!” She gave
Miriam a big push. Miriam staggered and grabbed at the wall, and then
ran out.

Miss Kew went back to Baby and hung over him, titch-titching with her
lips all tight.

“Don’t mess with him,” I said. “There’s nothin’ wrong with him. We’re
hungry.”

She gave me a look like I’d punched her. “Don’t speak to me!”

“Look,” I said, “we don’t like this any more’n you do. If Lone hadn’t
told us to, we wouldn’t never have come. We were doing all right where
we were.”

“Don’t say ‘wouldn’t never,’” said Miss Kew. She looked at all of us,
one by one. Then she took that silly little hunk of handkerchief and
pushed it against her mouth.

“See?” I said to Janie. “All the time gettin’ sick.”

“Ho-ho,” said Bonnie.

Miss Kew gave her a long look. “Gerard,” she said in a choked sort of
voice, “I understood you to say that these children were your sisters.”

“Well?”

She looked at me as if I was real stupid. “We don’t have little colored
girls for sisters, Gerard.”

Janie said, _“We_ do.”

Miss Kew walked up and back, real fast. “We have a great deal to do,”
she said, talking to herself.

Miriam came in with a big oval pan and towels and stuff on her arm. She
put it down on the bench thing and Miss Kew stuck the back of her hand
in the water, then picked up Baby and dunked him right in. Baby started
to kick.

I stepped forward and said, “Wait a minute. Hold on now. What do you
think you’re doing?”

Janie said, “Shut up, Gerry. He says it’s all right.”

“All right? She’ll drown him.”

“No, she won’t. Just shut up.”

Working up a froth with the soap, Miss Kew smeared it on Baby and turned
him over a couple of times and scrubbed at his head and like to
smothered him in a big white towel. Miriam stood gawking while Miss Kew
lashed up a dishcloth around him so it come out pants. When she was
done, you wouldn’t of known it was the same baby. And by the time Miss
Kew finished with the job, she seemed to have a better hold on herself.
She was breathing hard and her mouth was even tighter. She held out the
baby to Miriam.

“Take this poor thing,” she said, “and put him—”

But Miriam backed away. “I’m sorry, Miss Kew, but I am leaving here and
I don’t care.”

Miss Kew got her honk out. “You can’t leave me in a predicament like
this! These children need help. Can’t you see that for yourself?”

Miriam looked me and Janie over. She was trembling. “You ain’t safe,
Miss Alicia. They ain’t just dirty. They’re crazy!”

“They’re victims of neglect, and probably no worse than you or I would
be if we’d been neglected. And don’t say ‘ain’t.’ Gerard!”

“What?”

“Don’t say—oh, dear, we have so much to do. Gerard, if you and
your—these other children are going to live here, you shall have to make
a great many changes. You cannot live under this roof and behave as you
have so far. Do you understand that?”

“Oh, sure. Lone said we was to do whatever you say and keep you happy.”

“Will you do whatever I say?”

“That’s what I just said, isn’t it?”

“Gerard, you shall have to learn not to speak to me in that tone. Now,
young man, if I told you to do what Miriam says, too, would you do it?”

I said to Janie, “What about that?”

“I’ll ask Baby.” Janie looked at Baby and Baby wobbled his hands and
drooled some. She said, “It’s okay.”

Miss Kew said, “Gerard, I asked you a question.”

“Keep your pants on,” I said. “I got to find out, don’t I? Yes, if
that’s what you want, we’ll listen to Miriam too.”

Miss Kew turned to Miriam. “You hear that, Miriam?”

Miriam looked at Miss Kew and at us and shook her head. Then she held
out her hands a bit to Bonnie and Beanie.

They went right to her. Each one took hold of a hand. They looked up at
her and grinned. They were probably planning some sort of hellishness,
but I guess they looked sort of cute. Miriam’s mouth twitched and I
thought for a second she was going to look human. She said, “All right,
Miss Alicia.”

Miss Kew walked over and handed her the baby and she started upstairs
with him. Miss Kew herded us along after Miriam. We all went upstairs.

They went to work on us then and for three years they never stopped.

“That was hell,” I said to Stern.

“They had their work cut out.”

“Yeah, I s’pose they did. So did we. Look, we were going to do exactly
what Lone said. Nothing on earth could of stopped us from doing it. We
were tied and bound to doing every last little thing Miss Kew said to
do. But she and Miriam never seemed to understand that. I guess they
felt they had to push every inch of the way. All they had to do was make
us understand what they wanted, and we’d of done it. That’s okay when
it’s something like telling me not to climb into bed with Janie. Miss
Kew raised holy hell over that. You’d of thought I’d robbed the Crown
Jewels, the way she acted.

“But when it’s something like, ‘You must behave like little ladies and
gentlemen,’ it just doesn’t mean a thing. And two out of three orders
she gave us were like that. ‘Ah-ah!’ she’d say. ‘Language, language!’
For the longest time I didn’t dig that at all. I finally asked her what
the hell she meant, and then she finally come out with it. But you see
what I mean.”

“I certainly do,” Stern said. “Did it get easier as time went on?”

“We only had real trouble twice, once about the twins and once about
Baby. That one was real bad.”

“What happened?”

“About the twins? Well, when we’d been there about a week or so we began
to notice something that sort of stunk. Janie and me, I mean. We began
to notice that we almost never got to see Bonnie and Beanie. It was like
that house was two houses, one part for Miss Kew and Janie and me, and
the other part for Miriam and the twins. I guess we’d have noticed it
sooner if things hadn’t been such a hassle at first, getting us into new
clothes and making us sleep all the time at night, and all that. But
here was the thing: We’d all get turned out in the side yard to play,
and then along comes lunch, and the twins got herded off to eat with
Miriam while we ate with Miss Kew. So Janie said, ‘Why don’t the twins
eat with us?’

“‘Miriam’s taking care of them, dear,’ Miss Kew says.

“Janie looked at her with those eyes. ‘I know that. Let ’em eat here and
I’ll take care of ’em.’

“Miss Kew’s mouth got all tight again and she said, “They’re little
colored girls, Jane. Now eat your lunch.’

“But that didn’t explain anything to Janie or me, either. I said, ‘I
want ’em to eat with us. Lone said we should stay together.’

“‘But you _are_ together,’ she says. ‘We all live in the same house. We
all eat the same food. Now let us not discuss the matter.’

“I looked at Janie and she looked at me and she said, ‘So why can’t we
all do this livin’ and eatin’ right here?’

“Miss Kew put down her fork and looked hard. ‘I have explained it to you
and I have said that there will be no further discussion.’

“Well, I thought that was real nowhere. So I just rocked back my head
and bellowed, ‘Bonnie! Bonnie!’ And _bing,_ there they were.

“So all hell broke loose. Miss Kew ordered them out and they wouldn’t
go, and Miriam come steaming in with their clothes, and she couldn’t
catch them, and Miss Kew got to honking at them and finally at me. She
said this was too much. Well, maybe she’d had a hard week, but so had
we. So Miss Kew ordered us to leave.

“I went and got Baby and started out, and along came Janie and the
twins. Miss Kew waited till we were all out the door and next thing you
know she ran out after us. She passed us and got in front of me and made
me stop. So we all stopped.

“‘Is this how you follow Lone’s wishes?’ she asked.

“I told her yes. She said she understood Lone wanted us to stay with
her. And I said, ‘Yeah, but he wanted us to stay together more.’

“She said come back in, we’d have a talk. Janie asked Baby and Baby said
okay, so we went back. We had a compromise. We didn’t eat in the dining
room no more. There was a side porch, a sort of verandah thing with
glass windows, with a door to the dining room and a door to the kitchen,
and we all ate out there after that. Miss Kew ate by herself.

“But something funny happened because of that whole cockeyed hassle.”

“What was that?” Stern asked me.

I laughed. “Miriam. She looked and sounded like always but she started
slipping us cookies between meals. You know, it took me years to figure
out what all that was about. I mean it. From what I’ve learned about
people, there seems to be two armies fightin’ about race. One’s fightin’
to keep ’em apart, and one’s fightin’ to get ’em together. But I don’t
see why both sides are so _worried_ about it! Why don’t they just forget
it?”

“They can’t. You see, Gerry, it’s necessary for people to believe they
are superior in some fashion. You and Lone and the kids—you were a
pretty tight unit. Didn’t you feel you were a little better than all of
the rest of the world?”

“Better? How could we be better?”

“Different, then.”

“Well, I suppose so, but we didn’t think about it. Different, yes.
Better, no.”

“You’re a unique case,” Stern said. “Now go on and tell me about the
other trouble you had. About Baby.”

“Baby. Yeah. Well, that was a couple of months after we moved to Miss
Kew’s. Things were already getting real smooth, even then. We’d learned
all the ‘yes, ma’am, no, ma’am’ routines by then and she’d got us
catching up with school—regular periods morning and afternoon, five days
a week. Janie had long ago quit taking care of Baby, and the twins
walked to wherever they went. That was funny. They could pop from one
place to another right in front of Miss Kew’s eyes and she wouldn’t
believe what she saw. She was too upset about them suddenly showing up
bare. They quit doing it and she was happy about it. She was happy about
a lot of things. It had been years since she’d seen anybody—years. She’d
even had the meters put outside the house so no one would ever have to
come in. But with us there, she began to liven up. She quit wearing
those old-lady dresses and began to look halfway human. She ate with us
sometimes, even.

“But one fine day I woke up feeling real weird. It was like somebody had
stolen something from me when I was asleep, only I didn’t know what. I
crawled out of my window and along the ledge into Janie’s room, which I
wasn’t supposed to do. She was in bed. I went and woke her up. I can
still see her eyes, the way they opened a little slit, still asleep, and
then popped up wide. I didn’t have to tell her something was wrong. She
knew, and she knew what it was.

“‘Baby’s gone!’ she said.

“We didn’t care then who woke up. We pounded out of her room and down
the hall and into the little room at the end where Baby slept. You
wouldn’t believe it. The fancy crib he had and the white chest of
drawers and all that mess of rattles and so on, they were gone, and
there was just a writing desk there. I mean it was as if Baby had never
been there at all.

“We didn’t say anything. We just spun around and busted into Miss Kew’s
bedroom. I’d never been in there but once and Janie only a few times.
But forbidden or not, this was different. Miss Kew was in bed, with her
hair braided. She was wide awake before we could get across the room.
She pushed herself back and up until she was sitting against the
headboard. She gave the two of us the cold eye.

“‘What is the meaning of this?’ she wanted to know.

“‘Where’s Baby?’ I yelled at her.

“‘Gerard,’ she says, ‘there is no need to shout.’

“Janie was a real quiet kid, but she said, ‘You better tell us where he
is, Miss Kew,’ and it would of scared you to look at her when she said
it.

“So all of a sudden Miss Kew took off the stone face and held out her
hands to us. ‘Children,’ she said, ‘I’m sorry. I really am sorry. But
I’ve just done what is best. I’ve sent Baby away. He’s gone to live with
some children like him. We could never make him really happy here. You
know that.’

“Janie said, ‘He never told us he wasn’t happy.’

“Miss Kew brought out a hollow kind of laugh. ‘As if he could talk, the
poor little thing!’

“‘You better get him back here,’ I said. ‘You don’t know what you’re
fooling with. I told you we wasn’t ever to break up.’

“She was getting mad, but she held on to herself. ‘I’ll try to explain
it to you, dear,’ she said. ‘You and Jane here and even the twins are
all normal, healthy children and you’ll grow up to be fine men and
women. But poor Baby’s—different. He’s not going to grow very much more,
and he’ll never walk and play like other children.’

“‘That doesn’t matter,’ Janie said. ‘You had no call to send him away.’

“And I said, ‘Yeah. You better bring him back, but quick.’

“Then she started to jump salty. ‘Among the many things I have taught
you is, I am sure, not to dictate to your elders. Now then, you run
along and get dressed for breakfast, and we’ll say no more about this.’

“I told her, nice as I could, ‘Miss Kew, you’re going to wish you
brought him back right now. But you’re going to bring him back soon. Or
else.’

“So then she got up out of her bed and ran us out of the room.”

I was quiet awhile, and Stern asked, “What happened?”

“Oh,” I said, “she brought him back.” I laughed suddenly. “I guess it’s
funny now, when you come to think of it. Nearly three months of us
getting bossed around, and her ruling the roost, and then all of a
sudden we lay down the law. We’d tried our best to be good according to
her ideas, but, by God, that time she went too far. She got the
treatment from the second she slammed her door on us. She had a big
china pot under her bed, and it rose up in the air and smashed through
her dresser mirror. Then one of the drawers in the dresser slid open and
a glove come out of it and smacked her face.

“She went to jump back on the bed and a whole section of plaster fell
off the ceiling onto the bed. The water turned on in her little bathroom
and the plug went in, and just about the time it began to overflow, all
her clothes fell off their hooks. She went to run out of the room, but
the door was stuck, and when she yanked on the handle it opened real
quick and she spread out on the floor. The door slammed shut again and
more plaster come down on her. Then we went back in and stood looking at
her. She was crying. I hadn’t known till then that she could.

“‘You going to get Baby back here?’ I asked her.

“She just lay there and cried. After a while she looked up at us. It was
real pathetic. We helped her up and got her to a chair. She just looked
at us for a while, and at the mirror, and at the busted ceiling, and
then she whispered, ‘What happened? What happened?’

“‘You took Baby away,’ I said. ‘That’s what.’

“So she jumped up and said real low, real scared, but real strong:
‘Something struck the house. An airplane. Perhaps there was an
earthquake. We’ll talk about Baby after breakfast.’

“I said, ‘Give her more, Janie.’

“A big gob of water hit her on the face and chest and made her nightgown
stick to her, which was the kind of thing that upset her most. Her
braids stood straight up in the air, more and more, till they dragged
her standing straight up. She opened her mouth to yell and the powder
puff off the dresser rammed into it. She clawed it out.

“‘What are you doing? What are you doing?’ she says, crying again.

“Janie just looked at her and put her hands behind her, real smug. ‘We
haven’t done anything,’ she said.

“And I said, ‘Not yet we haven’t. You going to get Baby back?’

“And she screamed at us, ‘Stop it! Stop it! Stop talking about that
mongoloid idiot! It’s no good to anyone, not even itself! How could I
ever make believe it’s mine?’

“I said, ‘Get rats, Janie.’

“There was a scuttling sound along the baseboard. Miss Kew covered her
face with her hands and sank down on the chair. ‘Not rats,’ she said.
‘There are no rats here.’ Then something squeaked and she went all to
pieces. Did you ever see anyone really go to pieces?”

“Yes,” Stern said.

“I was about as mad as I could get,” I said, “but that was almost too
much for me. Still, she shouldn’t have sent Baby away. It took a couple
of hours for her to get straightened out enough so she could use the
phone, but we had Baby back before lunch time.” I laughed.

“What’s funny?”

“She never seemed able to rightly remember what had happened to her.
About three weeks later I heard her talking to Miriam about it. She said
it was the house settling suddenly. She said it was a good thing she’d
sent Baby out for that medical checkup—the poor little thing might have
been hurt. She really believed it, I think.”

“She probably did. That’s fairly common. We don’t believe anything we
don’t want to believe.”

“How much of this do you believe?” I asked him suddenly.

“I told you before—it doesn’t matter. I don’t want to believe or
disbelieve it.”

“You haven’t asked me how much of it I believe.”

“I don’t have to. You’ll make up your own mind about that.”

“Are you a _good_ psychotherapist?”

“I think so,” he said. “Whom did you kill?”

The question caught me absolutely off guard. “Miss Kew,” I said. Then I
started to cuss and swear. “I didn’t mean to tell you that.”

“Don’t worry about it,” he said. “What did you do it for?”

“That’s what I came here to find out.”

“You must have really hated her.”

I started to cry. Fifteen years old and crying like that!

He gave me time to get it all out. The first part of it came out in
noises, grunts and squeaks that hurt my throat. Much more than you’d
think came out when my nose started to run. And finally—words.

“Do you know where I came from? The earliest thing I can remember is a
punch in the mouth. I can still see it coming, a fist as big as my head.
Because I was crying. I been afraid to cry ever since. I was crying
because I was hungry. Cold, maybe. Both. After that, big dormitories,
and whoever could steal the most got the most. Get the hell kicked out
of you if you’re bad, get a big reward if you’re good. Big reward: they
let you alone. Try to live like that. Try to live so the biggest, most
wonderful thing in the whole damn world is just to have ’em let you
alone!

“So a spell with Lone and the kids. Something wonderful: you belong. It
never happened before. Two yellow bulbs and a fireplace and they light
up the world. It’s all there is and all there ever has to be.

“Then the big change: clean clothes, cooked food, five hours a day
school; Columbus and King Arthur and a 1925 book on Civics that explains
about septic tanks. Over it all a great big square-cut lump of ice, and
you watch it melting and the corners curve, and you know it’s because of
you, Miss Kew … hell, she had too much control over herself ever to
slobber over us, but it was there, that feeling. Lone took care of us
because it was part of the way he lived. Miss Kew took care of us and
none of it was the way she lived. It was something she wanted to do.

“She had a weird idea of ‘right’ and a wrong idea of ‘wrong,’ but she
stuck to them, tried to make her ideas do us good. When she couldn’t
understand, she figured it was her own failure … and there was an
almighty lot she didn’t understand and never could. What went right was
our success. What went wrong was her mistake. That last year, that was …
oh, good.”

“So?”

“So I killed her. Listen,” I said. I felt I had to talk fast. I wasn’t
short of time, but I had to get rid of it. “I’ll tell you all I know
about it. The day before I killed her. I woke up in the morning and the
sheets crackly clean under me, the sunlight coming in through white
curtains and bright red-and-blue drapes. There’s a closet full of my
clothes—mine, you see; I never had anything that was really mine
before—and downstairs Miriam clinking around with breakfast and the
twins laughing. Laughing with _her,_ mind you, not just with each other
like they always did before.

“In the next room, Janie moving around, singing, and when I see her, I
know her face will shine inside and out. I get up. There’s _hot_ hot
water and the toothpaste bites my tongue. The clothes fit me and I go
downstairs and they’re all there and I’m glad to see them and they’re
glad to see me, and we no sooner get set around the table when Miss Kew
comes down and everyone calls out to her at once.

“And the morning goes by like that, school with a recess, there in the
big long living room. The twins with the ends of their tongues stuck
out, drawing the alphabet instead of writing it, and then Janie, when
it’s time, painting a picture, a real picture of a cow with trees and a
yellow fence that goes off into the distance. Here I am lost between the
two parts of a quadratic equation, and Miss Kew bending close to help
me, and I smell the sachet she has on her clothes. I hold up my head to
smell it better, and far away I hear the shuffle and klunk of filled
pots going on the stove back in the kitchen.

“And the afternoon goes by like that, more school and some study and
boiling out into the yard, laughing. The twins chasing each other,
running on their two feet to get where they want to go; Janie dappling
the leaves in her picture, trying to get it just the way Miss Kew says
it ought to be. And Baby, he’s got a big playpen. He don’t move around
much any more, he just watches and dribbles some, and gets packed full
of food and kept as clean as a new sheet of tinfoil.

“And supper, and the evening, and Miss Kew reading to us, changing her
voice every time someone else talks in the story, reading fast and
whispery when it embarrasses her, but reading every word all the same.

“And I had to go and kill her. And that’s all.”

“You haven’t said why,” Stern said.

“What are you—stupid?” I yelled.

Stern didn’t say anything. I turned on my belly on the couch and propped
up my chin in my hands and looked at him. You never could tell what was
going on with him, but I got the idea that he was puzzled.

“I said why,” I told him.

“Not to me.”

I suddenly understood that I was asking too much of him. I said slowly,
“We all woke up at the same time. We all did what somebody else wanted.
We lived through a day someone else’s way, thinking someone else’s
thoughts, saying other people’s words. Janie painted someone else’s
pictures, Baby didn’t talk to anyone, and we were all happy with it. Now
do you see?”

“Not yet.”

“God!” I said. I thought for a while. “We didn’t blesh.”

“Blesh? Oh. But you didn’t after Lone died, either.”

“That was different. That was like a car running out of gas, but the
car’s there—there’s nothing wrong with it. It’s just waiting. But after
Miss Kew got done with us, the car was taken all to pieces, see?”

It was his turn to think awhile. Finally he said, “The mind makes us do
funny things. Some of them seem completely reasonless, wrong, insane.
But the cornerstone of the work we’re doing is this: there’s a chain of
solid, unassailable logic in the things we do. Dig deep enough and you
find cause and effect as clearly in this field as you do in any other. I
said _logic,_ mind; I didn’t say ‘correctness’ or ‘rightness’ or
‘justice’ or anything of the sort. Logic and truth are two very
different things, but they often look the same to the mind that’s
performing the logic.

“When that mind is submerged, working at cross-purposes with the surface
mind, then you’re all confused. Now in your case, I can see the thing
you’re pointing at—that in order to preserve or to rebuild that peculiar
bond between you kids, you had to get rid of Miss Kew. But I don’t see
the logic. I don’t see that regaining that ‘bleshing’ was worth
destroying this new-found security which you admit was enjoyable.”

I said desperately, “Maybe it wasn’t worth destroying it.”

Stern leaned forward and pointed his pipe at me. “It _was_ because it
made you do what you did. After the fact, maybe things look different.
But when you were moved to do it, the important thing was to destroy
Miss Kew and regain this thing you’d had before. I don’t see why and
neither do you.”

“How are we going to find out?”

“Well, let’s get to the most unpleasant part, if you’re up to it.”

I lay down. “I’m ready.”

“All right. Tell me everything that happened just before you killed
her.”

I fumbled through that last day, trying to taste the food, hear the
voices. A thing came and went and came again: it was the crisp feeling
of the sheets. I thrust it away because it was at the beginning of that
day, but it came back again, and I realized it was at the end, instead.

I said, “What I just told you, all that about the children doing things
other people’s way instead of their own, and Baby not talking, and
everyone happy about it, and finally that I had to kill Miss Kew. It
took a long time to get to that, and a long time to start doing it. I
guess I lay in bed and thought for four hours before I got up again. It
was dark and quiet. I went out of the room and down the hall and into
Miss Kew’s bedroom and killed her.”

“How?”

“That’s all there is!” I shouted, as loud as I could. Then I quieted
down. “It was awful dark … it still is. I don’t know. I don’t want to
know. She did love us. I know she did. But I had to kill her.”

“All right, all right,” Stern said. “I guess there’s no need to get too
gruesome about this. You’re—”

“What?”

“You’re quite strong for your age, aren’t you, Gerard?”

“I guess so. Strong enough, anyway.”

“Yes,” he said.

“I still don’t see that logic you were talking about.” I began to hammer
on the couch with my fist, hard, once for each word:
“Why—did—I—have—to—go—and—do—that?”

“Cut that out,” he said. “You’ll hurt yourself.”

“I ought to get hurt,” I said.

“Ah?” said Stern.

I got up and went to the desk and got some water. “What am I going to
do?”

“Tell me what you did after you killed her, right up until the time you
came here.”

“Not much,” I said. “It was only last night. I took her checkbook. I
went back to my room, sort of numb. I put all my clothes on except my
shoes. I carried them. I went out. Walked a long time, trying to think,
went to the bank when it opened. Cashed a check for eleven hundred
bucks. Got the idea of getting some help from a psychiatrist, spent most
of the day looking for one, came here. That’s all.”

“Didn’t you have any trouble cashing the check?”

“I never have any trouble making people do what I want them to do.”

He gave a surprised grunt.

“I know what you’re thinking—I couldn’t make Miss Kew do what I wanted.”

“That’s part of it,” he admitted.

“If I had of done that,” I told him, “she wouldn’t of been Miss Kew any
more. Now the banker—all I made him do was be a banker.”

I looked at him and suddenly realized why he fooled with the pipe all
the time. It was so he could look down at it and you wouldn’t be able to
see his eyes.

“You killed her,” he said—and I knew he was changing the subject—“and
destroyed something that was valuable to you. It must have been less
valuable to you than the chance to rebuild this thing you used to have
with the other kids. And you’re not sure of the value of that.” He
looked up. “Does that describe your main trouble?”

“Just about.”

“You know the single thing that makes people kill?” When I didn’t
answer, he said, “Survival. To save the self or something which
identifies with the self. And in this case that doesn’t apply, because
your setup with Miss Kew had far more survival value for you, singly and
as a group, than the other.”

“So maybe I just didn’t have a good enough reason to kill her.”

“You had, because you did it. We just haven’t located it yet. I mean we
have the reason, but we don’t know why it was important enough. The
answer is somewhere in you.”

“Where?”

He got up and walked some. “We have a pretty consecutive life-story
here. There’s fantasy mixed with the fact, of course, and there are
areas in which we have no detailed information, but we have a beginning
and a middle and an end. Now I can’t say for sure, but the answer may be
in that bridge you refused to cross a while back. Remember?”

I remembered all right. I said, “Why that? Why can’t we try something
else?”

He quietly pointed out, “Because you just said it. Why are you shying
away from it?”

“Don’t go making big ones out of little ones,” I said. Sometimes the guy
annoyed me. “That bothers me. I don’t know why, but it does.”

“Something’s lying hidden in there and you’re bothering _it_ so it’s
fighting back. Anything that fights to stay concealed is very possibly
the thing we’re after. Your trouble is concealed, isn’t it?”

“Well, yes,” I said, and I felt that sickness and faintness again, and
again I pushed it away. Suddenly I wasn’t going to be stopped any more.
“Let’s go get it.” I lay down.

He let me watch the ceiling and listen to silence for a while, and then
he said, “You’re in the library. You’ve just met Miss Kew. She’s talking
to you; you’re telling her about the children.”

I lay very still. Nothing happened. Yes, it did; I got tense inside all
over, from the bones out, more and more. When it got as bad as it could,
still nothing happened.

I heard him get up and cross the room to the desk. He fumbled there for
a while; things clicked and hummed. Suddenly I heard my own voice:

_“Well, there’s Janie, she’s eleven like me. And Bonnie and Beanie are
eight, they’re twins, and Baby. Baby is three.”_

_And the sound of my own scream—_

And nothingness.

Sputtering out of the darkness. I came up flailing with my fists. Strong
hands caught my wrists. They didn’t check my arms; they just grabbed and
rode. I opened my eyes. I was soaking wet. The thermos lay on its side
on the rug. Stern was crouched beside me, holding my wrists. I quit
struggling.

“What happened?”

He let me go and stood back watchfully. “Lord,” he said, “what a
charge!”

I held my head and moaned. He threw me a hand-towel and I used it. “What
hit me?”

“I’ve had you on tape the whole time,” he explained. “When you wouldn’t
get into the recollection, I tried to nudge you into it by using your
own voice as you recounted it before. It works wonders sometimes.”

“It worked wonders this time,” I growled. “I think I blew a fuse.”

“In effect, you did. You were on the trembling verge of going into the
thing you don’t want to remember, and you let yourself go unconscious
rather than do it.”

“What are you so pleased about?”

“Last-ditch defense,” he said tersely. “We’ve got it now. Just one more
try.”

“Now hold on. The last-ditch defense is that I drop dead.”

“You won’t. You’ve contained this episode in your subconscious mind for
a long time and it hasn’t hurt you.”

“Hasn’t it?”

“Not in terms of killing you.”

“How do you know it won’t when we drag it out?”

“You’ll see.”

I looked up at him sideways. Somehow he struck me as knowing what he was
doing.

“You know a lot more about yourself now than you did at the time,” he
explained softly. “You can apply insight. You can evaluate it as it
comes up. Maybe not completely, but enough to protect yourself. Don’t
worry. Trust me. I can stop it if it gets too bad. Now just relax. Look
at the ceiling. Be aware of your toes. Don’t look at your toes. Look
straight up. Your toes, your big toes. Don’t move your toes, but feel
them. Count outward from your big toes, one count for each toe. One,
two, three. Feel that third toe. Feel the toe, feel it, feel it go limp,
go limp, go limp. The toe next to it on both sides gets limp. So limp
because your toes are limp, all of your toes are limp—”

“What are you doing?” I shouted at him.

He said in the same silky voice, “You trust me and so do your toes trust
me. They’re all limp because you trust me. You—”

“You’re trying to hypnotize me. I’m not going to let you do that.”

“You’re going to hypnotize yourself. You do everything yourself. I just
point the way. I point your toes to the path. Just point your toes. No
one can make you go anywhere you don’t want to go, but you want to go
where your toes are pointed where your toes are limp where your …”

On and on and on. And where was the dangling gold ornament, the light in
the eyes, the mystic passes? He wasn’t even sitting where I could see
him. Where was the talk about how sleepy I was supposed to be? Well, he
knew I wasn’t sleepy and didn’t want to be sleepy. I just wanted to be
toes. I just wanted to be limp, just a limp toe. No brains in a toe, a
toe to go, go, go eleven times, eleven, I’m eleven …

I split in two, and it was all right, the part that watched the part
that went back to the library, and Miss Kew leaning toward me, but not
too near, me with the newspaper crackling under me on the library chair,
me with one shoe off and my limp toes dangling … and I felt a mild
surprise at this. For this was hypnosis, but I was quite conscious,
quite altogether there on the couch with Stern droning away at me, quite
able to roll over and sit up and talk to him and walk out if I wanted
to, but I just didn’t want to. Oh, if this was what hypnosis was like, I
was all for it. I’d work at this. This was all right.

There on the table I’m able to see that the gold will unfold on the
leather, and whether I’m able to stay by the table with you, with Miss
Kew, with Miss Kew …

“… and Bonnie and Beanie are eight, they’re twins, and Baby. Baby is
three.”

“Baby is three,” she said.

There was a pressure, a stretching apart, and a … a breakage. And with a
tearing agony and a burst of triumph that drowned the pain, it was done.

And this is what was inside. All in one flash, but all this.

Baby is three? My baby would be three if there were a baby, which there
never was…

Lone, I’m open to you. Open, is this open enough?

His irises like wheels. I’m sure they spin, but I never catch them at
it. The probe that passes invisibly from his brain, through his eyes,
into mine. Does he know what it means to me? Does he care? He doesn’t
care, he doesn’t know; he empties me and I fill as he directs me to; he
drinks and waits and drinks again and never looks at the cup.

When I saw him first, I was dancing in the wind, in the wood, in the
wild, and I spun about and he stood there in the leafy shadows, watching
me. I hated him for it. It was not my wood, not my gold-spangled
fern-tangled glen. But it was my dancing that he took, freezing it
forever by being there. I hated him for it, hated the way he looked, the
way he stood, ankle-deep in the kind wet ferns, looking like a tree with
roots for feet and clothes the color of earth. As I stopped he moved,
and then he was just a man, a great ape-shouldered, dirty animal of a
man, and all my hate was fear suddenly and I was just as frozen.

He knew what he had done and he didn’t care. Dancing … never to dance
again, because never would I know the woods were free of eyes, free of
tall, uncaring, dirty animal-men. Summer days with the clothes choking
me, winter nights with the precious decencies round and about me like a
shroud, and never to dance again, never to remember dancing without
remembering the shock of knowing he had seen me. How I hated him! Oh,
how I hated him!

To dance alone where no one knew, that was the single thing I hid to
myself when I was known as Miss Kew, that Victorian, older than her
years, later than her time; correct and starched, lace and linen and
lonely. Now indeed I would be all they said, through and through,
forever and ever, because he had robbed me of the one thing I dared to
keep secret.

He came out into the sun and walked to me, holding his great head a
little on one side. I stood where I was, frozen inwardly and outwardly
and altogether by the core of anger and the layer of fear. My arm was
still out, my waist still bent from my dance, and when he stopped, I
breathed again because by then I had to.

He said, “You read books?”

I couldn’t bear to have him near me, but I couldn’t move. He put out his
hard hand and touched my jaw, turned my head up until I had to look into
his face. I cringed away from him, but my face would not leave his hand,
though he was not holding it, just lifting it. “You got to read some
books for me. I got no time to find them.”

I asked him, “Who are you?”

“Lone,” he said. “You going to read books for me?”

“No. Let me go, let me go!” He wasn’t holding me.

“What books?” I cried.

He thumped my face, not very hard. It made me look up a bit more. He
dropped his hand away. His eyes, the irises were going to spin….

“Open up in there,” he said. “Open way up and let me see.”

There were books in my head, and he was looking at the titles … he was
not looking at the titles, for he couldn’t read. He was looking at what
I knew of the books. I suddenly felt terribly useless, because I had
only a fraction of what he wanted.

“What’s that?” he barked.

I knew what he meant. He’d gotten it from inside my head. I didn’t know
it was in there, even, but he found it.

“Telekinesis,” I said.

“How is it done?”

“Nobody knows if it can be done. Moving physical objects with the mind!”

“It can be done,” he said. “This one?”

“Teleportation. That’s the same thing—well, almost. Moving your own body
with mind power.”

“Yeah, yeah, I see it,” he said gruffly.

“Molecular interpenetration. Telepathy and clairvoyance. I don’t know
anything about them. I think they’re silly.”

“Read about ’em. It don’t matter if you understand or not. What’s this?”

It was there in my brain, on my lips. _“Gestalt.”_

“What’s that?”

“Group. Like a cure for a lot of diseases with one kind of treatment.
Like a lot of thoughts expressed in one phrase. The whole is greater
than the sum of the parts.”

“Read about that, too. Read a whole lot about that. That’s the _most_
you got to read about. That’s important.”

He turned away, and when his eyes came away from mine it was like
something breaking, so that I staggered and fell to one knee. He went
off into the woods without looking back. I got my things and ran home.
There was anger, and it struck me like a storm. There was fear, and it
struck me like a wind. I knew I would read the books, I knew I would
come back, I knew I would never dance again.

So I read the books and I came back. Sometimes it was every day for
three or four days, and sometimes, because I couldn’t find a certain
book, I might not come back for ten. He was always there in the little
glen, waiting, standing in the shadows, and he took what he wanted of
the books and nothing of me. He never mentioned the next meeting. If he
came there every day to wait for me, or if he only came when I did, I
have no way of knowing.

He made me read books that contained nothing for me, books on evolution,
on social and cultural organization, on mythology, and ever so much on
symbiosis. What I had with him were not conversations; sometimes nothing
audible would pass between us but his grunt of surprise or small, short
hum of interest.

He tore the books out of me the way he would tear berries from a bush,
all at once; he smelled of sweat and earth and the green juices his
heavy body crushed when he moved through the wood.

If he learned anything from the books, it made no difference in him.

There came a day when he sat by me and puzzled something out.

He said, “What book has something like this?” Then he waited for a long
time, thinking. “The way a termite can’t digest wood, you know, and
microbes in the termite’s belly can, and what the termite eats is what
the microbe leaves behind. What’s that?”

“Symbiosis,” I remembered. I remembered the words. Lone tore the content
from words and threw the words away. “Two kinds of life depending upon
one another for existence.”

“Yeah. Well, is there a book about four-five kinds doing that?”

“I don’t know.”

Then he asked, “What about this? You got a radio station, you got
four-five receivers, each receiver is fixed up to make something
different happen, like one digs and one flies and one makes noise, but
each one takes orders from the one place. And each one has its own power
and its own thing to do, but they are all apart. Now: is there life like
that, instead of radio?”

“Where each organism is a part of the whole, but separated? I don’t
think so … unless you mean social organizations, like a team, or perhaps
a gang of men working, all taking orders from the same boss.”

“No,” he said immediately, “not like that. Like one single animal.” He
made a gesture with his cupped hand which I understood.

I asked, “You mean a _gestalt_ life-form? It’s fantastic.”

“No book has about that, huh?”

“None I ever heard of.”

“I got to know about that,” he said heavily. “There is such a thing. I
want to know if it ever happened before.”

“I can’t see how anything of the sort could exist.”

“It does. A part that fetches, a part that figures, a part that finds
out, and a part that talks.”

“Talks? Only humans talk.”

“I know,” he said, and got up and went away.

I looked and looked for such a book but found nothing remotely like it.
I came back and told him so. He was still a very long time, looking off
to the blue-on-blue line of the hilly horizon. Then he drove those
about-to-spin irises at me and searched.

“You learn, but you don’t think,” he said, and looked again at the
hills.

“This all happens with humans,” he said eventually. “It happens piece by
piece right under folks’ noses, and they don’t see it. You got
mind-readers. You got people can move things with their mind. You got
people can move themselves with their mind. You got people can figure
anything out if you just think to ask them. What you ain’t got is the
one kind of person who can pull ’em all together, like a brain pulls
together the parts that press and pull and feel heat and walk and think
and all the other things.

“I’m one,” he finished suddenly. Then he sat still for so long I thought
he had forgotten me.

“Lone,” I said, “what do you do here in the woods?”

“I wait,” he said. “I ain’t finished yet.” He looked at my eyes and
snorted in irritation. “I don’t mean ‘finished’ like you’re thinking. I
mean I ain’t—completed yet. You know about a worm when it’s cut, growin’
whole again? Well, forget about the cut. Suppose it just grew that way,
for the first time, see? I’m getting parts. I ain’t finished. I want a
book about that kind of animal that is me when I’m finished.”

“I don’t know of such a book. Can you tell me more? Maybe if you could,
I’d think of the right book or a place to find it.”

He broke a stick between his huge hands, put the two pieces side by side
and broke them together with one strong twist.

“All I know is I got to do what I’m doing like a bird’s got to nest when
it’s time. And I know that when I’m done I won’t be anything to brag
about. I’ll be like a body stronger and faster than anything there ever
was, without the right kind of head on it. But maybe that’s because I’m
one of the first. That picture you had, the caveman …”

“Neanderthal.”

“Yeah. Come to think of it, he was no great shakes. An early try at
something new. That’s what I’m going to be. But maybe the right kind of
head’ll come along after I’m all organized. Then it’ll be something.”

He grunted with satisfaction and went away.

I tried, for days I tried, but I couldn’t find what he wanted. I found a
magazine which stated that the next important evolutionary step in man
would be in a psychic rather than a physical direction, but it said
nothing about a—shall I call it a _gestalt_ organism? There was
something about slime molds, but they seem to be more a hive activity of
amoebae than even a symbiosis.

To my own unscientific, personally uninterested mind, there was nothing
like what he wanted except possibly a band marching together, everyone
playing different instruments with different techniques and different
notes, to make a single thing move along together. But he hadn’t meant
anything like that.

So I went back to him in the cool of an early fall evening, and he took
what little I had in my eyes, and turned from me angrily with a gross
word I shall not permit myself to remember.

“You can’t find it,” he told me. “Don’t come back.”

He got up and went to a tattered birch and leaned against it, looking
out and down into the wind-tossed crackling shadows. I think he had
forgotten me already. I know he leaped like a frightened animal when I
spoke to him from so near. He must have been completely immersed in
whatever strange thoughts he was having, for I’m sure he didn’t hear me
coming.

I said, “Lone, don’t blame me for not finding it. I tried.”

He controlled his startlement and brought those eyes down on me. “Blame?
Who’s blamin’ anybody?”

“I failed you,” I told him, “and you’re angry.”

He looked at me so long I became uncomfortable.

“I don’t know what you’re talkin’ about,” he said.

I wouldn’t let him turn away from me. He would have. He would have left
me forever with not another thought; he didn’t _care!_ It wasn’t cruelty
or thoughtlessness as I have been taught to know those things. He was as
uncaring as a cat is of the bursting of a tulip bud.

I took him by the upper arms and shook him, it was like trying to shake
the front of my house. “You _can_ know!” I screamed at him. “You know
what I read. You must know what I think!”

He shook his head.

“I’m a person, a woman,” I raved at him. “You’ve used me and used me and
you’ve given me nothing. You’ve made me break a lifetime of
habits—reading until all hours, coming to you in the rain and on
Sunday—you don’t talk to me, you don’t look at me, you don’t know
anything about me and you don’t care. You put some sort of a spell on me
that I couldn’t break. And when you’re finished, you say, ‘Don’t come
back.’”

“Do I have to give something back because I took something?”

“People do.”

He gave that short, interested hum. “What do you want me to give you? I
ain’t got anything.”

I moved away from him. I felt … I don’t know what I felt. After a time I
said, “I don’t know.”

He shrugged and turned. I fairly leaped at him, dragging him back. “I
want you to—”

“Well, damn it, what?”

I couldn’t look at him; I could hardly speak. “I don’t know. There’s
something, but I don’t know what it is. It’s something that—I couldn’t
say if I knew it.” When he began to shake his head, I took his arms
again. “You’ve read the books out of me; can’t you read the … the _me_
out of me?”

“I ain’t never tried.” He held my face up and stepped close. “Here,” he
said.

His eyes projected their strange probe at me and I screamed. I tried to
twist away. I hadn’t wanted this, I was sure I hadn’t. I struggled
terribly. I think he lifted me right off the ground with his big hands.
He held me until he was finished, and then let me drop. I huddled to the
ground, sobbing. He sat down beside me. He didn’t try to touch me. He
didn’t try to go away. I quieted at last and crouched there, waiting.

He said, “I ain’t going to do much of that no more.”

I sat up and tucked my skirt close around me and laid my cheek on my
updrawn knee so I could see his face. “What happened?”

He cursed. “Damn mishmash inside you. Thirty-three years old—what you
want to live like that for?”

“I live very comfortably,” I said with some pique.

“Yeah,” he said. “All by yourself for ten years now ’cept for someone to
do your work. Nobody else.”

“Men are animals, and women …”

“You really hate women. They all know something you don’t.”

“I don’t want to know. I’m quite happy the way I am.”

“Hell you are.”

I said nothing to that. I despise that kind of language.

“Two things you want from me. Neither makes no sense.” He looked at me
with the first real expression I have ever seen in his face: a profound
wonderment. “You want to know all about me, where I came from, how I got
to be what I am.”

“Yes, I do want that. What’s the other thing I want that you know and I
don’t?”

“I was born some place and growed like a weed somehow,” he said,
ignoring me. “Folks who didn’t give even enough of a damn to try the
orphanage routine. So I just ran loose, sort of in training to be the
village idiot. I’da made it, but I took to the woods instead.”

“Why?”

He wondered why, and finally said, “I guess because the way people lived
didn’t make no sense to me. Out here I can grow like I want.”

“How is that?” I asked over one of those vast distances that built and
receded between him and me so constantly.

“What I wanted to get from your books.”

“You never told me.”

For the second time he said, “You learn, but you don’t think. There’s a
kind of—well, _person._ It’s all made of separate parts, but it’s all
one person. It has like hands, it has like legs, it has like a talking
mouth, and it has like a brain. That’s me, a brain for that person. Damn
feeble, too, but the best I know of.”

“You’re mad.”

“No, I ain’t,” he said, unoffended and completely certain. “I already
got the part that’s like hands. I can move ’em anywhere and they do what
I want, though they’re too young yet to do much good. I got the part
that talks. That one’s real good.”

“I don’t think you talk very well at all,” I said. I cannot stand
incorrect English.

He was surprised. “I’m not talking about me! She’s back yonder with the
others.”

“She?”

“The one that talks. Now I need one that thinks, one that can take
anything and add it to anything else and come up with a right answer.
And once they’re all together, and all the parts get used together often
enough, I’ll be that new kind of thing I told you about. See? Only—I
wish it had a better head on it than me.”

My own head was swimming. “What made you start doing this?”

He considered me gravely. “What made you start growing hair in your
armpits?” he asked me. “You don’t figure a thing like that. It just
happens.”

“What is that … that thing you do when you look in my eyes?”

“You want a name for it? I ain’t got one. I don’t know how I do it. I
know I can get anyone I want to do anything. Like you’re going to forget
about me.”

I said in a choked voice, “I don’t want to forget about you.”

“You will.” I didn’t know then whether he meant I’d forget, or I’d
_want_ to forget. “You’ll hate me, and then after a long time you’ll be
grateful. Maybe you’ll be able to do something for me some time. You’ll
be that grateful that you’ll be glad to do it. But you’ll forget, all
right, everything but a sort of … feeling. And my name, maybe.”

I don’t know what moved me to ask him, but I did, forlornly. “And no one
will ever know about you and me?”

“Can’t,” he said. “Unless … well, unless it was the head of the animal,
like me, or a better one.” He heaved himself up.

“Oh, wait, wait!” I cried. He mustn’t go yet, he mustn’t. He was a tall,
dirty beast of a man, yet he had enthralled me in some dreadful way.
“You haven’t given me the other … whatever it was.”

“Oh,” he said. “Yeah, that.”

He moved like a flash. There was a pressure, a stretching apart, and a …
a breakage. And with a tearing agony and a burst of triumph that drowned
the pain, it was done.

I came up out of it, through two distinct levels:

I am eleven, breathless from shock from a transferred agony of that
incredible entrance into the ego of another. And:

I am fifteen, lying on the couch while Stern drones on, “… quietly,
quietly limp, your ankles and legs as limp as your toes, your belly goes
soft, the back of your neck is as limp as your belly, it’s quiet and
easy and all gone soft and limper than limp….”

I sat up and swung my legs to the floor. “Okay,” I said.

Stern looked a little annoyed. “This is going to work,” he said, “but it
can only work if you cooperate. Just lie—”

“It did work,” I said.

“What?”

“The whole thing. A to Z.” I snapped my fingers. “Like that.”

He looked at me piercingly. “What do you mean?”

“It was right there, where you said. In the library. When I was eleven.
When she said, ‘Baby is three.’ It knocked loose something that had been
boiling around in her for three years, and it all came blasting out. I
got it, full force; just a kid, no warning, no defenses. It had such a—a
pain in it, like I never knew could be.”

“Go on,” said Stern.

“That’s really all. I mean that’s not what was in it; it’s what it did
to me. What it was, a sort of hunk of her own self. A whole lot of
things that happened over about four months, every bit of it. She knew
Lone.”

“You mean a whole _series_ of episodes?”

“That’s it.”

“You got a series all at once? In a split second?”

“That’s right. Look, for that split second I _was_ her, don’t you see? I
was her, everything she’d ever done, everything she’d ever thought and
heard and felt. Everything, everything, all in the right order if I
wanted to bring it out like that. Any part of it if I wanted it by
itself. If I’m going to tell you about what I had for lunch, do I have
to tell you everything else I’ve ever done since I was born? No. I tell
you I _was_ her, and then and forever after I can remember anything she
could remember up to that point. In just that one flash.”

“A _gestalt,”_ he murmured.

“Aha!” I said, and thought about that. I thought about a whole lot of
things. I put them aside for a moment and said, “Why didn’t I know all
this before?”

“You had a powerful block against recalling it.”

I got up excitedly. “I don’t see why. I don’t see that at all.”

“Just natural revulsion,” he guessed. “How about this? You had a
distaste for assuming a female ego, even for a second.”

“You told me yourself, right at the beginning, that I didn’t have that
kind of a problem.”

“Well, how does this sound to you? You say you felt pain in that
episode. So—you wouldn’t go back into it for fear of re-experiencing the
pain.”

“Let me think, let me think. Yeah, yeah, that’s part of it—that thing of
going into someone’s mind. She opened up to me because I reminded her of
Lone. I went in. I wasn’t ready; I’d never done it before, except maybe
a little, against resistance. I went all the way in and it was too much;
it frightened me away from trying it for years. And there it lay,
wrapped up, locked away. But as I grew older, the power to do that with
my mind got stronger and stronger, and still I was afraid to use it. And
the more I grew, the more I felt, down deep, that Miss Kew had to be
killed before she killed the … what I am. My God!” I shouted. “Do you
know what I am?”

“No,” he said. “Like to tell me about it?”

“I’d like to,” I said. “Oh, yes, I’d like that.”

He had that professional open-minded expression on his face, not
believing or disbelieving, just taking it all in. I had to tell him, and
I suddenly realized that I didn’t have enough words. I knew the things,
but not the names for them.

_Lone took the meanings and threw the words away._

Further back: _“You read books. Read books for me.”_

The look of his eyes. That—“opening up” thing.

I went over to Stern. He looked up at me, I bent close. First he was
startled, then he controlled it, then he came even closer to me.

“My God,” he murmured. “I didn’t look at those eyes before. I could have
sworn those irises spun like wheels….”

Stern read books. He’d read more books than I ever imagined had been
written. I slipped in there, looking for what I wanted.

I can’t say exactly what it was like. It was like walking in a tunnel,
and in this tunnel, all over the roof and walls, wooden arms stuck out
at you, like the thing at the carnival, the merry-go-round, the thing
you snatch the brass rings from. There’s a brass ring on the end of each
of these arms, and you can take any one of them you want to.

Now imagine you make up your mind which rings you want, and the arms
hold only those. Now picture yourself with a thousand hands to grab the
rings off with. Now just suppose the tunnel is a zillion miles long, and
you can go from one end of it to the other, grabbing rings, in just the
time it takes you to blink once. Well, it was like that, only easier.

It was easier for me to do than it had been for Lone.

Straightening up, I got away from Stern. He looked sick and frightened.

“It’s all right,” I said.

“What did you do to me?”

“I needed some words. Come on, come on. Get professional.”

I had to admire him. He put his pipe in his pocket and gouged the tips
of his fingers hard against his forehead and cheeks. Then he sat up and
he was okay again.

“I know,” I said. “That’s how Miss Kew felt when Lone did it to her.”

“What _are_ you?”

“I’ll tell you. I’m the central ganglion of a complex organism which is
composed of Baby, a computer; Bonnie and Beanie, teleports; Janie,
telekineticist; and myself, telepath and central control. There isn’t a
single thing about any of us that hasn’t been documented: the
teleportation of the Yogi, the telekinetics of some gamblers, the
idiosavant mathematicians, and most of all, the so-called poltergeist,
the moving about of household goods through the instrumentation of a
young girl. Only in this case every one of my parts delivers at peak
performance.

“Lone organized it, or it formed around him; it doesn’t matter which. I
replaced Lone, but I was too underdeveloped when he died, and on top of
that I got an occlusion from that blast from Miss Kew. To that extent
you were right when you said the blast made me subconsciously afraid to
discover what was in it. But there was another good reason for my not
being able to get in under that ‘Baby is three’ barrier.

“We ran into the problem of what it was I valued more than the security
Miss Kew gave us. Can’t you see now what it was? My _gestalt_ organism
was at the point of death from that security. I figured she had to be
killed or it—_I_—would be. Oh, the parts would live on: two little
colored girls with a speech impediment, one introspective girl with an
artistic bent, one mongoloid idiot, and me—ninety per cent
short-circuited potentials and ten per cent juvenile delinquent.” I
laughed. “Sure, she had to be killed. It was self-preservation for the
_gestalt.”_

Stern bobbled around with his mouth and finally got out: “I don’t—”

“You don’t need to,” I laughed. “This is wonderful. You’re good—real
good. Now I want to tell you this, because you can appreciate a fine
point in your specialty. You talk about occlusions! I couldn’t get past
the ‘Baby is three’ thing because in it lay the clues to what I really
am. I couldn’t find that out because I was afraid to remember that I was
two things—Miss Kew’s little boy, and something a hell of a lot bigger.
I couldn’t be both, and I wouldn’t release either one.”

He said, with his eyes on his pipe, “Now you can?”

“I have.”

“And what now?”

“What do you mean?”

Stern leaned back against the corner of his desk. “Did it occur to you
that maybe this—_gestalt_ organism of yours is already dead?”

“It isn’t.”

“How do you know?”

“How does your head know your arm works?”

He touched his face. “So … now what?”

I shrugged. “Did the Pekin man look at Homo Sap walking erect and say,
‘Now what?’ We’ll live, that’s all, like a man, like a tree, like
anything else that lives. We’ll feed and grow and experiment and breed.
We’ll defend ourselves.” I spread my hands. “We’ll just do what comes
naturally.”

“But what can you do?”

“What can an electric motor do? It depends on where we apply ourselves.”

Stern was very pale. “Just what do you—_want_ to do?”

I thought about that. He waited until I was quite finished thinking and
didn’t say anything. “Know what?” I said at last. “Ever since I was
born, people been kicking me around, right up until Miss Kew took over.
And what happened with her? She damn near killed me.”

I thought some more, and said, “Everybody’s had fun but me. The kind of
fun everybody has is kicking someone around, someone small who can’t
fight back. Or they do you favors until they own you, or kill you.” I
looked at him and grinned. “I’m just going to have fun, that’s all.”

He turned his back. I think he was going to pace the floor, but right
away he turned again. I knew then he would keep an eye on me. He said,
“You’ve come a long way since you walked in here.”

I nodded. “You’re a _good_ head-shrinker.”

“Thanks,” he said bitterly. “And you figure you’re all cured now, all
adjusted and ready to roll.”

“Well sure. Don’t you?”

He shook his head. “All you’ve found out is what you are. You have a lot
more to learn.”

I was willing to be patient. “Like?”

“Like finding out what happens to people who have to live with guilt
like yours. You’re different, Gerry, but you’re not that different.”

“I should feel guilty about saving my life?”

He ignored that. “One other thing: You said a while back that you’d been
mad at everybody all your life—that’s the way you lived. Have you ever
wondered why?”

“Can’t say I have.”

“One reason is that you were so alone. That’s why being with the other
kids, and then with Miss Kew, came to mean so much.”

“So? I’ve still got the kids.”

He shook his head slowly. “You _and_ the kids are a single creature.
Unique. Unprecedented.” He pointed the pipestem at me. _“Alone.”_

The blood started to pound in my ears.

“Shut up,” I said.

“Just think about it,” he said softly. “You can do practically anything.
You can have practically everything. And none of it will keep you from
being alone.”

“Shut up, shut up … Everybody’s alone.”

He nodded. “But some people learn how to live with it.”

“How?”

He said, after a time, “Because of something you don’t know anything
about. It wouldn’t mean anything to you if I told you.”

“Tell me and see.”

He gave me the strangest look. “It’s sometimes called morality.”

“I guess you’re right. I don’t know what you’re talking about.” I pulled
myself together. I didn’t have to listen to this. “You’re afraid,” I
said. “You’re afraid of _Homo Gestalt.”_

He made a wonderful effort and smiled. “That’s bastard terminology.”

“We’re a bastard breed,” I said. I pointed. “Sit down over there.”

He crossed the quiet room and sat at the desk. I leaned close to him and
he went to sleep with his eyes open. I straightened up and looked around
the room. Then I got the thermos flask and filled it and put it on the
desk. I fixed the corner of the rug and put a clean towel at the head of
the couch. I went to the side of the desk and opened it and looked at
the tape recorder.

Like reaching out a hand, I got Beanie. She stood by the desk,
wide-eyed.

“Look here,” I told her. “Look good, now. What I want to do is erase all
this tape. Go ask Baby how.”

She blinked at me and sort of shook herself, and then leaned over the
recorder. She was there—and gone—and back, just like that. She pushed
past me and turned two knobs, moved a pointer until it clicked twice.
The tape raced backward past the head swiftly, whining.

“All right,” I said, “beat it.”

She vanished.

I got my jacket and went to the door. Stern was still sitting at the
desk, staring.

“A _good_ head-shrinker,” I murmured. I felt fine.

Outside I waited, then turned and went back in again.

Stern looked up at me. “Sit over there, Sonny.”

“Gee,” I said. “Sorry, sir. I got in the wrong office.”

“That’s all right,” he said.

I went out and closed the door. All the way down to the police station I
grinned. They’d take my report on Miss Kew and like it. And sometimes I
laughed, thinking about this Stern, how he’d figure the loss of an
afternoon and the gain of a thousand bucks. Much funnier than thinking
about him being dead.

What the hell is morality, anyway?



3



MORALITY


“WHAT’S HE TO YOU, Miss Gerald?” demanded the sheriff.

“Gerard,” she corrected. She had gray-green eyes and a strange mouth.
“He’s my cousin.”

“All Adam’s chillun are cousins, one way or the other. You’ll have to
tell me a little more than that.”

“He was in the Air Force seven years ago,” she said. “There was
some—trouble. He was discharged. Medical.”

The sheriff thumbed through the file on the desk before him. “Remember
the doctor’s name?”

“Thompson first, then Bromfield. Dr. Bromfield signed the discharge.”

“Guess you do know something about him at that. What was he before he
did his hitch in the Air Force?”

“An engineer. I mean, he would have been if he’d finished school.”

“Why didn’t he?”

She shrugged. “He just disappeared.”

“So how do you know he’s here?”

“I’d recognize him anywhere,” she said. “I saw … I saw it happen.”

“Did you now.” The sheriff grunted, lifted the file, let it drop. “Look,
Miss Gerald, it’s not my business to go advising people. But you seem
like a nice respectable girl. Why don’t you just forget him?”

“I’d like to see him, if I may,” she said quietly.

“He’s crazy. Did you know that?”

“I don’t think so.”

“Slammin’ his fist through a plate glass window. For nothing.”

She waited. He tried again. “He’s dirty. He don’t know his own name,
hardly.”

“May I see him?”

The sheriff uttered a wordless growl and stood up. “Them Air Force
psychos had any sense, they’d’ve put him where he would never even get
near a jail. This way.”

The walls were steel plates like a ship’s bulkhead, studded with rivets,
painted a faded cream above and mustard color below. Their footsteps
echoed. The sheriff unlocked a heavy door with one small high grating
and slid it aside. They stepped through and he closed and locked it. He
motioned her ahead of him and they came into a barnlike area, concrete
on walls and ceiling. Built around it was a sort of balcony; under and
over this were the cells, steel walled, fronted by close-set bars. There
were perhaps twenty cells. Only a half dozen were occupied. It was a
cold, unhappy place.

“Well, what did you expect?” demanded the sheriff, reading her
expression. “The Waldorf Plaza or something?”

“Where is he?” she asked.

They walked to a cell on the lower tier. “Snap out of it, Barrows. Lady
to see you.”

“Hip! Oh, Hip!”

The prisoner did not move. He lay half on, half off a padded steel bunk,
one foot on the mattress, one on the floor. His left arm was in a dirty
sling.

“See? Nary a word out of him. Satisfied, Miss?”

“Let me in,” she breathed. “Let me talk to him.”

He shrugged and reluctantly unlocked the door. She stepped in, turned.
“May I speak to him alone?”

“Liable to get hurt,” he warned.

She gazed at him. Her mouth was extraordinarily expressive. “Well,” he
said at length, “I’ll stay in the area here. You yell if you need help.
S’help me I’ll put a slug through your neck, Barrows, if you try
anything.” He locked the barred door behind the girl.

She waited until he stepped away and then went to the prisoner. “Hip,”
she murmured. “Hip Barrows.”

His dull eyes slid in their sockets until they approximated her
direction. The eyes closed and opened in a slow, numb blink.

She knelt beside him. “Mr. Barrows,” she whispered, “you don’t know me.
I told them I was your cousin. I want to help you.”

He was silent.

She said, “I’m going to get you out of here. Don’t you want to get out?”

For a long moment he watched her face. Then his eyes went to the locked
door and back to her face again.

She touched his forehead, his cheek. She pointed at the dirty sling.
“Does it hurt much?”

His eyes lingered, withdrew from her face, found the bandage. With
effort, they came up again. She asked, “Aren’t you going to say
anything? Don’t you want me to help?”

He was silent for so long that she rose. “I’d better go. Don’t forget
me. I’ll help you.” She turned to the door.

He said, “Why?”

She returned to him. “Because you’re dirty and beaten and don’t care—and
because none of that can hide what you are.”

“You’re crazy,” he muttered tiredly.

She smiled. “That’s what they say about you. So we have something in
common.”

He swore, foully.

Unperturbed, she said, “You can’t hide behind that either. Now listen to
me. Two men will come to see you this afternoon. One is a doctor. The
other is a lawyer. We’ll have you out of here this evening.”

He raised his head and for the first time something came into his
lethargic face. Whatever it was was not pretty. His voice came from deep
in his chest. He growled, “What type doctor?”

“For your arm,” she said evenly. “Not a psychiatrist. You’ll never have
to go through that again.”

He let his head drop back. His features slowly lost their expression.
She waited and when he had nothing else to offer, she turned and called
the sheriff.

It was not too difficult. The sentence was sixty days for malicious
mischief. There had been no alternative fine offered. The lawyer rapidly
proved that there should have been, and the fine was paid. In his clean
new bandages and his filthy clothes, Barrows was led out past the
glowering sheriff, ignoring him and his threat as to what the dirty bum
could expect if he ever showed up in town again.

The girl was waiting outside. He stood stupidly at the top of the
jailhouse steps while she spoke to the lawyer. Then the lawyer was gone
and she touched his elbow. “Come on, Hip.”

He followed like a wound-up toy, walking whither his feet had been
pointed. They turned two corners and walked five blocks and then up the
stone steps of a clean, dried spinster of a house with a bay window and
colored glass set into the main door. The girl opened the main door with
one key and a door in the hallway with another. He found himself in the
room with the bay window. It was high ceilinged, airy, clean.

For the first time he moved of his own volition. He turned around,
slowly, looking at one wall after another. He put out his hand and
lifted the corner of a dresser scarf, and let it fall. “Your room?”

“Yours,” she said. She came to him and put two keys on the dresser.
“Your keys.” She opened the top drawer. “Your socks and handkerchiefs.”
With her knuckles she rapped on each drawer in turn. “Shirts.
Underclothes.” She pointed to a door. “Two suits in there; I think
they’ll fit. A robe. Slippers, shoes.” She pointed to another door.
“Bathroom. Lots of towels, lots of soap. A razor.”

“Razor?”

“Anyone who can have keys can have a razor,” she said gently. “Get
presentable, will you? I’ll be back in fifteen minutes. Do you know how
long it is since you’ve eaten anything?”

He shook his head.

“Four days. ’Bye now.”

She slipped through the door and was gone, even as he fumbled for
something to say to her. He looked at the door for a long time. Then he
swore and fell limply back on the bed.

He scratched his nose and his hand slid down to his jaw. It was ragged,
itchy. He half rose, muttered, “Damn if I will,” and lay back. And then,
somehow, he was in the bathroom, peering at himself in the mirror. He
wet his hands, splashed water on his face, wiped the dirt off onto a
towel and peered again. He grunted and reached for the soap.

He found the razor, he found the underclothes, the slacks, socks,
slippers, shirt, jacket. When he looked into the mirror he wished he had
a comb. When she elbowed the door open she put her packages on the top
of the dresser and then she was smiling up at him, her hand out, the
comb in it. He took it wordlessly and went and wet his head and combed
it.

“Come on, it’s all ready,” she called from the other room. He emerged.
She had taken the lamp off the night table and had spread out a thick
oval platter on which was a lean, rare steak, a bottle of ale, a smaller
bottle of stout, a split Idaho potato with butter melting in it, hot
rolls in a napkin, a tossed salad in a small wooden bowl.

“I don’t want nothing,” he said, and abruptly fell to. There was nothing
in the world then but the good food filling his mouth and throat, the
tingle of ale and the indescribable magic of the charcoal crust.

When the plate was empty, it and the table suddenly wanted to fly upward
at his head. He toppled forward, caught the sides of the table and held
it away from him. He trembled violently. She spoke from behind him, “All
right. It’s all right,” and put her hands on his shoulders, pressed him
back into his chair. He tried to raise his hand and failed. She wiped
his clammy forehead and upper lip with the napkin.

In time, his eyes opened. He looked round for her, found her sitting on
the edge of the bed, watching him silently. He grinned sheepishly.
_“Whew!”_

She rose. “You’ll be all right now. You’d better turn in. Good night!”

She was in the room, she was out of it. She had been with him, he was
alone. It made a change which was too important to tolerate and too
large to understand. He looked from the door to the bed and said “Good
night,” only because they were the last words she had said, and they
hung shimmering in the silence.

He put his hands on the chair arms and forced his legs to cooperate. He
could stand but that was all. He fell forward and side-wise, curling up
to miss the table as he went down. He lay across the counterpane and
blackness came.

“Good morning.”

He lay still. His knees were drawn up and the heels of his hands were
tight on his cheekbones. He closed his eyes tighter than sleep to shut
out the light. He closed his kinesthetic sense to shut out the slight
tilting of the mattress which indicated where she sat on the bed. He
disconnected his hearing lest she speak again. His nostrils betrayed
him; he had not expected there to be coffee in the room and he was
wanting it, wanting it badly, before he thought to shut it out.

Fuzzily he lay thinking, thinking something about her. If she spoke
again, he thought, he’d show her. He’d lie there till she spoke again
and when she spoke he’d ignore her and lie still some more.

He waited.

Well, if she wasn’t going to speak again, he couldn’t ignore her, could
he?

He opened his eyes. They blazed, round and angry. She sat near the foot
of the bed. Her body was still, her face was still, her mouth and her
eyes were alive.

He coughed suddenly, violently. It closed his eyes and when he opened
them he was no longer looking at her. He fumbled vaguely at his chest,
then looked down at himself.

“Slep’ in my clothes all night,” he said.

“Drink your coffee.”

He looked at her. She still had not moved, and did not. She was wearing
a burgundy jacket with a gray-green scarf. She had long, level,
gray-green eyes, the kind which in profile are deep clear triangles. He
looked away from her, farther and farther away, until he saw the coffee.
A big pot, a thick hot cup, already poured. Black and strong and good.
“Whoo,” he said, holding it, smelling it. He drank. “Whoo.”

He looked at the sunlight now. Good. The turn and fall and turn again of
the breeze-lifted marquisette at the window, in and out of a sunbeam.
Good. The luminous oval, a shadow of the sunlight itself, where the sun
glanced off the round mirror on one wall to the clean paint on the
adjoining one. Good. He drank more good coffee.

He set the cup down and fumbled at his shirt buttons. He was wrinkled
and sweaty. “Shower,” he said.

“Go ahead,” said the girl. She rose and went to the dresser where there
was a cardboard box and some paper sacks. She opened the box and took
out an electric hot plate. He got three buttons undone and somehow the
fourth and fifth came off with little explosive tearing sounds. He got
the rest of his clothes off somehow. The girl paid him no attention,
neither looking at him nor away, just calmly doing things with the hot
plate. He went into the bathroom and fussed for a long time with the
shower handles, getting the water just right. He got in and let the
water run on the nape of his neck. He found soap in the dish, so he let
the water run on his head and then rubbed it furiously with the cake of
soap until he was mantled in warm, kind, crawling lather. _God,_ the
thought came from somewhere, _I’m thin as a xylophone. Got to put some
beef back on or I’ll get sick and_ … The same thought looped back to
him, interrupting itself: _Not supposed to get well. Get good and sick,
stay sick. Get sicker._ Angrily he demanded, “Who says I got to get
sick?” but there was no answer except a quick echo off the tiles.

He shut off the water and stepped out and took an oversized towel from
the rack. He started one end of it on his scalp, worked it on his hair
from one end to the other. He threw it on the floor, in the corner, and
took another towel and rubbed himself pink. He threw that one down too
and came out into the room. The robe lay over the arm of an easy chair
by the door so he put it on.

The girl was spooning fragrant bacon grease over and over three perfect
eggs in a pan. When he sat down on the edge of the bed she slid the eggs
deftly onto a plate, leaving all the grease behind in the pan. They were
perfect, the whites completely firm, the yolks unbroken, liquid, faintly
filmed over. There was bacon, four brief seconds less than crisp, paper
dried and aromatic. There was toast, golden outside, soft and white
inside, with butter melting quickly, running to find and fill the
welcoming caves and crevices; two slices with butter, one with
marmalade. And these lay in some sunlight, giving off a color possible
only to marmalade and to stained glass.

He ate and drank coffee; ate more and drank coffee and coffee. All the
while she sat in the easy chair with his shirt in her lap and her hands
like dancers, while the buttons grew back onto the material under their
swift and delicate paces.

He watched her and when she was finished he came to her and put out his
hand for the shirt, but she shook her head and pointed. “A clean one.”

He found a knitted pullover polo shirt. While he dressed she washed his
dishes and the frying pan and straightened out the bed. He lay back in
the easy chair and she knelt before him and worked the soggy dressing
off his left hand, inspected the cuts and bound them up again. The
bandage was firm and comforting. “You can do without the sling now,” she
said, pleased. She got up and went to the bed. She sat there facing him,
still again except for her eyes, except for her mouth.

Outside an oriole made a long slender note, broke it, and let the
fragments fall through the shining air. A stake-bed truck idled past,
busily shaking the string of cowbells on its back, while one hoarse man
and one with a viola voice flanked it afoot, chanting. In one window
came a spherical sound with a fly at its heart and at the other appeared
a white kitten. Out by the kitten went the fly and the kitten reared up
and batted at it, twisted and sprang down out of sight as if it had
meant all along to leave; only a fool would have thought it had lost its
balance.

And in the room was quiet and a watchfulness which was without demand,
except perhaps a guarding against leaving anything unwatched. The girl
sat with her hands aslumber and her eyes awake, while a pipe-cleaner man
called Healing was born in all his cores, all his marrow, taking the
pose of his relaxed body, resting and growing a little and resting again
and growing.

Later, she rose. Without consultation, but merely because it seemed time
to do so, she picked up a small handbag and went to the door where she
waited. He stirred, rose, went to her. They went out.

They walked slowly to a place where there was smooth rolling land, mowed
and tended. Down in the hollow some boys played softball. They stood for
a while, watching. She studied his face and when she saw reflected in it
only the moving figures and not the consecutive interest of the game
itself, she touched his elbow and moved on. They found a pond where
there were ducks and straight cinder paths with flower beds. She picked
a primrose and put it in his lapel. They found a bench. A man pushed a
bright clean wagon up to them. She bought a frankfurter and a bottle of
soda and handed them to him. He ate and drank silently.

It was a quiet time they had together.

When it began to grow dark, she brought him back to the room. She left
him alone for half an hour and returned to find him sitting just where
she had left him. She opened packages and cooked chops and mixed a
salad, and while he was eating, made more coffee. After dinner he
yawned. She was on her feet immediately. “Good night,” she said, and was
gone.

He turned slowly and looked at the closed door. After a time he said,
“Good night.” He undressed and got into bed and turned out the light.

The next day was the day they rode on a bus and lunched in a restaurant.

The day after that was the one they stayed out a little later to see a
band concert

Then there was the afternoon when it rained and they went to a movie
which he watched wordlessly, not smiling, not frowning, not stirring to
the musical parts.

“Your coffee.” “Let’s get these to the laundry.” “Come.” “Good night.”
These were the things she said to him. Otherwise she watched his face
and, undemandingly, she waited.

He awoke, and it was too dark. He did not know where he was. The face
was there, wide-browed, sallow, with its thick lenses and its pointed
chin. Wordlessly, he roared at it and it smiled at him. When he realized
that the face was in his mind and not in the room, it disappeared … no;
it was simply that he knew it was not there. He was filled with fury
that it was not there; his brain was fairly melting with rage. _Yes, but
who is he?_ he asked, and answered, “I don’t know, I don’t know, I don’t
know …” and his voice became a moan, softer and softer and softer until
it was gone. He inhaled deeply and then something inside him slipped and
fell apart and he began to cry. Someone took his hand, took his other
hand, held them together; it was the girl; she’d heard him, she’d come.
He was not alone.

Not alone … it made him cry harder, bitterly. He held her wrists as she
bent over him, looked up through darkness at her face and her hair and
he wept.

She stayed with him until he was finished and for as long afterward as
he held her hand. When he released it he was asleep, and she drew the
blanket up to his chin and tiptoed out.

In the morning he sat on the edge of the bed, watching the steam from
his coffee spread and fade in the sunlight, and when she put the eggs
before him he looked up at her. His mouth quivered. She stood before
him, waiting.

At last he said, “Have you had your breakfast yet?”

Something was kindled in her eyes. She shook her head.

He looked down at the plate, puzzling something out. Finally he pushed
it away from him a fraction of an inch and stood up. “You have this,” he
said. “I’ll fix some more.”

He had seen her smile but he had not noticed it before. Now, it was as
if the warmth of all of them was put together for this one. She sat down
and ate. He fried his eggs, not as well as she had done, and they were
cooked before he thought of toast and the toast burned while he was
eating the eggs. She did not attempt to help him in any way, even when
he stared blankly at the little table, frowned and scratched his jaw. In
his own time he found what he was looking for—the other cup on top of
the dresser. He poured fresh coffee for her and took the other which she
had not touched, for himself, and she smiled again.

“What’s your name?” he asked her, for the very first time.

“Janie Gerard.”

“Oh.”

She considered him carefully, then stretched down to the foot-post of
the bed where her handbag hung by its strap. She drew it toward her,
opened it, and took out a short piece of metal. At first glance, it was
a piece of aluminum tubing, perhaps eight inches long and oval in
cross-section. But it was flexible—woven of tiny strands rather than
extruded. She turned his right hand palm up, where it lay beside his
coffee cup, and put the tubing into it.

He must have seen it for he was staring down into the cup. He did not
close his fingers on it. His expression did not change. At length he
took a slice of toast. The piece of tubing fell, rolled over, hung on
the edge of the table and dropped to the floor. He buttered his toast.

After that first shared meal there was a difference. There were many
differences. Never again did he undress before her or ignore the fact
that she was not eating. He began to pay for little things—bus fares,
lunches, and, later, to let her precede him through doorways, to take
her elbow when they crossed streets. He went to the market with her and
carried the packages.

He remembered his name; he even remembered that the “Hip” was for
“Hippocrates.” He was, however, unable to remember how he came by the
name, or where he had been born, or anything else about himself. She did
not urge him, ask him. She simply spent her days with him, waiting. And
she kept the piece of aluminum webbing in sight.

It was beside his breakfast plate almost every morning. It would be in
the bathroom, with the handle of his toothbrush thrust into it. Once he
found it in his side jacket pocket where the small roll of bills
appeared regularly; this one time the bills were tucked into the tubing.
He pulled them out and absently let the tubing fall and Janie had to
pick it up. She put it in his shoe once and when he tried to put the
shoe on and could not, he tipped it out onto the floor and let it lie
there. It was as if it were transparent or even invisible to him; when,
as in the case of finding his money in it, he had to handle it, he did
so clumsily, with inattention, rid himself of it and apparently forgot
it. Janie never mentioned it. She just quietly put it in his path, time
and time again, patient as a pendulum.

His afternoons began to possess a morning and his days, a yesterday. He
began to remember a bench they had used, a theater they had attended,
and he would lead the way back. She relinquished her guidance as fast as
he would take it up until it was he who planned their days.

Since he had no memory to draw on except his time with her, they were
days of discovery. They had picnics and rode learningly on buses. They
found another theater and a place with swans as well as ducks.

There was another kind of discovery too. One day he stood in the middle
of the room and turned, looking at one wall after another, at the
windows and the bed. “I was sick, wasn’t I?”

And one day he stopped on the street, stared at the grim building on the
other side. “I was in there.”

And it was several days after that when he slowed, frowned, and stood
gazing into a men’s furnishing shop. No—not into it At it. At the
window.

Beside him Janie waited, watching his face.

He raised his left hand slowly, flexed it, looked down at the curled
scar on the back of his hand, the two straight ones, one long, one
short, on his wrist.

“Here,” she said. She pressed the piece of tubing into his hand.

Without looking at it he closed his fingers, made a fist. Surprise
flickered across his features and then a flash of sheer terror and
something like anger. He swayed on his feet.

“It’s all right,” said Janie softly.

He grunted questioningly, looked at her as if she were a stranger and
seemed slowly to recognize her. He opened his hand and looked carefully
at the piece of metal. He tossed it, caught it. “That’s mine,” he said.

She nodded.

He said, “I broke that window.” He looked at it, tossed the piece of
metal again, and put it in his pocket and began to walk again. He was
quiet for a long time and just as they mounted the steps of their house
he said, “I broke the window and they put me in that jail. And you got
me out and I was sick and you brought me here till I was well again.”

He took out his keys and opened the door, stood back to let her pass in.
“What did you want to do that for?”

“Just wanted to,” she said.

He was restless. He went to the closet and turned out the pockets of his
two suit jackets and his sport coat. He crossed the room and pawed
aimlessly at the dresser scarf and opened and shut drawers.

“What is it?”

“That thing,” he said vaguely. He wandered into and out of the bathroom.
“You know, that piece of pipe, like.”

“Oh,” she said.

“I had it,” he muttered unhappily. He took another turn around the room
and then shouldered past Janie where she sat on the bed, and reached to
the night table. “Here it is!”

He looked at it, flexed it, and sat down in the easy chair. “Hate to
lose that,” he said relievedly. “Had it a long time.”

“It was in the envelope they were holding for you while you were in
jail,” Janie told him.

“Yuh. Yuh.” He twisted it between his hands, then raised it and shook it
at her like some bright, thick, admonishing forefinger. “This thing—”

She waited.

He shook his head. “Had it a long time,” he said again. He rose, paced,
sat down again. “I was looking for a guy who … _Ah!”_ he growled, “I
can’t remember.”

“It’s all right,” she said gently.

He put his head in his hands. “Damn near almost found him too,” he said
in a muffled voice. “Been looking for him a long time. I’ve _always_
been looking for him.”

“Always?”

“Well, ever since … Janie, I can’t remember again.”

“All right.”

“All right, all right, it isn’t all right!” He straightened and looked
at her. “I’m sorry, Janie. I didn’t mean to yell at you.”

She smiled at him. He said, “Where was that cave?”

“Cave?” she echoed.

He waved his arms up, around. “Sort of a cave. Half cave, half log
house. In the woods. Where was it?”

“Was I there with you?”

“No,” he said immediately. “That was before, I guess. I don’t remember.”

“Don’t worry about it.”

“I _do_ worry about it!” he said excitedly. “I can worry about it, can’t
I?” As soon as the words were out, he looked to her for forgiveness and
found it. “You got to understand,” he said more quietly, “this is
something I—I got to—Look,” he said, returning to exasperation, “can
something be more important than anything else in the world, and you
can’t even remember what it is?”

“It happens.”

“It’s happened to me,” he said glumly. “I don’t like it either.”

“You’re getting yourself all worked up,” said Janie.

“Well, sure!” he exploded. He looked around him, shook his head
violently. “What is this? What am I doing here? Who are you, anyway,
Janie? What are you getting out of this?”

“I like seeing you get well.”

“Yeah, get well,” he growled. “I should get well! I ought to be sick. Be
sick and get sicker.”

“Who told you that?” she rapped.

“Thompson,” he barked and then slumped back, looking at her with stupid
amazement on his face. In the high, cracking voice of an adolescent he
whimpered, “Thompson? Who’s Thompson?”

She shrugged and said, matter-of-factly, “The one who told you you ought
to be sick, I suppose.”

“Yeah,” he whispered, and again, in a soft-focused flood of
enlightenment, “yeah-h-h-h …” He wagged the piece of mesh tubing at her.
“I saw him. Thompson.” The tubing caught his eye then and he held it
still, staring at it. He shook his head, closed his eyes. “I was looking
for…” His voice trailed off.

“Thompson?”

“Nah!” he grunted. “I never wanted to see _him!_ Yes I did,” he amended.
“I wanted to beat his brains out.”

“You did?”

“Yeah. You see, he—he was—aw, what’s the matter with my _head?”_ he
cried.

“Sh-h-h,” she soothed.

“I can’t remember, I can’t,” he said brokenly. “It’s like … you see
something rising up off the ground, you got to grab it, you jump so hard
you can feel your kneebones crack, you stretch up and get your fingers
on it, just the tips of your fingers….” His chest swelled and sank.
“Hang there, like forever, your fingers on it, knowing you’ll never make
it, never get a grip. And then you fall, and you watch it going up and
up away from you, getting smaller and smaller, and you’ll never—” He
leaned back and closed his eyes. He was panting. He breathed, barely
audible, “And you’ll never…”

He clenched his fists. One of them still held the tubing and again he
went through the discovery, the wonder, the puzzlement. “Had this a long
time,” he said, looking at it. “Crazy. This must sound crazy to you,
Janie.”

“Oh, no.”

“You still think I’m crazy?”

_“No.”_

“I’m sick,” he whimpered.

Startlingly, she laughed. She came to him and pulled him to his feet.
She drew him to the bathroom and reached in and switched on the light.
She pushed him inside, against the washbasin, and rapped the mirror with
her knuckles. “Who’s sick?”

He looked at the firm-fleshed, well-boned face that stared out at him,
at its glossy hair and clear eyes. He turned to Janie, genuinely
astonished. “I haven’t looked this good in years! Not since I was in
the… Janie, was I in the Army?”

“Were you?”

He looked into the mirror again. “Sure don’t _look_ sick,” he said, as
if to himself. He touched his cheek. “Who keeps telling me I’m sick?”

He heard Janie’s footsteps receding. He switched off the light and
joined her. “I’d like to break that Thompson’s back,” he said. “Throw
him right through a—”

“What is it?”

“Funny thing,” he said, “was going to say, through a brick wall. I was
thinking it so hard I could see it, me throwing him.”

“Perhaps you did.”

He shook his head. “It wasn’t a wall. It was a plate glass window. I
know!” he shouted. “I saw him and I was going to hit him. I saw him
standing right there on the street looking at me and I yelled and jumped
him and … and …” He looked down at his scarred hand. He said, amazed, “I
turned right around and hauled off and hit the window instead. God.”

He sat down weakly. “That’s what the jail was for and it was all over.
Just lie there in that rotten jail, sick. Don’t eat, don’t move, get
sick and sicker and it’s all over.”

“Well, it isn’t all over, is it?”

He looked at her. “No. No, it isn’t. Thanks to you.” He looked at her
eyes, her mouth. “What about you, Janie? What are you after, anyway?”

She dropped her eyes.

“Oh, I’m sorry, I’m sorry. That must’ve sounded …” He put out a hand to
her, dropped it without touching her. “I don’t know what’s gotten into
me today. It’s just that … I don’t figure you, Janie. What did I ever do
for you?”

She smiled quickly. “Get better.”

“It’s not enough,” he said devoutly. “Where do you live?”

She pointed. “Right across the hall.”

“Oh,” he said. He remembered the night he had cried, and pushed the
picture away in embarrassment. He turned away, hunting for a change of
subject, any change. “Let’s go out.”

“All right.” Was that relief he detected in her voice?

They rode on a roller coaster and ate cotton candy and danced in an
outdoor pavilion. He wondered aloud where he had ever learned to dance,
but that was the only mention he made of the things which were troubling
him until late in the evening. It was the first time he had consciously
enjoyed being with Janie; it was an Occasion, rather than a way of life.
He had never known her to laugh so easily, to be so eager to ride this
and taste that and go yonder to see what was there. At dusk they stood
side by side, leaning on a railing which overlooked the lake, watching
the bathers. There were lovers on the beach, here and there. Hip smiled
at the sight, turned to speak to Janie about it and was arrested by the
strange wistfulness which softened her taut features. A surge of
emotion, indefinable and delicate, made him turn away quickly. It was in
part a recognition of the rarity of her introspection and an
unwillingness to interrupt it for her; and partly a flash of
understanding that her complete preoccupation with him was not
necessarily all she wanted of life. Life had begun for him, to all
intents and purposes, on the day she came to his cell. It had never
occurred to him before that her quarter of a century without him was not
the clean slate that his was.

Why had she rescued him? Why him, if she must rescue some one? And—why?
What could she want from him? Was there something in his lost life that
he might give her? If there was, he vowed silently, it was hers,
whatever it might be; it was inconceivable that anything, anything at
all she might gain from him would be of greater value than his own
discovery of the life which produced it.

But what could it be?

He found his gaze on the beach and its small galaxy of lovers, each
couple its own world, self-contained but in harmony with all the others
adrift in the luminous dusk. Lovers … he had felt the tuggings of love …
back somewhere in the mists, he couldn’t quite remember where, with whom
… but it was there, and with it his old, old reflex, _not until I’ve
hunted him down and—_But again he lost the thought. Whatever it was, it
had been more important to him than love or marriage or a job or a
colonelcy. (Colonelcy? Had he ever wanted to be a colonel?)

Well, then maybe it was a conquest. Janie loved him. She’d seen him and
the lightning had struck and she wanted him, so she was going about it
in her own way. Well, then! If that’s what she wanted …

He closed his eyes, seeing her face, the tilt of her head in that
waiting, attentive silence; her slim strong arms and lithe body, her
magic hungry mouth. He saw a quick sequence of pictures taken by the
camera of his good male mind, but filed under “inactive” in his
troubled, partial one: Janie’s legs silhouetted against the window, seen
through the polychrome cloud of her liberty silk skirt. Janie in a
peasant blouse, with a straight spear of morning sunlight bent and
molded to her bare shoulder and the soft upper curve of her breast.
Janie dancing, bending away and cleaving to him as if he and she were
the gold leaves of an electroscope. _(Where had he seen … worked with …
an electroscope … Oh, of course! In the_ … But it was gone.) Janie
barely visible in the deep churning dark, palely glowing through a mist
of nylon and the flickering acid of his tears, strongly holding his
hands until he quieted.

But this was no seduction, this close intimacy of meals and walks and
long shared silences, with never a touch, never a wooing word.
Lovemaking, even the suppressed and silent kind, is a demanding thing, a
thirsty and yearning thing. Janie demanded nothing. She only … she only
waited. If her interest lay in his obscured history she was taking a
completely passive attitude, merely placing herself to receive what he
might unearth. If something he had been, something he had done, was what
she was after, wouldn’t she question and goad, probe and pry the way
Thompson and Bromfield had done? _(Bromfield? Who’s he?)_ But she never
had, never.

No, it must be this other, this thing which made her look at lovers with
such contained sadness, with an expression on her face like that of an
armless man spell-bound by violin music….

Picture of Janie’s mouth, bright, still, waiting. Picture of Janie’s
clever hands. Picture of Janie’s body, surely as smooth as her shoulder,
as firm as her forearm, warm and wild and willing—

They turned to each other, he the driving, she the driven gear. Their
breath left them, hung as a symbol and a promise between them, alive and
merged. For two heavy heartbeats they had their single planet in the
lovers’ spangled cosmos; and then Janie’s face twisted in a spasm of
concentration, bent not toward a ponderous control, but rather to some
exquisite accuracy of adjustment.

A thing happened to him, as if a small sphere of the hardest vacuum had
appeared deep within him. He breathed again and the magic about them
gathered itself and whipped in with the breath to fill the vacuum which
swallowed and killed it, all of it, in a tick of time. Except for the
brief spastic change in her face, neither had moved; they still stood in
the sunset, close together, her face turned up to his, here gloried,
here tinted, there self-shining in its own shadow. But the magic was
gone, the melding; they were two, not one, and this was Janie quiet,
Janie patient, Janie not damped, but unkindled. But no—the real
difference was in him. His hands were lifted to go round her and no
longer cared to and his lips lost their grip on the unborn kiss and let
it fall away and be lost. He stepped back. “Shall we go?”

A swift ripple of regret came and went across Janie’s face. It was a
thing like many other things coming now to plague him: smooth and
textured things forever presenting themselves to his fingertips and
never to his grasp. He almost understood her regret, it was there for
him, it was there—and gone, altogether gone, dwindling high away from
him.

They walked silently back to the midway and the lights, their pitiable
thousands of candlepower; and to the amusement rides, their balky
pretense at motion. Behind them in the growing dark they left all real
radiance, all significant movement. All of it; there was not enough left
for any particular reaction. With the compressed air guns which fired
tennis balls at wooden battleships; the cranks they turned to make the
top greyhounds race up a slope; the darts they threw at balloons—with
these they buried something now so negligible it left no mound.

At an elaborate stand were a couple of war surplus servo-mechanisms
rigged to stimulate radar gun directors. There was a miniature
anti-aircraft gun to be aimed by hand, its slightest movement followed
briskly by the huge servo-powered gun at the back. Aircraft silhouettes
were flashed across the domed half ceiling. All in all, it was a fine
conglomeration of gadgetry and dazzle, a truly high-level catchpenny.

Hip went first, amused, then intrigued, then enthralled as his small
movements were so obediently duplicated by the whip and weave of the
massive gun twenty feet away. He missed the first “plane” and the
second; after that he had the fixed error of the gun calculated
precisely and he banged away at every target as fast as they could throw
them and knocked out every one. Janie clapped her hands like a child and
the attendant awarded them a blurred and glittering clay statue of a
police dog worth all of a fifth of the admission price. Hip took it
proudly, and waved Janie up to the trigger. She worked the aiming
mechanism diffidently and laughed as the big gun nodded and shook
itself. His cheeks flushed, his eyes expertly anticipating the
appearance-point of each target. Hip said out of the corner of his
mouth, “Up forty or better on your right quadrant, corp’r’l, or the
pixies’ll degauss your fuses.”

Janie’s eyes narrowed a trifle and perhaps that was to help her aiming.
She did not answer him. She knocked out the first target that appeared
before it showed fully over the artificial horizon, and the second, and
the third. Hip swatted his hands together and called her name joyfully.
She seemed for a moment to be pulling herself together, the odd,
effortful gesture of a preoccupied man forcing himself back into a
conversation. She then let one go by and missed four in a row. She hit
two, one low, one high, and missed the last by half a mile. “Not very
good,” she said tremulously.

“Good enough,” he said gallantly. “You don’t have to hit ’em these days,
you know.”

“You don’t?”

“Nah. Just get near. Your fuses take over from there. This is the
world’s most diabetic dog.”

She looked down from his face to the statuette and giggled. “I’ll keep
it always,” she said. “Hip, you’re getting that nasty sparkle stuff all
over your jacket. Let’s give it away.”

They marched up and across and down and around the tinsel stands in
search of a suitable beneficiary, and found him at last—a solemn urchin
of seven or so, who methodically sucked the memory of butter and juice
from a well-worn corncob. “This is for _you,”_ caroled Janie. The child
ignored the extended gift and kept his frighteningly adult eyes on her
face.

Hip laughed. “No sale!” He squatted beside the boy. “I’ll make a deal
with you. Will you haul it away for a dollar?”

No response. The boy sucked his corncob and kept watching Janie.

“Tough customer,” grinned Hip.

Suddenly Janie shuddered. “Oh, let’s leave him alone,” she said, her
merriment gone.

“He can’t outbid _me,”_ said Hip cheerfully. He set the statue down by
the boy’s scuffed shoes and pushed a dollar bill into the rip which
looked most like a pocket. “Pleasure to do business with you, sir,” he
said and followed Janie, who had already moved off.

“Regular chatterbox,” laughed Hip as he caught up with her. He looked
back. Half a block away, the child still stared at Janie. “Looks like
you’ve made a lifetime impress—_Janie!”_

Janie had stopped dead, eyes wide and straight ahead, mouth a triangle
of shocked astonishment. “The little _devil!”_ she breathed. “At his
age!” She whirled and looked back.

Hip’s eyes obviously deceived him for he saw the corncob leave the
grubby little hands, turn ninety degrees and thump the urchin smartly on
the cheekbone. It dropped to the ground; the child backed away four
paces, shrilled an unchivalrous presumption and an unprintable
suggestion at them and disappeared into an alley.

“Whew!” said Hip, awed. “You’re so right!” He looked at her admiringly.
“What clever ears you have, grandma,” he said, not very successfully
covering an almost prissy embarrassment with badinage. “I didn’t hear a
thing until the second broadside he threw.”

“Didn’t you?” she said. For the first time he detected annoyance in her
voice. At the same time he sensed that he was not the subject of it. He
took her arm. “Don’t let it bother you. Come on, let’s eat some food.”

She smiled and everything was all right again.

Succulent pizza and cold beer in a booth painted a too-bright, edge-worn
green. A happy-weary walk through the darkening booths to the late bus
which waited, breathing. A sense of membership because of the fitting of
the spine to the calculated average of the bus seats. A shared doze, a
shared smile, at sixty miles an hour through the flickering night, and
at last the familiar depot on the familiar street, echoing and empty but
_my_ street in _my_ town.

They woke a taxi driver and gave him their address. “Can I be more alive
than this?” he murmured from his corner and then realized she had heard
him. “I mean,” he amended, “it’s as if my whole world, everywhere I
lived, was once in a little place inside my head, so deep I couldn’t see
out. And then you made it as big as a room and then as big as a town and
tonight as big as … well, a lot bigger,” he finished weakly.

A lonely passing streetlight passed her answering smile over to him. He
said, “So I was wondering how much bigger it can get.”

“Much bigger,” she said.

He pressed back sleepily into the cushions. “I feel fine,” he murmured.
“I feel … Janie,” he said in a strange voice, “I feel sick.”

“You know what that is,” she said calmly.

A tension came and went within him and he laughed softly. “Him again.
He’s wrong. He’s wrong. He’ll never make me sick again. _Driver!”_

His voice was like soft wood tearing. Startled, the driver slammed on
his brakes. Hip surged forward out of his seat and caught the back of
the driver under his armpit. “Go back,” he said excitedly.

“Goddlemighty,” the driver muttered. He began to turn the cab around.
Hip turned to Janie, an answer, some sort of answer, half formed, but
she had no question. She sat quietly and waited. To the driver Hip said,
“Just the next block. Yeah, here. Left. Turn left.”

He sank back then, his cheek to the window glass, his eyes raking the
shadowed houses and black lawns. After a time he said, “There. The house
with the driveway, there where the big hedge is.”

“Want I should drive in?”

“No,” Hip said. “Pull over. A little further … there, where I can see
in.”

When the cab stopped, the driver turned around and peered back. “Gettin’
out here? That’s a dollar ’n—”

_“Shh!”_ The sound came so explosively that the driver sat stunned. Then
he shook his head wearily and turned to face forward. He shrugged and
waited.

Hip stared through the driveway’s gap in the hedge at the faintly
gleaming white house, its stately porch and porte-cochère, its neat
shutters and fanlit door.

“Take us home,” he said after a time.

Nothing was said until they got there. Hip sat with one hand pressing
his temples, covering his eyes. Janie’s corner of the cab was dark and
silent.

When the machine stopped Hip slid out and absently handed Janie to the
walk. He gave the driver a bill, accepting the change, pawed out a tip
and handed it back. The cab drove off.

Hip stood looking down at the money in his hand, sliding it around on
his palm with his fingers. “Janie?”

“Yes, Hip.”

He looked at her. He could hardly see her in the darkness. “Let’s go
inside.”

They went in. He switched on the lights. She took off her hat and hung
her bag on the bedpost and sat down on the bed, her hands on her lap.
Waiting.

He seemed blind, so deep was his introspection. He came awake slowly,
his gaze fixed on the money in his hand. For a moment it seemed without
meaning to him; then slowly, visibly, he recognized it and brought it
into his thoughts, into his expression. He closed his hand on it, shook
it, brought it to her and spread it out on the night table—three
crumpled bills, some silver. “It isn’t mine,” he said.

“Of course it is!”

He shook his head tiredly. “No it isn’t. None of it’s been mine. Not the
roller coaster money or the shopping money or coffee in the mornings or
… I suppose there’s rent here.”

She was silent.

“That house,” he said detachedly. “The instant I saw it I knew I’d been
there before. I was there just before I got arrested. I didn’t have any
money then. I remember. I knocked on the door and I was dirty and crazy
and they told me to go around the back if I wanted something to eat. I
didn’t have any money; I remember that _so_ well. All I had was …”

Out of his pocket came the woven metal tube. He caught lamplight on its
side, flicked it off again, squeezed it, then pointed with it at the
night table. “Now, ever since I came here, I have money. In my left
jacket pocket every day. I never wondered about it. It’s your money,
isn’t it, Janie?”

“It’s yours. Forget about it, Hip. It’s not important.”

“What do you mean it’s mine?” he barked. “Mine because you give it to
me?” He probed her silence with a bright beam of anger and nodded.
“Thought so.”

“Hip!”

He shook his head, suddenly, violently, the only expression he could
find at the moment for the great tearing wind which swept through him.
It was anger, it was humiliation, it was a deep futility and a raging
attack on the curtains which shrouded his self-knowledge. He slumped
down into the easy chair and put his hands over his face.

He sensed her nearness, then her hand was on his shoulder. “Hip …” she
whispered. He shrugged the shoulder and the hand was gone. He heard the
faint sound of springs as she sat down again on the bed.

He brought his hands down slowly. His face was twisted, hurt. “You’ve
got to understand, I’m not mad at you, I haven’t forgotten what you’ve
done, it isn’t that,” he blurted. “I’m all mixed up again,” he said
hoarsely. “Doing things, don’t know why. Things I _got_ to do, I don’t
know what. Like …” He stopped to think, to sort the thousand scraps that
whirled and danced in the wind which blew through him. “Like knowing
this is wrong, I shouldn’t be here, getting fed, spending money, but I
don’t know who ever said I shouldn’t, where I learned it. And … and like
what I told you, this thing about finding somebody and I don’t know who
it is and I don’t know why. I said tonight …” He paused and for a long
moment filled the room with the hiss of breath between his teeth, his
tense-curled lips. “I said tonight, my world … the place I live, it’s
getting bigger all the time. It just now got big enough to take in that
house where we stopped. We passed that corner and I knew the house was
there and I had to look at it. I knew I’d been there before, dirty and
all excited … knocked … they told me to go around back … I yelled at
them … somebody else came. I asked them, I wanted to know about some—”

The silence, again the hissing breath.

“—children who lived there, and no children lived there. And I shouted
again, everybody was afraid, I straightened out a little. I told them
just tell me what I wanted to know. I’d go away, I didn’t want to
frighten anybody. I said all right, no children, then tell me where is
Alicia Kew, just let me talk to Alicia Kew.”

He straightened up, his eyes alight, and pointed the piece of tubing at
Janie. “You see? I remember, I remember her name, Alicia Kew!” He sank
back. “And they said, ‘Alicia Kew is dead.’ And then they said, oh _her_
children! And they told me where to go to find them. They wrote it down
someplace, I’ve got it here somewhere….” He began to fumble through his
pockets, stopped suddenly and glared at Janie. “It was the old clothes,
_you_ have it, _you’ve_ hidden it!”

If she had explained, if she had answered, it would have been all right
but she only watched him.

“All right,” he gritted. “I remembered one thing, I can remember
another. Or I can go back there and ask again. I don’t need you.”

Her expression did not change but, watching it, he knew suddenly that
she was holding it still and that it was a terrible effort to her.

He said gently, “I did need you. I’d’ve died without you. You’ve been …”
He had no word for what she had been to him so he stopped searching for
one and went on, “It’s just that I’ve got so I don’t need you that way
any more. I have some things to find out but I have to do it myself.”

At last she spoke: “You have done it yourself, Hip. Every bit of it. All
I’ve done is to put you where you could do it. I—want to go on with
that.”

“You don’t need to,” he reassured her. “I’m a big boy now. I’ve come a
long way; I’ve come alive. There can’t be much more to find out.”

“There’s a lot more,” she said sadly.

He shook his head positively. “I tell you, I _know!_ Finding out about
those children, about this Alicia Kew, and then the address where they’d
moved—that was right at the end; that was the place where I got my
fingertips on the—whatever it was I was trying to grab. Just that one
more place, that address where the children are; that’s all I need.
That’s where he’ll be.”

“He?”

“The one, you know, the one I’ve been looking for. His name is—” He
leapt to his feet. “His name’s—”

He brought his fist into his palm, a murderous blow. “I forgot,” he
whispered.

He put his stinging hand to the short hair at the back of his head,
screwed up his eyes in concentration. Then he relaxed. “It’s all right,”
he said. “I’ll find out, now.”

“Sit down,” she said. “Go on, Hip. Sit down and listen to me.”

Reluctantly he did; resentfully he looked at her. His head was full of
almost-understood pictures and phrases. He thought, _Can’t she let me
alone? Can’t she let me think awhile?_ But because she … Because she was
Janie, he waited.

“You’re right, you can do it,” she said. She spoke slowly and with
extreme care. “You can go to the house tomorrow, if you like, and get
the address and find what you’ve been looking for. And it will mean
absolutely—_nothing—_to you. Hip, I _know!”_

He glared at her.

“Believe me, Hip; believe me!”

He charged across the room, grabbed her wrists, pulled her up, thrust
his face to hers. “You know!” he shouted. “I _bet_ you know. You know
every damn thing, don’t you? You have all along. Here I am going half
out of my head wanting to know and you sit there and watch me squirm!”

“Hip! Hip, my arms—”

He squeezed them tighter, shook her. “You _do_ know, don’t you? All
about me?”

“Let me go. Please let me go. Oh, Hip, you don’t know what you’re
doing!”

He flung her back on the bed. She drew up her legs, turned on her side,
propped up on one elbow and, through tears, incredible tears, tears
which didn’t belong to any Janie he had yet seen, she looked up at him.
She held her bruised forearm, flexed her free hand. “You don’t know,”
she choked, “what you’re …” And then she was quiet, panting, sending,
through those impossible tears, some great, tortured, thwarted message
which he could not read.

Slowly he knelt beside the bed. “Ah, Janie. Janie.”

Her lips twitched. It could hardly have been a smile but it wanted to
be. She touched his hair. “It’s all right,” she breathed.

She let her head fall to the pillow and closed her eyes. He curled his
legs under him, sat on the floor, put his arms on the bed and rested his
cheek on them.

She said, with her eyes closed, “I understand, Hip; I do understand. I
want to help, I want to go on helping.”

“No you don’t,” he said, not bitterly, but from the depths of an emotion
something like grief.

He could tell—perhaps it was her breath—that he had started the tears
again. He said, “You know about me. You know everything I’m looking
for.” It sounded like an accusation and he was sorry. He meant it only
to express his reasoning. But there wasn’t any other way to say it.
“Don’t you?”

Still keeping her eyes closed, she nodded.

“Well then.”

He got up heavily and went back to his chair. _When she wants something
out of me,_ he thought viciously, _she just sits and waits for it._ He
slumped into the chair and looked at her. She had not moved. He made a
conscious effort and wrung the bitterness from his thought, leaving only
the content, the advice. He waited.

She sighed then and sat up. At sight of her rumpled hair and flushed
cheeks, he felt a surge of tenderness. Sternly he put it down.

She said, “You have to take my word. You’ll have to trust me, Hip.”

Slowly he shook his head. She dropped her eyes, put her hands together.
She raised one, touched her eye with the back of her wrist.

She said, “That piece of cable.”

The tubing lay on the floor where he had dropped it. He picked it up.
“What about it?”

“When was the first time you remembered you had it—remembered it was
yours?”

He thought. “The house. When I went to the house, asking.”

“No,” she said, “I don’t mean that. I mean, after you were sick.”

“Oh.” He closed his eyes briefly, frowned. “The window. The time I
remembered the window, breaking it. I remembered that and then it … oh!”
he said abruptly. “You put it in my hand.”

“That’s right. And for eight days I’d been putting it in your hand. I
put it in your shoe, once. On your plate. In the soap dish. Once I stuck
your toothbrush inside it. Every day, half a dozen times a day—eight
days, Hip!”

“I don’t—”

“You don’t understand! Oh, I can’t blame you.”

“I wasn’t going to say that. I was going to say, I don’t believe you.”

At last she looked at him; when she did he realized how rare it was for
him to be with her without her eyes on his face. “Truly,” she said
intensely. “Truly, Hip. That’s the way it was.”

He nodded reluctantly. “All right. So that’s the way it was. What has
that to do with—”

“Wait,” she begged. “You’ll see … now, every time you touched the bit of
cable, you refused to admit it existed. You’d let it roll right out of
your hand and you wouldn’t see it fall to the floor. You’d step on it
with your bare feet and not even feel it. Once it was in your food, Hip;
you picked it up with a forkful of lima beans, you put the end of it in
your mouth, and then just let it slip away; you didn’t know it was
there!”

“Oc—” he said with an effort, then, “occlusion. That’s what Bromfield
called it.” _Who was Bromfield?_ But it escaped him; Janie was talking.

“That’s right. Now listen carefully. When the time came for the
occlusion to vanish, it did; and there you stood with the cable in your
hand, knowing it was real. But nothing I could do beforehand could make
that happen until it was ready to happen!”

He thought about it. “So—what made it ready to happen?”

“You went back.”

“To the store, the plate glass window?”

“Yes,” she said and immediately, “No. What I mean is this: You came
alive in this room, and you—well, you said it yourself: the world got
bigger for you, big enough to let there be a room, then big enough for a
street, then a town. But the same thing was happening with your memory.
Your memory got big enough to include yesterday, and last week, and then
the jail, and then the thing that got you into jail. Now look: At that
moment, the cable meant something to you, something terribly important.
But when it happened, for all the time after it happened, the cable
meant nothing. It didn’t mean anything until the second your memory
could go back that far. Then it was real again.”

“Oh,” he said.

She dropped her eyes. “I knew about the cable. I could have explained it
to you. I tried and tried to bring it to your attention but you couldn’t
see it until you were ready. All right—I know a lot more about you. But
don’t you see that if I told you, _you wouldn’t be able to hear me?”_

He shook his head, not in denial but dazedly. He said, “But I’m not—sick
any more!”

He read the response in her expressive face. He said faintly, “Am I?”
and then anger curled and kicked inside him. “Come on now,” he growled,
“you don’t mean to tell me I’d suddenly get deaf if you told me where I
went to high school.”

“Of course not,” she said impatiently. “It’s just that it wouldn’t mean
anything to you. It wouldn’t relate.” She bit her lip in concentration.
“Here’s one: You’ve mentioned Bromfield a half dozen times.”

“Who? Bromfield? I have not.”

She looked at him narrowly. “Hip—you have. You mentioned him not ten
minutes ago.”

“Did I?” He thought. He thought hard. Then he opened his eyes wide. “By
God, I did!”

“All right. Who is he? What was he to you?”

“Who?”

“Hip!” she said sharply.

“I’m sorry,” he said. “I guess I’m a little mixed up.” He thought again,
hard, trying to recall the entire sequence, every word. At last,
“B-Bromfield,” he said with difficulty.

“It will hardly stay with you. Well, it’s a flash from a long way back.
It won’t mean anything to you until you go back that far and get it.”

“Go back? Go back how?”

“Haven’t you been going back and back—from being sick here to being in
jail to getting arrested, and just before that, to your visit to that
house? Think about that, Hip. Think about why you went to the house.”

He made an impatient gesture. “I don’t need to. Can’t you see? I went to
that house because I was searching for something—what was it? Oh,
children; some children who could tell me where the halfwit was.” He
leapt up, laughed. “You see? The halfwit—I remembered. I’ll remember it
all, you’ll see. The halfwit … I’d been looking for him for years,
forever. I … forget why, but,” he said, his voice strengthening, “that
doesn’t matter any more now. What I’m trying to tell you is that I don’t
have to go all the way back; I’ve done all I need to do. I’m back on the
path. Tomorrow I’m going to that house and get that address and then
I’ll go to wherever that is and finish what I started out to do in the
first place when I lost the—”

He faltered, looked around bemusedly, spied the tubing lying on the
chair arm, snatched it up. “This,” he said triumphantly. “It’s part of
the—the—oh, _damn_ it!”

She waited until he had calmed down enough to hear her. She said, “You
see?”

“See what?” he asked brokenly, uncaring, miserable.

“If you go out there tomorrow, you’ll walk into a situation you don’t
understand, for reasons you can’t remember, asking for someone you can’t
place, in order to go find out something you can’t conceive of. But,”
she admitted, “you are right, Hip—you _can_ do it.”

“If I did,” he said, “it would all come back.”

She shook her head. He said harshly, “You know everything, don’t you?”

“Yes, Hip.”

“Well, I don’t care. I’m going to do it anyway.”

She took one deep breath. “You’ll be killed.”

_“What?”_

“If you go out there you will be killed,” she said distinctly. “Oh, Hip,
haven’t I been right so far? Haven’t I? Haven’t you gotten back a lot
already—really gotten it back, so it doesn’t slip away from you?”

Agonized, he said, “You tell me I can walk out of here tomorrow and find
whatever it is I’ve been looking—Looking? _Living_ for … and you tell me
it’ll kill me if I do. What do you want from me? What are you trying to
tell me to do?”

“Just keep on,” she pleaded. “Just keep on with what you’ve been doing.”

“For what?” he raged. “Go back and back, go farther away from the thing
I want? What good will—”

“Stop it!” she said sharply. To his own astonishment he stopped. “You’ll
be biting holes in the rug in a minute,” she said gently and with a
gleam of amusement. “That won’t help.”

He fought against her amusement but it was irresistible. He let it touch
him and thrust it away; but it had touched him. He spoke more quietly:
“You’re telling me I mustn’t _ever_ find the—the halfwit and the …
whatever it is?”

“Oh,” she said, her whole heart in her reflection, “oh, _no!_ Hip,
you’ll find it, truly you will. But you have to know what it is; you
have to know why.”

“How long will it take?”

She shook her head soberly. “I don’t know.”

“I can’t wait. Tomorrow—” He jabbed a finger at the window. The dark was
silvering, the sun was near, pressing it away. _“Today,_ you see?
_Today_ I could go there … I’ve got to; you understand how much it
means, how long I’ve been …” His voice trailed off; then he whirled on
her. “You say I’ll be killed; I’d rather be killed, there with it in my
hands; it’s what I’ve been living for anyway!”

She looked up at him tragically. “Hip—”

“No!” he snapped. “You can’t talk me out of it.”

She started to speak, stopped, bent her head. Down she bent, to hide her
face on the bed.

He strode furiously up and down the room, then stood over her. His face
softened. “Janie,” he said, “help me….”

She lay very still. He knew she was listening. He said, “If there’s
danger … if something is going to try to kill me … tell me what. At
least let me know what to look for.”

She turned her head, faced the wall, so he could hear her but not see
her. In a labored voice she said, “I didn’t say anything will try to
kill you. I said you _would_ be killed.”

He stood over her for a long time. Then he growled, “All right. I will.
Thanks for everything, Janie. You better go home.”

She crawled off the bed slowly, weakly, as if she had been flogged. She
turned to him with such a look of pity and sorrow in her face that his
heart was squeezed. But he set his jaw, looked toward the door, moved
his head toward it.

She went, not looking back, dragging her feet. It was more than he could
bear. But he let her go.

The bedspread was lightly rumpled. He crossed the room slowly and looked
down at it. He put out his hand, then fell forward and plunged his face
into it. It was still warm from her body and for an instant so brief as
to be indefinable, he felt a thing about mingled breaths, two spellbound
souls turning one to the other and about to be one. But then it was
gone, everything was gone and he lay exhausted.

_Go on, get sick. Curl up and die._ “All right,” he whispered.

Might as well. What’s the difference anyway? Die or get killed, who
cares?

Not Janie.

He closed his eyes and saw a mouth. He thought it was Janie’s, but the
chin was too pointed. The mouth said, _“Just lie down and die, that’s
all,”_ and smiled. The smile made light glance off the thick glasses
which must mean he was seeing the whole face. And then there was a pain
so sharp and swift that he threw up his head and grunted. His hand, his
hand was cut. He looked down at it, saw the scars which had made the
sudden, restimulative pain. “Thompson, I’m gonna kill that Thompson.”

Who was Thompson who was Bromfield who was the halfwit in the cave …
cave, where is the cave where the children … children … no, it was
_children’s …_ where the children’s … _clothes,_ that’s it! Clothes,
old, torn, rags; but that’s how he …

Janie … You will be killed. _Just lie down and die._

His eyeballs rolled up, his tensions left him in a creeping lethargy. It
was not a good thing but it was more welcome than feeling. Someone said,
“Up forty or better on your right quadrant, corp’r’l, or the pixies’ll
degauss your fuses.” Who said that?

He, Hip Barrows. He said it.

Who’d he say it to?

Janie with her clever hand on the ack-ack prototype.

He snorted faintly. Janie wasn’t a corporal. “Reality isn’t the most
pleasant of atmospheres, Lieutenant. But we like think we’re engineered
for it. It’s a pretty fine piece of engineering, the kind an engineer
can respect. Drag in an obsession and reality can’t tolerate it.
Something has to give; if reality goes, your fine piece of engineering
is left with nothing to operate on. Nothing it was designed to operate
on. So it operates badly. So kick the obsession out; start functioning
the way you were designed to function.”

Who said that? Oh—Bromfield. The jerk! He should know better than to try
to talk engineering to an engineer. “Cap’n Bromfield” (tiredly, the
twenty damn thousandth time), “if I wasn’t an engineer I wouldn’t’ve
found it, I wouldn’t’ve recognized it and I wouldn’t give a damn now.”
Ah, it doesn’t matter.

_It doesn’t matter. Just curl up and as long_ as Thompson don’t show his
face. _Just curl up and_ … “No, by God,” roared Hip Barrows. He sprang
off the bed, stood quaking in the middle of the room. He clapped his
hands over his eyes and rocked like a storm-blown sapling. He might be
all mixed up, Bromfield’s voice, Thompson’s face, a cave full of
children’s clothes, Janie who wanted him killed; but there was one thing
he was sure of, one thing he _knew:_ Thompson wasn’t going to make him
curl up and die. Janie had rid him of _that_ one!

He whimpered as he rocked, “Janie …?”

Janie didn’t want him to die.

Janie didn’t want him killed; what’s the matter here? Janie just wants …
go back. Take time.

He looked at the brightening window.

Take time? Why, maybe today he could get that address and see those
children and find the halfwit and … well, find him anyway; that’s what
he wanted, wasn’t it? _Today._ Then by God he’d show Bromfield who had
an obsession!

If he lived, he’d show Bromfield.

But no; what Janie wanted was to go the other way, go back. For how
long? More hungry years, nobody believes you, no one helps, you hunt and
hunt, starve and freeze, for a little clue and another to fit it: the
address that came from the house with the porte-cochère which came from
the piece of paper in the children’s clothes which were … in the …

“Cave,” he said aloud. He stopped rocking, straightened.

He had found the cave. And in the cave were children’s clothes, and
among them was the dirty little scrawled-up piece of paper and that had
led him to the porte-cochère house, right here in town.

Another step backward, a big one too; he was deeply certain of that.
Because it was the discovery in the cave that had really proved he had
seen what Bromfield claimed he had not seen; he had a piece of it! He
snatched it up and bent it and squeezed it: silvery, light, curiously
woven—the piece of tubing. Of course, of _course!_ The piece of tubing
had come from the cave too. Now he had it.

A deep excitement began to grow within him. She’d said “Go back,” and he
had said no, it takes too long. How long for this step, this rediscovery
of the cave and its treasures?

He glanced at the window. It couldn’t have been more than thirty
minutes—forty at the outside. Yes, and while he was all messed up,
exhausted, angry, guilty, hurt. Suppose he tried this going-back
business head-on, rested, fed with all his wits about him, with—with
Janie to help?

He ran to the door, threw it open, bounded across the hall, shoved the
opposite door open. “Janie, listen,” he said, wildly excited: “Oh,
Janie—” and his voice was cut off in a sharp gasp. He skidded to a stop
six feet into the room, his feet scurrying and slipping, trying to get
him back out into the hall again, shut the door. “I beg your—excuse
_me,”_ he bleated out of the shock which filled him. His back struck the
door, slammed it; he turned hysterically, pawed it open, and dove
outside. God, he thought, I wish she’d _told_ me. He stumbled across the
hall to his own room, feeling like a gong which had just been struck. He
closed and locked his door and leaned against it. Somewhere he found a
creaky burst of embarrassed laughter which helped. He half turned to
look at the panels of his locked door, drawn to them against his will.
He tried to prevent his mind’s eye from going back across the hall and
through the other door; he failed; he saw the picture of it again,
vividly, and again he laughed, hot-faced and uncomfortable. “She
should’ve told me,” he muttered.

His bit of tubing caught his eye and he picked it up and sat down in the
big chair. It drove the embarrassing moment away; brought back the
greater urgency. He had to see Janie. Talk with her. Maybe it was crazy
but she’d know: maybe they could do the going-back thing fast, really
fast, so fast that he could go find that halfwit today after all. Ah …
it was probably hopeless; but Janie, Janie’d know. Wait then. She’d come
when she was ready; she had to.

He lay back, shoved his feet as far out as they would go, tilted his
head back until the back of the chair snugged into the nape of his neck.
Fatigue drifted and grew within him like a fragrant smoke, clouding his
eyes and filling his nostrils.

His hands went limp, his eyes closed. Once he laughed, a small foolish
snicker; but the picture didn’t come clear enough or stay long enough to
divert him from his deep healthy plunge into sleep.

_Bup-bup-bup-bup-bup-bup-bup-bup._

(Fifties, he thought, way off in the hills. Lifelong ambition of every
red-blooded boy: get a machine gun and make like a garden hose with it.)

Wham-wham-wham-wham!

(Oerlikons! Where’d they dredge those things up from? Is this an ack-ack
station or is it a museum?)

“Hip! Hip Barrows!”

(For Pete’s sake, when is that corporal going to learn to say
“Lieutenant”? Not that I gave a whistle, one way or another, but one of
these days he’ll do it in front of some teenage Air Force Colonel and
get us both bounced for it.)

Wham! Wham! “Oh … Hip!”

He sat up palming his eyes, and the guns were knuckles on a door and the
corporal was Janie, calling somewhere, and the antiaircraft base
shattered and misted and blew away to the dream factory.

“Hip!”

“Come on,” he croaked. “Come on in.”

“It’s locked.”

He grunted and got numbly to his feet. Sunlight poured in through the
curtains. He reeled to the door and opened it His eyes wouldn’t track
and his teeth felt like a row of cigar butts.

“Oh, Hip!”

Over her shoulder he saw the other door and he remembered. He drew her
inside and shut his door. “Listen, I’m awful sorry about what happened.
I feel like a damn fool.”

“Hip—don’t,” she said softly. “It doesn’t matter, you know that. Are you
all right?”

“A little churned up,” he admitted and was annoyed by the reappearance
of his embarrassed laugh. “Wait till I put some cold water on my face
and wake up some.” From the bathroom he called, “Where you been?”

“Walking. I had to think. Then … I waited outside. I was afraid you
might—you know. I wanted to follow you, be with you. I thought I might
help….You really are all right?”

“Oh sure. And I’m not going anywhere without talking to you first. But
about the other thing—I hope _she’s_ all right.”

“What?”

“I guess she got a worse shock than I did. I wish you’d told me you had
somebody in there with you. I wouldn’t’ve barged—”

“Hip, what are you talking about? What happened?”

“Oh!” he said. “Omigosh. You came straight here—you haven’t been in your
room yet.”

“No. What on _earth_ are you—”

He said, actually blushing, “I wish she’d told you about it rather than
me. Well, I suddenly had to see you, but _bad._ So I steamed across the
hall and charged in, never dreaming there would be anyone but you there,
and here I am halfway across the room before I could even stop, and
there stood this friend of yours.”

“Who? Hip, for heaven’s sake—”

“The woman. Had to be someone you know, Janie. Burglars aren’t likely to
prance around naked.”

Janie put a slow hand up to her mouth.

“A colored woman. Girl. Young.”

“Did she … what did she …”

“I don’t know what she did. I didn’t get but a flash glimpse of her—if
that’s any comfort to her. I hightailed right out of there. Aw, Janie,
I’m sorry. I know it’s sort of embarrassing, but it can’t be _that_ bad.
Janie!” he cried in alarm.

“He’s found us … We’ve got to get out of here,” she whispered. Her lips
were nearly white; she was shaking. “Come on, oh, come _on!”_

“Now wait! Janie, I got to talk to you. I—”

She whirled on him like a fighting animal. She spoke with such intensity
that her words blurred. “Don’t talk! Don’t ask me. I can’t tell you; you
wouldn’t understand. Just get out of here, get away.” With astonishing
power her hand closed on his arm and pulled. He took two running steps
or he would have been flat on the floor. She was at the door, opening
it, as he took the second step, and she took the slack of his shirt in
her free hand, pulled him through, pushed him down the hall toward the
outer exit. He caught himself against the doorpost; surprise and anger
exploded together within him and built an instant of mighty
stubbornness. No single word she might have uttered could have moved
him; braced and on guard as he was, not even her unexpected strength
could have done anything but cause him to strike back. But she said
nothing nor did she touch him; she ran past, white and whimpering in
terror, and bounded down the steps outside.

He did the only thing his body would do, without analysis or conscious
decision. He found himself outside, running a little behind her. “Janie
…”

“Taxi!” she screamed.

The cab had barely begun to slow down when she had the door open. He
fell in after her. “Go on,” said Janie to the driver and knelt on the
seat to peer through the rear window.

“Go where?” gasped the driver.

“Just go. Hurry.”

Hip joined her at the window. All he could see was the dwindling house
front, one or two gaping pedestrians. “What was it? What happened?”

She simply shook her head.

“What was it?” he insisted. “The place going to explode or something?”

Again she shook her head. She turned away from the window and cowered
into the corner. Her white teeth scraped and scraped at the back of her
hand. He reached out and gently put it down. She let him.

Twice more he spoke to her, but she would not answer except to
acknowledge it, and that only by turning her face slightly away from him
each time. He subsided at last, sat back and watched her.

Just outside of town where the highway forks, the driver asked timidly,
“Which way?” and it was Hip who said, “Left.” Janie came out of herself
enough to give him a swift, grateful glance and sank out of sight behind
her face.

At length there was a difference in her, in some inexplicable way,
though she still sat numbly staring at nothing. He said quietly,
“Better?”

She put her eyes on him and, appreciably later, her vision. A rueful
smile plucked at the corners of her mouth. “Not worse anyway.”

“Scared,” he said.

She nodded. “Me too,” he said, his face frozen. She put her hand on his
arm. “Oh Hip, I’m sorry; I’m more sorry than I can say. I didn’t expect
this—not so soon. And I’m afraid there isn’t anything I can do about it
now.”

“Why?”

“I can’t tell you.”

“You can’t tell me? Or you can’t tell me _yet?”_

She said, carefully, “I told you what you’d have to do—go back and back;
find all the places you’ve been and the things that happened, right to
the beginning. You can do it, given time.” The terror was in her face
again and turned to a sadness. “But there isn’t any more time.”

He laughed almost joyfully. “There is.” He seized her hand. “This
morning I found the cave. That’s two years back, Janie! I know where it
is, what I found there: some old clothes, children’s clothes. An
address, the house with the porte-cochère. And my piece of tubing, the
one thing I ever saw that proved I was right in searching for … for …
Well,” he laughed, “that’s the next step backward. The important thing
is that I found the cave, the biggest step yet. I did it in thirty
minutes or so and I did it without even trying. Now I’ll _try._ You say
we have no more time. Well, maybe not weeks, maybe not days; do we have
a day, Janie? Half a day?”

Her face began to glow. “Perhaps we have,” she said. “Perhaps …Driver!
This will do.”

It was she who paid the driver; he did not protest it. They stood at the
town limits, a place of open, rolling fields barely penetrated by the
cilia of the urban animal: here a fruit stand, there a gas station, and
across the road, some too-new dwellings of varnished wood and obtrusive
stucco. She pointed to the high meadows.

“Well be found,” she said flatly, “but up there we’ll be alone … and
if—anything comes, we can see it coming.”

On a knoll in the foothills, in a green meadow where the re-growth
barely cloaked the yellow stubble of a recent mowing, they sat facing
one another, where each commanded half a horizon.

The sun grew high and hot and the wind blew and a cloud came and went.
Hip Barrows worked; back and back he worked. And Janie listened, waited,
and all the while she watched, her clear deep eyes flicking from side to
side over the open land.

Back and back … dirty and mad, Hip Barrows had taken nearly two years to
find the house with the porte-cochère. For the address had a number and
it had a street; but no town, no city.

It took three years from the insane asylum to the cave. A year to find
the insane asylum from the county clerk’s office. Six months to find the
county clerk from the day of his discharge. From the birth of his
obsession until they threw him out of the Service, another six months.

Seven plodding years from starch and schedules, promise and laughter, to
a dim guttering light in a jail cell. Seven years snatched away, seven
years wingless and falling.

Back through the seven years he went until he knew what he had been
before they started.

It was on the anti-aircraft range that he found an answer, a dream, and
a disaster.

Still young, still brilliant as ever, but surrounded by puzzling
rejection, Lieutenant Barrows found himself with too much spare time,
and he hated it.

The range was small, in some respects merely a curiosity, a museum, for
there was a good deal of obsolete equipment. The installation itself,
for that matter, was obsolete in that it had been superseded years ago
by larger and more efficient defense nets and was now part of no system.
But it had a function in training gunners and their officers, radar men
and technicians.

The Lieutenant, in one of his detested idle moments, went rummaging into
some files and came up with some years-old research figures on the
efficiency of proximity fuses, and some others on the minimum elevations
at which these ingenious missiles, with their fist-sized radar
transmitters, receivers and timing gear, might be fired. It would seem
that ack-ack officers would much rather knock out a low-flying plane
than have their sensitive shells pre-detonated by an intervening treetop
or power pole.

Lieutenant Barrows’ eye, however, was one of those which pick up
mathematical discrepancies, however slight, with the accuracy of the
Toscanini ear for pitch. A certain quadrant in a certain sector in the
range contained a tiny area over which passed more dud shells than the
law of averages should respectably allow. A high-dud barrage or two or
three perhaps, over a year, might indicate bad quality control in the
shells themselves; but when every flight of low-elevation “prox” shells
over a certain point either exploded on contact or not at all, the
revered law was being broken. The scientific mind recoils at
law-breaking of this sort, and will pursue a guilty phenomenon as grimly
as ever society hunted its delinquents.

What pleased the Lieutenant most was that he had here an exclusive.
There had been little reason for anyone to throw great numbers of shells
at low elevations anywhere. There had been less reason to do so over the
area in question. Therefore it was not until Lieutenant Barrows hunted
down and compared a hundred reports spread over a dozen years that
anyone had had evidence enough to justify an investigation.

But it was going to be _his_ investigation. If nothing came of it,
nothing need be said. If on the other hand it turned out to be
important, he could with immense modesty and impressive clarity bring
the matter to the attention of the Colonel; and perhaps then the Colonel
might be persuaded to revise his opinion of ROTC Lieutenants. So he made
a field trip on his own time and discovered an area wherein to varying
degrees his pocket voltmeter would not work properly. And it dawned on
him that what he had found was something which inhibited magnetism. The
rugged but sensitive coils and relays in the proximity fuses, to all
intents and purposes, ceased to exist when they passed this particular
hillside lower than forty yards. Permanent magnets were damped just as
electromagnets.

Nothing in Barrows’ brief but brilliant career had even approached this
incredible phenomenon in potential. His accurate and imaginative mind
drank and drank of it and he saw visions: the identification and
analysis of the phenomenon (Barrows Effect, perhaps?) and then a
laboratory effort—successful of course—to duplicate it. Then,
application. A field generator which would throw up an invisible wall of
the force; aircraft and their communications—even their
intercoms—failing with the failure of their many magnets. Seeking gear
on guided missiles, arming and blasting devices, and of course the
disarming of proximity fuses … the perfect defensive weapon for the
electromagnetic age … and how much else? No limit to it. Then there
would be the demonstrations of course, the Colonel introducing him to
renowned scientists and military men: _“This, gentlemen, is your ROTC
man!”_

But first he had to find what was doing it, now that he knew where it
was being done; and so he designed and built a detector. It was simple
and ingenious and very carefully calibrated. While engaged in the work,
his irrepressible mind wrought and twisted and admired and reworked the
whole concept of “contramagnetism.” He extrapolated a series of laws and
derived effects just as a mathematical pastime and fired them off to the
Institute of Electrical Engineers, who could appreciate them and did;
for they were later published in the Journal. He even amused himself in
gunnery practice by warning his men against low-elevation shelling over
his area, because “the pixies would degauss (demagnetize) their
proximity fuses.” And this gave him a high delight, for he pictured
himself telling them later that his fanciful remark had been nothing but
the truth and that had they the wit God gave a goose they could have
gone out and dug up the thing, whatever it was, for themselves.

At last he finished his detector. It involved a mercury switch and a
solenoid and a variable power supply and would detect the very slightest
changes in the field of its own magnet. It weighed about forty pounds
but this mattered not at all since he did not intend to carry it. He got
the best ordnance maps of the area that he could find, appointed as a
volunteer the stupidest-looking Pfc he could find, and spent a long day
of his furlough time out on the range, carefully zig-zagging the slope
and checking the reading off on his map until he located the center of
the degaussing effect.

It was in a field on an old abandoned farm. In the middle of the field
was an ancient truck in the last stages of oxidation. Drought and drift,
rain and thaw had all but buried the machine and the Lieutenant flogged
himself and his patient soldier into a frenzy of explosive excavation.
After sweaty hours, they had dug and scraped and brushed until what was
left of the truck stood free and clear; and under it they found the
source of the incredible field.

From each corner of the frame ran a gleaming silvery cable. They came
together at the steering column and joined and thence a single cable ran
upward to a small box. From the box protruded a lever. There was no
apparent power source but the thing was operating.

When Barrows pushed the lever forward, the twisted wreck groaned and
sank noticeably into the soft ground. When he pulled the lever back, it
crackled and creaked and lifted up to the limits of its broken springs
and wanted to lift even more.

He returned the lever to neutral and stepped back.

This was everything he had hoped to find certainly and made practical
the wildest of his dreams. It was the degaussing generator, awaiting
only his dissection and analysis. But it was all these things as a
by-product.

Lever forward, this device made the truck _heavier._ Lever back,
_lighter._

It was antigravity!

Antigravity: a fantasy, a dream. Antigravity, which would change the
face of the earth in ways which would make the effects of steam,
electricity, even nuclear power, mere sproutings of technology in the
orchard this device would grow. Here was skyward architecture no artist
had yet dared to paint; here was wingless flight and escape to the
planets, to the stars, perhaps. Here was a new era in transportation,
logistics, even the dance, even medicine. And oh, the research … and it
was all his.

The soldier, the dull-witted Pfc, stepped forward and yanked the lever
full back. He smiled and threw himself at Barrows’ legs. Barrows kicked
free, stood, sprang so his knees crackled. He stretched, reached, and
the tips of his fingers touched the cool bright underside of one of the
cables. The contact could not have lasted longer than a tenth of a
second; but for years afterward, for all the years Barrows was to live,
part of him seemed to stay there in the frozen instant, his fingertips
on a miracle, his body adrift and free of earth. He fell.

Nightmare.

First the breast-bursting time of pounding heart and forgotten
breathing, the madness of an ancient ruin rising out of its element,
faster and faster, smaller and smaller into the darkening sky, a patch,
a spot, a speck, a hint of light where the high sunlight touched it. And
then a numbness and pain when the breath came again.

From somewhere the pressure of laughter; from somewhere else, a fury to
hate it and force it down.

A time of mad shouting arguments, words slurred into screams, the
widening crescents of laughing eyes, and a scuttling shape escaping him,
chuckling. _He did it … and he tripped me besides._

And nothing to kill; racing into the growing dark and nothing there;
pound-pound of feet and fire in the guts and flame in the mind. Falling,
hammering the uncaring sod.

The lonely return to the empty, so empty, so very empty hole in the
ground. Stand in it and yearn upward for the silver cables you will
never see again.

A yellow-red eye staring. Bellow and kick; the detector rising too, but
only so high, turning over and over, smashed, the eye blind.

The long way back to barracks, dragging an invisible man called Agony
whose heavy hands were clamped upon a broken foot.

Fall down. Rest and rise. Splash through, wallow, rise and rest and then
the camp.

HQ. Wooden steps, the door dark; hollow hammering; blood and mud and
hammering. Footsteps, voices: astonishment, concern, annoyance, anger.

The white helmets and the brassards: MP. Tell them, bring the Colonel.
No one else, only the Colonel.

Shut up, you’ll wake the Colonel.

_Colonel, it’s anti-magnetron, to the satellite, and freight; no more
jets!_

Shut up, ROTC boy.

Fight them then and someone screamed when someone stepped on the broken
foot.

The nightmare lifted and he was on a white cot in a white room with
black bars on the windows and a big MP at the door.

“Where am I?”

“Hospital, prison ward, Lieutenant.”

“God, what happened?”

“Search me, Sir. Mostly you seemed to want to kill some GI. Kept telling
everybody what he looks like.”

He put a forearm over his eyes. “The Pfc. Did you find him?”

“Lieutenant, there ain’t such a man on the roster. Honest. Security’s
been through every file we got. You better take it easy, Sir.”

A knock. The MP opened the door. Voices.

“Lieutenant, Major Thompson wants to talk to you. How you feel?”

“Lousy, Sergeant. Lousy …. I’ll talk to him, if he wants.”

“He’s quiet now, Sir.”

A new voice—_that_ voice! Barrows pressed down on the forearm he held
over his eyes until sparks shone. _Don’t look; because if you’re right,
you’ll kill him._

The door. Footsteps. “Evening, Lieutenant. Ever talk to a psychiatrist
before?”

Slowly, in terror of the explosion he knew must come, Barrows lowered
his arm and opened his eyes. The clean, well-cut jacket with a Major’s
leaves and the Medical Corps insignia did not matter. The man’s
professionally solicitous manner, the words he spoke—these meant
nothing. The only thing in the universe was the fact that the last time
he had seen this face, it belonged to a Pfc, who had uncomplainingly and
disinterestedly hauled his heavy detector around for a whole, hot day;
who had shared his discovery; and who had suddenly smiled at him, pulled
the lever, let a wrecked truck and a lifetime dream fall away upwards
into the sky.

Barrows growled and leapt.

The nightmare closed down again.

They did everything they could to help him. They let him check the files
himself and prove that there was no such Pfc. The “degaussing” effect?
No observations of it. Of course, the Lieutenant himself admitted that
he had taken all pertinent records to his quarters. No, they are not in
the quarters. Yes, there was a hole in the ground out there and they’d
found what he called his “detector,” though it made no sense to anyone;
it merely tested the field of its own magnet. As to Major Thompson, we
have witnesses who can prove he was in the air on his way here when it
happened. If the Lieutenant would only rid himself of the idea that
Major Thompson is the missing Pfc, we’d get along much better; he isn’t,
you know; he couldn’t be. But of course, Captain Bromfield might be
better for you at that….

_I know what I did, I know what I saw. I’ll find that device or whoever
made it. And I’ll kill that Thompson!_

Bromfield was a good man and heaven knows he tried. But the combination
in the patient of high observational talent and years of observational
training would not accept the denial of its own data. When the demands
for proof had been exhausted and the hysterical period was passed and
the melancholia and finally the guarded, superficial equilibrium was
reached, they tried facing him with the Major. He charged and it took
five men to protect the Major.

These brilliant boys, you know. They crack.

So they kept him awhile longer, satisfying themselves that Major
Thompson was the only target. Then they wrote the Major a word of
warning and they kicked the Lieutenant out. Too bad, they said.

The first six months was a bad dream. He was still full of Captain
Bromfield’s fatherly advice and he tried to get a job and stay with it
until this “adjustment” the Captain talked about should arrive. It
didn’t.

He’d saved a little and he had his separation pay. He’d take a few
months off and clear this thing out of his mind.

First, the farm. The device was on the truck and the truck obviously
belonged to the farmer. Find him and there’s your answer.

It took six months to find the town records (for the village had been
preempted when the ack-ack range was added to the base) and to learn the
names of the only two men who might tell him about the truck. A. Prodd,
farmer. A halfwitted hired hand, name unknown, whereabouts unknown.

But he found Prodd, nearly a year later. Rumor took him to Pennsylvania
and a hunch took him to the asylum. From Prodd, all but speechless in
the last gasp of his latest dotage, he learned that the old man was
waiting for his wife, that his son Jack had never been born, that old
Lone maybe was an idiot, but nobody ever was a better hand at getting
the truck out of the mud; that Lone was a good boy, that Lone lived in
the woods with the animals, and that he, Prodd, had never missed a
milking.

He was the happiest human being Hip had ever seen.

Barrows went into the woods with the animals. For three and a half years
he combed those woods. He ate nuts and berries and trapped what he
could; he got his pension check until he forgot about picking it up. He
forgot engineering; he very nearly forgot his name. The only thing he
cared to know was that to put such a device on such a truck was the act
of an idiot, and that this Lone was a halfwit.

He found the cave, some children’s clothes and a scrap of the silvery
cable. An address.

He found the address. He learned where to find the children. But then he
ran into Thompson—and Janie found him.

Seven years.

It was cool where he lay and under his head was a warm pillow and
through his hair strayed a gentling touch. He was asleep, or he had been
asleep. He was so completely exhausted, used, drained that sleeping and
waking were synonymous anyway and it didn’t matter. Nothing mattered. He
knew who he was, who he had been. He knew what he wanted and where to
find it; and find it he would when he had slept.

He stirred happily and the touch in his hair ceased and moved to his
cheek where it patted him. In the morning, he thought comfortably, I’ll
go see my halfwit. But you know what, I think I’ll take an hour off just
remembering things. I won the sack race at the Sunday school picnic and
they awarded me a khaki handkerchief. I caught three pike before
breakfast at the Scout camp, trolling, paddling the canoe and holding
the fishing line in my teeth; the biggest of the fish cut my mouth when
he struck. I hate rice pudding. I love Bach and liverwurst and the last
two weeks in May and deep clear eyes like …“Janie?”

“I’m here.”

He smiled and snuggled his head into the pillow and realized it was
Janie’s lap. He opened his eyes. Janie’s head was a black cloud in a
cloud of stars; a darker night in nighttime. “Nighttime?”

“Yes,” she whispered. “Sleep well?”

He lay still, smiling, thinking of how well he had slept. “I didn’t
dream because I knew I could.”

“I’m glad.”

He sat up. She moved cautiously. He said, “You must be cramped up in
knots.”

“It’s all right,” she said. “I liked to see you sleep like that.”

“Let’s go back to town.”

“Not yet. It’s my turn. Hip. I have a lot to tell you.”

He touched her. “You’re cold. Won’t it wait?”

“No—oh, no! You’ve got to know everything before he … before we’re
found.”

_“He?_ Who’s he?”

She was quiet a long time. Hip almost spoke and then thought better of
it. And when she did talk, she seemed so far from answering his question
that he almost interrupted; but again he quelled it, letting her lead
matters in her own way, in her own time.

She said, “You found something in a field; you had your hands on it just
long enough to know what it was, what it could mean to you and to the
world. And then the man who was with you, the soldier, made you lose it.
Why do you suppose he did that?”

“He was a clumsy, brainless bastard.”

She made no immediate comment but went on, “The medical officer they
sent in to you, a Major, looked exactly like that Pfc to you.”

“They proved otherwise.”

He was close enough to her to feel the slight movement in the dark as
she nodded. “Proof: the men who said they were with him in a plane all
afternoon. Now, you had a sheaf of files which showed a perturbation of
some sort which affected proximity fuses over a certain area. What
happened to them?”

“I don’t know. My room was locked, as far as I know, from the time I
left that day until they went to search it.”

“Did it ever occur to you that those three things—the missing Pfc, the
missing files, and the resemblance of the Major to the Pfc—were the
things which discredited you?”

“That goes without saying. I think if I could’ve straightened out any
one or any two of those three things, I wouldn’t have wound up with that
obsession.”

“All right. Now think about this. You stumbled and grubbed through seven
years, working your way closer and closer to regaining what you had
lost. You traced the man who built it and you were just about to find
him. But something happened.”

“My fault. I bumped into Thompson and went crazy.”

She put her hand on his shoulder. “Suppose it wasn’t carelessness that
made that Pfc pull the lever. Suppose it was done on purpose.”

He could not have been more shocked if she had fired a flashbulb in his
face. The light was as sudden, as blinding, as that. When he could, he
said, “Why didn’t I ever think of that?”

“You weren’t allowed to think of it,” she said bitterly.

“What do you mean, I wasn’t—”

“Please. Not yet,” she said. “Now, just suppose for a moment that
someone did this to you. Can you reason out who it was—why he did
_it—how_ he did it?”

“No,” he said immediately. “Eliminating the world’s first and only
antigravity generator makes no sense at all. Picking on me to persecute
and doing it through such an elaborate method means even less. And as to
method, why, he’d have to be able to reach into locked rooms, hypnotize
witnesses and read minds!”

“He did,” said Janie. “He can.”

_“Janie—who?”_

“Who made the generator?”

He leaped to his feet and released a shout that went rolling down and
across the dark field.

“Hip!”

“Don’t mind me,” he said, shaken. “I just realized that the only one who
would dare to destroy that machine is someone who could make another if
he wanted it. Which means that—oh, my _God!—_the soldier and the
halfwit, and maybe Thompson—yes, Thompson: he’s the one made me get
jailed when I was just about to find him again—they’re all the same!—Why
didn’t I ever think of that before?”

“I told you. You weren’t allowed.”

He sank down again. In the east, dawn hung over the hill like the loom
of a hidden city. He looked at it, recognizing it as the day he had
chosen to end his long, obsessive search and he thought of Janie’s
terror when he had determined to go headlong into the presence of
this—this monster—without his sanity, without his memory, without arms
or information.

“You’ll have to tell me, Janie. All of it.”

She told him—all of it. She told him of Lone, of Bonnie and Beanie and
of herself; Miss Kew and Miriam, both dead now, and Gerry. She told how
they had moved, after Miss Kew was killed, back into the woods, where
the old Kew mansion hid and brooded, and how for a time they were very
close. And then …

“Gerry got ambitious for a while and decided to go through college,
which he did. It was easy. Everything was easy. He’s pretty unremarkable
looking when he hides those eyes of his behind glasses, you know; people
don’t notice. He went through medical school too, and psych.”

“You mean he really is a psychiatrist?” asked Hip.

“He is not. He just qualifies by the book. There’s quite a difference.
He hid in crowds; he falsified all sorts of records to get into school.
He was never caught at it because all he had to do with anyone who was
investigating him was to give them a small charge of that eye of his and
they’d forget. He never failed any exam as long as there was a men’s
room he could go to.”

“A what? Men’s room?”

“That’s right.” She laughed. “There was hell to pay one time. See, he’d
go in and lock himself in a booth and call Bonnie or Beanie. He’d tell
them where he was stumped and they’d whip home and tell me and I’d get
the answer from Baby and they’d flash back with the information, all in
a few seconds. So one fine day another student heard Gerry talking and
stood up in the next booth and peeked over. You can imagine! Bonnie and
Beanie can’t carry so much as a toothpick with them when they teleport,
let alone clothes.”

Hip clapped a hand to his forehead. “What happened?”

“Oh, Gerry caught up with the kid. He’d charged right out of there
yelling that there was a naked girl in the john. Half of the student
body dove in there; of course she was gone. And when Gerry caught up
with the kid, he just naturally forgot all about it and wondered what
all the yelling was about. They gave him a pretty bad time over it.

“Those were good times,” she sighed. “Gerry was so interested in
everything. He read all the time. He was at Baby all the time for
information. He was interested in people and books and machines and
history and art—everything. I got a lot from it. As I say, all the
information cleared through me.

“But then Gerry began to … I was going to say, get sick, but that’s not
the way to say it.” She bit her lip thoughtfully. “I’d say from what I
know of people that only two kinds are really progressive—really dig
down and learn and then use what they learn. A few are genuinely
interested; they’re just built that way. But the great majority want to
prove something. They want to be better, richer. They want to be famous
or powerful or respected. With Gerry the second operated for a while.
He’d never had any real schooling and he’d always been a little afraid
to compete. He had it pretty rough when he was a kid; ran away from an
orphanage when he was seven and lived like a sewer rat until Lone picked
him up. So it felt good to get honors in his classes and make money with
a twist of his wrist any time he wanted it. And I think he was genuinely
interested in some things for a little while: music and biology and one
or two other things.

“But he soon came to realize that he didn’t need to prove anything to
anyone. He was smarter and stronger and more powerful than anybody.
Proving it was just dull. He could have anything he wanted.

“He quit studying. He quit playing the oboe. He gradually quit
everything. Finally he slowed down and practically stopped for a year.
Who knows what went on in his head? He’d spend weeks lying around, not
talking.

“Our _gestalt,_ as we call it, was once an idiot, Hip, when it had Lone
for a ‘head.’ Well, when Gerry took over it was a new, strong, growing
thing. But when this happened to him, it was in retreat like what used
to be called a manic-depressive.”

“Uh!” Hip grunted. “A manic-depressive with enough power to run the
world.”

“He didn’t want to run the world. He knew he could if he wanted to. He
didn’t see any reason why he should.

“Well, just like in his psych texts he retreated and soon he regressed.
He got childish. And his kind of childishness was pretty vicious.

“I started to move around a little; I couldn’t stand it around the
house. I used to hunt around for things that might snap him out of it.
One night in New York I dated a fellow I know who was one of the
officers of the I.R.E.”

“Institute of Radio Engineers,” said Hip. “Swell outfit. I used to be a
member.”

“I know. This fellow told me about you.”

“About _me?”_

“About what you called a ‘mathematical recreation,’ anyway. An
extrapolation of the probable operating laws and attendant phenomena of
magnetic flux in a gravity generator.”

“God!”

She made a short and painful laugh. “Yes, Hip. I did it to you. I didn’t
know then of course. I just wanted to interest Gerry in something.

“He was interested all right. He asked Baby about it and got the answer
pronto. You see, Lone built that thing before Gerry came to live with
us. We’d forgotten about it pretty much.”

“Forgotten! A thing like _that?”_

“Look, we don’t think like other people.”

“You don’t,” he said thoughtfully and, “Why should you?”

“Lone built it for the old farmer, Prodd. That was just like Lone. A
gravity generator, to increase and decrease the weight of Prodd’s old
truck so he could use it as a tractor. All because Prodd’s horse died
and he couldn’t afford another.”

“No!”

“Yes. He was an idiot all right. Well, he asked Baby what effect it
would have if this invention got out and Baby said plenty. He said it
would turn the whole world upside down, worse than the industrial
revolution. Worse than anything that ever happened. He said if things
went one way we’d have such a war, you wouldn’t believe it. If they went
the other way, science would go too far, too fast. Seems that gravitics
is the key to everything. It would lead to the addition of one more item
to the Unified Field—what we now call psychic energy, or ‘psionics.’”

“Matter, energy, space, time and psyche,” he breathed, awed.

“Yup,” Janie said casually, “all the same thing and this would lead to
proof. There just wouldn’t _be_ any more secrets.”

“That’s the—the biggest thing I ever heard. So—Gerry decided us poor
half-developed apes weren’t worthy?”

“Not Gerry! He doesn’t care what happens to you apes! One thing he found
out from Baby, though, was that whichever way it went the device would
be traced to us. You should know. You did it by yourself. But Central
Intelligence would’ve taken seven weeks instead of seven years.

“And that’s what bothered Gerry. He was in retreat. He wanted to stew in
his own juice in his hideout in the woods. He didn’t want the Armed
Forces of the United Nations hammering at him to come out and be
patriotic. Oh sure, he could have taken care of ’em all in time, but
only if he worked full time at it. Working full time was out of his
field. He got mad. He got mad at Lone who was dead and he especially got
mad at you.”

“Whew. He could have killed me. Why didn’t he?”

“Same reason he didn’t just go out and confiscate the device before you
saw it. I tell you, he was vicious and vengeful—childish. You’d bothered
him. He was going to fix you for it.

“Now I must confess I didn’t care much one way or the other, it did me
so much good to see him moving around again. I went with him to the
base.

“Now, here’s something you just wouldn’t remember. He walked right into
your lab while you were calibrating your detector. He looked you once in
the eye and walked out again with all the information you had, plus the
fact that you meant to take it out and locate the device, and that you
intended to—what was your phrase?—‘appoint a volunteer.’”

“I was a hotshot in those days,” said Hip ruefully.

She laughed. “You don’t know. You just don’t know. Well, out you came
with that big heavy instrument on a strap. I saw you, Hip; I can still
see you, your pretty tailored uniform, the sun on your hair … I was
seventeen.

“Gerry told me to lift a Pfc shirt quick. I did, out of the barracks.”

“I didn’t know a seventeen-year-old could get in and out of a barracks
with a whole skin. Not a female type seventeen-year-old.”

“I didn’t go in!” she said. Hip shouted in sheer surprise as his own
shirt was wrenched and twisted. The tails flew up from under his belt
and flapped wildly in the windless dawn. “Don’t _do_ that!” he gasped.

“Just making a point,” she said, twinkling. “Gerry put on the shirt and
leaned against the fence and waited for you. You marched right up to him
and handed him the detector. ‘Come on, soldier,’ you said. ‘You just
volunteered for a picnic. You carry the lunch.’”

“What a little stinker I was!”

“I didn’t think so. I was peeping out from behind the MP shack. I
thought you were sort of wonderful. I did, Hip.”

He half laughed. “Go on. Tell me the rest.”

“You know the rest. Gerry flashed Bonnie to get the files out of your
quarters. She found them and threw them down to me. I burned them. I’m
sorry, Hip. I didn’t know what Gerry was planning.”

“Go on.”

“Well, that’s it. Gerry saw to it that you were discredited.
Psychologically, it had to be that way. You claimed the existence of a
Pfc no one had ever seen. You claimed he was the psychiatrist—a real
danger sign, as any graduate medic knows. You claimed files, facts and
figures to back you up and they couldn’t be traced. You could prove that
you’d dug something up, but there was nothing to show what it might have
been. But most of all, you had a trained scientist’s mind, in full
possession of facts which the whole world could prove weren’t so—and
did. Something had to give.”

“Cute,” murmured Hip from deep in his chest.

“And just for good measure,” said Janie with some difficulty, “he handed
you a post-hypnotic command which made it impossible for you to relate
him either as Major Thompson, psychiatrist, or as the Pfc, to the
device.

“When I found out what he’d done I tried to make him help you. Just a
little. He—he just laughed at me. I asked Baby what could be done. He
said nothing. He said only that the command might be removed by a
reverse abreaction.”

“What in time is that?”

“Moving backward, mentally, to the incident itself. Abreaction is the
process of reliving, in detail, an event. But you were blocked from
doing that because you’d have to start from the administration of the
command; that’s where the incident started. And the only way would be to
immobilize you completely, not tell you why, and unpeel all subsequent
events one by one until you reached the command. It was a ‘from now on’
command like all such. It couldn’t stop you when you were traveling in
reverse.

“And how was I ever going to find you and immobilize you without letting
you know why?”

“Holy smoke,” Hip said boyishly. “This makes me feel kind of important.
A guy like that taking all that trouble.”

“Don’t flatter yourself!” she said acidly, then: “I’m sorry, Hip. I
didn’t mean that the way it sounded…. It was no trouble for him. He
swatted you like a beetle. He gave you a push and forgot all about you.”

Hip grunted. “Thank _you.”_

“He did it again!” she said furiously. “There you were, seven good
youthful years shot, your good engineer’s mind gone, with nothing left
but a starved, dirty frame and a numb obsession that you were incapable
of understanding or relieving. Yet, by heaven, you had enough
of—whatever it is that makes you what you are—to drag through those
seven years picking up the pieces until you were right at his doorstep.
When he saw you coming—it was an accident, he happened to be in town—he
knew immediately who you were and what you were after. When you charged
him he diverted you into that plate glass window with just a blink of
those … rotten … poison … eyes of his …”

“Hey,” he said gently. “Hey, Janie, take it easy!”

“Makes me mad,” she whispered, dashing her hand across her eyes. She
tossed her hair back, squared her shoulders. “He sent you flying into
the window and at the same time gave you that ‘curl up and die’ command.
I saw it, I saw him do it…. S-so rotten….”

She said, in a more controlled tone, “Maybe if it was the only one I
could have forgotten it. I never could have approved it but I once had
faith in him … you’ve got to understand, we’re a part of something
together, Gerry and I and the kids; something real and alive. Hating him
is like hating your legs or your lungs.”

“It says in the Good Book, ‘If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and
cast it from thee. If thy right hand—’”

“Yes, your eye, your hand!” she cried. “Not your _head!”_ She went on,
“But yours wasn’t the only case. Did you ever hear that rumor about the
fusion of Element 83?”

“A fairy tale. Bismuth won’t play those games. I remember vaguely … some
crazy guy called Klackenhorst.”

“A crazy guy called Klackenheimer,” she corrected. “Gerry got into one
of his bragging phases and let go with a differential he shouldn’t have
mentioned. Klack picked it up. He fusioned bismuth all right. And Gerry
got worried; a thing like that would make too much of a splash and he
was afraid he’d be bothered by a mob of people who might trace him. So
he got rid of poor old Klack.”

“Klackenheimer died of cancer!” snorted Hip.

She gave him a strange look. “I know,” she said softly.

Hip beat his temples softly with his fists. Janie said, “There’ve been
more. Not all big things like that. I dared him into wooing a girl once,
strictly on his own, without using his talents. He lost out to someone
else, an awfully sweet kid who sold washing machines door-to-door and
was doing pretty well. The kid wound up with _acne rosacea.”_

“The nose like a beet. I’ve seen it.”

“Like an extra-boiled, extra-swollen beet,” she amended. “No job.”

“No girl,” he guessed.

She smiled and said, “She stuck by him. They have a little ceramics
business now. He stays in the back.”

He had a vague idea of where the business had come from. “Janie, I’ll
take your word for it. There were lots of ’em. But—why me? You went all
out for me.”

“Two good reasons. First, I saw him do that to you in town, make you
charge his image in the glass, thinking it was him. It was the last
piece of casual viciousness I ever wanted to see. Second, it was—well,
it was _you.”_

“I don’t get you.”

“Listen,” she said passionately, “we’re not a group of freaks. We’re
_Homo Gestalt,_ you understand? We’re a single entity, a new kind of
human being. We weren’t invented. We evolved. We’re the next step up.
We’re alone; there are no more like us. We don’t live in the kind of
world you do, with systems of morals and codes of ethics to guide us.
We’re living on a desert island with a herd of goats!”

“I’m the goat.”

“Yes, yes, you _are,_ can’t you see? But we were born on this island
with no one like us to teach us, tell us how to behave. We can learn
from the goats all the things that make a goat a good goat, but that
will never change the fact that we’re _not_ a goat! You can’t apply the
same set of rules to us as you do to ordinary humans; we’re just not the
same thing!”

She waved him down as he was about to speak. “But listen, did you ever
see one of those museum exhibits of skeletons of, say horses, starting
with the little Eohippus and coming right up the line, nineteen or
twenty of them, to the skeleton of a Percheron? There’s an awful lot of
difference between number one and number nineteen. But what real
difference is there between number fifteen and number sixteen? _Damn_
little!” She stopped and panted.

“I hear you. But what’s that to do with—”

“With you? Can’t you see? _Homo Gestalt_ is something new, something
different, something superior. But the parts—the arms, the guts of it,
the memory banks, just like the bones in those skeletons—they’re the
same as the step lower, or very little different. I’m _me,_ I’m _Janie._
I saw him slap you down like that; you were like a squashed rabbit, you
were mangy and not as young as you should be. But I recognized you. I
saw you and then I saw you seven years ago, coming out into the yard
with your detector and the sun on your hair. You were wide and tall and
pressed and you walked like a big glossy stallion. You were the reason
for the colors on a bantam rooster, you were a part of the thing that
shakes the forest when the bull moose challenges; you were shining armor
and a dipping pennant and my lady’s girdle on your brow, you were, you
were … I was _seventeen,_ damn it, Barrows, whatever else I was. I was
seventeen years old and all full of late spring and dreams that scared
me.”

Profoundly shaken, he whispered, “Janie … Janie …”

“Get away from me!” she spat. “Not what you think, not love at first
sight. That’s childish; love’s a different sort of thing, hot enough to
make you flow into something, interflow, cool and anneal and be a weld
stronger than what you started with. I’m not talking about love. I’m
talking about being seventeen and feeling … all …” She covered her face.
He waited. Finally she put her hands down. Her eyes were closed and she
was very still. “… all … _human,”_ she finished.

Then she said, matter-of-factly, “So that’s why I helped you instead of
anyone else.”

He got up and walked into the fresh morning, bright now, new as the
fright in a young girl’s frightening dream. Again he recalled her total
panic when he had reported Bonnie’s first appearance; through her eyes
he saw what it would be like if he, blind, numb, lacking weapons and
insight, had walked again under that cruel careless heel.

He remembered the day he had emerged from the lab, stepped down into the
compound, looking about for a slave. Arrogant, self-assured, shallow,
looking for the dumbest Pfc in the place.

He thought more then about himself as he had been that day; not about
what had happened with Gerry, for that was on the record, accomplished;
susceptible to cure but not in fact to change. And the more he thought
of himself as he had been the more he was suffused with a deep and
choking humility.

He walked almost into Janie as she sat watching her hands sleeping in
her lap as he had slept and he thought, surely they too must be full of
pains and secrets and small magics too, to smile at.

He knelt beside her. “Janie,” he said, and his voice was cracked, “you
have to know what was inside that day you saw me. I don’t want to spoil
you-being-seventeen … I just want to tell you about the part of it that
was me, some things that—weren’t what you thought.” He drew a deep
breath. “I can remember it better than you because for you it’s been
seven years and for me it’s only just before I went to sleep and dreamed
that I went hunting for the halfwit. I’m awake again and the dream is
gone, so I remember it all very well….

“Janie, I had trouble when I was a child and the first thing I learned
was that I was useless and the things I wanted were by definition
worthless. I hardly questioned that until I broke away and found out
that my new world had different values from my old one and in the new I
was valuable. I was wanted, I belonged.

“And then I got into the Air Force and suddenly I wasn’t a football hero
and captain of the Debating Society. I was a bright fish with drying
scales, and the mud-puppies had it all their way. I nearly died there,
Janie.

“Yes, I found the degaussing field all by myself. But what I want you to
know is that when I stepped out of the lab that day and you saw me, I
wasn’t the cockerel and the bull moose and those other things. I was
going to discover something and bring it to humanity, not for humanity’s
sake, but so that they would …” he swallowed painfully, “… ask me to
play the piano at the officers’ club and slap me on the back and … look
at me when I came in. That’s all I wanted. When I found out that it was
more than magnetic damping (which would make me famous) but antigravity
(which would change the face of Earth) I felt only that it would be the
President who asked me to play and generals who would slap my back; the
things I wanted were the same.”

He sank back on his haunches and they were quiet together for a long
time. Finally she said, “What do you want now?”

“Not that any more,” he whispered. He took her hands. “Not any more.
Something different.” Suddenly he laughed. “And you know what, Janie? _I
don’t know what it is!”_

She squeezed his hands and released them. “Perhaps you’ll find out. Hip,
we’d better go.”

“All right. Where?”

She stood beside him, tall. “Home. _My_ home.”

“Thompson’s?”

She nodded.

“Why, Janie?”

“He’s got to learn something that a computer can’t teach him. He’s got
to learn to be ashamed.”

“Ashamed?”

“I don’t know,” she said, looking away from him, “how moral systems
operate. I don’t know how you get one started. All I know about morals
is that if they’re violated, you feel ashamed. I’ll start him with
that.”

“What can I do?”

“Just come,” she flashed. “I want him to see you—what you are, the way
you think. I want him to remember what you were before, how much
brilliance, how much promise you had, so he’ll know how much he has cost
you.”

“Do you think any of that will really make a difference?”

She smiled; one could be afraid of someone who could smile like that.
“It will,” she said grimly. “He will have to face the fact that he is
not omnipotent and that he can’t kill something better than he is just
because he’s stronger.”

“You want him to try to kill me?”

She smiled again and this time it was the smile of deep achievement. “He
won’t.” She laughed, then turned to him quickly. “Don’t worry about it,
Hip. _I am his only link with Baby._ Do you think he’d perform a
prefrontal lobotomy on himself? Do you think he’d risk cutting himself
off from his memory? It isn’t the kind of memory a man has, Hip. It’s
_Homo Gestalt’s._ It’s all the information it has ever absorbed, plus
the computation of each fact against every other fact in every possible
combination. He can get along without Bonnie and Beanie, he can get
things done at a distance in other ways. He can get along without any of
the other things I do for him. But he can’t get along without Baby. He’s
had to ever since I began working with you. By this time he’s frantic.
He can touch Baby, lift him, talk to him. But he can’t get a thing out
of him unless he does it through me!”

“I’ll come,” he said quietly. Then he said, “You won’t have to kill
yourself.”

They went first to their own house and Janie laughed and opened both
locks without touching them. “I’ve wanted so to do that but I didn’t
dare,” she laughed. She pirouetted into his room. “Look!” she sang. The
lamp on the night table rose, sailed slowly through the air, settled to
the floor by the bathroom. Its cord curled like a snake, sank into a
baseboard outlet and the switch clicked. It lit. “Look!” she cried. The
percolator hopped forward on the dresser-top, stopped. He heard water
trickling and slowly condensed moisture formed on the outside as the pot
filled up with ice water. “Look,” she called, “look, look!” and the
carpet grew a bulge which scuttled across and became nothing at the
other side, the knives and forks and his razor and toothbrush and two
neckties and a belt came showering around and down and lay on the floor
in the shape of a heart with an arrow through it. He shouted with
laughter and hugged her and spun her around. He said, “Why haven’t I
ever kissed you, Janie?”

Her face and body went quite still and in her eyes was an indescribable
expression—tenderness, amusement and something else. She said, “I’m not
going to tell you because you’re wonderful and brave and clever and
strong, but you’re also just a little bit prissy.” She spun away from
him and the air was full of knives and forks and neckties, the lamp and
the coffeepot, all going back to their places. At the door she said,
“Hurry,” and was gone.

He plunged after her and caught her in the hall. She was laughing.

He said, “I know why I never kissed you.”

She kept her eyes down, but could not do the same with the corners of
her mouth. “You do?”

“You can add water to a closed container. Or take it away.” It was not a
question.

“I can?”

“When we poor males start pawing the ground and horning the low branches
off trees, it might be spring and it might be concreted idealism and it
might be love. But it’s always triggered by hydrostatic pressure in a
little tiny series of reservoirs smaller than my little fingernail.”

“It is?”

“So when the moisture content of these reservoirs is suddenly lowered,
I—we—uh … well, breathing becomes easier and the moon has no
significance.”

“It hasn’t?”

“And that’s what you’ve been doing to me.”

“I have?”

She pulled away from him, gave him her eyes and a swift, rich arpeggio
of laughter. “You can’t say it was an immoral thing to do,” she said.

He gave her laughter back to her. “No _nice_ girl would do a thing like
that.”

She wrinkled her nose at him and slipped into her room. He looked at her
closed door and probably through it, and then turned away.

Smiling and shaking his head in delight and wonderment, encasing a small
cold ball of terror inside him with a new kind of calm he had found;
puzzled, enchanted, terrified and thoughtful, he turned the shower on
and began to undress.

They stood in the road until after the taxi had gone and then Janie led
the way into the woods. If they had ever been cut, one could not know it
now. The path was faint and wandering but easy to follow, for the growth
overhead was so thick that there was little underbrush.

They made their way toward a mossy cliff; and then Hip saw that it was
not a cliff but a wall, stretching perhaps a hundred yards in each
direction. In it was a massive iron door. It clicked as they approached
and something heavy slid. He looked at Janie and knew that she was doing
it.

The gate opened and closed behind them. Here the woods were just the
same, the trees as large and as thick, but the path was of brick and
took only two turns. The first made the wall invisible and the second, a
quarter of a mile further, revealed the house.

It was too low and much too wide. Its roof was mounded rather than
peaked or gabled. When they drew closer to it, he could see at each
flank the heavy, gray-green wall, and he knew that this whole area was
in prison.

“I don’t, either,” said Janie. He was glad she watched his face.

_Gooble._

Someone stood behind a great twisted oak near the house, peeping at
them. “Wait, Hip.” Janie walked quickly to the tree and spoke to
someone. He heard her say, “You’ve _got_ to. Do you want me dead?”

That seemed to settle the argument. As Janie returned he peered at the
tree, but now there seemed to be no one there.

“It was Beanie,” said Janie. “You’ll meet her later. Come.”

The door was ironbound, of heavy oak planks. It fitted with curious
concealed hinges into the massive archway from which it took its shape.
The only windows to be seen were high up in the moundlike gables and
they were mere barred slits.

By itself—or at least, without a physical touch—the door swung back. It
should have creaked, but it did not; it was silent as a cloud. They went
in, and when the door closed there was a reverberation deep in the
subsonic; he could feel it pounding on his belly.

On the floor was a reiteration of tiles, darkest yellow and a brownish
gray, in hypnotic diamond shapes they were repeated in the wainscoting
and in the upholstery of furniture either built-in or so heavy it had
never been moved. The air was cool but too humid and the ceiling was too
close. I am walking, he thought, in a great sick mouth.

From the entrance room they started down a corridor which seemed
immensely long and was not at all, for the walls came in and the ceiling
drew even lower while the floor rose slightly, giving a completely
disturbing false perspective.

“It’s all right,” said Janie softly. He curled his lips at her, meaning
to smile but quite unable to, and wiped cold water from his upper lip.

She stopped near the end door and touched the wall. A section of it
swung back, revealing an anteroom with one other door in it. “Wait here,
will you, Hip?” She was completely composed. He wished there were more
light.

He hesitated. He pointed to the door at the end of the hall. “Is he in
there?”

“Yes.” She touched his shoulder. It was partly a salutation, partly an
urging toward the little room. “I have to see him first,” she said.
“Trust me, Hip.”

“I trust you all right. But are you—is he—”

“He won’t do anything to me. Go on, Hip.”

He stepped through. He had no chance to look back, for the door swung
swiftly shut. It gave no more sign of its existence on this side than it
had on the other. He touched it, pushed it. It might as well have been
that great wall outside. There was no knob, no visible hinge or catch.
The edges were hidden in the paneling; it simply had ceased to exist as
a door.

He had one blinding moment of panic and then it receded. He went and sat
down across from the other door which led, apparently, into the same
room to which the corridor led.

There was not a sound.

He picked up an ottoman and placed it against the wall. He sat with his
back tight against the paneling, watching the door with wide eyes.

Try that door, see if it’s locked too.

He didn’t dare, he realized. Not yet. He sensed vaguely what he would
feel if he found it locked; he wanted no more just now than that
chilling guess.

“Listen,” he hissed to himself, furiously, “you’d better do something.
Build something. Or maybe just _think._ But don’t sit here like this.”

Think. Think about that mystery in there, the pointed face with its
thick lenses, which smiled and said, Go on, die.

Think about something else! Quick!

Janie. By herself, facing the pointed face with the—

_Homo Gestalt,_ a girl, two tongue-tied Negroes, a mongoloid idiot and a
man with a pointed face and—

Try that one again. _Homo Gestalt,_ the next step upward. Well, sure,
why not a psychic evolution instead of the physical?

_Homo sapiens_ stood suddenly naked and unarmed but for the wrinkled
jelly in his king-sized skull; he was as different as he could be from
the beasts which bore him.

Yet he was the same, the same; to this day he was hungry to breed,
hungry to own; he killed without compunction; if he was strong he took,
if he was weak he ran; if he was weak and could not run, he died.

_Homo sapiens_ was going to die.

The fear in him was a good fear. Fear is a survival instinct; fear in
its way is a comfort for it means that somewhere hope is alive.

He began to think about survival.

Janie wanted _Homo Gestalt_ to acquire a moral system so that such as
Hip Barrows would not get crushed. But she wanted her _Gestalt_ to
thrive as well; she was a part of it. My hand wants me to survive, my
tongue, my belly wants me to survive.

Morals: they’re nothing but a coded survival instinct!

Aren’t they? What about the societies in which it is immoral not to eat
human flesh? What kind of survival is that?

Well, but those who adhere to morality survive within the group. If the
group eats human flesh, you do too.

There must be a name for the code, the set of rules, by which an
individual lives in such a way as to help his species—something over and
above morals.

Let’s define that as the ethos.

That’s what _Homo Gestalt_ needs: not morality, but an ethos. And shall
I sit here, with my brains bubbling with fear, and devise a set of
ethics for a superman?

I’ll try. It’s all I can do.

Define:

Morals: Society’s code for individual survival. (That takes care of our
righteous cannibal and the correctness of a naked man in a nudist
group.)

Ethics: An individual’s code for society’s survival. (And that’s your
ethical reformer: he frees his slaves, he won’t eat humans, he “turns
the rascals out.”)

Too pat, too slick; but let’s work with ’em.

As a group, _Homo Gestalt_ can solve his own problems. But as an entity:

_He can’t have a morality, because he is alone._

An ethic then. “An individual’s code for society’s survival.” He has no
society; yet he has. He has no species; he is his own species.

Could he—should he choose a code which would serve all of humanity?

With the thought, Hip Barrows had a sudden flash of insight, completely
intrusive in terms of his immediate problem; yet with it, a load of
hostility and blind madness lifted away from him and left him light and
confident. It was this:

_Who am I to make positive conclusions about morality, and codes to
serve all of humanity?_

_Why—I am the son of a doctor, a man who chose to serve mankind, and who
was positive that this was right. And he tried to make me serve in the
same way, because it was the only rightness he was sure of. And for this
I have hated him all my life … I see now, Dad, I see!_

He laughed as the weight of old fury left him forever, laughed in purest
pleasure. And it was as if the focus was sharper, the light brighter, in
all the world, and as his mind turned back to his immediate problem, his
thought seemed to place its fingers better on the rising undersurface,
slide upward toward the beginnings of a grip.

The door opened. Janie said, “Hip—”

He rose slowly. His thought reeled on and on, close to something. If he
could get a grip, get his fingers curled over it … “Coming.”

He stepped through the door and gasped. It was like a giant greenhouse,
fifty yards wide, forty deep; the huge panes overhead curved down and
down and met the open lawn—it was more a park—at the side away from the
house. After the closeness and darkness of what he had already seen it
was shocking but it built in him a great exhilaration. It rose up and up
and up rose his thought with it, pressing its fingertips just a bit
higher….

He saw the man coming. He stepped quickly forward, not so much to meet
him as to be away from Janie if there should be an explosion. There was
going to be an explosion; he knew that.

“Well, Lieutenant. I’ve been warned, but I can still say—this _is_ a
surprise.”

“Not to me,” said Hip. He quelled a surprise of a different nature; he
had been convinced that his voice would fail him and it had not. “I’ve
known for seven years that I’d find you.”

“By God,” said Thompson in amazement and delight. It was not a good
delight. Over Hip’s shoulder he said, “I apologize, Janie. I really
didn’t believe you until now.” To Hip he said, “You show remarkable
powers of recovery.”

“Homo sap’s a hardy beast,” said Hip.

Thompson took off his glasses. He had wide round eyes, just the color
and luminescence of a black-and-white television screen. The irises
showed the whites all the way around; they were perfectly round and they
looked as if they were just about to spin.

Once, someone had said, _Keep away from the eyes and you’ll be all
right._

Behind him Janie said sharply, “Gerry!”

Hip turned. Janie put up her hand and left a small glass cylinder,
smaller than a cigarette, hanging between her lips. She said, “I warned
you, Gerry. You know what this is. Touch him and I bite down on it—and
then you can live out the rest of your life with Baby and the twins like
a monkey in a cage of squirrels.”

The thought, the thought—“I’d like to meet Baby.”

Thompson thawed; he had been standing, absolutely motionless, staring at
Janie. Now he swung his glasses around in a single bright circle. “You
wouldn’t like him.”

“I want to ask him a question.”

“Nobody asks him questions but me. I suppose you expect an answer too?”

“Yes.”

Thompson laughed. “Nobody gets answers these days.”

Janie said quietly, “This way, Hip.”

Hip turned toward her. He distinctly felt a crawling tension behind him,
in the air, close to his flesh. He wondered if the Gorgon’s head had
affected men that way, even the ones who did not look at her.

He followed her down to a niche in the house wall, the one which was not
curved glass. In it was a crib the size of a bathtub.

He had not known that Baby was so fat.

“Go ahead,” said Janie. The cylinder bobbed once for each of her
syllables.

“Yes, go ahead.” Thompson’s voice was so close behind him that he
started. He had not heard the man following him at all and he felt
boyish and foolish. He swallowed and said to Janie, “What do I do?”

“Just think your question. He’ll probably catch it. Far as I know he
receives everybody.”

Hip leaned over the crib. Eyes gleaming dully like the uppers of dusty
black shoes caught and held him. He thought, _Once this Gestalt had
another head. It can get other telekines, teleports. Baby: Can you be
replaced?_

“He says yes,” said Janie. “That nasty little telepath with the
corncob—remember?”

Thompson said bitterly, “I didn’t think you’d commit such an enormity,
Janie. I could kill you for that.”

“You know how,” said Janie pleasantly.

Hip turned slowly to Janie. The thought came closer, or he went high and
faster than it was going. It was as if his fingers actually rounded a
curve, got a barest of purchases.

If Baby, the heart and core, the ego, the repository of all this new
being had ever been or done or thought—if Baby could be replaced, then
_Homo Gestalt_ was _immortal!_

And with a rush, he had it. He had it all.

He said evenly, “I asked Baby if he could be replaced; if his memory
banks and computing ability could be transferred.”

“Don’t tell him that!” Janie screamed.

Thompson had slipped into his complete, unnatural stillness. At last he
said, “Baby said yes. I already know that. Janie, you knew that all
along, didn’t you?”

She made a sound like a gasp or a small cough.

Thompson said, “And you never told me. But of course, you wouldn’t. Baby
can’t talk to me; the next one might. I can get the whole thing from the
Lieutenant, right now. So go ahead with the dramatics. I don’t need you,
Janie.”

“Hip! Run! Run!”

Thompson’s eyes fixed on Hip’s. “No,” he said mildly, “don’t run.”

They were going to spin; they were going to spin like wheels, like fans,
like … like …

Hip heard Janie scream and scream again and there was a crunching sound.
Then the eyes were gone.

He staggered back, his hand over his eyes. There was a gabbling shriek
in the room, it went on and on, split and spun around itself. He peeped
through his fingers.

Thompson was reeling, his head drawn back and down almost to his
shoulderblades. He kicked and elbowed backward. Holding him, her hands
over his eyes, her knee in the small of his back, was Bonnie, and it was
from her the gabbling came.

Hip came forward running, starting with such a furious leap that his
toes barely touched the floor in the first three paces. His fist was
clenched until pain ran up his forearm and in his arm and shoulders was
the residual fury of seven obsessive years. His fist sank into the taut
solar plexus and Thompson went down soundlessly. So did the Negro but
she rolled clear and bounced lithely to her feet. She ran to him,
grinning like the moon, squeezed his biceps affectionately, patted his
cheek and gabbled.

“And I thank _you!”_ he panted. He turned. Another dark girl, just as
sinewy and just as naked, supported Janie who was sagging weakly.
“Janie!” he roared. “Bonnie, Beanie, whoever you are—did she …”

The girl holding her gabbled. Janie raised her eyes. They were deeply
puzzled as she watched him come. They strayed from his face to Gerry
Thompson’s still figure. And suddenly she smiled.

The girl with her, still gabbling, reached and caught his sleeve. She
pointed to the floor. The cylinder lay smashed under their feet. A
slight stain of moisture disappeared as he watched. “Did I?” repeated
Janie. “I never had a chance, once this butterfly landed on me.” She
sobered, stood up, came into his arms. “Gerry … is he …”

“I don’t think I killed him,” said Hip and added, “yet.”

“I can’t tell you to kill him,” Janie whispered.

“Yes,” he said. “Yes, I know.”

She said, “It’s the first time the twins ever touched him. It was very
brave. He could have burned out their brains in a second.”

“They’re wonderful. Bonnie!”

“Ho.”

“Get me a knife. A sharp one with a blade at least so long. And a strip
of black cloth, so-by-so.”

Bonnie looked at Janie. Janie said, “What—”

He put his hand on her mouth. Her mouth was very soft. “Sh.”

Janie said, panicked, “Bonnie, don’t—”

Bonnie disappeared. Hip said, “Leave me alone with him for a while.”

Janie opened her mouth to speak then turned and fled through the door.
Beanie vanished.

Hip walked over to the prone figure and stood looking down at it. He did
not think. He had his thought; all he had to do was hold it there.

Bonnie came through the door. She held a length of black velvet and a
dagger with an eleven-inch blade. Her eyes were very big and her mouth
was very small.

“Thanks, Bonnie.” He took them. The knife was beautiful. Finnish, with
an edge he could have shaved with, and a point drawn down almost to
invisibility. “Beat it, Bonnie!”

She left—blip!—like a squirted appleseed. Hip put the knife and the
cloth down on a table and dragged Thompson to a chair. He gazed about
him, found a bell-pull and tore it down. He did not mind if a bell rang
somewhere; he was rather sure he would not be interrupted. He tied
Thompson’s elbows and ankles to the chair, tipped the head back and made
the blindfold.

He drew up another chair and sat close. He moved his knife hand gently,
not quite tossing it, just feeling the scend of its superb balance in
his palm. He waited.

And while he was waiting he took his thought, all of it, and placed it
like a patterned drape across the entrance to his mind. He hung it
fairly, attended to its folds and saw with meticulous care that it
reached quite to the bottom, quite to the top and that there were no
gaps at the sides.

The pattern read:

Listen to me, orphan boy, I am a hated boy too. You were persecuted; so
was I.

Listen to me, cave boy. You found a place to belong and you learned to
be happy in it. So did I.

Listen to me, Miss Kew’s boy. You lost yourself for years until you went
back and learned again. So did I.

Listen to me, _Gestalt_ boy. You found power within you beyond your
wildest dreams and you used it and loved it. So did I.

Listen to me, Gerry. You discovered that no matter how great your power,
nobody wanted it. So did I.

You want to be wanted. You want to be needed. So do I.

Janie says you need morals. Do you know what morals are? Morals are an
obedience to rules that people laid down to help you live among them.

You don’t need morals. No set of morals can apply to you. You can obey
no rules set down by your kind because there are no more of your kind.
And you are not an ordinary man, so the morals of ordinary men would do
you no better than the morals of an anthill would do me.

So nobody wants you and you are a monster.

Nobody wanted me when I was a monster.

But Gerry, there is another kind of code for you. It is a code which
requires belief rather than obedience. It is called ethos.

The ethos will give you a code for survival too. But it is a greater
survival than your own, or my species, or yours. What it is really is a
reverence for your sources and your posterity. It is a study of the main
current which created you, and in which you will create still a greater
thing when the time comes.

Help humanity, Gerry, for it is your mother and your father now; you
never had them before. And humanity will help you for it will produce
more like you and then you will no longer be alone. Help them as they
grow; help them to help humanity and gain still more of your own kind.
For you are immortal, Gerry. You are immortal now.

And when there are enough of your kind, your ethics will be their
morals. And when their morals no longer suit their species, you or
another ethical being will create new ones that vault still farther up
the main stream, reverencing you, reverencing those who bore you and the
ones who bore them, back and back to the first wild creature who was
different because his heart leapt when he saw a star.

I was a monster and I found this ethos. You are a monster. It’s up to
you.

Gerry stirred.

Hip Barrows stopped tossing the knife and held it still.

Gerry moaned and coughed weakly. Hip pulled the limp head back, cupped
it in the palm of his left hand. He set the point of the knife exactly
on the center of Gerry’s larynx.

Gerry mumbled inaudibly. Hip said, “Sit quite still, Gerry.” He pressed
gently on the knife. It went in deeper than he wanted it to. It was a
beautiful knife. He said, “That’s a knife at your throat. This is Hip
Barrows. Now sit still and think about that for a while.”

Gerry’s lips smiled but it was because of the tension at the sides of
his neck. His breath whistled through the not-smile.

“What are you going to do?”

“What would you do?”

“Take this thing off my eyes. I can’t see.”

“You see all you need to.”

“Barrows. Turn me loose. I won’t do anything to you. I promise. I can do
a lot for you, Barrows. I can do anything you want.”

“It is a moral act to kill a monster,” said Hip. “Tell me something,
Gerry. Is it true you can snatch out the whole of a man’s thought just
by meeting his eyes?”

“Let me go. Let me go,” Gerry whispered.

With the knife at the monster’s throat, with this great house which
could be his, with a girl waiting, a girl whose anguish for him he could
breathe like ozoned air, Hip Barrows prepared his ethical act.

When the blindfold fell away there was amazement in the strange round
eyes, enough and more than enough to drive away hate. Hip dangled the
knife. He arranged his thought, side to side, top to bottom. He threw
the knife behind him. It clattered on the tiles. The startled eyes
followed it, whipped back. The irises were about to spin….

Hip bent close. “Go ahead,” he said softly.

After a long time, Gerry raised his head and met Hip’s eyes again.

Hip said, “Hi.”

Gerry looked at him weakly. “Get the hell out of here,” he croaked.

Hip sat still.

“I could’ve killed you,” said Gerry. He opened his eyes a little wider.
“I still could.”

“You won’t though.” Hip rose, walked to the knife and picked it up. He
returned to Gerry and deftly sliced the knots of the cord which bound
him. He sat down again.

Gerry said, “No one ever … I never …” He shook himself and drew a deep
breath. “I feel ashamed,” he whispered. “No one ever made me feel
ashamed.” He looked at Hip, and the amazement was back again. “I know a
lot. I can find out anything about anything. But I never … how did _you_
ever find out all that?”

“Fell into it,” said Hip. “An ethic isn’t a fact you can look up. It’s a
way of thinking.”

“God,” said Gerry into his hands. “What I’ve done … the things I could
have….”

“The things you _can_ do,” Hip reminded him gently. “You’ve paid quite a
price for the things you’ve done.”

Gerry looked around at the huge glass room and everything in it that was
massive, expensive, rich. “I have?”

Hip said, from the scarred depths of memory, “People all around you, you
by yourself.” He made a wry smile. “Does a superman have super-hunger,
Gerry? Super-loneliness?”

Gerry nodded, slowly. “I did better when I was a kid.” He shuddered.
“Cold….”

Hip did not know what kind of cold he meant, and did not ask. He rose.
“I’d better go see Janie. She thinks maybe I killed you.”

Gerry sat silently until Hip reached the door. Then he said, “Maybe you
did.”

Hip went out.

Janie was in the little anteroom with the twins. When Hip entered, Janie
moved her head slightly and the twins disappeared.

Hip said, “I could tell them too.”

“Tell me,” Janie said. “They’ll know.”

He sat down next to her. She said, “You didn’t kill him.”

“No.”

She nodded slowly, “I wonder what it would be like if he died. I—don’t
want to find out.”

“He’ll be all right now,” Hip said. He met her eyes. “He was ashamed.”

She huddled, cloaking herself, her thoughts. It was a waiting, but a
different one from that he had known, for she was watching herself in
her waiting, not him.

“That’s all I can do. I’ll clear out.” He breathed once, deeply. “Lots
to do. Track down my pension checks. Get a job.”

“Hip—”

Only in so small a room, in such quiet, could he have heard her. “Yes,
Janie.”

“Don’t go away.”

“I can’t stay.”

“Why?”

He took his time and thought it out, and then he said, “You’re a part of
something. I wouldn’t want to be part of someone who was … part of
something.”

She raised her face to him and he saw that she was smiling. He could not
believe this, so he stared at her until he had to believe it.

She said, “The _Gestalt_ has a head and hands, organs and a mind. But
the most _human_ thing about anyone is a thing he learns and … and
earns. It’s a thing he can’t have when he’s very young; if he gets it at
all, he gets it after a long search and a deep conviction. After that
it’s truly part of him as long as he lives.”

“I don’t know what you mean. I—you mean I’m … I could be part of the …
No, Janie, no.” He could not escape from that sure smile. “What part?”
he demanded.

“The prissy one who can’t forget the rules. The one with the insight
called ethics who can change it to the habit called morals.”

“The still small voice!” He snorted. “I’ll be damned!”

She touched him. “I don’t think so.”

He looked at the closed door to the great glass room. Then he sat down
beside her. They waited.

It was quiet in the glass room.

For a long time the only sound was Gerry’s difficult breathing. Suddenly
even this stopped, as something happened, something—_spoke._

It came again.

_Welcome._

The voice was a silent one. And here, another, silent too, but another
for all that. _It’s the new one. Welcome, child!_

Still another: _Well, well, well! We thought you’d never make it._

_He had to. There hasn’t been a new one for so long_…_._

Gerry clapped his hands to his mouth. His eyes bulged. Through his mind
came a hush of welcoming music. There was warmth and laughter and
wisdom. There were introductions; for each voice there was a discrete
personality, a comprehensible sense of something like stature or rank,
and an accurate locus, a sense of physical position. Yet, in terms of
amplitude, there was no difference in the voices. They were all here,
or, at least, all equally near.

There was happy and fearless communion, fearlessly shared with
Gerry—cross-currents of humor, of pleasure, of reciprocal thought and
mutual achievement. And through and through, _welcome, welcome._

They were young, they were new, all of them, though not as new and as
young as Gerry. Their youth was in the drive and resilience of their
thinking. Although some gave memories old in human terms, each entity
had lived briefly in terms of immortality and they were all immortal.

Here was one who had whistled a phrase to Papa Haydn, and here one who
had introduced William Morris to the Rossettis. Almost as if it were his
own memory, Gerry saw Fermi being shown the streak of fission on a
sensitive plate, a child Landowska listening to a harpsichord, a drowsy
Ford with his mind suddenly lit by the picture of a line of men facing a
line of machines.

To form a question was to have an answer.

Who are you?

_Homo Gestalt._

I’m one; part of; belonging …

_Welcome._

Why didn’t you tell me?

_You weren’t ready. You weren’t finished. What was Gerry before he met
Lone?_

And now … is it the ethic? Is that what completed me?

_Ethic is too simple a term. But yes, yes … multiplicity is our first
characteristic; unity our second. As your parts know they are parts of
you, so must you know that we are parts of humanity._

Gerry understood then that the things which shamed him were, each and
all, things which humans might do to humans, but which humanity could
not do. He said, “I was punished.”

_You were quarantined._

And—are you … we … responsible for all humanity’s accomplishments?

_No! We share. We are humanity!_

Humanity’s trying to kill itself.

(A wave of amusement, and a superb confidence, like joy.) _Today, this
week, it might seem so. But in terms of the history of a race … O new
one, atomic war is a ripple on the broad face of the Amazon!_

Their memories, their projections and computations flooded in to Gerry,
until at last he knew their nature and their function; and he knew why
the ethos he had learned was too small a concept. For here at last was
power which could not corrupt; for such an insight could not be used for
its own sake, or against itself. Here was why and how humanity existed,
troubled and dynamic, sainted by the touch of its own great destiny.
Here was the withheld hand as thousands died, when by their death
millions might live. And here, too, was the guide, the beacon, for such
times as humanity might be in danger; here was the Guardian of Whom all
humans knew—not an exterior force, nor an awesome Watcher in the sky,
but a laughing thing with a human heart and a reverence for its human
origins, smelling of sweat and new-turned earth rather than suffused
with the pale odor of sanctity.

He saw himself as an atom and his _gestalt_ as a molecule. He saw these
others as a cell among cells, and he saw in the whole the design of
what, with joy, humanity would become.

He felt a rising, choking sense of worship, and recognized it for what
it has always been for mankind—self-respect.

He stretched out his arms, and the tears streamed from his strange eyes.
_Thank you,_ he answered them. _Thank you, thank you …_

And humbly, he joined their company.



A BIOGRAPHY OF THEODORE STURGEON


Theodore Hamilton Sturgeon (1918–1985) is the acclaimed author of eleven
novels and more than two hundred short stories. Considered to be among
the most influential writers of science fiction’s “Golden Age,” he won
the International Fantasy Award for his novel _More Than Human_, and the
Hugo and Nebula Awards for his short story “Slow Sculpture.”

Born Edward Hamilton Waldo in Staten Island, New York, Sturgeon was the
son of Edward Molineaux Waldo, a paint and dye manufacturer, and
Christine Hamilton Waldo, a teacher. At the age of eleven, following his
mother’s remarriage, his name was legally changed to Theodore Sturgeon.

Sturgeon began writing stories and poems during the three years he spent
working as an engine room laborer on a freighter. Beginning in 1938, he
published short stories for genre and general market publications
including _Astounding_ (now _Analog Science Fiction and Fact_), _Unknown
Worlds of Science Fiction_, and _Argosy_. His groundbreaking short story
“The World Well Lost” (1953), which was among the first science fiction
stories to include positive themes of homosexuality, went on to win the
Gaylactic Spectrum Award in 2000.

Sturgeon’s 1953 novel _More Than Human_ was considered groundbreaking
for science fiction in its stylistic daring, fine characterization, and
visionary impact. Offering the idea that the next step in human
evolution was a gestalt organism composed of people with different and
strange talents who “bleshed,” _More Than Human_ was an inspiration to
many in the 1960s counterculture, including artists and musicians such
as the Grateful Dead and Crosby, Stills and Nash.

In the 1960s, Sturgeon ventured into television writing, penning the
screenplays for two of the most popular _Star Trek_ episodes: “Shore
Leave” (1966) and “Amok Time” (1967). He is credited with inventing the
story of Spock’s sex life, as well as the famous Vulcan greeting, “Live
long and prosper,” and (with Leonard Nimoy) its accompanying hand
signal. Two of Sturgeon’s stories were adapted for _The New Twilight
Zone_, and his novella _Killdozer!_ (1944) became a television movie in
1974. He is also the creator of Sturgeon’s Law—90 percent of everything
is crap—which he developed to counter the common denigration of science
fiction as a genre.

Beloved by critics and readers alike, Sturgeon inspired a generation of
authors across genres, such as Samuel R. Delany, Michael Chabon,
Jonathan Lethem, Octavia E. Butler, Karen Joy Fowler, and Rad Bradbury.
Kurt Vonnegut considered Sturgeon to be one of the best writers in
America, and Sturgeon served as inspiration for Vonnegut’s recurring
character, Kilgore Trout.

Survived by his seven children, Sturgeon died in Eugene, Oregon, on May
8, 1985. In 2000, he was posthumously inducted into the Science Fiction
Hall of Fame.

[bio]

The decree wherein Sturgeon is officially adopted by his stepfather
(William “Argyll” D. Sturgeon) and his mother, and his last name is
changed accordingly, from “Waldo” to “Sturgeon.” (Photo courtesy of
Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer Research Library, University of
Kansas.)

[bio]

Sturgeon’s report card from the Pennsylvania State Nautical Schoolship
“Annapolis” postmarked April 10, 1937, showing his rank as last in his
class of cadets. (Photo courtesy of Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer
Research Library, University of Kansas.)

[bio]

Sturgeon with his third wife, Marion McGahan, and (left to right)
daughter Tandy (b. 1954), son Robin (b. 1952), and daughter Noël (b.
1956).

[bio]

An early draft of Sturgeon’s 1957 story “The Other Celia.” (Photo
courtesy of Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer Research Library,
University of Kansas.)

[bio]

Sturgeon’s notes for his iconic book _More Than Human._ (Photo courtesy
of Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer Research Library, University of
Kansas.)

[bio]

Notes, dated 6/12/66 and entitled “Spock Blows Top,” for an episode of
_Star Trek_ that Sturgeon wrote, ultimately titled “Amok Time.” (Photo
courtesy of Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer Research Library,
University of Kansas.)

[bio]

Sturgeon in his library.

[bio]

From left to right, author N. K. Jemisin, Noël Sturgeon—Ted’s daughter
and trustee of the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust—and author Samuel R.
Delany at a May 4, 2011, tribute to Sturgeon sponsored by the _New York
Review of Science Fiction_. (Photo courtesy of Marc Blackman.)

[bio]

The Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award, which was designed by Elden Tefft
and is presented annually by the Center for the Study of Science Fiction
for the best short story of the year. (Photo courtesy of the Center for
the Study of Science Fiction.)

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this ebook onscreen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of the
publisher.

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents
either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used
fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead,
businesses, companies, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 1958 by Theodore Sturgeon

Copyright renewed 1986 by the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust

cover design by Mauricio Diaz

978-1-4532-9541-0

This edition published in 2013 by Open Road Integrated Media

345 Hudson Street

New York, NY 10014

www.openroadmedia.com

[colophon]



EBOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON


FROM OPEN ROAD MEDIA

[ad] [ad] [ad] [ad] [ad] [ad] [ad]

Available wherever ebooks are sold

[logo]

ALSO AVAILABLE:


The Complete Short Stories of Theodore Sturgeon Series

— now in hardcover and ebook!

[ad] [ad] [ad]

On sale wherever books are sold from North Atlantic Books, distributed
by Random House

WWW.NORTHATLANTICBOOKS.COM

Join the conversation! Find fellow Sturgeon fans at
www.NABCommunities.com.

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

I. The Ultimate Egoist (1994)

II. Microcosmic God (1995)

III. Killdozer! (1996)

IV. Thunder and Roses (1997)

V. The Perfect Host (1998)

VI. Baby Is Three (1999)

VII. A Saucer of Loneliness (2000)

VIII. Bright Segment (2002)

IX. And Now the News… (2003)

X. The Man Who Lost the Sea (2005)

XI. The Nail and the Oracle (2007)

XII. Slow Sculpture (2009)

XIII. Case and the Dreamer (2010)

[ad] North Atlantic Books

[logo2]

OPEN ROAD INTEGRATED MEDIA is a digital publisher and multimedia content
company. Open Road creates connections between authors and their
audiences by marketing its ebooks through a new proprietary online
platform, which uses premium video content and social media.

VIDEOS, ARCHIVAL DOCUMENTS, AND NEW RELEASES

Sign up for the Open Road Media newsletter and get news delivered
straight to your inbox.

Sign up now at

www.openroadmedia.com/newsletters

FIND OUT MORE AT

WWW.OPENROADMEDIA.COM

FOLLOW US:

@OPENROADMEDIA AND

FACEBOOK.COM/OPENROADMEDIA
