[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon, New York City, March 1945.
“No, This isn’t the office boy cutting up after the boss left for lunch.
This is Teddy as Copy Director of the Hudson-American Corporation for
two glorious weeks.
Isn’t he cute with his little blue pencil?” (written on the back of the
photo by THS, to his sister-in-law)

[]

Copyright © 1996 the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1941, 1942, 1943, 1944, 1946, 1947,
1948, 1963 by Theodore Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary
Trust. Foreword copyright © 1996 by Robert Silverberg. Afterword
copyright © 1986 by Robert A. Heinlein. All rights reserved. No portion
of this book, except for brief review, may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the written
permission of the publisher. For information contact North Atlantic
Books.

Published
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712
Cover art by Paul Orban
Cover design by Paula Morrison

_Killdozer!_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native Arts
and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are to
develop an educational and crosscultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGED THE PRINTED EDITION AS FOLLOWS:

Sturgeon, Theodore.
   Killdozer! : the complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon / edited by
Paul Williams : foreword by Robert Silverberg, Afterword by Robert A.
Heinlein.
    p. cm
   Contents: v. 3 1941–1946
   eISBN: 978-1-58394-747-0
   I. Williams, Paul. II. Title
  PS3569.T875U44 1994
  813′.54—dc20           94–38047

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the third of a series of volumes that will collect all of
his short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel. The
volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized chronologically
by order of composition (insofar as it can be determined). This third
volume contains stories believed to have been written between 1941 and
1946. Four are being published here for the first time; and two others
have never before appeared in a Sturgeon collection.

For invaluable assistance in the preparation of this volume, I would
like to thank Noël Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust,
Marion Sturgeon, Jayne Williams, Debbie Notkin, Robert Silverberg,
Virginia Heinlein, Ralph Vicinanza, Lindy Hough, Richard Grossinger, Tom
Whitmore, Frank Robinson, Kyle McAbee, Matt Austern, Donya White, Sue
Armitage, Bob Greene, Dixon Chandler, David G. Hartwell, T. V. Reed,
Cindy Lee Berryhill, Sam Moskowitz, and all of you who have expressed
your interest and support.



BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON


_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry Medusa_](1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore_ _Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News …_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (2010)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

_Editor’s Note_

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword by Robert Silverberg

Blabbermouth

Medusa

Ghost of a Chance

The Bones

The Hag Séleen

Killdozer!

Abreaction

Poor Yorick

Crossfire

Noon Gun

Bulldozer Is a Noun

August Sixth, 1945

The Chromium Helmet

Memorial

Mewhu’s Jet

Story Notes by Paul Williams (including the original ending of
_Killdozer!_ and the unpublished alternate ending of _Mewhu’s Jet_)

Afterword by Robert A. Heinlein



FOREWORD
BY ROBERT SILVERBERG


THE STORIES IN this volume are the work of a writer in transition, a
writer on the threshold of greatness who has already found his important
themes but has not yet—quite—attained his full measure of artistic
breadth and technical assurance. The familiar Sturgeon warmth and
compassion are there, the concern with the inner workings of the human
soul, the narrative ingenuity. What we don’t yet have is the soaring
poetry, the visionary beauty, of Sturgeon’s writing in the great period
of his maturity that began about 1950 with the novel _The Dreaming
Jewels_ and reached its apogee with the 1953 novel _More Than Human_ and
the myriad short stories and novellas of 1952–1962. But we can see
harbingers of it.

The present group of stories come from two very different periods in
Sturgeon’s life. “Blabbermouth,” “Medusa,” “The Hag Séleen,” “Ghost of a
Chance” and “The Bones” were written by 1941, when he was 23 years old.
They represent the last outburst of the precocious first phase of his
career, the 1939–41 period when he carved a place for himself among the
heroes of editor John W. Campbell’s Golden Age period with such tales as
“Microcosmic God,” “It,” “Shottle Bop,” and “Yesterday Was Monday” in
Campbell’s magazines _Astounding Science-Fiction_ and _Unknown_. The
remaining stories in the book were written between the spring of 1944
and the early months of 1946, after three years of silence. That
three-year gap is a significant one, and not only because three years is
a long time in the development of a prolific writer who is still in his
twenties. Those particular three years were the years of World War II,
which worked an immense transformation on Ted Sturgeon and on the world
in which he lived. They were a time of challenge and maturity for him;
the author of “Memorial” was a very different man from the author of
“Medusa,” and the problems of 1946 were very different from those of
1941.

The war years were bleak and gray ones for science fiction readers and
writers. The war effort itself was all-encompassing. Most of the top
writers were involved, either through actual battlefield experience or
in some non-combatant role that absorbed most of their energies. In
those years magazine publishers were plagued by skyrocketing expenses
and paper shortages; many magazines disappeared altogether and those
that survived cut back severely on their frequency of publication and
number of pages per issue. Magazines then were the only outlet for
publication that an American science-fiction writer had: paperback book
publishing in the United States had only barely been born, and the
orthodox hardcover publishers had scarcely any interest in science
fiction. Only in the pulp magazines—gaudy-looking crudely printed
entities with names like _Startling Stories, Thrilling Wonder Stories_,
and _Astounding Science-Fiction_—could a science fiction writer find
readers, and then only at a rate of pay that even then had to be
considered a pittance. $50 to $75 was the going price for short stories;
a long work, running to 100 manuscript pages or even more, might fetch
$200 or so. The shrinkage of the magazine market during those years
eliminated any hope that a writer, even one who had not gone to the war,
could earn even a modest living from science fiction.

It was in the brief pre-war boom of the pulp magazines that the young
Ted Sturgeon, unfettered and experimental-minded, launched his writing
career. After some uncertain times writing short-short stories for
newspaper syndicates, he turned to fantasy and science fiction in 1939
and clicked almost immediately with John Campbell, the pre-eminent
science fiction editor of the day. Throughout 1940 and 1941 he sold
Campbell virtually everything he wrote.

Campbell, a ponderous, emotionally awkward man with a background in
engineering and gadgetry, found the mercurial, elfin young Sturgeon
immensely charming. Isaac Asimov, another of Campbell’s discoveries of
that era, wrote more than forty years later of how, “little by little,
John gathered a stable of writers and learned the trick of keeping us
rubbing our noses against the grindstone. One thing he did, in my case,
was to tell me what the other members of his stable were doing.

“The one he mentioned with the greatest affection was Theodore Sturgeon.
I can see him grinning now as he would hint at the manifold pleasures of
something upcoming by Ted.

“How I watched for his stories myself. I remember ‘It’ and ‘Ether
Breather’ (his first) and ‘Shottle Bop’ and ‘Yesterday was Monday’ and
‘Killdozer’—and how eagerly I read them and how hopelessly I decided I
couldn’t match him. And I never could. He had a delicacy of touch that I
couldn’t duplicate if my fingers were feathers.”

Those early stories of Sturgeon’s stood out like beacons in the pages of
Campbell’s two magazines, even against those of Asimov, Robert A.
Heinlein, A.E. van Vogt, and the rest of Campbell’s galaxy of new stars,
because of that magical lightness of touch and the cunning of his
narrative strategies, so different from the earnest straightforward
storytelling and simple functional prose of most of his contemporaries.

Consider the insinuating, ingratiating charm of the first words of
“Microcosmic God”—“Here is a story about a man who had too much power,
and a man who took too much, but don’t worry; I’m not going political on
you.” Pulp-magazine writers in 1941 didn’t begin stories that way,
unless they were Theodore Sturgeon.

Consider the tone of the opening, both disarming and compelling, of
“Medusa”—“I wasn’t sore at them. I didn’t know what they had done to me,
exactly—I knew that some of it wasn’t so nice, and that I’d probably
never be the same again.” It is a tone we will hear again in the famous
opening lines of _The Dreaming Jewels_ a decade later: “They caught the
kid doing something disgusting out under the bleachers at the high
school stadium, and he was sent home from the grammar school across the
street. He was eight years old then. He’d been doing it for years.”

Consider the last line of “He Shuttles”—“Perhaps he was never here at
all. But this is the story I wrote last night.” Sturgeon speaking to the
reader in his own voice: confident of his irresistible appeal, smiling
and winking as he pulls us through the convolutions of his plots.

It was a new and refreshing way to write science fiction, which until
then had, by and large, been straitjacketed by pulp-magazine conventions
of plot and narrative mode. What it was, actually, was a compounding of
Sturgeon’s unique irreverent sensibility and a storytelling manner
imported from mainstream fiction, from the broader, more expansive modes
common in such magazines as _The Saturday Evening Post_, modes which
such writers as F. Scott Fitzgerald had raised in the 1920s from slick
commercialism to something approaching art. The slick-magazine stories
were primarily _people_-centered rather than _plot_-centered or (as in
the best science fiction of the day) _idea_-centered, and their writers
allowed themselves considerably more latitude in their narrative methods
than pulp editors permitted.

At the beginning of his career in the late 1930s, Sturgeon had had
little luck selling the stories that he aimed at such magazines. The
best of them, “Bianca’s Hands,” had to wait until 1947 to see print, and
others remained unpublished until collected in the first of these
present volumes, _The Ultimate Egoist_. But his application of
slick-magazine techniques to a pulp-magazine market made an immediate
impact. John Campbell, then engaged in an all-out challenge of science
fiction’s established modes, which ran heavily to rarefied tales of
science on the one hand and slam-bang adventure on the other, welcomed
Sturgeon’s material eagerly and only occasionally rejected any of it.
(“Blabbermouth,” one of the weaker Sturgeon stories of the period,
probably was intended for _Unknown_, but went unpublished for six years.

His stories still relied heavily on mechanical plot contrivances, and
his style was freighted with colloquialisms that now seem archaic; but,
thanks to Campbell, Sturgeon quickly found himself selling regularly and
developing the self-confidence a professional writer needs.

He was now the head of a family, though, with a host of new
responsibilities, and the writing income available to even a successful
science-fiction writer in pre-war America was proving insufficient.
Sturgeon found a job managing a resort hotel in the British West Indies
in June of 1941 and hoped to go on writing on the side. But the coming
of the war brought a swift close to this period of Sturgeon’s literary
career. Married and the father of a small child, he was safe from the
military draft, but the outbreak of war meant the end of his resort job
and soon he was serving as assistant chief steward for the U.S. Army at
Fort Simonds, where he ran a tractor lubrication center and learned to
handle earth-moving machinery. The following year saw him in Puerto Rico
at Ensenada Honda, an airfield, drydock, and shipyard, where he had
further experience with bulldozers and other heavy-duty equipment, until
the end of 1943. After some months doing clerical work for the Navy, he
and his family moved to St. Croix in the American Virgin Islands. From
the summer of 1941 to the spring of 1944 he wrote no fiction at all. The
end of his military employment forced him back to writing in April 1944,
and for the first story of this new period he drew on all the
considerable knowledge that he had acquired during the war about
earth-moving machinery, an unlikely subject, perhaps, for science
fiction, but one which brought forth gripping results. In nine days
Sturgeon wrote the 31,000–word novella “Killdozer!,” his longest and
probably most successful work up until then, in which he imbued a
fantastic notion with rock-solid specificity of detail to create great
conviction and enormous suspense. Campbell, who had been struggling to
keep _Astounding_ filled with good material during the wartime absence
of most of his best contributors, was overjoyed, and rushed the powerful
story into print within a few months, in the November, 1944 issue. The
magazine’s readers responded enthusiastically.

The sale of “Killdozer!” brought Sturgeon a bonus rate of $542.50, the
most he had ever received for a story—something like $10,000, or even
more, in modern purchasing power. The end of the war seemed in sight,
here in mid-1944, and the story’s success awakened in him the
possibility of reviving his dormant writing career. It was at this time
that he wrote “Abreaction,” another bulldozer story but this one a
psychological fantasy, which perhaps might have sold to Campbell’s
off-trail magazine _Unknown;_ but _Unknown_ had vanished in 1943, a
victim of wartime paper shortages, and the story went unpublished until
the venerable _Weird Tales_, a magazine market of the most marginal
kind, printed it in 1948. Once again he attempted an entry into
mainstream fiction, too, with “Noon Gun,” probably written late in 1944
or early in 1945. But it was a mediocre story at best, and found no
takers. (Slightly refurbished, it sold to _Playboy_ in 1962, most likely
on the strength of Sturgeon’s science fiction accomplishments in the
intervening years.)

Despite these unpromising early results, Sturgeon persisted in his plans
for returning to writing as a profession. A clause in his government
contract enabled him to wangle plane fare from St. Croix back to the
American mainland, where he attempted to make arrangements for finding a
job or a new literary agent and moving his family to New York. But
nothing worked out. The literary agents of the era had no use for
writers who proposed to earn a living writing stories at a cent or two a
word for a single specialized market that consisted only of John
Campbell’s remaining magazine and five or six low-paying quasi-juvenile
competitors. Sturgeon drifted into a period of confusion and despair;
what had been intended as a ten-day trip stretched into a futile eight
months, during which time he received word from his wife in the Virgin
Islands that she wanted a divorce. By late 1945 he found himself alone
in New York, penniless, bewildered, and wholly unable to write.

It was Campbell, once again, who rescued him. In December of 1945,
Sturgeon was staying as a house guest in Campbell’s New Jersey home, and
Campbell sat him before a typewriter in his gadget-crowded basement. Out
came the story “The Chromium Helmet,” which Campbell read as it emerged
and accepted instantly. It was the first substantial fiction Sturgeon
had managed to write in a year and a half.

“The Chromium Helmet” is marked by slick-magazine cuteness (“Dreams is
all fuzzy. But I stinkly _remember_ about that doll”) and clichéd
pulp-magazine slanginess (“ ‘Don’t let me horn in,’ I said. ‘Only—I’ve
known youse guys for a long time’ ”) that put it below such masterpieces
to come as 1953’s “A Saucer of Loneliness” and 1954’s “To Here and the
Easel.” But the intricacy of its high-tech plot showed that Sturgeon’s
story-constructing skills were undiminished, and the thoroughness of its
machine-shop technical background (perhaps inspired by the clutter of
electronic gear all about him in Campbell’s legendary basement as he
worked) is impressive testimony to his unwillingness to fake his
material. He works his story out down to the last inductance bridge and
oscilloscope, where a lesser writer might have been content to speak
vaguely of unspecified “devices” and “gadgets” and let it go at that.

So a new beginning had been made. Sturgeon followed “The Chromium
Helmet” with “Memorial,” a heavy-handed and implausible vignette written
(as so many stories in Campbell’s magazine were that year) in an
emotional response to the detonation of the first atomic bombs the
previous summer, and then with the much stronger “Mewhu’s Jet,” which
anticipates the themes of Stephen Spielberg’s movie _E.T_. and much of
Sturgeon’s own later output by putting a normal American family in
contact with a highly abnormal situation and working it not for horror
or thrills but for emotional warmth.

The Sturgeon of 1946 is not yet the Sturgeon of the sudden 1950–51
efflorescence (“The Stars are the Styx,” “Rule of Three,” and the gaudy
adventure story “The Incubi of Parallel X,”) or of the more profound
“Hurricane Trio” and “Bulkhead” and “A Way of Thinking,” which will come
another few years onward from those. But the man who wrote the splendid
stories of his major epoch—that man of such outward tenderness and
charm, such inner turbulence and stormy ambition—is recognizably present
here, and so are the basic technical skills, however they would develop
and blossom later on. Everything is in place for the greatness to come.

Robert Silverberg
March 1996



BLABBERMOUTH


SHE WAS A LOVELY THING, and before either of us knew it my arms were
around her and her deep eyes were all tangled up in mine. I held her a
little too close a little too long, I guess; she squirmed away, got her
balance and brushed me off like so much pretzel-juice.

“Sorry,” I lied.

A winged eyebrow went up as two heavy lids went down.

“That’s all right,” she said in a voice like the sound of a cello
whispering in the low register. “But you really ought to signal for a
turn.” I’d been trying to whip in front of a rotund individual who was
about to climb into the taxi I wanted to get, and in doing so had almost
knocked the girl off her feet. She turned away just in time to miss the
practiced click of my heels as I tipped my hat. I sighed and flagged
another cab. I had a lot of friends and knew a lot of glamour, and until
this minute I had flattered myself on having a pretty picturesque string
of ’em in my little black book. But now—well, I could only wish I had
seen her somewhere before. She reminded me of someone I used to know a
few years back, when I really was a bigshot. Instead of running an
all-night radio program and writing feature articles on the side, I used
to be a Power. I was in high school and managed the basketball team. I
cut a lot of ice and a lot of corners.

I stepped into the cab and gave the address of the restaurant where I
was supposed to meet Sylvia. That was a date I’d worked hard to get, and
now for some strange reason, I had little stomach for it. I stared out
of the side window as the taxi drew past the girl I’d just run into. She
was walking slowly, apparently looking at something beautiful two miles
away and two hundred feet up, and there was an entrancing half-smile on
her face. Her hair was long and black and it turned under just about
where her straight back started to make her waist so slim; I’d never
seen hair like that, but there was something about the strong, clean
curve of her jaw and the way the inside corners of her eyes were lower
than they should be—

“Stop!” I screamed to the cabby. He must have thought that I was about
to have some kind of an attack. He was wrong, then. I had already had
the attack but it had just now hit me. Anyway, he did a dollar and a
half’s worth of damage to his brake linings, took the dollar I threw at
him as I dived out, and went his unprofitable way.

I ran to her, caught her elbow. “Hey! I—”

“Ah,” she contraltoed. “My friend the Juggernaut.”

“Amend that,” I said quickly. “Your very dear friend Eddie Gretchen.”

“Oh?” said her eyebrow, and she said, “And when and where did Eddie
Gretchen become my very dear friend?”

“Damfino,” I said, and we began walking. By glancing at me without
turning her head, she conveyed the general idea that we were walking the
same way but not together. “That’s for you to figure out,” I went on,
“and in all sincerity I wish you would. I know you. I used to circulate
around you like a bloodstream. But I honestly can’t remember when it
happened. You’re a dream that got broken up by an alarm clock. Come on
now—you have my face and you have my name. What do they mean to you?”

“I was never married to you,” she said distantly. “So I haven’t your
name. And I don’t want your face.”

“With a face like yours,” I said, “I can’t blame—”

She actually smiled at me. “You haven’t changed a bit, Eddie.”

I glowed for a second and then realized that she didn’t intend to help
any. “All right—when was it?”

“The year Covina High beat your Filthy Five 48 to 17.”

“It was 48 to 19,” I said furiously, “And they were the Fighting Five.”

“They were filthy,” she said, and laughed richly.

“Fighting,” I growled. “And besides, the referees—hey! You’re not
Underhanded Mazie?”

“I am not! No one knows me well enough to call me that! I’m Maria
Undergaard—_Miss_ Undergaard to you, Mr. Gretchen.”

“Aha! Er—Mazie, m’love, what was it they called the team?”

“The Fighting Five,” she acknowledged.

“Okay, Maria.” I took her arm happily.

“But they were filthy,” she muttered. I let it go at that.

We found a table off the avenue on which to hook our elbows and gab. I
don’t think I took my eyes from her once in three hours. It was
unbelievable. When I had first met her, she’d been a refugee from one of
the low countries, in this country about four years. She had, then, an
utterly charming clipped accent, which was now replaced by beautifully
schooled diction—the pluperfect English achieved only by those who have
thoroughly learned it as a strange language. Ah, she’d been a
kiIler-diller in her school days. She’d always had an odd seriousness
about her, a deep and unwavering intensity; and my strongest memory of
her was the sleepless night I spent after our first—and only—date. It
was all wonderment. I wondered what a girl like that would ever develop
into. I wondered how in blue hell she had kept me at a respectable
distance all evening without using her hands. And most of all I wondered
at the overwhelming sense of satisfaction I had got out of it. I never
spoiled that satisfaction by asking for another date—it was too
complete. For the kind of wild Indian I used to be, that was quite
something. And now here she was, telling me how she had inherited a
little money after she graduated, had spent four years at a small
college up on the Lakes, and had been studying herself myopic ever
since.

“Studying what?”

She looked at me oddly. “Spiritism. Psychic manifestations. Possession,
more than anything else. I’ve read a million books and barked up a
million wrong trees, but I—think I proved what I thought all along.”

“What?”

“That possession is an established fact. That anyone can be possessed.
That I myself can be possessed.”

“I’d like to be sure of that,” I said. She took it the nice way, though
her eyes told me that she hadn’t missed anything. “Psychic possession is
a very strange thing. But it is not strange in the way you might think.
I’m sure you’ve read stories—books, articles—about it. How spirits drift
about in and among us, how, as elementals and familiars, they sometimes
take possession, causing us to do things completely alien to ourselves.
Well, it isn’t like that at all. It isn’t psychic—it’s psychological. I
have proof of that.” As she spoke her eyes began to wander and her voice
to fade and come in strong with her wavering gaze. She seemed to be
struggling desperately to keep her attention on what she was saying; but
it seemed as if she were being distracted by some conversation inaudible
to me. “Did you know that a vibrating string never gives off the fullest
tone unless it has a sounding board back of it? The ‘spirit’ that
possesses people is like that. My vibrating string in the analogy is the
source of that spirit—a mind emanating suspicion. The sounding board
is—” She broke off, looking over her shoulder at the woman who sat alone
at the next table. I’d noticed her before, because of the remarkable
viciousness of her expression, and the brittle politeness of the man who
had sat there with her. They seemed to be a little bit married and
finding it quite a strain. Maria half rose, glanced at me, and with an
effort sat down again.

“What’s the matter—don’t you feel well?” I asked.

“Oh no—no, I’m perfectly all—I was just …” She sipped at her drink,
glanced over her shoulder again, took a deep breath, smiled at me.

“Someone you know?” I queried.

She shook her head. “Where was I?”

“You were here with me, looking very lovely, and you had just told me
that the possessing spirit is in reality an emanation of suspicion.”

“Oh. Well, it has its sounding board in a mind which bears a guilty
conscience. Suspicion and guilt; when the two of them combine, they form
a very powerful psychological entity, which is actually the thing which
possesses a mind opened to it.”

“Sounds very involved and not overly important to me,” I said,
scratching my ear. “Now that you’ve got it, what’s it get you?”

She shrugged. “What good is any knowledge, once achieved? Maybe some day
someone cleverer than I will find out how to use what I have learned. As
far I’m concerned, I’ve learned all I—care to about it.” She looked at
me; there was something behind that statement and the poignant glance
that went with it. She was smooth, svelte; the most equable and poised
human being I had ever seen; and yet under that knee-action armor she
wore was a pleading, little-girl kind of terror at something she
couldn’t understand. It didn’t fit. It didn’t make sense. It made me
frightened, too, a little, and hugely anxious to share it with her,
whatever it was. No matter _what_ it was!

She giggled suddenly. I said. “Huh?”

“I just thought of something, Eddie. You were in an awful rush when you
swept me off my feet on the Avenue. Whatever became of that appointment
you had to keep?”

“Oh, that. Well, I—_holy smoke!_”

I leaped up, a horrible picture of Sylvia sitting in a restaurant for
three hours, waiting for me, wafted through my mind. I excused myself to
Maria’s laughing face and hightailed for a phone. Halfway there it
occurred to me that Maria had come out with her little reminder with
peculiar suddenness. One phone booth was occupied, I noticed, by the
frozen-faced gentleman lately from the table next to ours. He was ogling
into the phone with a real genuine sugar-candy ogle. I hate guys like
that. I slid into the next booth, dialed. While I was waiting for my
connection I glanced back at my table. Maria wasn’t there. I froze. This
was dandy. Call up one babe to fix a stand-up while another was doing
precisely the same thing to me.

I got helloed at through the receiver and asked to have Sylvia paged.
Sitting back to wait, I looked out again. I’d been wrong. Maria hadn’t
gone, she was over at the next table, talking earnestly to the basilisk
who sat there. I felt my eyebrows go up. What did she mean by lying to
me about not knowing those people? And why lie about it?

I could see even at that distance how the woman’s face was lowering and
setting as Maria spoke swiftly in her ear. When her countenance had
achieved the general lines of the bulbous bow on a battleship, she got
up and started over toward the phones. I had an impulse to pop into the
next booth and warn the man in there that she was coming, but I didn’t
want to miss my call. Just as she reached the booths and plastered her
ear against the glass, I heard Sylvia’s voice in my receiver.

“Hello?”

“Sylvia? This is Eddie Gretchen.”

“Ah. Eddie Gretchen. I wish I didn’t know you well enough to remember
your name. Where have you been? Where are you?”

“It was this way,” I said gently. “An old friend of mine is in trouble.
I just had to lend a hand—couldn’t help myself.” That’s true enough, I
thought, and anyway, she’s not listening to me.

“Too bad,” she said bitterly. “Meanwhile I’ve waited for two and a half
hours in a restaurant where I’m not known, in which I have eaten a
substantial lunch and from which I have secured a pack of expensive
cigarettes, and to which I have brought no money. I am to assume that
you will not be here?”

“Oh, Sylvia, I can’t possibly. About the check, put the manager on. He
knows me. I can fix that. And Sylvia—I’m terribly sorry. I—” but she had
put down the receiver. In a moment the manager’s voice came over. I
explained the situation, got his okay, and asked for Sylvia.

“I’m sorry,” said the manager. “The lady seemed—well, miffed. Definitely
miffed. She said to tell you not to hold your finger down your throat
until you hear from her again, because you’ll sure digest it off. Heh
heh.”

“Heh heh,” I mimicked, and hung up. I stepped out of the booth into the
messiest piece of publicized domesticity I had ever seen. It was the
woman Maria had spoken to. She was just in the act of bursting into the
next booth. Piling in practically on top of the hapless man inside, she
gave vent to her emotions in a screaming falsetto.

“You moth-eaten old billygoat! How dare you leave me sitting alone in a
fourth-rate dive while you call up that sleazy little tramp? Take your
hand away from the mouthpiece, you crumb. Let her hear me. Here—get
away. (into the phone:) Listen, you home-wrecker. If you want my filthy
husband you can have him. But you just better think it over. If you want
his money, he hasn’t any. I haven’t had a new dress in six months,
although I’ll bet you have, you—ah, she hung up.” She banged the
receiver violently onto its hook and turned to her palsied spouse.
“Things have come to a pretty pass,” she shrieked, “when total strangers
can walk up to me and tell me about your goings-on! You—”

Along about then she began to repeat herself, and my interest dwindled.
I pushed my way through the crowd that had collected, and went back to
Maria. She sat with her head bowed, and I really don’t think she knew I
had returned until I was seated and spoke to her.

“Maria—”

“Oh, Eddie—” with a bright, phony smile, “did you get it fixed up all
right?”

“Yeh.” I sat looking at her somberly. “You did, too.”

“What?” all innocence.

“Fixed something up all right. I hate to pry, Mazie, but you just caused
a hell of a stink over there. What was the idea of tipping that woman
off that her husband was daddying some sugar over the phone? How did you
know what he was up to in the first place? And why the devil did you
tell me you didn’t know those people?”

She was a little panicked. Her eyes went wide, and she reached over and
clutched my wrist. She didn’t know it, but her touch on my arm clinched
any argument, forever and ever. As long as she held me that way, looked
at me that way, she was right; I was wrong. “Please don’t be angry,
Eddie. I hoped you hadn’t noticed. No, I didn’t lie to you. I never saw
them before. How did I know what was going on? I just—knew, Eddie.
Please believe me—please don’t catechize me! Will you forget it—just
this once? I’ll try not to let it happen again! Truly I will, Eddie!”

I tried to grin those bright tear-stars out of her eyes. I put one fist
under her chin, punched it gently, shaking my head. “Sure, Maria. Sure.
Heck—it was nothing. Skip it.”

Why I hadn’t sense enough to tie the incident up with her theory of
possession, I’ll never know.

The fourth time I saw her I proposed. That was three hours after the
third time, which was one day after the second time, which was five
solid weeks after the first time. Yes, it took five weeks for me to
persuade her to entrust herself to me for an evening after that occasion
in the little bar off the Avenue. Twice she almost cried over the phone,
and after that she laughed it off; and when she had run out of reasons
for not seeing me she broke down and confessed that it was because she
was afraid she would embarrass me the same way again. I had to tell her
that in the first place I hadn’t been embarrassed and in the second
place I didn’t give a damn about its happening again; I just wanted to
see her. It wasn’t until I threatened to walk out of a window at the
studio that she finally made that second date. Eighty-seven floors is a
long way, and I meant what I said.

She always insisted on going to places where we’d be more or less alone,
whether it was in a hansom cab in Central Park or a walk over the
Brooklyn Bridge. That suited me so well I didn’t bother to wonder about
it. But she’d go to any lengths to avoid being with me and strangers at
the same time. So it was there in the park, at four o’clock in the
afternoon on the day I’d rolled out of bed early to take her to lunch,
that I proposed. It was easy. I just held both her hands and felt afraid
to look into her eyes when I said,

“Hey. We got to get married.”

And she smiled her very own smile and nodded. I kissed her. When a
passing cop grinningly broke it up, she straightened her hat, parted the
back of my hand and shook her head. “I wouldn’t marry you, Eddie,” she
said quietly. My blood turned to salt water and began to ooze coldly out
of my pores. I didn’t have to ask her to say it again because she did.
Then she stood up. “Let’s get out of here, Eddie.” One of my arms went
up and yanked her back down on the bench. I stared woodenly at some kids
who were feeding the ducks down on the lake.”

“For a minute I was scared,” I said. My voice hurt me. “I thought you
said you wouldn’t marry me.”

“I did, Eddie.”

“Yeah.” I turned to her and when she saw my face she lifted her hands a
little and shrank back. “Why?” I asked. “Single, aren’t you?”

She nodded. “It’s something that—Eddie, will you take my word for
it—just this once?”

“No,” I said, “I already took your word for something ‘just this once.’
Spill it.”

“It’s—about the things I studied. I spent a month or so by myself up in
the mountains not long ago—did I tell you? I didn’t see a soul for
forty-two days. I was always susceptible to what has been called the
psychic. Up there, I studied, and I tried out a lot of things, and
experimented a lot. That was when I got on the right track. About
possession, I mean. I found out how to open my mind to possession. I
went too far. I held it open too long. It—grew that way. I can’t close
it. I’m a permanent susceptible, Eddie. When I came down from the
mountains I was different. I always will be.”

“What the hell’s this all about?” I snarled. “Do you love me?”

“You don’t have to ask me that,” she whispered. I looked at her. I
didn’t have to ask her. I put my arms around her and said, with my teeth
on the lobe of her ear, “Tell the rest of that nonsense to your husband
on your honeymoon.”

The cop came along again. I thumbed at the lake over my shoulder and
told him to go jump in it. He went away laughing.

Different she might have been but her only difference was in being
better, finer, sweeter than any other woman on earth. That’s what I
believed after our honeymoon. I believe it now, with an amendment. Then,
I thought that what I just said covered everything. Since, I learned a
little more. Maria did have a profound difference from other women.

It didn’t show up until we came back to the city and I got back on the
air again. I had a nice stretch, and she adjusted herself to it
gracefully. I m.c.’d an all-night radio program from two to seven in the
morning, which meant getting up around four and breakfasting at
suppertime. Great stuff. That way you’re fresh and ready to go in the
evening when everyone else who has to work for a living is tired out
from a day’s work. Before I got married I had a thousand friends and a
thousand places to go every night. Afterward, I couldn’t see why Maria
shouldn’t go to at least five hundred of them with me. She didn’t like
the idea. Acted afraid of it. I kidded her and swore at her and annoyed
her and persuaded her. “A guy like me has to have friends,” I said.
“Look. My program has sponsors. As long as people wire in requests for
phonograph records, the sponsors know that if they’re hearing the music
they can’t very well avoid the plugs. They renew their contracts and
that’s what gives me nickels and dimes to buy you ice cream cones and
automobiles and stuff. You’d be surprised how many people wire in from
bars and restaurants, whether they know me personally or not, just
because they saw me there during the evening. I got to get around. I can
notice the slack-off already, when I’ve only been off the stem for a
couple of weeks. Last night I played fifty-eight minutes of records and
transcriptions without getting a single wire. That isn’t good, babe.”

And she kept saying, “Then go, Eddie. I’ll be all right. I won’t run
away from you if you leave me alone for a few hours. Go see your
friends.” So I did. But it didn’t work out. Those weren’t stag parties I
was going to. The babes all knew I was married, and when they saw me by
myself all the time they got the wrong idea. A little bit of this, and I
went home one night and laid down the law.

She didn’t like it, but she didn’t argue. She took an unconscionably
long time to put on her face, but she came without a peep. I didn’t
expect that meekness. I told her so. She smiled without enthusiasm.

“I’ve asked you not to force me to come with you,” she said sadly. “I
guess you’ve just got to find out for yourself.”

We started on West Fifty-second Street and did it up pretty well. The
evening netted us four dinner invitations, three pairs of tickets to
shows on the stem, and a total of ninety-two telegrams on that night’s
program. Maria did me proud. There wasn’t a lovelier or more charming
woman under lights that night, and after the first half hour or so she
seemed to be enjoying it. When I tossed her into a cab in front of the
studio at one-thirty, she grinned and squeezed my hand. “Maybe I was
wrong, Eddie. I hope so anyway. But it was swell.”

I went on up to the studio, feeling all warm inside, and it wasn’t the
highballs either. Jakie Feltner was winding up the “Hits at Home”
stretch, two hours of records of bands playing currently in New York
spots, with a background of transcribed night-club chatter to make the
unwary listener think he was listening to the real thing. He gave me a
peculiar look through the plate-glass as I went in, waved his hand
toward my table. I threaded my way through the record-stacks and picked
up the sheaf of early wires that fed out of the teletype by my
microphone. As a favor to me, Jakie used to read off the one-thirty to
two wires and stack up the first few releases for me while his own were
being played. I gathered that he had come across a wire of particular
moment. He had. Among the run-of-the-mill requests was this little gem,
marked “Personal”:

HEY EDDIE BETTER KEEP THAT SHEMALE SHERLOCK YOU MARRIED OUT OF POWDER
ROOMS OR SHE’LL WIND UP MINUS AN EYE. SHE WENT OVER FIVE WOMEN IN THERE
ONE AFTER ANOTHER, TOLD EACH ONE EXACTLY WHAT SHE WANTED TO KNOW. TOLD
MY WIFE ABOUT THE RAISE I GOT TWO MONTHS AGO. I GOT TROUBLE SON. YOU
LEAVE HER HOME NEXT TIME.

DUKE FROM DUBUQUE.

I read it over three times. The Duke was one of my steadies, who
apparently went on a telegram binge every payday. I’ve seen him send
twenty-eight in two hours. I never did find out who he was, though he
apparently saw me very often.

“Pretty, huh?” said Jakie, closing the soundproof door into the other
section and coming over to me.

“Yeah,” I said. “The guy’s nuts.” He looked over my shoulder at the
Duke’s wire. “Oh—that one. Could be. Maybe all these are nuts too.” He
riffled through the pile, tossed out three more wires.

DEAR EDDIE THERE CAME THE BRIDE AND THERE WENT THE DETAILS OF MY
MONKEY-BUSINESS TO THE WAITING EARS OF THE WORLD. IF YOU CAN’T AFFORD A
MUZZLE I’LL SEND YOU ONE. PLEASE PLAY “I’LL BE GLAD WHEN YOU’RE DEAD”
AND DEDICATE IT TO YOUR WIFE.

A FRIEND.

HI EDDIE SAW THE NEW MATA HARI ON FIFTY-SECOND STREET AND WAS TOLD SHE
BELONGS TO YOU. WHO’D OF THOUGHT YOU’D WED A PUBLICITY ENEMY? PLEASE
PLAY “WHISPERING GRASS.”

ANN ONYMUS.

EDDIE: DIDN’T HAVE A CHANCE TO TELL YOU AT THE TIME BUT I WISH YOU’D
KEEP WHAT I TELL YOU UNDER YOUR HAT. YOUR WIFE TOLD BERGEN ABOUT MY
MERGER WITH WILLIAMSON WHICH WAS DUE TOMORROW. THAT WILL COST ME ABOUT
EIGHT THOUSAND. GUESS IT WASN’T MARIA’S FAULT BUT YOU SHOULD HAVE TOLD
HER TO KEEP QUIET ABOUT IT. HARRY ELLIOTT.

They were all lousy but the last one hurt the most. Harry had been a
friend of mine for years. Maria and I had joined his crowd a couple of
hours ago at Dave’s place. Bergen and his wife were there. Bergen was
Harry’s A-number-one rival and competitor in the printing business. I’d
known for quite some time that Harry had a deal coming up with the
Williamson concern that would give him weight enough to drive Bergen
underground. I gathered that now that the info had leaked out through
Maria, Bergen had managed to bear down on Williamson and kill the
merger. That was bad enough in itself; but imagine how I felt when I
remembered that _I had positively not told Maria one word about Harry
Elliot’s affairs!_

Jakie said quietly, “Sorry, Eddie.”

I looked at him. I felt my jaw flapping foolishly and waved him away.
“Go back to your turntables, Jakie. You’re on the air—remember?”

“Yeh.” He went to the door, turned to give me a long look, and then
dashed for the mike as his number played itself out. Jakie was swell.
He’d do anything for me, I knew, but there was nothing he could do about
this.

How could Maria have done these things? If she had why did she? I could
easily see how. Anyone who goes clubbing with me has to spend a lot of
time by himself, because I know so damn many people. I’m always hopping
from one table to another. While I was making the rounds, I guess Maria
had been getting in her work.

“That—stinks,” I said.

Long practice had taught me how to maintain a free-and-easy mike style
no matter how I felt, no matter how much good luck or bad had piled into
me before the show. Jakie put my theme on the table and the red light in
front of me flashed on. I sat back mulling over the whole dirty business
and when the last chorus of my theme faded, I grabbed the mike around
the neck and went to work.

“Top o’ the wee sma’ to ye, boys and gals. This is the man behind the
mike who makes all that talking noise between the music—Eddie Gretchen’s
the name. We’re open for business till the sun comes up and stops us,
and if there’s any ol’ thing you want to hear over the air, drop me a
wire and tell me about it. Don’t call me up because I haven’t the
intelligence to use a phone. Before I play you some transcriptions and
stuff there’s a little something on my mind, viz. and to wit: There’s no
law yet in this country against sending me personal wires while I’m
working. It’s fun for you and fun for me. But there’s nothing funny
about hitting below the belt. I just got a sheaf of that kind of thing
and I don’t feel so happy about it, boys and gals. I’m not saying to
quit sending them, though. Oh no. But when you do, sign your names and
addresses. If I find out that the information is phony, I might like to
drop around and personally cave in some faces. Think it over while Tony
Reddik’s swell little band shows you and you how drums are really kicked
around in ‘Suitcase Shuffle.’ ” I spun the platter and let it go.

Well, it brought results. During the show I got fourteen more wires of
that sort. I think all of that powder room crowd were represented. Some
of them were funny and some of them were nasty and some were just hurt
about it. I got my names and addresses too. Nine of them were women. It
certainly seemed as if Maria had done the most vicious piece of blabbing
I’d ever heard of. She told husbands about their wives and wives about
their best friends. She broke up business deals and caused fistfights
and broke up more than one otherwise happy couple. I couldn’t understand
where she got all her information, or what on earth possessed her to
spill it around. Possessed—possessed … the word did something to my
brain. That was the thing she was always trying to tell me about. The
reason she didn’t want to mix with a crowd. I’d seen loose-tongued women
before, but this particular woman—damn it! She was so restrained! Her
every thought and movement was so perfectly controlled! Well, I thought
sourly, she’s going to have her chance to explain it all tonight. Every
dirty lousy little bit of it.

She was asleep when I came in. I stood over her, wanting to kiss her,
wanting to punch her lovely mouth, wanting to kick her teeth in, wanting
to have her put her arms around me so I could cry on her shoulder. She
must have sensed me near her. She put up her arms and smiled without
opening her eyes. I took the telegrams out of my breast pocket and
closed her fingers on them. Without a word I went into the bathroom and
shut the door. As I peeled off my clothes and got into pajamas and a
robe I heard her start to cry, and then be quiet again. When I went back
she was lying with her face buried in the crumpled telegrams.

“I see you beat me to it,” I said evenly. She turned her head ever so
slightly, so that one dark eye regarded me piteously. “What do you
mean?”

“Why, I was going to rub your nose in those wires myself.”

She rolled over and sat up. Her face was scared and defiant, and not
terribly apologetic. I hadn’t expected any of that except the fear.
“Don’t say I didn’t warn you,” she said softly. “Don’t say I didn’t try
and try to keep you from taking me to those places. Don’t say I didn’t
try to tell you about it even before we were married.”

“My mistake for shutting you up. Go on—you have the floor.”

“What do you expect me to say? I’m sorry?”

“Babe, that doesn’t begin to cover it.” I went over to her. My gums
hurt, the way my jaw was clenched, driving the teeth into them. “I want
the whole story. I want to know why you are such a lousy little
blabbermouth, and how you got the dirt you threw around all night.”

“Sit down,” she said coolly, “or you’ll get a seizure and fall down.”

Her eyes were very wide, and that dark something in them that had
chilled me on the day we met was there. I crossed the room and sat. She
began to talk in a low voice.

“I was possessed last night, Eddie. Not once, but time and time again.
Oh, you’re so stupid sometimes! I knew this was going to happen—I knew
it, but you had to be so bullheaded and—oh, I can’t blame it on you,
except for not trying to understand. I’ll try once more. You can take it
or leave it, Eddie. I’ve known this was coming; I know just what to say.
Funny, isn’t it?

“Remember what I told you about the entity that is conceived of
suspicion and born of guilt? It’s a wicked little _poltergeist_—an
almost solid embodiment of hate. And I’m a susceptible. Eddie, I can’t
be in the same room with any two people who bear suspicion and the
corresponding sense of guilt! And the world is full of those people—you
can’t avoid them. Everyone has dozens upon dozens of petty hates and
prejudices. Let me give you an example. Suppose you have a racial hatred
of, say, Tibetans. You and I are sitting here, and a Tibetan walks in.
Now, you know him. He has a very fine mind, or he has done you a favor,
or he is a friend of a good friend of yours. You talk for a half hour,
politely, and everything’s all right. In your heart, though, you’re
saying, ‘I hate your yellow hide, you sniveling filth.’ Everything will
still be all right as long as he is unconscious of it. But once let this
thought flicker into his mind—‘He dislikes me because of my race’—and
then and there the _poltergeist_ is born. The room is full of it,
charged with it. It has body and power of its own, completely
independent of you or the Tibetan. I am a susceptible. The entity
approaches me. I try to avoid it. I make bright remarks. I move around
the room, busy myself with some flowers, a book, anything, but it’s no
use. I can’t escape it. I can’t fight it away or close my ego to it.
Suddenly it has me, completely. I am part of it. It directs me, drives
me. Its whole purpose is one hate. It wants to drag your dislike and his
suspicion into the light. I am its instrument now. My control is only
strong enough to temper the words that burn at my lips. So instead of
screaming out ‘He hates you, because he hates all of your yellow kind!’
I move closer to the man. I stop near him, and say out of the corner of
my mouth, ‘You’d better go soon. He doesn’t like Tibetans and I don’t
know how long he can keep on being polite.’ Once it’s said, the
_poltergeist_ is nullified. The hatred between you is open, no longer
secret, and secret hate is the very essence of a _poltergeist_. It
dissipates, and I am free; but the damage is done. The most that I can
do is to apologize, make a joke of it, say I was trying to be funny. I
won’t be believed, because my statement, rotten as it was, was true in
its very essence and can’t be denied. But if I should be believed in my
apology, then the seeds of hatred and suspicion are left, and the entity
is conceived all over again, and possession takes place once more, then
and there. To be spared that, I never deny what I have said, and never
apologize for it. It would only make it worse.

“That’s how it happens, Eddie, and it can’t be changed. I was always
susceptible, and I made the condition permanent and acute by my
experiments when I was alone in the mountains. I can’t change, Eddie. I
shouldn’t have married you, shouldn’t have done this to you. I—guess
this is the wind-up. I’ll get out.” She tried a weak little laugh. “Good
thing we haven’t been married long enough to have collected a house and
a mess of furniture, eh?”

“Yeh,” I said. I watched her as she got up, slipped into a house coat,
and began to pack. She moved swiftly about the place, collecting the
little odds and ends that I had just been learning to expect in my
apartment. It had taken some learning, too. Bachelor digs sure get made
over when a woman comes into them. After a while I went over and got
into the bed. It was still a little warm and smelled nice. I turned my
face to the wall, and in a minute I heard her thump a suitcase down
beside the others in the middle of the room. She was looking at me; I
could feel her eyes on the nape of my neck. I knew she was dressed for
the street, all ready to go.

“Maria …”

“Yes, Eddie?” She answered a little too quickly to hide the fact that
she wasn’t as collected as she hoped.

“Wake me up around four, will you? We’ll eat us some scrambled eggs and
then take that spin around the park like we did when we were single.”

There was a thump when she dropped her handbag, and then she was all
over me. I put my arms around her and held her until she gasped for
breath, and then I ginned at her and got me some sleep.

After that I did my clubbing solo and let Maria build me a home. She
loved it. If she missed not seeing people, she didn’t complain. I guess
she got used to it after a while; I know I did. Things went along
beautifully until Ivor Jones, the station manager, called Jakie Feltner
and me into his office one evening. Neither of us knew what was up, but
we both had guesses.

Jones pursed his lips and took off his glasses as we came in. He was a
dried-up little man, a stickler for detail but a pretty good man to work
for. He told us to sit, handed cigarettes around.

“Boys, I want you to help me. I don’t have to tell you how the station
is making out. I think we all are satisfied with it, but you know and I
know that a small independent broadcasting station can’t make as much or
pay as much as a big network outlet. Now, one of the network stations
here is shutting down. It needs complete new equipment, and the
corporation wouldn’t mind doing it. But since there are too many
stations here already, and since we are equipped up to the hilt with all
the latest, I rather think they’d like to take us over. They’d boost our
power ten thousand watts. We’d run all their releases and therefore
share in their income. You boys, as staff announcers, stand to get a
twenty-per-cent raise. How’s it sound?”

“Swell,” said Jakie. I nodded.

“I’m sold on it,” said Jones. “If we could get Shanaman, the general
manager of the Eastern Network, to feel the same way, we could come to
terms. I’ve done all I could think of in a business way. But it’ll take
a little more than that. If I can mellow the old boy down a bit with a
swell dinner-party, I might get him to sign the papers then and there. I
want you two to come and bring your women. It’ll be next Friday night.
Shanaman’s bringing his wife. My house. You’ll be there?”

“Formal?” asked Jakie. Jones nodded.

“I’d rather not, Mr. Jones,” I said. “I sort of had an engagement—”

“Break it,” Jones said. “Shanaman’s interested in meeting you. As a
matter of fact, your show is a high spot, a real selling point for the
station. You’ve got to come. And bring that new wife of yours. I want to
meet her.”

Jakie laughed and got up, slapping me on the back. “I’ll persuade him,
Mr. Jones. We’ll be there, don’t worry.” He was a big fellow, that
Feltnor. He had me rushed out of there before I knew what went on.
Cornering me in the corridor, he said, “Come on Eddie—be a sport. Don’t
queer that party. It means a lot to me. Claire has been acting a little
peculiar lately and that party ought to fix the trouble. No kidding,
Eddie—you’ve got to do it.”

“I’ll see what Maria says,” I muttered, and headed for home.

Maria said she didn’t like the idea. We had a long argument about it. I
pointed out that it was formal, that it was a business affair, that the
eight people who were there knew each other very little and had nothing
but the broadest interests in common, and that anyway I couldn’t avoid
it. It was orders. I also mentioned the fact that Jakie wanted me to do
it, and I was a good friend of his. Maria’s arguments were all old stuff
to me, but for one new one. She was afraid that she wouldn’t be able to
stand it. When she had been in more or less constant contact with
people, she was conditioned to the influx of possessions. Now it was
different. She feared it. It was months since she had been through it;
she was afraid of what it might do to her. But I had my way, and Friday
night found us walking into Jones’s place in Queens Village.

It was quite a layout. Jones had a nice income and used it. Big house,
big rooms, big butler. We were the last to arrive. We got rid of our
coats and were shown into the library, where cocktails were being
served. I stopped at the door and looked around the room. Over in a
corner Jones was talking to a stout old apple who seemed all jowls and
boiled shirt. Shanaman, I surmised. Talking uninterestedly with Jones’s
slightly washed-out wife, was Claire Feltner. I knew her well; she hung
around the studio a lot. A nasty thought occurred to me; I noticed
Claire there many a time when Jakie was out. Jones always seemed to be
around at the time. I began to see why Jakie had been so anxious to
bring Claire and Jones into the same room. He wanted to watch them. That
was bad.

I rescued Jakie from the voluminous feminine counterpart of Shanaman.
The network manager’s wife had poor Feltner in a corner and was pounding
his ear frighteningly with an account of her husband’s metabolism.

Introductions were made all around, and I left Maria with Jakie while I
joined Jones and Shanaman. The talk was general and too loud. Just about
then I began to wish I hadn’t come. That went on all the time I was
there. I disliked particularly this business of our being in that big
room free to wander from person to person for Lord knows how long until
dinner was served. In a matter of minutes Maria could stumble across one
of her little _poltergeists_, and then—well, in a matter of minutes
Maria did.

Shanaman was building up to a terrific climax in an unfunny story, when
I saw Maria across the room from me, looking from Shanaman to Mrs. Jones
and back again. There was something about her stance, her eyes, that
told me she was fighting the thing. I broke away from Shanaman as fast
as I could. Not fast enough. Maria got to Mrs. Jones before I did, sat
down beside her, began talking swiftly. As I got there, Mrs. Jones rose,
glaring at Shanaman, and went over to her husband.

“What goes on?” I asked anxiously.

“Oh, Eddie, it happened again.” She would have cried if I hadn’t caught
her hands, squeezed them until they hurt. “Shanaman plans to put a
network crew in your station if he takes it over. Everyone will lose his
job, except you, Eddie!”

“And you told that to Mrs. Jones?”

“Yes—don’t you see? She suspected it, and Shanaman knew he was going to
do it! I couldn’t help myself, Eddie!”

“That’s all right, kid,” I whispered. “No hair off our necks.” I watched
the Joneses. It seemed to me that he didn’t believe his wife. She was
evidently furious with him for his stupidity and said so into his ear.
He turned his back on her and went to Claire Feltner. She went over to
see if she couldn’t pump some information out of Shanaman. Jakie stood
near them, glumly watching his wife puckering up to Jones.

“Try to keep away from Jakie,” I said, turning back to Maria. But she
had slipped away when I was looking at Jones. She was standing by the
window behind me, kneading her hands and staring out into the night. I
figured it was best to leave her alone as long as she could stand it.
Meanwhile, I was going to try to keep the rest of them away from her. I
barged in on Shanaman’s conversation with Mrs. Jones. It was short and
sweet. She was just winding up what must have been quite a scintillating
piece of vituperation.

“—and don’t think I don’t know what you’re up to, you old wolf,” she was
saying. She was hopping mad. Shanaman looked bewilderedly indignant. It
was too late to do anything about it.

“My dear lady,” he said pompously, “I regret exceedingly that your
suspicions should have reached such a state. Ah—Mr. Jones. Will you come
here a minute?” Jones looked up, saw what was happening, came rabbiting
over. I saw the studio deal flitting out the window when I saw Jones
reach out and clip his wife across the mouth. Shanaman held up his hands
in horror, then barged across the room to his wife.

Then everything happened at once. Maria popped up from nowhere, nudged
Jakie Feltner, whispered in his ear, nodded toward Claire. Jakie roared,
reached out, spun Jones around and smeared him with a terrific right
hook. Shanaman, fear of publicity plastered all over his fat face,
bolted for the door with his wife.

And that was the wind-up of Jones’s precious little dinner party. Maria
filled in the details for me on the way home. It seemed that Jones had
been seeing Jakie’s wife, and Maria, possessed, told Jakie how far it
had gone, and he punched Jones’s mouth. Mrs. Jones’s hysterical calling
of Shanaman’s bluff sprang, I imagine, from jealousy and the desire to
hurt Jones. It was an unholy mess, one of those awful things that are
awful when they happen and funny afterward. Except for one thing. Jones
didn’t get up after Jakie knocked him down. He smashed his silly brains
out on the brass andiron in the fireplace.

The rest of it was rough. When the trial was over and poor old Feltner
got sent up for thirty years on a second-degree murder charge, there
wasn’t much left for me. Unfavorable publicity pulled a lot of
advertising contracts, and anyway, as I said, there are too many radio
stations in this town. But the notoriety hadn’t finished with me when it
took my living away from me. Eddie Gretchen turned out to be the guy
with a thousand friends who never heard of him. The radio game was
strictly on the receiving end, for me. Old Shanaman’s bolting for the
door the night of the murder hadn’t done him a bit of good; he was
subpoenaed and put on the grill with the rest of us. I hadn’t liked the
way he cried about it—after all, big shots and little, we were all in
the same boat—and he got even with me by passing the word around the
studios that I wasn’t to get so much as an audition. That, after seven
years in radio! Yeah, it was rough. I’d always had money and I didn’t
know how to go about being poor. I learned. Maria had a couple of grand
in the cooler but that went quickly, along with what I’d saved, which
wasn’t a hell of a lot. I hit the jolly old rock-ribbed bottom the day I
tried to get a job as a studio page and got well treated until somebody
remembered me and I got handed the rush. The smell even reached into
publishing houses, and the feature articles I used to sell brought
checks every six months instead of every two weeks. I sold a little
stuff under a phony name; but for that Maria and I would have starved.
We lost our place and our furniture and the car. Bad. But I couldn’t
lose Maria. She almost left me right after the trial, feeling herself
guilty of Jones’s murder. I talked her out of that, telling her that he
had it coming to him anyway; and then she got morbid and turned on the
gas one day. I got there in time, and the police emergency squad brought
her around. After that she buckled down like the ace she was, and tried
helping instead of hindering. God, when I think of her down on her four
bones scrubbing floors, and rubbing her white hands raw on my shirts, I
know what they mean when they say “For richer, for poorer”…

I stood out on the sidewalk in front of the radio playhouse and shivered
because I had sold my overcoat six weeks before. There was nowhere else
to turn to, and I hadn’t the gall to go back to Maria so early in the
day. Uptown, downtown, crosstown—all the same to me.

A man walked up, looked me over, handed me a slip of paper. It said,
“Could you tell me how to get to South Ferry from here?”

I said, “Sure. Take the Seventh Avenue subway—”

He shook his head, pointed to an ear. Deaf. I took the pencil he
offered, wrote down the directions. He tipped his hat, went his way. I
remember wondering how a guy like that got such a nice warm coat. Some
agency, I guessed. I got all my faculties and no overcoat. He’s a deaf
mute and has an overcoat. I’ll take the overcoat.

Then the great idea hit me. I smacked my hands together, whooped like a
drunken Indian, and headed at a dead run for the West Side, where Maria
was trying to make a home for me out of an eleven-a-month cold water
flat. I reached it, flung myself up three flights of stairs, fell
gasping and moaning for breath inside the room. Maria didn’t know what
to make of it, and figured even less when I got wind enough to explain.
If she was possessed, I wanted to know, could she keep from tipping
anybody off about it _if she wrote the information down?_

“I don’t know, Eddie. I never tried it.”

“Well, try it, damn it. Try it!”

“H-how?”

I glanced at the ninety-eight cent alarm clock on the stove. “Come on,
babe. Get your coat on. We’re going to get some money.”

She was used to me by this time or she never would have done it. I
didn’t tell her until we reached the pawnshop that the money was coming
from the one thing of value she’d hung onto—the star sapphire I’d given
her as an engagement ring the day before we got married. Under the three
golden spheres I relieved her of it, shoved an old envelope and a stub
of pencil into her hands, and dragged her in.

I knew the broker well by that time. The only Irishman I’d ever seen in
a hock shop. “Terry, me lad,” I shouted. “I’m about to do you a favor.
Hock me this ring for eighty bucks and you can’t lose a thing.” I gave
it to him. He grunted sourly. Maria started forward, about to speak. I
shoved her toward a trunk, pointed at the paper and pencil. She grinned
and began to write.

“I’ll give ye ten,” said Terence.

“And I’ll take me pathronage ilsewhere,” I mocked him.

“Twinty, an’ ye’re a young thief.”

“Sivinty-foive, ye grave-robber.”

“Twinty-two an’ a half, and be dommed to ye. It’s white gold, not
platinum.”

“Platinum’s twenty bucks an ounce on the open market you pernicious old
Gael, and gold’s thirty-five. Don’t blind me with your jeweler’s
tricks.”

And still not an interruption from Maria.

Terence looked at the ring carefully through his glass. “Thirty
dollars.”

“Will you make that thirty-two fifty?”

“I will that, and there I’m done.”

“You’re a good business man, Terence, and I’ll treat you right. You just
went up ten dollars and I can afford to come down ten. That’s meeting
you halfway at sixty-five dollars.” Maria’s pencil scribbled busily.

“Fifty dollars to get yez out o’ my store,” said the broker with a great
effort.

“Fifty-seven fifty.”

We settled at fifty-five; I signed the book and we left. As soon as we
were outside I snatched the envelope. Maria had written no less than
twelve times, “Don’t be a fool. He only paid sixty for it when it was
new.”

I kissed her then and there. “It works,” I breathed. “It works!”

She looked at the envelope. The truth will out,” she grinned. “But
Eddie—I didn’t want to pawn that ring. I—”

“You dry up and leave it to me, pal,” I said. “Come home—I want you to
dig up that dress of yours—you know, the black-brown one with the
truffles on it.”

“Ruffles,” she said. “You eat truffles. But it’s an evening gown, Eddie.
Where—”

“—are we going? West five-two street, babe, and we’re going to scrabble
up all the dirt from gutter to gutter.” I stopped in front of a “Tuxedos
to Hire” joint. “I’m going in here. You beat it home and pretty up.”

She did, under protest. I got myself a fair-enough dinner jacket, and
brought it home. In two hours we looked like a million. I tucked the
thin little roll into my pocket, and we started. We took the subway to
Fiftieth and caught a cab there to go to Fifty-second. A thirty-cent cab
ride looks just as good as a three-dollar one at the far end of the
line. I carried a battery of sharp pencils and Maria had my little black
book.

Well, it was a snap, I’d barge into a table, and because I looked it and
felt it, the old “friends” thought I was up on top again, and so they
were glad to see me. Maria sat quietly with her book in front of her. I
told everyone she was gathering material for a novel. Once in a while
she would look sharply at a couple of faces and begin to scribble madly.
For once in my life I let other people pick up the checks, and we worked
practically the whole street. We got out of there with eighteen bucks
left, which is something of a record, and I took the lady all the way
home in a taxi. We spent the rest of the night poring through the book.

Man! What a haul! There was enough dirt there to resurface the Dust Bowl
and ten like it. Advance information on big business deals; messings
about with the Stock Exchange; who was seeing who, how long, why, and
how much it cost; what book a major studio was going to buy; the truth
about that fixed fight at the Garden Monday night. I found Maria an
excellent editor. Once the little old _poltergeist_ had dissipated, she
was quite impersonal about what she found out. We took, out of more than
two hundred juicy items, ten that were due to happen within the next
twenty-four hours. They were carefully picked to do the least possible
harm if they were made public, and they all packed a wallop. There was
an act of sabotage, three elopements, a decision on the locale of the
premiere of a new picture, two business deals, a diplomatic stroke of
genius, a lapse of option on an erstwhile great movie star, and the name
and address of a firm which was going to get a government contract for
high-pressure boilers on the battlewagons under construction at Boston
Navy Yard. I wrote them up, wording them for the most punch, and first
thing the next morning I took them up to the newspaper with the largest
newsstand circulation in the country. I was in the office for forty
minutes, and I walked out with fifty bucks advance. The following day I
got a wire to come in and go to work. Every item had come as predicted.
Score, one hundred per cent.

So I’m back in the big time again. Yes, I’m the guy they talk about. The
one about whom they say, “Did you see his column today? Holy Swiss
cheese, where does that man get all his information?” And “I’d like to
know how a Broadway columnist gets that radio personality.”

Well, I get the first from my wife, who sits quietly, writing in a
little black book. She gets her dope from a thousand million little
_poltergeisten_. And don’t mention radio to me too often. The name of
Eddie Gretchen still stinks on the stem, but I don’t care. I don’t use
it any more. You ought to know who I am by this time.



MEDUSA


I WASN’T SORE at them. I didn’t know what they’d done to me, exactly—I
knew that some of it wasn’t so nice, and that I’d probably never be the
same again. But I was a volunteer, wasn’t I? I’d asked for it. I’d
signed a paper authorizing the department of commerce of the league to
use me as they saw fit. When they pulled me out of the fleet for routine
examinations, and when they started examinations that were definitely
not routine, I didn’t kick. When they asked for volunteers for a project
they didn’t bother to mention by name, I accepted it sight unseen. And
now—

“How do you feel, Rip?” old Doc Renn wanted to know. He spoke to me
easylike, with his chin on the backs of his hands and his elbows on the
table. The greatest name in psychoscience, and he talks to me as if he
were my old man. Right up there in front of the whole psycho board, too.

“Fine, sir,” I said. I looked around. I knew all the doctors and one or
two of the visitors. All the medicos had done one job or another on me
in the last three years. Boy, did they put me through the mill. I
understood only a fraction of it all—the first color tests, for
instance, and the electro-coordination routines. But that torture
machine of Grenfell’s, and that copper helmet that Winton made me wear
for two months—talk about your nightmares! What they were doing to or
for me was something I could only guess at. Maybe they were testing me
for something. Maybe I was just a guinea pig. Maybe I was in training
for something. It was no use asking, either. I volunteered, didn’t I?

“Well, Rip,” Doc Renn was saying, “it’s all over now—the preliminaries,
I mean. We’re going ahead with the big job.”

“Preliminaries?” I goggled. “You mean to tell me that what I’ve been
through for the last three years was all preliminaries?”

Renn nodded, watching me carefully. “You’re going on a little trip. It
may not be fun, but it’ll be interesting.”

“Trip? Where to?” This was good news; the repeated drills on spaceship
techniques, the refresher courses on astrogation, had given me a
good-sized itch to get out into the black again.

“Sealed orders,” said Renn, rather sharply. “You’ll find out. The
important thing for you to remember is that you have a very important
role to play.” He paused; I could see him grimly ironing the snappiness
out of his tone. Why in Canaan did he have to be so careful with _me?_
“You will be put aboard a Forfield Super—the latest and best equipped
that the league can furnish. Your job is to tend the control machinery,
and to act as assistant astrogator no matter what happens. Without doubt
you will find your position difficult at times. You are to obey your
orders as given, without question, and without the use of force where
possible.”

This sounded screwy to me. “That’s all written up, just about word for
word, in the Naval Manual,” I reminded him gently, “under ‘Duties of
Crew.’ I’ve had to do all you said every time I took a ship out. Is
there anything special about this one, that it calls for all this
underlining?”

He was annoyed, and the board shuffled twenty-two pairs of feet. But his
tone was still friendly, half-persuasive when he spoke. “There is
definitely something special about this ship, and—its crew. Rip, you’ve
come through everything we could hand you, with flying colors. Frankly,
you were subjected to psychic forces that were enough to drive a normal
man quite mad. The rest of the crew—it is only fair to tell you—are
insane. The nature of this expedition necessitates our manning the ship
that way. Your place on the ship is a key position. Your responsibility
is a great one.”

“Now—hold on, sir,” I said. “I’m not questioning your orders, sir, and I
consider myself under your disposition. May I ask a few questions?”

He nodded.

“You say the crew is insane. Isn’t that a broad way of putting it—” I
couldn’t help needling him; he was trying so hard to keep calm—“for a
psychologist?”

He actually grinned. “It is. To be more specific, they’re schizoids—dual
personalities. Their primary egos are paranoiac. They’re perfectly
rational except on the subject of their particular phobia—or mania, as
the case may be. The recessive personality is a manic depressive.”

Now, as I remembered it, most paranoiacs have delusions of grandeur
coupled with a persecution mania. And a manic depressive is the “Yes
master” type. They just didn’t mix. I took the liberty of saying as much
to one of Earth’s foremost psychoscientists.

“Of course they don’t mix,” snapped Renn. “I didn’t say they did.
There’s no interflowing of egos in these cases. They are schizoids. The
cleavage is perfect.”

I have a mole under my arm that I scratch when I’m thinking hard. I
scratched it. “I didn’t know anything like that existed,” I said. Renn
seemed bent on keeping this informal, and I was playing it to the limit.
I sensed that this was the last chance I’d have to get any information
about the expedition.

“There never were any cases like that until recently,” said Renn
patiently. “Those men came out of our laboratories.”

“Oh. Sort of made-to-order insanity?” He nodded.

“What on earth for, sir?”

“Sealed orders,” he said immediately. His manner became abrupt again.
“You take off tomorrow. You’ll be put aboard tonight. Your commanding
officer is Captain William Parks.” I grinned delightedly at this.
Parks—the horny old fire eater! They used to say of him that he could
create sunspots by spitting straight up. But he was a real
spaceman—through and through. “And don’t forget, Rip,” Renn finished.
“There is only one sane man aboard that ship. That is all.”

I saluted and left.

A Forfield Super is as sweet a ship as anything ever launched. There’s
none of your great noisy bulk pushed through the ether by a cityful of
men, nor is it your completely automatic “Eyehope”—so called because
after you slipped your master control tape into the automatic pilot you
always said, “you’re on your way, you little hunk of tinfoil—I hope!”

With an eight-man crew, a Forfield can outrun and outride anything else
in space. No rockets—no celestial helices—no other such clumsy nonsense
drives it. It doesn’t go places by going—it gets there by standing
still. By which I mean that the ship achieves what laymen call
“Universal stasis.”

The Galaxy is traveling in an orbit about the mythical Dead Center at an
almost incredible velocity. A Forfield, with momentum nullified, just
stops dead while the Galaxy streams by. When the objective approaches,
momentum is resumed, and the ship appears in normal space with only a
couple of thousand miles to go. That is possible because the lack of
motion builds up a potential in motion; motion, being a relative thing,
produces a set of relative values.

Instead of using the terms “action” and “reaction” in speaking of the
Forfield drive, we speak of “stasis” and “re-stasis.” I’d explain
further but I left my spherical slide rule home. Let me add only that a
Forfield can achieve stasis in regard to planetary, solar, galactic or
universal orbits. Mix ’em in the right proportions, and you get
resultants that will take you anywhere, fast.

I was so busy from the instant I hit the deck that I didn’t have time to
think of all the angles of this more-than-peculiar trip. I had to check
and double-check every control and instrument from the milliammeter to
the huge compound integrators, and with a twenty-four-hour deadline that
was no small task. I also had to take a little instruction from a league
master mechanic who had installed a couple of gadgets which had been
designed and tested at the last minute expressly for this trip. I paid
little attention to what went on round me; I didn’t even know the
skipper was aboard until I rose from my knees before the integrators,
swiveled around on my way to the control board, and all but knocked the
old war horse off his feet.

“Rip! I’ll be damned!” he howled. “Don’t tell me—you’re not signed on
here?”

“Yup,” I said. “Let go my hand, skipper—I got to be able to hold a pair
of needle noses for another hour so. Yeah, I heard you were going to
captain this barrel. How do you like it?”

“Smooth,” he said, looking around, then bringing his grin back to me. He
only grinned twice a year because it hurt his face; but when he did, he
did it all over. “What do you know about the trip?”

“Nothing except that we have sealed orders.”

“Well, I’ll bet there’s some kind of a honkatonk at the end of the
road,” said Parks. “You and I’ve been on … how many is it? Six?
Eight?… anyway, we’ve been on plenty of ships together, and we managed
to throw a whing-ding ashore every trip. I hope we can get out Aldebaran
way. I hear Susie’s place is under new management again. Heh! Remember
the time we—”

I laughed. “Let’s save it, skipper. I’ve got to finish this check-up,
and fast. But, man, it’s good to see you again.” We stood looking at
each other, and then something popped into my head and I felt my smile
washing off. What was it that Dr. Renn had said—“Remember there’s only
one sane man aboard!” Oh, no—they hadn’t put Captain Parks through that!
Why—

I said, “How do you—feel, cap’n?”

“Swell,” he said. He frowned. “Why? You feel all right?”

Not right then, I didn’t. Captain Parks batty? That was just a little
bit lousy. If Renn was right—and he was always right—then his board had
given Parks the works, as well as the rest of the crew. All but me, that
is. I _knew_ I wasn’t crazy. I didn’t feel crazy. “I feel fine,” I said.

“Well, go ahead then,” said Parks, and turned his back.

I went over to the control board, disconnected the power leads from the
radioscope, and checked the dials. For maybe five minutes I felt the old
boy’s eyes drilling into the nape of my neck, but I was too upset to say
anything more. It got very quiet in there. Small noises drifted into the
control room from other parts of the ship. Finally I heard his shoulder
brush the doorpost as he walked out.

How much did the captain know about this trip? Did he know that he had a
bunch of graduates from the laughing academy to man his ship? I tried to
picture Renn informing Parks that he was a paranoiac and a manic
depressive, and I failed miserably. Parks would probably take a swing at
the doctor. Aw, it just didn’t make sense. It occurred to me that
“making sense” was a criterion that we put too much faith in. What do
you do when you run across something that isn’t even supposed to make
sense?

I slapped the casing back on the radioscope, connected the leads, and
called it quits. The speaker over the forward post rasped out, “All
hands report to control chamber!” I started, stuck my tools into their
clips under the chart table, and headed for the door. Then I remembered
I was already in the control room, and subsided against the bulkhead.

They straggled in. All hands were in the pink, well fed and eager. I
nodded to three of them, shook hands with another. The skipper came in
without looking at me—I rather thought he avoided my eyes. He went
straight forward, faced about and put his hands low enough on the canted
control board so he could sit on them. Seabiscuit, the quartermaster,
and an old shipmate of mine, came and stood beside me. There was an
embarrassed murmur of voices while we all awaited the last two
stragglers.

Seabiscuit whispered to me, “I once said I’d sail clear to Hell if Bill
Parks was cap’n of the ship.”

I said, out of the side of my face, “So?”

“So it looks like I’m goin’ to,” said the Biscuit.

The captain called the roll. That crew was microscopically hand picked.
I had heard every single one of the names he called in connection with
some famous escapade or other. Harry Voight was our chemist. He is the
man who kept two hundred passengers alive for a month with little more
than a week’s supply of air and water to work with, after the liner
crossed bows with a meteorite on the Pleione run. Bort Brecht was the
engineer, a man who could do three men’s work with his artificial hand
alone. He lost it in the _Pretoria_ disaster. The gunner was Hoch McCoy,
the guy who “invented” the bow and arrow and saved his life when he was
marooned on an asteroid in the middle of a pack of poison-toothed
“Jackrabbits.” The mechanics were Phil and Jo Hartley, twins, whose
resemblance enabled them to change places time and again during the
Insurrection, thus running bales of vital information to the league high
command.

“Report,” he said to me.

“All’s well in the control chamber, sir,” I said formally.

“Brecht?”

“All’s well back aft, sir.”

“Quartermaster?”

“Stores all aboard and stashed away, sir,” said the Biscuit.

Parks turned to the control board and threw a lever. The air locks slid
shut, the thirty second departure signal began to sound from the
oscillator on the hull and from signals here and in the engineer’s
chamber. Parks raised his voice to be heard over their clamor.

“I don’t know where we’re goin’,” he said, with an odd smile, “but—” the
signals stopped, and that was deafening—“we’re on our way!”

The master control he had thrown had accomplished all the details of
taking off—artificial gravity, “solar” and “planetary” stases, air
pumps, humidifiers—everything. Except for the fact that there was
suddenly no light streaming in through the portholes any more, there was
no slightest change in sensation. Parks reached out and tore the seals
off the tape slot on the integrators and from the door of the orders
file. He opened the cubbyhole and drew out a thick envelope. There was
something in my throat that I couldn’t swallow.

He tore it open and pulled out eight envelopes and a few folded sheets
of paper. He glanced at the envelopes and, with raised eyebrows, handed
them to me. I took them. There was one addressed to each member of the
crew. At a nod from the skipper I distributed them. Parks unfolded his
orders and looked at them.

“Orders,” he read. “By authority of the Solar League, pertaining to
destination and operations of Xantippean Expedition No. 1.”

Startled glances were batted back and forth. Xantippe! No one had ever
been to Xantippe! The weird, cometary planet of Betelgeuse was, and had
always been, taboo—and for good reason.

Parks’s voice was tight. “Orders to be read to crew by the captain
immediately upon taking off.” The skipper went to the pilot chair,
swiveled it, and sat down. The crew edged closer.

“The league congratulates itself on its choice of a crew for this most
important mission. Out of twenty-seven hundred volunteers, these eight
men survived the series of tests and conditioning exercises provided by
the league.

“General orders are to proceed to Xantippe. Captain and crew have been
adequately protected against the field. Object of the expedition is to
find the cause of the Xantippe field and to remove it.

“Specific orders for each member of the crew are enclosed under separate
sealed covers. The crew is ordered to read these instructions, to
memorize them, and to destroy the orders and envelopes. The league
desires that these orders be read in strictest secrecy by each member of
the crew, and that the individual contents of the envelopes be held as
confidential until contrary orders are issued by the league.” Parks drew
a deep breath and looked around at his crew.

They were a steady lot. There was evidence of excitement, of surprise,
and in at least one case, of shock. But there was no fear.
Predominantly, there was a kind of exultance in the spaceburned,
hard-bitten faces. They bore a common glory, a common hatred. “That
isn’t sensible,” I told myself. “It isn’t natural, or normal, or sane,
for eight men to face madness, years of it, with that joyous light in
their eyes. But then—they’re mad already, aren’t they? _Aren’t they?”_

It was catching, too. I began to hate Xantippe. Which was, I suppose,
silly. Xantippe was a planet, of a sort. Xantippe never killed anybody.
It drove men mad, that was all. More than mad—it fused their synapses,
reduced them to quivering, mindless hulks, drooling, their useless minds
turned supercargo in a useless body. Xantippe had snared ship upon ship
in the old days; ships bound for the other planets of the great star.
The mad planet used to blanket them in its mantle of vibrations, and
they were never heard from again. It was years before the league
discovered where the ships had gone, and then they sent patrols to
investigate. They lost eighteen ships and thirty thousand men that way.

And then came the Forfield drive. In the kind of static hyperspace which
these ships inhabited, surely they would pass the field unharmed. There
were colonists out there on the other planets, depending on supplies
from Sol. There were rich sources of radon, uranium, tantalum, copper.
Surely a Forfield ship could—

But they couldn’t. They were the first ships to penetrate the field, to
come out on the other side. The ships were intact, but their crews could
use their brains for absolutely nothing. Sure, I hated Xantippe. Crazy
planet with its cometary orbit and its unpredictable complex ecliptic.
Xantippe had an enormous plot afoot. It was stalking us—even now it was
ready to pounce on us, take us all and drain our minds—

I shook myself and snapped out of it. I was dreaming myself into a case
of the purple willies. If I couldn’t keep my head on my shoulders aboard
this spacegoing padded cell, then who would? Who else could?

The crew filed out, muttering. Parks sat on the pilot’s chair, watching
them, his bright gaze flitting from face to face. When they had gone he
began to watch me. Not look at me. Watch me. It made me sore.

“Well?” he said after a time.

“Well _what?”_ I barked, insubordinately.

“Aren’t you going to read your bedtime story? I am.”

“Bed—oh.” I slit the envelope, unfolded my orders. The captain did
likewise at the extreme opposite side of the chamber. I read:

“Orders by authority of the Solar League pertaining to course of action
to be taken by Harl Ripley, astromechanic on Xantippean Expedition No.
1.

“Said Harl Ripley shall follow the rules and regulations as set forth in
the naval regulations, up until such time as the ship engages the
Xantippean Field. He is then to follow the orders of the master, except
in case of the master’s removal from active duty from some unexpected
cause. Should such an emergency arise, the command does not necessarily
revert to said Harl Ripley, but to the crew member who with the greatest
practicability outlines a plan for the following objective: The
expedition is to land on Xantippe; if uninhabited, the planet is to be
searched until the source of the field is found and destroyed. If
inhabited, the procedure of the pro-tem commander must be dictated by
events. He is to bear in mind, however, that the primary and only
purpose of the expedition is to destroy the Xantippean Field.”

That ended the orders; but scrawled across the foot of the page was an
almost illegible addendum: “Remember your last board meeting, Rip. And
good luck!” The penciled initials were C. Renn, M.Ps.S. That would be
Doc Renn.

I was so puzzled that my ears began to buzz. The government had
apparently spent a huge pile of money in training us and outfitting the
expedition. And yet our orders were as hazy as they could possibly be.
And what was the idea of giving separate orders to each crew member? And
such orders! “The procedure of the pro-tem commander must be dictated by
events.” That’s what you’d call putting us on our own! It wasn’t like
the crisp, detailed commands any navy man is used to. It was crazy.

Well, of course it was crazy, come to think of it. What else could you
expect with this crew? I began to wish sincerely that the board had
driven me nuts along with the rest of them.

I was at the chart table, coding up the hundred-hour log entry
preparatory to slipping it into the printer, when I sensed someone
behind me. The skipper, of course. He stayed there a long time, and I
knew he was watching me.

I sat there until couldn’t stand it any longer. “Come on in,” I said
without moving. Nothing happened. I listened carefully until I could
hear his careful breathing. It was short, swift. He was trying to
breathe in a whisper. I began to be really edgy. I had a nasty suspicion
that if I whirled I would be just in time to catch a bolt from a by-by
gun.

Clenching my jaw till my teeth hurt, I rose slowly, and without looking
around, went to the power-output telltales and looked at them. I didn’t
know what was the matter with me. I’d never been this way before—always
expecting attack from somewhere. I used to be a pretty nice guy. As a
matter of fact, I used to be the nicest guy I knew. I didn’t feel that
way any more.

Moving to the telltales took me another six or eight feet from the man
at the door. Safer for both of us. And this way I had to turn around to
get back to the table. I did. It wasn’t the skipper. It was the chemist,
Harry Voight. We were old shipmates, and I knew him well.

“Hello, Harry. Why the dark companion act?”

He was tense. He was wearing a little mustache of perspiration on his
upper lip. His peculiar eyes—the irises were as black as the pupils—were
set so far back in his head that I couldn’t see them, for the alleyway
light was directly over his head. His bald, bulging forehead threw two
deep purple shadows, and out of them he watched me.

“Hi, Rip. Busy?”

“Not too busy. Put it in a chair.”

He came in and sat down. He turned as he passed me, backed into the
pilot’s seat. I perched on the chart table. It looked casual, and it
kept my weight on one foot. If I had to move in any direction, including
up, I was ready to.

After a time he said, “What do you think of this, Rip?” His gesture took
in the ship, Xantippe, the league, the board.

“I only work here,” I quoted. That was the motto of the navy. Our
insignia is the league symbol superimposed on a flaming sun, under which
is an ultraradio screen showing the words, “I only work here.” The
famous phrase expresses the utmost in unquestioning, devoted duty.

Harry smiled a very sickly smile. If ever I saw a man with something
eating him, it was Harry Voight. “S’matter,” I asked quietly. “Did
somebody do you something?”

He looked furtively about him, edged closer. “Rip, I want to tell you
something. Will you close the door?”

I started to refuse, and then reflected that regulations could stand a
little relaxing in a coffin like this one. I went and pressed the panel
and it slid closed. “Make it snappy,” I said. “If the skipper comes up
here and finds that door closed he’ll slap some wrists around here.”

As soon as the door closed, Harry visibly slumped. “This is the first
time in two days I’ve felt—comfortable,” he said. He looked at me with
sudden suspicion. “Rip—when we roomed together in Venus City, what color
was that jacket I used to keep my Naval Manual in?”

I frowned. I’d only seen the thing a couple of times—“Blue,” I said.

“That’s right.” He wiped his forehead. “You’re O.K.” He made a couple of
false starts and then said, “Rip, will you keep everything I say
strictly to yourself? Nobody can be trusted here—nobody!” I nodded.
“Well,” he went on in a strained voice, “I know that this is a screwy
trip. I know that the crew is—has been made—sort of—well, not normal—”

He said, with conviction, “The league has its own reasons for sending
us, and I don’t question them. But something has gone wrong. You think
Xantippe is going to get us? Ha! Xantippe is getting us _now!”_ He sat
back triumphantly.

“You don’t say!”

“But I do! I know she’s countless thousands of light years away. But I
don’t have to tell you of the power of Xantippe. For a gigantic power
like that, a little project like what they’re doing to us is nothing.
Any force that can throw out a field three quarters of a billion miles
in diameter can play hell with us at a far greater distance.”

“Could be,” I said. “Just what are they doing?”

“They’re studying us,” he hissed. “They’re watching each of us, our
every action, our every mental reflex. And one by one they are—taking us
away! They’ve got the Hartley twins, and Bort Brecht, and soon they’ll
have me. I don’t know about the others, but their turns will come. They
are taking away our personalities, and substituting their own. I tell
you, those three men—and soon now, I with them—those men are not humans,
but Xantippeans!”

“Now wait,” I said patiently. “Aren’t you going on guesswork? Nobody
knows if Xantippe’s inhabited. And I doubt that this substitution you
speak of can be done.”

“You don’t think so? For pity’s sake, Rip—for your own good, try to
believe me! The Xantippean Field is a thought force, isn’t it? And
listen—I know it if you don’t—this crew was picked for its hatred of
Xantippe. Don’t you see why? The board expects that hatred to act as a
mental ‘fender’—to partly ward off the field. They think there might be
enough left of our minds when we’re inside the field to accomplish our
objective. They’re wrong, Rip—_wrong!_ The very existence of our
communal hatred is the thing that has given us away. They have been
ready for us for days now—and they are already doing their work aboard.”

He subsided, and I prodded him with a gentle question.

“How do you know the Xantippeans have taken away those three men?”

“Because I happened to overhear the Hartley twins talking in the
messroom two days ago. They were talking about their orders. I know I
should not have listened, but I was already suspicious.”

“They were talking about their orders? I understood that the orders were
confidential.”

“They were. But you can’t expect the Hartleys to pay much attention to
that. Anyway, Jo confided that a footnote on his orders had intimated
that there was only one sane man aboard. Phil laughed that off. He said
he knew he was sane, and he knew that Jo was sane. Now, I reason this
way. Only a crazy man would question the league; a crazy man or an
enemy. Now the Hartleys may be unbalanced, but they are still rational.
They are still navy men. Therefore, they must be enemies, because navy
men never question the league.”

I listened to that vague logic spoken in that intense, convincing voice,
and I didn’t know what to think. “What about Bort Brecht—and yourself?”

“Bort! Ahh!” His lips curled. “I can sense an alien ego when I speak to
him. It’s overwhelming. I hate Xantippe,” he said wildly, “but I hate
Bort Brecht more! The only thing I could possibly hate more than
Xantippe would be a Xantippean. That proves my point!” He spread his
hands. “As for me—Rip, I’m going mad. I feel it. I see things—and when I
do, I will be another of them. And then we will all be lost. For there
is only one sane man aboard this ship, and that is me, and when I’m
turned into a Xantippean, we will be doomed, and I want you to kill me!”
He was half hysterical. I let him simmer down.

“And do I look crazy?” I asked. “If you are the only sane man—”

“Not crazy,” he said quickly. “A schizoid—but you’re perfectly rational.
You must be, or you wouldn’t have remembered what color my book jacket
was.”

I got up, reached out a hand to help him to his feet. He drew back.
“Don’t touch me!” he screamed, and when I recoiled, he tried to smile.
“I’m sorry, Rip, but I can’t be sure about anything. You may be a
Xantippean by now, and touching me might … I’ll be going now … I—” He
went out, his black, burning eyes half closed.

I stood at the door watching him weave down the alleyway. I could guess
what was the matter. Paranoia—but bad! There was the characteristic
persecution mania, the intensity of expression, the peculiar
single-track logic—even delusions of grandeur. Heh! He thought _he_ was
the one mentally balanced man aboard!

I walked back to the chart table, thinking hard. Harry always had been
pretty tight-lipped. He probably wouldn’t spread any panic aboard. But
I’d better tip the captain off. I was wondering why the Hartley twins
and Harry Voight had all been told that all hands but me were batty,
when the skipper walked in.

“Rip,” he said without preamble. “Did you ever have a fight with Hoch
McCoy?”

“Good gosh, no!” I said. “I never saw him in my life until the day we
sailed. I’ve heard of him, of course. Why?”

Parks looked at me oddly. “He just left my quarters. He had the most
long-winded and detailed song and dance about how you were well known as
an intersolar master saboteur. Gave names and dates. The names I know
well. But the dates—well, I can alibi you for half of ’em. I didn’t tell
him that. But—Lord! He almost had me convinced!”

“Another one!” I breathed. And then I told him about Harry Voight.

“I don’t imagine Doc Renn thought they would begin to break so soon,”
said Parks when I had finished. “These boys were under laboratory
conditions for three solid years, you know.”

“I didn’t know,” I said. “I don’t know a damn thing that’s going on
around here and I’d better learn something before I go off my kilter,
too!”

“Why, Ripley,” he said mockingly. “You’re overwrought!” Well, I was.
Parks said, “I don’t know much more than you do, but that goofy story of
Harry Voight’s has a couple of pretty shrewd guesses in it. For
instance, I think he was right in assuming that the board had done
something to the minds of … ah … some of the crew as armor against the
field. Few men have approached it consciously—those who have were
usually scared half to death. It’s well known that fear forms the
easiest possible entrance for the thing feared—ask any good hypnotist.
Hate is something different again. Hate is a psychological block against
fear and the thing to be feared. And the kind of hate that these guys
have for Xantippe and the field is something extra special. They’re mad,
but they’re not afraid—and that’s no accident. When we do hit the field,
it’s bound to have less effect on us than it had on the crews of poor
devils who tried to attack it.”

“That sounds reasonable. Er … skipper, about this ‘one sane man’
business. What do you think of that?”

“More armor,” said Parks. “But armor against the man himself. Harry, for
instance, was made a paranoiac, which is a very sensible kind of nut;
but at the same time he was convinced that he alone was sane. If he
thought his mind had been actually tampered with instead of just—tested,
he’d get all upset about it and, like as not, undo half the Psy Board’s
work.”

Some of that struck frightening chords in my memory. “Cap’n—do you
believe that there is one sane, normal man aboard?”

“I do. One.” He smiled slowly. “I know what you’re thinking. You’d give
anything to compare your orders with mine, wouldn’t you?”

“I would. But I won’t do it. Confidential. I couldn’t let myself do it
even if you agreed, because—” I paused.

“Well?”

“Because you’re an officer and I’m a gentleman.”

In my bunk at last, I gave over wishing that we’d get to the field and
have it over with, and tried to do some constructive thinking. I tried
to remember exactly what Doc Renn had said, and when I did, I was sorry
I’d made the effort. “You are sane,” and “You have been subjected to
psychic forces that are sufficient to drive a normal man quite mad”
might easily be totally different things. I’d been cocky enough to
assume that they meant the same thing. Well, face it. Was I crazy? I
didn’t feel crazy. Neither did Harry Voight. He thought he was going
crazy, but he was sure he hadn’t got there yet. And what was “crazy,”
anyway? It was normal, on this ship, to hate Xantippe so much that you
felt sick and sweated cold when you thought of it. Paranoia—persecution.
Did I feel persecuted? Only by the thought of our duty toward Xantippe,
and the persecution was Xantippe, not the duty. Did I have delusions of
grandeur? Of course not; and yet—hadn’t I blandly assumed that Voight
had such delusions because he thought _he_ was the one sane man aboard?

What was the idea of that, anyway? Why had the board put one sane man
aboard—if it had? Perhaps to be sure that one man reacted differently to
the others at the field, so that he could command. Perhaps merely to
make each man feel that he was sane, even though he wasn’t. My poor
tired brain gave it up and I slept.

We had two casualties before we reached the field. Harry Voight cut his
throat in the washroom, and my gentle old buddy, Seabiscuit, crushed in
the back of Hoch McCoy’s head. “He was an Insurrectionist spy,” he said
mildly, time and again, while we were locking him up.

After that we kept away from each other. I don’t think I spoke ten words
to anyone outside of official business, from that day until we snapped
into galactic stasis near Betelgeuse. I was sorry about Hoch, because he
was a fine lad. But my sorrow was tempered by the memory of his visit to
the captain. There had been a pretty fine chance of his doing that to
me!

In normal space once more, we maneuvered our agile little craft into an
orbit about the huge sun and threw out our detectors. These wouldn’t
tell us much when the time came, for their range wasn’t much more than
the radius of the field.

The mad planet swam up onto the plates and I stared at it as I buzzed
for the skipper. Xantippe was a strangely dull planet, even this close
to her star. She shone dead silver, like a moonlit corpse’s flesh. She
was wrinkled and patched, and—perhaps it was an etheric disturbance—she
seemed to pulsate slowly from pole to pole. She wasn’t quite round; more
nearly an ovoid, with the smaller end toward Betelgeuse. She was between
two and three times the size of Luna. Gazing at her, I thought of the
thousands of men of my own service who had fallen prey to her, and of
the fine ships of war that had plunged into the field and disappeared.
Had they crashed? Had they been tucked into some weird warp of space?
Were they captives of some strange and horrible race?

Xantippe had defied every type of attack so far. She swallowed up atomic
mines and torpedoes with no appreciable effect. She was apparently
impervious to any rayed vibration known to man; but she was matter, and
should be easy meat for an infragun—if you could get an infragun close
enough. The gun’s twin streams of highly charged particles, positrons on
one side, mesatrons on the other, would destroy anything that happened
to be where they converged. But an infragun has an effective range of
less than five hundred miles. Heretofore, any ship which carried the
weapon that close to Xantippe carried also a dead or mindless crew.

Captain Parks called the crew into the control room as soon as he
arrived. No one spoke much; they didn’t need any more information after
they had glanced at the viewplate which formed the forward wall of the
chamber. Bort Brecht, the swarthy engineer, wanted to know how soon we’d
engage the field.

“In about two hours,” said the captain glibly. I got a two-handed grip
on myself to keep from yapping. He was a cold-blooded liar—we’d hit it
in half an hour or less, the way I figured it. I guessed that he had his
own reasons. Perhaps he thought it would be easier on the crew that way.

Parks leaned casually against the integrators and faced the crew. “Well,
gentlemen,” he said as if he were banqueting on Earth, “we’ll soon find
out what this is all about. I have instructions from the league to place
certain information at your disposal.

“All hands are cautioned to obey the obvious commander once we’re inside
the field. That commander may or may not be myself. That has been
arranged for. Each man must keep in mind the objective—the destruction
of the Xantippean Field. One of us will lead the others toward that
objective. Should no one seem to be in command a pro-tem captain is to
be elected.”

Brecht spoke up. “Cap’n, how do we know that this ‘commander’ that has
been arranged for isn’t Harry Voight or Hoch McCoy?”

“We don’t know,” said Parks gravely. “But we will. We will.”

Twenty-three minutes after Xantippe showed up on the plates, we engaged
her field.

All hands were still in the control room when we plunged in. I remember
the sudden weakness of my limbs, and the way all five of the others
slipped and slid down to the deck. I remember the Biscuit’s quaver, “I
tell you it’s all a dirty Insurrectionist plot.” And then I was down on
the deck, too.

Something was hurting me, but I knew exactly where I was. I was under
Dr. Grenfell’s torture machine; it was tearing into my mind, chilling my
brain. I could feel my brains, every last convolution of them. They were
getting colder and colder, and bigger and bigger, and pretty soon now
they would burst my skull and the laboratory and the building and chill
the earth. Inside my chest I was hot, and of course I knew why. I was
Betelgeuse, mightiest of suns, and with my own warmth I warmed half a
galaxy. Soon I would destroy it, too, and that would be nice.

All the darkness in Great Space came to me.

Leave me alone. I don’t care what you want done. I just want to lie here
and—But nobody wanted me to do anything. What’s all the hollering about,
then? Oh. _I_ wanted something done. There’s something that has to be
done, so get up, get up, get—

“He _is_ dead. Death is but a sleep and a forgetting, and he’s asleep,
and he’s forgotten everything, so he must be dead!” It was Phil Hartley.
He was down on his hunkers beside me, shrieking at the top of his voice,
mouthing and pointing like an ape completely caught up in the violence
of his argument. Which was odd, because he wasn’t arguing with anybody.
The skipper was sitting silently in the pilot’s chair, tears streaming
down his cheeks. Jo Hartley was dead or passed out on the deck. The
Biscuit and Bort Brecht were sitting on the deck holding hands like
children, staring entranced into the viewplate. It showed a quadrant of
Xantippe, filling the screen. The planet’s surface did indeed pulsate,
and it was a beautiful sight. I wanted to watch it drawing closer and
closer, but there was something that had to be done first.

I sat up achingly. “Get me some water,” I muttered to Phil Hartley. He
looked at me, shrieked, and went and hid under the chart table.

The vision of Xantippe caught and held me again, but I shook it off. It
was the most desirable thing I’d ever seen, and it promised me all I
could ever want, but there was something I had to do first. Maybe
someone could tell me. I shook the skipper’s shoulder.

“Go away,” he said. I shook him again. He made no response. Fury snapped
into my brain. I cuffed him with my open hand, front and back, front and
back. He leaped to his feet, screamed, “Leave me alone!” and slumped
back into the chair. At the sound Bort Brecht lurched to his feet and
came over to us. When he let go Seabiscuit’s hand, the Biscuit began to
cry quietly.

“I’m giving the orders around here,” Bort said.

I was delighted. There had been something, a long time ago, about
somebody giving orders. “I have to do something,” I said. “Do you know
what it is?”

“Come with me.” He led the way, swaggering, to the screen. “Look,” he
commanded, and then sat down beside Seabiscuit and lost himself in
contemplation. Seabiscuit kept on crying.

“That’s not it,” I said doubtfully. “I think you gave me the wrong
orders.”

“Wrong?” he bellowed. “Wrong? I am never wrong!” He got up, and before I
knew what was coming, he hauled off and cracked three knuckles with my
jawbone. I hit the deck with a crash and slid up against Jo Hartley. Jo
didn’t move. He was alive, but he just didn’t seem to give a damn. I lay
there for a long time before I could get up again. I wanted to kill Bort
Brecht, but there was something I had to do first.

I went back to the captain and butted him out of the chair. He snarled
at me and went and crouched by the bulkhead, tears still streaming down
his cheeks. I slumped into the seat, my fingers wandering idly about the
controls without touching them, my eyes desperately trying to avoid the
glory of Xantippe.

It seemed to me that I was very near to the thing I was to do. My right
hand touched the infragun activator switch, came away, went back to it,
came away. I boldly threw another switch; a network of crosshairs and a
bright central circle appeared on the screen. This was it, I thought.
Bort Brecht yelped like a kicked dog when the crosshairs appeared, but
did not move. I activated the gun, and grasped the range lever in one
hand and the elevation control in the other. A black-centered ball of
flame hovered near the surface of the planet.

This was it! I laughed exultantly and pushed the range lever forward.
The ball plunged into the dull-silver mystery, leaving a great blank
crater. I pulled and pushed at the elevation control, knowing that my
lovely little ball was burning and tearing its inexorable way about in
the planet’s vitals. I drew it out to the surface, lashed it up and down
and right and left, cut and slashed and tore.

Bort Brecht was crouched like an anthropoid, knees bent, knuckles on the
deck, fury knotting his features, eyes fixed on the scene of
destruction. Behind me Phil Hartley was teetering on tiptoe, little
cries of pain struggling out of his lips every time the fireball
appeared. Bort spun and was beside me in one great leap. “What’s
happening? Who’s doing that?”

“He is,” I said immediately, pointing at Jo Hartley. I knew that this
was going to be tough on Jo, but I was doing the thing I had to do, and
I knew Bort would try to stop me. Bort leaped on the prone figure, using
teeth and nails and fists and feet; and Phil Hartley hesitated only a
minute, torn between the vision of Xantippe and something that called to
him from what seemed a long, long while ago. Then Jo cried out in agony,
and Phil, a human prototype of my fireball, struck Bort amidships. Back
and forth, fore and aft, the bloody battle raged, while Seabiscuit
whimpered and the skipper, still sunk in his introspective trance, wept
silently. And I cut and stabbed and ripped at Xantippe.

I took care now, and cut a long slash almost from pole to pole; and the
edges opened away from the wound as if the planet had been wrapped in a
paper sheath. Underneath it was an olive-drab color, shot with scarlet.
I cut at this incision again and again, sinking my fireball in deeper at
each slash. The weakened ovoid tended to press the edges together, but
the irresistible ball sheared them away as it passed; and when it had
cut nearly all the way through, the whole structure fell in on itself
horribly. I had a sudden feeling of lightness, and then unbearable
agony. I remember stretching back and back over the chair in the throes
of some tremendous attack from inside my body, and then I struck the
deck with my head and shoulders, and I was all by myself again in the
beautiful black.

There was a succession of lights that hurt, and soothing smells, and the
sound of arcs and the sound of falling water. Some of them were weeks
apart, some seconds. Sometimes I was conscious and could see people
tiptoeing about. Once I thought I heard music.

But at last I awoke quietly, very weak, to a hand on my shoulder. I
looked up. It was Dr. Renn. He looked older.

“How do you feel, Rip?”

“Hungry.”

He laughed. “That’s splendid. Know where you are?”

I shook my head, marveling that it didn’t hurt me.

“Earth,” he said. “Psy hospital. You’ve been through the mill, son.”

“What happened?”

“Plenty. We got the whole story from the picrecording tapes inside and
outside of your ship. You cut Xantippe all to pieces. You incidentally
got Bort Brecht started on the Hartley family, which later literally cut
_him_ to pieces. It cost three lives, but Xantippe is through.”

“Then—I destroyed the projector, or whatever it was—”

“You destroyed Xantippe. You—killed Xantippe. The planet was a … a thing
that I hardly dare think about. You ever see a hydro-medusa here on
Earth?”

“You mean one of those jellyfish that floats on the surface of the sea
and dangles paralyzing tentacles down to catch fish?”

“That’s it. Like a Portuguese man-of-war. Well, that was Xantippe, with
that strange mind field about her for her tentacles. A space dweller;
she swept up anything that came her way, killed what was killable,
digested what was digestible to her. Examination of the pictures,
incidentally, shows that she was all set to hurl out a great cloud of
spores. One more revolution about Betelgeuse and she’d have done it.”

“How come I went under like that?” I was beginning to remember.

“You weren’t as well protected as the others. You see, when we trained
that crew we carefully split the personalities; paranoiac hatred enough
to carry them through the field and an instant reversion to manic
depressive under the influence of the field. So you were the leader—you
were delegated to do the job. All we could do to you was implant a
desire to destroy Xantippe. You did the rest. But when the psychic
weight of the field was lifted from you, your mind collapsed. We had a
sweet job rebuilding it, too, let me tell you!”

“Why all that business about ‘one sane man’?”

Renn grinned. “That was to keep the rest of the crew fairly sure of
themselves, and to keep you from the temptation of taking over before
you reached the field, knowing that the rest, including the captain,
were not responsible for their actions.”

“What about the others, after the field disappeared?”

“They reverted to something like normal. Not quite, though. The
quartermaster tied up the rest of the crew just before they reached
Earth and handed them over to us as Insurrectionist spies!

“But as for you, there’s a command waiting for you if you want it.”

“I want it,” I said. He clapped me on the shoulder and left. Then they
brought me a man-sized dinner.



GHOST OF A CHANCE


SHE SAID, “There’s something following me!” in a throttled voice, and
started to run.

It sort of got me. Maybe because she was so tiny and her hair was so
white. Maybe because, white hair and all, she looked so young and
helpless. But mostly, I think, because of what she said. “There’s
something following me.” Not “someone.” “Something.” So I just naturally
hauled out after her.

I caught her at the corner, put my hand on her shoulder. She gasped, and
shot away from me. “Take it easy, lady,” I panted. “I won’t let it get
you.”

She stopped so suddenly that I almost ran her down. We stood looking at
each other. She had great big dark eyes that didn’t go with her hair at
all. I said, “What makes you go dashing around at three o’clock in the
morning?”

“What makes you ask?” Her voice was smooth, musical.

“Now, look—you started this conversation.”

She started to speak, and then something over my shoulder caught her
eye. She froze for a second; and I was so fascinated by the play of
expression on her face that I didn’t follow her gaze. Abruptly she
brought her eyes back to my face and then slapped it. It was a stinger.
I stepped back and swore, and by the time I was finished she was halfway
up the block. I stood there rubbing my cheek and let her go.

I met Henry Gade a couple of days later and told him about it. Henry is
a practical psychologist. Perhaps I should say his field is practical
psychology, because Henry ain’t practical. He has theories. He has more
damn theories than any man alive. He is thirty and bald and he makes
lots of money without doing any work.

“I think she was crazy,” I said.

“Ah,” said Henry, and laid a finger beside his nose. I think the nose
was longer. “But did you ask her what _she_ thought?”

“No. I only asked her what she was doing running around that time of
night.”

“The trouble with you, Gus, is that you have no romance in you. What you
should have done was to catch her up in your arms and smothered her with
kisses.”

“She’d have sla—”

“She did, anyway, didn’t she?” said Henry, and walked off.

Henry kids a lot. But he sometimes says crazy things like that when he
isn’t kidding a bit.

I met the girl again three months later. I was in the Duke’s beer garden
looking at his famous sunflower. The sunflower was twelve feet tall and
had crutches to keep it standing up. It grew beside the dirt alley that
was the main road of the beer garden. There were ratty-looking
flowerbeds all over the place and tables set among them. And Japanese
lanterns that had been out in the rain, and a laryngitic colored band.
The place was crowded, and I was standing there letting all that noise
beat me back and forth, looking at the sunflower. The Duke swore he
could fill a No. 6 paper bag with the seeds from that one flower.

And then she said, “Hello. I’m sorry I had to slap your face.” She was
squinched up against the stem of the sunflower, in amongst all those
shadows and leaves.

I said, “Well, if it isn’t my pretty little pug. What do you mean,
you’re sorry you _had_ to? You should be just sorry you did.”

“Oh, I had to. I wouldn’t slap you just for nothing.”

“Oh—I did something? I shoulda got slapped?”

“Please,” she said. “I am sorry.”

I looked at her. She was. “What are you doing in there—hiding?”

She nodded.

“Who are you hiding from?”

She wouldn’t say. She just shrugged and said she was just—you
know—hiding.

“Is it the same thing you were running away from that night?”

“Yes.”

I told her she was being silly. “I looked all around after you left and
there wasn’t a thing on the street.”

“Oh, yes there was!”

“Not that I could see.”

“I know that.”

I suddenly got the idea that this was a very foolish conversation. “Come
out of there and have a beer with me. We’ll talk this thing over.”

“Oh, I couldn’t do that!”

“Sure you could. Easy. Look.” I reached in and grabbed her.

“You should know better than that,” she said, and then something
happened to break the stem of the big sunflower. It tottered and came
crashing down like a redwood. The huge flower landed on the tray that
Giuseppe, the waiter, was carrying. It held eight long beers, two
pitchers and a martini. The beers and a lot of broken glass flew in
every direction but up. The martini went back over his head and crashed
on the bars of the cage where the Duke kept his trained squirrel. There
was some confusion. The girl with the white hair was gone. All the time
that the Duke was telling me what a menace I was, I kept staring over
his heaving shoulder at the squirrel, which was lapping up the martini
that had splashed inside the cage. After the Duke ran out of four-letter
words he had me thrown out. We’d been pretty good friends before that,
too.

I got hold of Henry as soon as I could. “I saw that girl again,” I told
him, “and I grabbed her like you said.” I told him what had happened. He
laughed at me. Henry always laughs at me.

“Don’t look so solemn about it, Gus!” he said, and slapped me on the
back. “A little excitement is good for the blood. Laugh it off. The Duke
didn’t sue you, did he?”

“No,” I said, “not exactly. But that squirrel of his ate the olive out
of that cocktail that fell into his cage and got awful sick. And the
Duke went and had the doctor send his bill to me. Stomach pump.”

Henry had been eating salted nuts, and when I said that he snorted half
a mouthful of chewed nuts up into his nose. I’ve done that and it hurts.
In a way I was glad to see Henry suffer.

“I need some help,” I told him after he got his health back. “Maybe that
girl’s crazy, but I think she’s in trouble.”

“She most certainly is,” said Henry. “But I don’t see what you could do
about it.”

“Oh, I’d figure out something.”

“I also don’t see why you want to help her out.”

“That’s a funny thing,” I said slowly. “You know me, Henry—I got no use
for wimmen unless they leave me alone. Every time one of ’em does
something nice, it’s because she’s figgerin’ to pull something lousy a
little later.”

Henry swallowed some cashews carefully and then laughed. “You’ve summed
up at least seven volumes of male objectivism,” he said. “But what has
that got to do with your silver-haired Nemesis?”

“Nemesis? I thought maybe she was Polish. Her? Well, she’s never done
anything to me that wasn’t lousy. So I figure maybe she’s different. I
figure maybe she’s going to work it the other way around and pull
something nice. And I want to be around when that happens.”

“Your logic is labored but dependable.” He said something else, about
what’s the use of being intelligent and educated when all wisdom rests
on the lips of a child of nature, but I didn’t catch on. “Well, I’m
rather interested in whether or not you can do anything for her. Go
ahead and stick your neck out.”

“I don’t know where she lives or nothing.”

“Oh—that.” He pulled out a little notebook and a silver pencil and wrote
down something. “Here,” he said, tearing it off and handing it to me. It
said, “Iola Harvester, 2336 Dungannon Street.”

“Who’s this?”

“Your damsel in distress. Your dark-eyed slapper of faces.”

“How the devil do you know her name?”

“She was a patient of mine for quite a while.”

“She was? Why you son-of-a-gun! Why didn’t you tell me?”

“Why didn’t you ask me?”

I started for the door, reading over the name and address. “You know
what, Henry?”

“What?”

“Iola’s a pretty name.”

Henry laughed. “Let me know how you make out.”

I went up and rang the bell. It was a big apartment house; Iola lived on
the fourth floor. The foyer door belched at me and I pushed it open and
went in. They had one of those self-service elevators so I went up the
stairs. Those things make me nervous.

She was waiting up on her floor to find out who had rung the bell. She
was wearing a black housecoat that touched the floor all the way around
and was close around her throat. It had a stiff collar that stuck up and
out and seemed to sort of cradle her head. There was a zipper all down
the front and two silver initials on the left breast. I couldn’t get my
wind right away and it wasn’t the stairs.

“Oh!” she said. “It’s you!”

_“Yup!”_ I looked at her for a minute. “Gee! I didn’t know you were so
_tiny!”_ There was something about her that made me want to laugh out
loud, but not because I saw anything funny. When I said that she got
pink.

“I … don’t know whether I should ask you in,” she said. “I don’t even
know your name.”

“My name is Gus. So now you can ask me in.”

“You’re the only man I have ever met who can be fresh without being
fresh,” she said, and stood aside. I didn’t know what she meant, but I
went in, anyway. It was a nice place. Everything in it was delicate and
small, like Iola. I stood in the middle of the floor spinning my hat on
one finger until she took it away from me. “Sit down,” she said. I did
and she did, with the room between us. “What brings you here; how did
you find out my address; and will you have some coffee or a drink?”

“I came because I think you’re in a jam and you might need help. A
friend of mine gave me your name and address. I don’t want any coffee
and what have you got to drink?”

“Sauterne,” she said. “Rum, rye and Scotch.”

“I never _touch_ that stuff.”

“What do you drink?”

“Gin.” She looked startled. “Or milk. Got any milk?”

She had. She got me a great big glass of it. She even had some herself.
She said, “Now, what’s on your mind?”

“I told you, Miss Iola. I want to help you.”

“There’s nothing you can do.”

“Oh, yes there is. There must be. If you’ll tell me what’s botherin’
you, making you hide away in … in sunflowers and runnin’ away from
nothing. I’ll bet I could fix you up—What are you laughing at?”

“You’re so earnest!” she said.

“Everybody’s all the time laughing at me,” I said sadly. “Well, how
about it?”

The smile faded away from her face and she sat for a long time saying
nothing. I went and sat beside her and looked at her. I didn’t try to
touch her at all. Suddenly she nodded and began to talk.

“I might as well tell you. It’s tough to keep it to myself. Most people
would laugh at me; the one doctor I went to eventually gave me up as a
bad job. He said I was kidding myself. He said that what had happened
just couldn’t happen—I imagined it all. But you—I think I can trust you.
I don’t know why—

“It started about two years ago. I had a slight crush on a fellow at a
summer camp. He took me to a dance one night—one of those country square
dances. It was a lot of fun and we danced ourselves tired. Then we went
out onto the lake shore and he—well, the moon and all, you know—he put
his arms around me. And just then a voice spoke to me. It said, ‘If you
know what’s good for you, you’ll keep away from this fellow.’ I started
back and asked the boy if he had said something. He hadn’t. I was scared
and ran all the way home. He tried to catch me, but he couldn’t. I saw
him the next day and tried to apologize but there wasn’t very much I
could say. I tried to be nice to him, but as time went on he got more
and more irritable. And he lost weight. He wound up in the hospital.
Almost—died. You see, he couldn’t sleep. He was afraid to sleep. He had
the most terrible dreams. I heard about one of them. It was awful.

“I didn’t realize then that my seeing him had anything to do with his
getting sick; but as soon as they had him in the hospital he began to
get better, fast, as long as I didn’t visit him. Then he would have a
relapse. I heard that after he left the camp for good and went back to
his home in Chicago, he was quite all right.

“Well, nothing happened for quite a while, and then I began to notice
that a counterman at a sandwich bar where I ate every day had begun to
act strangely. I saw him every day, but there was absolutely nothing
between us. One afternoon while I was eating, he began dropping things.
It was nothing at first, but it got very bad. It got so that he couldn’t
lift so much as a spoon without dropping it. He spilled cup after cup of
coffee. He would try to make a sandwich and he’d drop the makings all
over the floor and his work table. He couldn’t set a place at the
counter, he couldn’t wait on anybody—_as long as I was there!_ At first
he kidded about it and called me his jinx girl. But after a week or so
of that, he came over to me just as I sat down and said:

“Miss Harvester, I hope you don’t mind what I’m going to say, but
something’s got to be done. I’ll lose my job if I don’t stop dropping
things. But I never do that unless you’re here! I don’t know why it is,
but there you have it. Would you be angry if I asked you not to eat here
for a while?” I was astonished, but he was so worried and so polite
about it that I never ate there again. And from what I’ve heard my
friends say, he never dropped anything again.

“And from then on it got worse and worse. A traffic cop, a nice old man,
that I used to nod to each morning on my way to work, began to _itch!_ I
could see it, every time I passed him! I’d nod, and he’d nod, and then
start to scratch as if he itched so badly he just couldn’t help himself.
And an office boy who spent a lot of time near my desk began to miss
doors! I mean, he just couldn’t get through a door without running into
the jamb. The poor boy almost went crazy. He’d walk slowly toward a
door, aim carefully, and try to go through, but he couldn’t do it unless
he struck the jamb first. I got so heartsick watching him that I quit my
job and got another—which took care of the nice policeman, too. Neither
of them were ever troubled again.

“But that’s the way it’s been ever since. Any man I see regularly starts
suffering dreadfully from strange trouble. It’s bad enough for the ones
who just see me in a routine way. But oh, the poor men who try to take
me out to shows and things! When I go out, that strange voice speaks to
me again, and tells me to keep away from the man. And if I don’t, he
gets terribly sick, or he gets blind spells when he crosses any streets,
or he does things that cause him to lose his job or his business. Do you
see what I’m up against?”

“Don’t cry, Miss Iola. Please don’t cry.”

“I’m n-not crying, Mr. Gus!”

“Just plain Gus!”

“Well then, you call me just plain Iola. Or Miss Harvester. Not Miss
Iola.”

“I’d have to feel a certain way about you to call you Iola,” I said
slowly. “And I’d have to feel a certain other way about you to call you
Miss Harvester. I’m goin’ to call you Miss Iola.”

“Oh, Gus,” she said, “you’re so _cute!”_ She smiled and sipped some milk
and then went on with her story.

“I work now for a woman who owns a cosmetic business,” she said. “I have
a woman boss and a woman manager and office force and mostly women
customers. And I hate them! I hate all women!”

“Me, too,” I said.

She gave me an odd glance, and went on. “Once in a while I’m free of
this thing. I can’t tell you exactly how I know, but I do. It’s a sort
of lightening of the pressure. And then I’ll be walking along the street
and I can feel it trying to catch up with me—just as if it had hunted me
out and was following me. Sometimes I can hide and get away from it.
Generally I can’t.”

“Oh—that’s why you were running away that night I first saw you! But—why
did you slap my face?”

“Because I liked you.”

“That’s a funny sort of way to show it, Miss Iola.”

“Oh, no! The thing, whatever it is, had just caught up with me. It knew
I liked you. It would have done some terrible thing to you if I hadn’t
slapped you to make it think I disliked you. And after I had done it I
was so ashamed I ran away.”

“Why did you break the stem of the sunflower?”

“Gus, I didn’t! The thing did that, to get you in trouble.”

“He succeeded.”

“Oh, Gus—I’m so sorry.”

“What for? Not your fault.”

“Not—Gus, you believe me, don’t you?”

She kissed me. Just a little one, on the cheek, but it made my heart pop
up into the back of my neck and slug me.

“Well,” I said as soon as I could make my breathing operate my voice,
“whatever this thing is, I’ll help you lick it. Ah—what is it, by the
way? Got any ideas?”

“Yes,” she said quietly. “I certainly have. When I told the doctor this,
it convinced him that I was suffering from an overdose of old wives’
tales. Doesn’t it seem funny to you that after all I’ve told you about
what happens to a man if I so much as talk to him, nothing is happening
to you?”

“Come to think of it, it is funny.”

“Look, then,” she said, pointing. “There, and there, and there!”

I looked. Over the tops of the three doors that opened into the room,
and over the two big windows, were strands of—garlic.

“I … heard of that,” I said. “A ghost, huh?”

“A ghost,” said Iola. “A jealous ghost. A dirty, rotten
dog-in-the-manger ghost! Why doesn’t he leave me alone?”

“I’ll tear’m apart,” I growled.

She smiled, the saddest, puckered-up little smile I ever did see. “No,
Gus, no. You’re strong, all right, but that kind of strength won’t do me
much good with my haunt.”

“I’ll find some way, Miss Iola,” I said. “I will, so help me!”

“You’ll try,” she said softly. “So help _me!”_

She got my hat and opened the door for me, then closed it with a bang,
whirled and stood with her back to it. “Gus!” She was pale, anyway, but
now she looked bloodless. “Gus. He’s out there! The ghost—he knows
you’re in here, and he’s waiting for you!”

I looked at my hands. “Move on out of the way, then, Miss Iola,” I said
quietly, “and let me at him.”

“No, Gus—no!”

“Now, looky here. It’s getting late—too late for you to have my kind in
your digs. I’ll run along.” I walked over to her, took her by the
shoulders, and lifted her out of the way. Her forehead was near, so I
kissed it before I put her down.

“Good night,” I said. She didn’t answer. She was crying, so I guess she
couldn’t. Awful scared. I was glad about that because I knew it wasn’t
herself she was scared for.

I woke up the next morning and thought I was still asleep, in the middle
of a foul dream. I was cold—stone-cold, wet-cold. I felt as slimy as an
eel in a barrel of oil. I opened my eyes and tried to shake the feeling
off. It wouldn’t shake. My last night’s dinner rolled inside me as I
realized that the sliminess was there, all right—my two sheets were
coated with it. I could feel the wet, thick mass of it all over me. I
could strip it off one arm with the other hand, and throw
it—_sclup_—onto the floor.

But I couldn’t see it.

I ran, gasping and retching, into the bathroom. My feet seemed to slip
on the stuff, and I had trouble turning the doorknob with my slimy
fingers. I climbed under the hottest shower I had ever taken, soaped,
rinsed, soaped again, rinsed again. And I got out of the tub feeling
cold and clammy and slimy as ever.

I tried to put some clothes on, but I couldn’t stand the pressure of
them; they seemed to drive the thick mass of it into my pores. I threw
them off, leaped into bed, and pulled the covers over me, and with a
yelp I leaped out again. It was bad enough to have it, but I couldn’t
bear to wallow in it. The phone rang. Iola.

“Gus, I’m terribly worried about you. Has he … it … done anything to
you?”

I hesitated. It wouldn’t do any good to lie. “Yeah, he’s been skylarking
around.”

“Gus, what has he done?

“Nothin’ worth talking about.”

“Oh, you won’t tell me. It must be something really terrible!”

“Why so?”

“Because I … I … well, I—Gus, aren’t you going to say it first? Why is
that he would you treat you worse than any other man?”

I slowly began to get what she was driving at. “Miss Iola—you don’t
lo … care for me or something?”

“Darling!”

I said, “Holy smoke!”

I did some thinking after I hung up. I couldn’t let this thing get me
down—not now, not after my hearing news like that. I clamped my jaw and
got out some clean underwear and socks. I was remembering something my
pop told me after my first street fight. “If ye git hurt, me bye, don’t
let th’ other fellow know it. If he thinks he can’t hurt ye, ye’ve got
’im licked.”

So I dressed. With my clothes I clasped the chill ooze to me, and when I
walked out the door the slime dripped from the creases of my flesh as I
moved. I stepped out onto the street with some misgivings, but it was
invisible, thank the Powers.

And when I woke the next day the sliminess was gone.

I went to Henry Gade’s place and borrowed a pen and paper. I had told
him what I’d heard from Iola about her trouble, but nothing else.

“Who are you writing to?” he asked over his pipe, watching me scratching
laboriously away at the letter.

“I’m doin’ what anyone should do when he’s in trouble—consulting an
expert,” I said, and kept on writing.

“ ‘Miss Beatrice Dix, _The Daily Mail,’ ”_ he read aloud, and roared
with laughter. “So you’ve got trouble along those lines, too, have you?
Ha? Beatrice Dix—Advice to the Lovelorn!”

“You tell your little mouth to stop making those noises or it’ll get
poked,” I growled. He went on reading what I had written:

_Dear Miss Dix:_

_I got a problem about a girl I am very serious with. This girl has a
fellow who likes her, but she don’t like him none at all. He keeps on
bothering her and ordering her to keep away from other men, but he never
comes to see her or gives her anything or takes her out and on top of
that he keeps on doing things to any other man that is interested in her
and especially to me because—_

“Good heavens, Gus, couldn’t you put a full stop in there somewhere?”

_—because I am at present her big moment. The things he does are not the
kind of things you can get the law on him for. What I want to know is
what right has this fellow to be so jealous when the girl has no use for
him and what can we do to get rid of him_.

“Either you’re an extremely exacting student of literary styling,” said
Henry, “or you actually are the kind of person who writes in to Beatrice
Dix’s column. I’ve always wondered what one of those nitwits looked
like,” he added thoughtfully, standing off and regarding me as if I were
a museum piece. “Tell me—who’s the cutter-inner in your little romance?”

“A ghost.”

“A ghost? Iola’s jealous ghost? Gus, Gus, you improve by the hour. And
do you really think you can exorcise him with the aid of a heart-throb
column?”

“He don’t need no exercise.”

“Get out of here, Gus, you’re killing me.”

“I will before I do,” I said.

The following day Iola’s haunt created something new and different for
me. But I couldn’t brave this one out. I stayed home all day after
phoning the boss that I was very, very ill. Exactly what was done
couldn’t be printed.

The answer to my letter came far sooner than I had hoped. I hadn’t asked
for a personal reply, and so it was printed, with my letter, thus:

_G.S.:_

_You are up against a very difficult problem, if we understand the
situation correctly. We have run up against such cases before. The young
man who is persecuting the two of you will continue to do so just as
long as he finds the girl attractive to his peculiar type of mind. And
what can you do about it?_

_You can ignore him completely_.

_Or you can, together or singly, get the man to talk the whole thing out
with you_.

_Or you might try to find someone else who would interest him_.

_But you must be patient. Please, for your own sakes, do not do anything
rash_.

I read it over half a dozen times. I figured this Dix woman was a real
expert at this racket, and she ought to know what to do. But how to go
about it? “Ignore him completely.” How can you be married to a woman
when you know you’re liable to turn slimy at a moment’s notice? “Appeal
to his better nature—talk it out with him.” Catch him first. “Find
someone else who would interest him.” Catch a lady ghost, huh? And
persuade her to vamp him.

I took the paper over to Henry Gade. He’s better at thinking things out
than I am.

He waved the paper aside as I came in. “I’ve seen it,” he said. “I was
looking for it.”

“What do you think?”

“I think it’s a lovely piece of say-nothing, except that she hit the
nail on the head when she said that the guy will keep right on bothering
you lovebirds just as long as he finds the girl attractive. I can’t get
over it!” he exploded, and put his head on one side, watching me. “Good
old Gus, in love after all these years!”

“Maybe it hits harder for that,” I said, and he stopped his ape-grinning
and laid a hand on my shoulder.

“I guess it does. You do reach in and get the truth at times, old man.”

The letter from Iola was waiting for me when I got back home.

_Dearest Gus_,

_This is a rotten thing for me to do, but I’ve got to do it. I have a
suspicion of what you’ve been going through so bravely; he talked to me
last night and told me some of the things he’s done to you_.

_So you mustn’t write, Gus darling, and you mustn’t phone, and above all
you must never, never see me again. It’s the only way out for both of
us, and if it’s a painful and a cruel way, then that’s the breaks_.

_But, beloved—don’t try to get in touch with me. I have bought a little
revolver, and if you do that I’ll kill myself. That’s not idle talk,
Gus. I’m not afraid to do it. I’ve lived through enough pain_.

_Sweet, sweet sweetheart, how my heart bleeds for you!_

I read it over once and tried to read it again because, somehow, I
couldn’t see so well. Then I dove for the phone, and thought about the
revolver, and turned my back on it. Oh, she’d do it—I knew her.

Then I went out.

Henry found me. Maybe it was three weeks later, maybe four. I didn’t
know because I didn’t give a damn. I was sitting on a bench with a
couple of other gentlemen.

“Go away. You’re Henry. I remember you. Go away, Henry.”

“Gus! Get up out of that! You’re drunk! Come home with me, Gus.”

One of the other gentlemen back-slid to the extent of taking some of
Henry’s money for helping Henry get me home. Once there, I slept the
clock around.

Henry woke me, sponging my face with warm water. “Lost thirty pounds or
more,” he was muttering. “Filthy rags—ten-day beard—”

“You know what happened to me,” I said, as if that excused and explained
everything.

“Yes, I know what happened to you,” he roared. “You lost your
cotton-headed filly. And did you stand up and take it? No! You lay down
and let yourself get kicked like the jelly-bellied no-good you are!”

“But she wouldn’t—”

“I know, I know. She refused to see you any more. That’s got nothing to
do with it. You’re wound up with her—finished. And you tried to run
away. You tried to escape into filth and rotgut liquor. Don’t you
realize that you do nothing that way but burn up what’s clean in you and
leave all that’s rotten, with the original wound festering in the middle
of it?”

I turned my face to the wall, but I couldn’t stop his voice. “Get up and
bathe and shave and eat a decent meal! Try to act like a human being
until you can give as good an imitation as you used to.”

“No,” I said thickly.

Suddenly he was on his knees by the bed, an arm across my shoulders.
“Stop your blubbering,” he said gently. “Gus—you’re a grown man now.” He
sat back on his haunches, frowning and breathing too deeply. Suddenly he
rolled me over on my back, began slapping my face with his right hand,
back and front, back and front, over and over and over.

And then something snapped inside me and I reared up off the bed and
sent a whistling roundhouse at him. He ducked under it and jarred me
with a left to the temple. And then we went to work. I was big and
emaciated, and he was little and inspired. It was quite a show. It ended
with him stretched out on the carpet.

“Thanks, Gus,” he grinned weakly.

“Why’d you get me so riled up? Why’d you make me hit you?”

“Applied psychology,” he said, getting up groggily. I helped him.

I felt my swollen nose. “I thought psychology was brain stuff!”

“Listen, pal. You and I are going to straighten old Gus out for good.
You’ve got something deep inside that hurts—right? What did you see in
that white-headed babe, anyway?”

“She’s … she’s … I just can’t get along without her.”

“You got slushy. I think your taste is lousy.” Henry’s eyes were
narrowed and he teetered on the balls of his feet. He knew when he was
treading on thin ice, but he was going through with this. “What do you
see in an anemic-looking wretch like that? Give me nice, firm, rosy
girls with some blood in their veins. _Heh!_ Her, with her white hair
and white skin and two great big black holes for eyes. She looks like a
ghost! She isn’t worth—”

I roared and charged. He stepped nimbly out of the way. I charged right
past him and into the bathroom. “Where’s your razor?” I shouted.
“Where’s the soap?” And I dove into the shower.

When I came out of the bathroom and started climbing into some clothes,
he demanded an explanation. “What did I say? What did I do?” He was
hopping exultantly from one foot to the other.

“You said it a long while back,” I said. “So did Beatrice Dix. Something
about, ‘He’ll annoy you just as long as he finds the girl attractive.’ ”
I laced the second shoe, demanded some money, and pounded out before I
had the sentence well finished.

I rang somebody else’s bell at the apartment house and when the buzzer
burped at me I headed for the stairs. I rang Iola’s bell and waited
breathlessly. The knob turned and I crowded right in. She was drawing a
negligee about her. Her eyes were red-rimmed.

“Gus!” She drew back, turned and ran to a lamp table. “Oh, you _fool!_
Why do you have to make it harder for us?” She moved so fast I couldn’t
stop her. She had the gun in her hand.

“Hold on, you little dope!” I roared. “That may be a way out, but you’re
not going out alone. We’re going together!”

“Gus—”

“And doing it together we’re not doing it that way! Give me that thing!”
I strode across the room, lifted it out of her hand. I opened the
magazine, took the barrel in one hand and the butt in the other and
twisted them apart, throwing the pieces at her feet. “Now get in there
and get dressed. We’ve got things to do!” She hesitated, and I pushed
her roughly toward the bedroom. “One of us is going to dress you,” I
said somberly.

She squeaked and moved. I tramped up and down the living room, gleefully
kicking the broken gun on every trip. She was ready in about four
minutes; she came out frightened and puzzled and radiant. I took her
wrist and dragged her out of the apartment. As soon as we passed under
the garlic on the door, my skin began to tingle, then to itch, and
suddenly I felt that I was a mass of open, festering sores. And on top
of this came the slime again. I gritted my teeth and sluiced down my
pain with sheer exultation.

We piled into a taxi and I gave an address. When Iola asked questions I
laughed happily. We pulled up at a curb and I paid off the driver. “Go
in there,” I said.

“A beauty parlor! But what—”

I pushed her in. A white-uniformed beautician came forward timidly. I
took a strand of Iola’s white hair and tossed it. “Dye this,” I said.
“Dye it black!”

“Gus!” gasped Iola. “You’re mad! I don’t _want_ to be a brunette! I
haven’t the coloring for—”

“Coloring? You know what kind of coloring you have, with those big black
holes of eyes and that white skin and hair? _You look like a ghost!_
Don’t you see? That’s why he hounded you! That’s why he loved you and
was jealous of you!”

Her eyes got very bright. She looked in a mirror and said, “Gus—you
remember that summer I told you about, when he first spoke to me? I was
wearing a long white dress—white shoes—”

“Get in there and be a brunette,” I growled. The operator took her.

I settled down into a big chair to wait. I was suffering a thousand
different agonies, a hundred different kinds of torments. Pains and
horrid creeping sensations flickered over my body the way colors shift
on a color-organ. I sat there taking it, and taking it, and then I heard
the operator’s voice from the back of the studio. “There you are, ma’am.
All done. Look in there—how do you like it?”

And deep within me I almost heard a sound like a snort of disgust, and
then there was a feeling like an infinite lightening of pressure. And
then my body was fresh and whole again, and the ghostly pains were gone.

Iola came out and flung her arms around my neck. As a brunette she was
stunning.

Henry Gade was our best man.



THE BONES


DONZEY CAME TO the door with a pair of side-cutting pliers in his hand
and soldering flux smeared on the side of his jaw. “Oh—Farrel. Come in.”

“Hi, Donzey.” The town’s police force ducked his head under the doorway
and followed the mechanic through a littered living room into what had
once been a pantry. It was set up as a workshop, complete with vises, a
power lathe, a small drill press and row upon row of tools. It was a
great deal neater than the living room. By the window was a small table
on which was built an extraordinarily complicated radio set which
featured a spherical antenna and more tubes and transformers and
condensers than a small-town bicycle repairman can be expected to buy
and still eat. Farrel added a stick of gum to his already oversize wad
and stared at it.

“That it?” he asked.

“That’s it,” said Donzey proudly. He sat down beside the table and
picked up an electric soldering iron. “She ought to work this time,” he
said, holding the iron close to his cheek to see if it were hot enough.

“And I used to think FM was the initials of a college,” said Farrel.

“Not in radio,” said Donzey. The lump of solder in his hand slumped into
glittering fluidity, sealed a joint. “And this is a different kind of
frequency modulation, too. This is the set that’s going to make us some
real money, Farrel.”

“Yeah,” said the sheriff without enthusiasm. He was thinking of the
irrepressible Donzey’s flotation motor, that was supposed to use the
power developed by a chain of hollow balls floating to the top of a
tank; of his ingenious plan for zoning highways by disappearing concrete
walls between the lanes—a swell idea only somebody else had patented it.
Also there was a little matter of a gun which could be set to fire
thirty bullets at any interval between a fifth of a second to thirty
minutes. Only nobody wanted it. Donzey was as unsuccessful as he was
enthusiastic. He kept body and soul indifferently together only because
he had infinite powers of persuasion. He could sell one of his ideas to
the proverbial brass monkey—more; he could get a man like Farrel to
invest capital in an idea like his directional FM transmitter. His basic
principle was a signal beamed straight up, which would strike the
Heaviside layer and bounce _almost_ straight down, thus being receivable
only in the receiver at which it was aimed. Donzey had got the idea over
at the pool parlor. If you could aim an eight-ball at a six-ball, off
the cushion, you ought to be able to aim a signal from the transmitter
to the receiver, off the Heaviside layer. The thing would be handy as a
wireless field telephone for military liaison.

Of course, Donzey knew little about radio. But he always worked on the
theory that logic was as good or better than book-learning. His mind was
as incredibly facile as his stubby fingers. What it lacked in exactitude
it made up for in brilliance. Seeing the wiring on the set, an
electrical engineer would have sighed and asked Donzey if he was going
to put tomato sauce on all that spaghetti. Donzey would have called the
engineer a hidebound conservative. Because of Donzey’s pragmatic way of
working, the world will never know the wiring diagram of that set.
Donzey figured that if it worked he could build more like it. If it
didn’t, who cared how it was made?

Donzey laid the soldering iron on the bed it had charred out for itself
on the workbench, brushed back his wiry black hair without effect, and
announced that he was ready. “She may not work just yet,” he said,
plugging the set in and holding his breath for a moment in silent prayer
until he was sure that the fuse was not going to blow. “But then again
she might.” When the tubes began to glow, he cut in the loudspeaker. It
uttered a horrifying roar; he tuned it down to a hypnotic hum.

Farrel folded himself into a chair and stared glumly at the proceedings,
wondering whether or not he would ever get his twenty-eight dollars and
sixty cents out of this contraption. Donzey switched off the speaker and
handed him a headset. “Put these on and see what you get.”

Farrel clamped the phones over his ears and tried to look bored. Donzey
went back to his knobs and dials.

“Anything yet?”

“Yeah.” Farrel shifted his cud. “It howls like a houn’ dawg.”

Donzey grunted and put a finger on one phone connection and a thumb on
the other. Farrel swore and snatched off the headset. “What you tryin’
to do,” he growled, rubbing a large, transparent ear, “make me deef?”

“Easy with the phones, son.” Donzey was fifteen years younger than the
sheriff, but he could say “son” and make it stick. “Phone condenser’s
shot. And that’s the last .00035 I have. Got to rig up something. Wait a
minute.” He flew out of the room.

Farrel sighed and walked over to the window. Donzey was locally famous
for the way he “rigged things up.” He rigged up a supercharger for the
municipal bandit-chaser which really worked, once you got used to its
going backward in second gear. Farrel was not at all surprised to see
Donzey out in the yard, busily rummaging through the garbage can.

He entered the room a moment later, unabashedly blowing the marrow out
of a section of mutton bone. “Got a cigarette?” he said, wiping his
mouth. Farrel dourly handed over a pack. Donzey ripped it open, spilling
the smokes over the workbench. He stripped off the tinfoil, tore it in
half, and after cleaning up the bone inside and out with Farrel’s
handkerchief, poked some of the foil into the bone and wrapped it
carefully in the other piece. “Presto,” he said. “A condenser.”

“My handkerchief—” began Farrel.

“You’ll be able to buy yourself a trainload of ’em when we put this on
the market,” said Donzey with superb confidence. He busily connected the
outside layer of tinfoil to one phone plug and the inside wad to the
other. “Now,” he said, handing the earphones to the sheriff, “that ought
to do it. I’m sending from this key. There’s no connection between
transmitter and receiver. The signal’s going straight up—I hope. It
should come straight down.”

“But I don’t know that dit-dot stuff,” said Farrel, putting on the
headset nevertheless.

“Don’t have to,” said Donzey. “I’ll play “Turkey in the Straw.” You
ought to recognize that.”

They sat down and again Donzey switched on the juice. His fingers found
the key as his eyes found Farrel’s face; and then his fingers forgot
about the key.

Farrel’s heavy lids closed for a long second, while his lantern jaw
slowly lit up. Then the eyes began to open, slowly. At just the halfway
mark, they stopped and the man did something extraordinary with his
nostrils. A long sigh escaped him, and his wide lips flapped
resoundingly in the breeze. His head tilted slowly to one side.

“Mmmwaw,” he said.

“Farrel!” snapped Donzey, horrified.

“M-m-ba-a-a-a—”

Before Donzey could reach him he reared up out of his chair, tossing his
head back. By some miracle the earphones stayed in place. Farrel’s hands
hit the floor; he landed on one palm and one wrist, which grated
audibly. His huge feet kicked out and his arms gave way. He landed on
his face, the wire from the headset tightened and the table on which the
radio stood began to lean out from the wall. Donzey squalled and put out
his arms to catch his darling; and catch it he did. His hands gripped
the chassis, perfectly grounded, and as he hugged the set to him to save
it, the upper terminal of a 6D6 tube contacted his chin. He suddenly
felt as if a French 75 had gone off in his face. He saw several very
pretty colors. One of them, he recalled later, looked like the smell of
a rose, and another looked like a loud noise. He hit the floor with a
bump, number instinct acting just far enough to twist his body under the
precious radio. Nothing broke but the power line; and as soon as that
parted, Farrel scrambled most profanely to his feet.

“Get up, you hind-end of a foot,” he roared, “so I can slap you down
again!”

“Wh-wh-whooee!” said Donzey’s lungs, trying to get the knack of
breathing again.

“Go away,” breathed the quivering mass under the radio. Donzey waited a
few seconds, and when Farrel still continued to hang over him, he
decided to go on waiting. He knew that the canny old sheriff would never
plow through a cash investment to get to him. As long as the radio was
perched on his chest he was safe.

“Who you fink you’re pwayin’ twickf on?” said the sheriff through a
rapidly swelling lip.

“I wasn’t pwaying any twickf,” mimicked Donzey. “Sizzle down, bud. What
happened?”

“I ftarted to go cwavy, vat’s all. What kind of devil’f gadget iv vat,
anyway?”

Sensing that the sheriff’s anger was giving way to self-pity, Donzey
took a chance on lifting the radio off himself. “My gosh, man—you’re
hurt!”

Farrel followed Donzey’s eyes to his rapidly swelling wrist.
“Yeah … I—Hey! It hurts!” he said, surprised.

“It should,” said Donzey. While Farrel grunted, he bound it against a
piece of board, and then went for a couple of ice cubes for the now
balloon-like lip. As soon as Farrel was comfortable, Donzey started
asking questions.

“What happened when I switched on the set?”

Farrel shuddered. “It was awful. I seen pictures.”

“Pictures? You mean—pictures, like television?” Donzey’s gadgeteer’s
heart leaped at the ideas that thronged into his cluttered mind. Maybe
his set, by some odd circuiting, could induce broadcast television
signals directly on the mind! Maybe he had invented an instrument for
facilitating telepathy. Maybe he had stumbled on something altogether
new and unheard of. Any way you looked at it, there was millions in it.
_Piker_, he told himself, _there’s billions in it!_

“Nah,” said Farrel. His face blanched; like many a bovine character
before him he suddenly realized he had swallowed his cud.

“Don’t worry about it,” said the observant Donzey. “Chewing gum won’t
hurt you. Chew some more and forget it. Now, about those pictures—”

“Them … they wasn’t like television. They wasn’t like nothin’ I ever
heard about before. They were colored pictures—”

“Moving pictures?”

“Oh, yeah. But they were all foggy. Things close to me, they were clear.
Anything more’n thirty feet away was—fuzzy.”

“Like a camera out of focus?”

“Um. But things ‘way far away, they were clear as a bell.”

“What did you see?”

“Hills—fields. I didn’t recognize that part of the country. But it all
looked different. The grass was green, but sort of gray, too. An’ the
sky was just—blank. It all seemed good. I dunno—you won’t laugh at me,
Donzey?” asked the sheriff suddenly.

“Good gosh no!”

“Well, I was—_eatin’_ the grass!” Farrel peered timidly at the mechanic
and then seemed reassured. “It was queer. I couldn’t figure time at all.
I don’t know how long it went on—might ’a’ been years. Seemed like it
was raining sometimes. Sometimes it was cold, an’ that didn’t bother me.
Sometimes it was hot, and boy, that did.”

“Are you telling me you _felt_ things in those pictures?”

Farrel nodded soberly. “Donzey, I was _in_ those pictures.”

Donzey thought, _What have I got here? Transmigration? Teleportation?
Clairvoyance? Why, there’s ten billion in it!_

“What got me,” said Farrel thoughtfully, “was that everything seemed so
good. Until the end. There was miles of alleys, like, and then a great
big dark building. I was scared, but everyone else seemed to be going my
way, so I went along. Then some feller with a … a cleaver, he … I tried
to get away, but I couldn’t. He hit me. I hollered.”

“I’ll say you did.” They shuddered together for a moment.

“That’s all,” said Farrel. “He hit me twice, and I woke up on the floor
with a busted wing and saw you all mixed up with the radio. Now you tell
me—what happened?”

“You seemed to go into a kind of trance. You hollered, and then started
thrashing around. You did a high-dive onto the deck an’ dragged the
radio off the table. I caught it an’ my chin hit it where it was hot. It
knocked me silly. The whole thing didn’t last twenty seconds.”

“Donzey,” said the sheriff, standing up, “you can keep the money I put
into this thing. I don’t want no more of it.” He went to the door.
“Course, if you should make a little money, don’t forget who helped you
get a start.”

Donzey laughed. “I’ll keep in touch with you,” he said. “Look—about that
big building you went into. You said you were scared, but everybody else
was going the same way, so you went along. What were the others like?”

Farrel looked at him searchingly. “Did I say ‘everybody else’?”

“You did.”

“That’s funny.” Farrel scratched his head with his unbandaged arm. “All
the rest of ’em was—sheep.” And he went out.

For a long time after Farrel had gone, Donzey sat and stared at the
radio. “Sheep,” he muttered. He got up and set the transmitter carefully
back on the table, rapidly checking over the wiring and tubes to see
that all was safe and unbroken. “Sheep?” he asked himself. What had an
FM radio to do with sheep? He put away his pliers and sal ammoniac and
solder and flux; hung his friction tape on its peg; picked up the
soldering iron by the point and was reminded that it was still plugged
in. He looked down at his scorched palm. “Sheep!” he said absently.

It wasn’t anything you could just figure out, like what made an
automobile engine squeak when you ran it more than two hundred miles
without any oil, or why most of the lift comes from the top surface of
an airplane’s wing. It was something you had to try out, like getting
drunk or falling in love. Donzey switched on the radio, sat down and
picked up the headset. As he adjusted the crownpiece back down to
man-size, he was struck by an ugly thought. Farrel had been in a bad way
when he was inside this headset. He was—dreaming, was it?—that some guy
was striking him with a cleaver just as he lurched forward and cut the
juice. Suppose he hadn’t cut it—would he have died, like the … the sheep
he thought he was?

Donzey lay the earphones down and went into the bedroom for his alarm
clock. Bolting it to the table, he wrapped a cord around the alarm key
and led it to the radio switch. Then he set it carefully, so it would go
off in one minute and turn off the set. He put on the headset, waited
twenty-five seconds, and turned it on. Fifteen seconds to warm up, and
then—

It happened for him, too, that gray grass and blank sky, the
timelessness, the rain, the cold, the heat, and the sheep. The_—other_
sheep. He ate the grass and it was good. He was frightened and milled
with the others through those alleyways. He saw the dark building.
He—and the alarm shrilled, the set clicked off, and he sat there
sweating, a-tremble. This was bad. Oh, but bad.

Any money in it? Would anybody pay for pictures you could live in? And
die in?

He had a wholesome urge to take his little humdinger—a machinist’s
hammer—and ding the hum out of the set. He got the better of the urge.
He did, however, solemnly swear never to eat another bite of lamb or
mutton. That noise Farrel had made—

Mutton? Wasn’t there some mutton involved in the radio? He looked at
it—at the phone condenser. An innocent-looking little piece of bone,
hollow, with the tinfoil inside and out. Giggling without mirth, he took
a piece of wire and shorted the homemade condenser out of the circuit,
set his time switch, and put on the phones. Nothing happened. He reached
over, snatched the wire away. Immediately he was eating gray-green grass
under a blank sky, and it was good—good—and now the cold—and then the
alarm, and he was back in his chair, staring at the mutton-bone
condenser.

“That bone,” he whispered, “just ain’t dead yet!”

He went and stood at the front door, thinking of the unutterable horror
of that dark building, the milling sheep. Farrel’s sprained wrist. The
mutton bone. “Somewhere, somehow,” he told himself, “there’s a hundred
billion in it!”

Ringing a doorbell with a hand burdened by a huge bundle of groceries
while the other is in a sling, presents difficulties, but Sheriff Farrel
managed it. Turning the knob was harder, but Farrel managed that, too,
when there was no response to the bell. From the inside room came the
most appalling series of sounds—a chuckling, hysterical gabbling which
rose in pitch until it was cut off with a frightful gurgling. Farrel
tossed his burden on a seedy divan and ran into the workshop.

Donzey was lolling in the chair by the radio with the earphones on. His
face was pale and his eyes were closed, and he twitched. The radio, in
the two weeks since Farrel had seen it, had undergone considerable
change. It was now compactly boxed in a black enameled sheet-iron box,
from which protruded the controls and a pair of adjustable steer clips,
which held what looked like a small white stick. The old speaker, the
globular antenna, and all of the external spaghetti was gone. Among the
dials on the control panel was that of a clock with a sweep second-hand.
This and Donzey’s twitching were the only movements in the room.

Suddenly the set clicked and Donzey went limp. Farrel gazed with sad
apprehension at the mechanic, thinking that being his pallbearer would
be little trouble.

“Donzey—”

Donzey shook his head and sat up. He was thinner, and his eyes told the
sheriff that he was in the throes of something or other. He leaped up
and pumped Farrel’s good hand. “Just the man I wanted to see. It works,
Farrel—it works!”

“Yeah, we’re rich,” said Farrel dourly. “I heard all that before. Heck
with it. Come out o’ here.” He dragged Donzey into the living room and
indicated the bundle on the divan. “Start in on that.”

Donzey investigated. “What’s this for?”

“Eatin’, dope. The whole town’s talkin’ about you starvin’ yourself. If
I hadn’t given you that money, you wouldn’t have built that radio.”

“Well, you don’t have to feed me,” said Donzey warmly.

“I feed any stray dog that follers me home,” said Farrel. “An’ I ain’t
responsible for ’em bein’ hungry. Eat, now.”

“Who said I was hungry?”

“Goes without sayin’. A guy that goes scrabblin’ around Tookey’s butcher
shop lookin’ for bones twice a day just ain’t gettin’ enough Vitamin B.”

Donzey laughed richly, looked at the sheriff and laughed again.
“Oh—that! I wasn’t hungry!”

“Don’t start pullin’ the wool over my eyes. You’ll eat that stuff or
I’ll spread it on the floor and roll you in it.” He took the bag and
upended it over the couch.

Donzey, with awe, looked at the bread, the butter, the preserves, canned
fruit, steak, potatoes, lard, vegetables—“Farrel, for gosh sakes! Black
market. It must be, for all that—”

“It ain’t,” said the sheriff grimly. He herded Donzey into the kitchen,
brushed a lead-crucible and a miniature steam engine off the stove and
started to cook.

Donzey protested volubly until the steak started to sizzle, and then was
stopped by an excess of salivary fluid. He was a little hungry, after
all.

Farrel kept packing it in him until he couldn’t move, and then sat down
opposite and began to eye him coldly. “Now what’s all this about?” he
asked. “Why didn’t you come to me for a handout?”

“I didn’t need a handout,” said Donzey, “and if I did I was too busy to
notice it. Farrel, we’ve got the biggest thing of the century sitting in
there!”

“It shoots a signal where you want it to, like you said?”

“Huh? What do you.… Oh, you mean the Heaviside beam thing? Nah,” said
Donzey with scorn. “Son, this is _big!_”

“Hm-m-m,” said Farrel, looking at his sling. “But what good is it?”

“An entirely new school of thought will be built up around this thing,”
exulted Donzey. “It touches on philosophy, my boy, and metaphysics—the
psychic sciences, even.”

“What good is it?”

“Course, I can only guess on the whys and wherefores. When you came in,
I was a chicken. I got my neck wrung. Sound silly? Well, it wouldn’t to
you … you _know_. But nobody else would believe me. I was a chicken—”

“What good is it?”

“—because between the clips I’ve built on the set I put a sliver of
chicken bone. There was mutton on it when you tried it. I’ve been cattle
and swine through that gadget, Farrel. I’ve been a sparrow and a
bullfrog and an alley cat and a rock bass. I know how each one of them
lived and died!”

“Swell,” said Farrel. “But what good is it?”

“What good is it? How can you ask me such a question? Can’t you think of
anything but money?”

This sudden reversal caught Farrel right between the eyes. He rose with
dignity, as if he were sitting on an elevator. “Donzey,” he said,
“you’re a thief an’ a robber, an’ I don’t want no more to do with you.
Miz’ Curtis was sayin’ the other day that Donzey is a boy that’s goin’
places. I guess it’s up to me to tell you where to go.” He told him and
stamped out.

Donzey laughed, reached for a toothpick and set about enjoying the last
of that delicious steak. Farrel was a nice guy, but he lacked
imagination.

Come to think of it, what good _was_ the gadget?

Two hours later a small package was delivered. It contained a note and a
splinter of bone. The note read:

I know I’m bein a fool, but I can’t forget the first time I met that FM
thing of yours. Maybe for once in your life you can put one of your
contraptions to work.

Seems as how Bill Kelley just was in here wantin me to trace his wife
Eula. They been havin fights—well, you know Bill, he always treated her
like she was in third grade. I often wondered why she didn’t take out a
long time ago, the way he used to smack her around and all, and seems
like she did.

Bill allows she has run out with somebody, he don’t know who. Anyway,
right after he left a deputy comes in and says he has found Eula out on
the highway in her car. Says she is all busted up. I drove out there and
sure enough there she is. She is all by herself and she is dead. Car
climbed a power pole on the wrong side of a cyclone fence. What I want
you to find out is whether there was anyone with her. She had a compound
fracture and it wasn’t no trouble to get this sample. See what you can
get.

FARREL

Donzey realized that he still had the bone splinter in his hand. He laid
it quickly on the table and stared at it as if he expected it to moan at
him. He had known for some time that he would have to get a human bone
to experiment with, but he would rather have had an anonymous one. He
had known Eula Kelley for years. Farrel’s clumsy note didn’t begin to
state the tragedy of her life since she married the town’s rich man. She
was a Kelley, and she had been a Walsh before that, and he wasn’t
surprised that she had finally decided to leave him. But it didn’t make
sense that she had left with another man. Not Eula.

Feeling a little sick, Donzey clipped the bone into his machine, set it
for twenty seconds, put on the phones and threw the switch. He sat quite
still until it clicked off, and then, white and shaken, adjusted the
time switch for forty seconds. Once again he “listened,” then made his
final setting of fifty-two seconds—enough to take him right up to the
mental image of Eula’s death. More than that he dared not do. His great
fear was that someday his psychic identification with the bone’s
individuality would be carried with it into death.

Farrel arrived and found him sitting on the steps, his jaw muscles
knotting furiously, his sharp eyes full of puzzled anger. Farrel left a
deputy in his car and went inside with Donzey.

“Get anything?” he asked.

“Plenty. Farrel, that Bill Kelley ought to be shot, and I’d like to do
the shooting.”

“Yeah. He’s a louse. That ain’t our affair. Was there anyone with her?”

“I—think there was. You better see for yourself.”

Farrel shot him a quizzical glance and then sat down beside the machine.
Donzey turned it on as the sheriff donned the headset, and then sat
back, watching. He was sorry that he had to put Farrel through it, but
he felt that the sheriff should know the story that splinter had to
tell. His mind ran back over Eula’s idea-patterns, the images they
yielded. It was a story of incredible sordidness, and of a man’s utter
cruelty to a woman. It told of the things he had done, things he had
said. Eula had borne it and borne it, and her ego had slowly been
crushed under the weight of it. Then there was that last terrible
incident, and she had run away from him. It didn’t matter where she was
running to, as long as it was away. And there was the flight of hope,
the complete death of relief, when she realized, out there on the
highway, that there was no escape. Bill Kelley’s mark was on her; she
couldn’t leave him or her life with him. She knew exactly what she was
doing when she threw the wheel hard over and closed her eyes against the
beginning of that tearing crash.

The set clicked off. Farrel stared at Donzey, and drew a deep,
shuddering breath.

“It don’t seem right, Donzey, knowing things like that about a woman. I
always knew Bill was a snake, but—”

“Yeah,” said Donzey. “I know.”

Farrel peeled off the headset and went to the door. “Harry,” he called
to his deputy, “go get Bill Kelley.”

“What’s that for?” asked Donzey when he returned.

“Strictly outside the law,” said Farrel very quietly. “I’m goin’ to give
Bill Kelley somethin’ he needs.” He took off his badge and laid it on
the bench.

Donzey suddenly remembered hearing that, years ago, Eula Walsh had
married Bill Kelley when she was engaged to Farrel. He wondered if would
have called Farrel in if he had remembered that before, and decided that
he would have.

“Farrel,” he said after a time, “about that other person in the car—”

Farrel’s big head came up. “That’s right—there was somebody—I got just
the impression of it, just before the crash. I don’t rightly
remember—seems like it was someone I know, though.”

“Me, too. I can’t understand it, Farrel. She wasn’t running away with
anybody. She wasn’t interested in anybody or anything except in getting
away. I didn’t get any intimation of her meeting anyone, or even being
with anyone until that last few seconds.”

“That’s right. What did he look like?”

“Sort of … well, medium-sized and … damn if I remember. But I don’t
think I’ve seen him before.”

“I haven’t, either,” said Farrel. “I don’t know that it’s really
important. If she ran away with somebody, she rated it. I don’t think
she did, but … heck, he was probably just a hitchhiker that she was too
upset to think about,” he finished lamely.

“A woman don’t commit suicide with a stranger along,” Donzey said.

“A woman’s liable to do anything after she’s been through what Eula went
through.” The doorbell pealed. “That’ll be Kelley.”

As Farrel went to the door, Donzey noticed that his palms were wet.
Farrel opened the door and the deputy’s voice drifted in: “I saw Kelley,
sheriff. He wouldn’t come.”

“He wouldn’t come? Why?”

Harry’s voice was aggrieved. “Aw, he seemed to have a wild hair up his
nose. Got real mad. Started foamin’ at the mouth. Said by golly the
police were public servants. Said he wasn’t used to bein’ ordered around
like a criminal. Said if you want to see him you got to come to him, or
prove he committed a crime. Sour-castic son-of-a-gun.”

“That ain’t all he is,” said Farrel. “Forget it, Harry. Shove off. I’ll
walk into town when I’m through here.” He banged the door. “Donzey,
we’re goin’ to fix that feller.”

Donzey didn’t like to see a big, easy-going lug like Farrel wearing that
icy grin. The huge hands that pinned the badge back in its place shook
ever so little.

“Sure,” said Donzey futilely, “sure—we’ll get him.”

Farrel spun on his heel as if Kelley’s face were under it, and stalked
out.

It was about three days later that one of Farrel’s stooges at the county
hospital sent up a bone specimen from an appendicitis death. Attached
was a brief case history:

Cause of death, appendicitis. Age, about forty; male. Appendix ruptured
suddenly in Sessions Restaurant at 8:30 pm. Went on operating table
about 9:15. Doctor in charge administered adrenalin by pericardial
hypodermic. Patient roused sufficiently to allow operation. Removal of
appendix and sponging of peritoneum successful. Death by post-operative
hemorrhage, 9:28.

“We have,” muttered Donzey as he clipped the bone into the machine, “a
little scientist in our midst. Ol’ Doc Grinniver up to his tricks again!
A ruptured appendix and he tosses in a jolt of adrenalin to ‘rouse’ the
patient, in the meantime making his heart pump poison all over his body,
high-pressure.” He picked up his earphones and glanced at the report
again. “ ‘Post-operative hemorrhage’ my blue eyeballs! That was
peritonitis! Oh, well, I guess he would have died anyway, and I guess
the old butcher couldn’t get hold of a guinea pig with appendicitis.” He
sat down at the machine, adjusted the time switch, and his mind slipped
into the bone emanations.

It was the usual life-and-death story, but with a difference. The man
had been in the midst of a slimy little office intrigue which seemed to
have taken command of most of his thoughts in the last few months; but
the ragged stab of pain when his appendix burst drove all that out. Pain
is like that, and Donzey had found that people handled it in two ways.
They let it pile up on them until it suffocated them, or they floated up
and up in it until it supported them; they lay in it like a bed. The
second way, though, required a knack which took years to develop, and
Donzey was glad he could learn it from other people’s experience.

This particular case took it the first way, and it wasn’t very nice. The
agony grew and dimmed all his senses except the one that feels pain; and
that grew. Pretty soon he couldn’t even think. But when it got past that
stage, it began to overwhelm his sensories, too, and the pain lessened.
His eyes were open—had been, because he realized that his eyeballs were
dry—but slowly he began to see again. Someone was bending over him. He
was on the operating table. He had been to the movies, and he never
remembered seeing anyone in dark clothes around an operating table
before. And as his vision strengthened and the figure became clearer and
clearer, he felt first curiosity, then awe, then the absolute, outside
utmost in terror. Like a beam of negative energy, he felt it soaking up
the heat of his body, his very life. It was a huge and monstrous thing.
He had strength for just one thing; he closed his eyes just a tenth of a
second before the dark one’s face swam into focus; and then, in the same
instant, the doctor’s needle entered his heart. The warmth flowed back
weakly, and when he dared to open his eyes again the dark one was gone.

And then the operation; and he felt every scrape and slice of it. When
Donzey thought about it afterward, he felt his own appendix literally
squirm in sympathy—not an experience measuring up to the highest
standards of animal comfort. Soon enough it was over, and the set
clicked off with a nice life margin of two minutes to go.

Donzey sat for a long time thinking this over. His was a mechanic’s
mind, and such a mind seldom rejects anything because it has never heard
of it before, or because it has heard otherwise. This machine now—it
proposed certain very important questions. Donzey spread the questions
out on a blank spot in his brain and looked at them.

The machine showed what death felt like, just before it happened. That
was the really valuable point—it _happened_, it wasn’t a light going
out. It was a force swinging into action, so strong that it could
impress itself on the carefully constructed thought patterns
mysteriously apparent in bones. All right—

_What was this force called Death?_

Donzey thought of that dark figure in the operating theater of the
county hospital, and knew without a doubt that that question was
answered. He was very happy that the late possessor of that piece of
bone had had the consideration to close his eyes before he had taken a
good look. Or was it the adrenalin that drove the dark thing out of
sight? What had being in sight to do with death? Did looking on the Dark
One—the capitalization was Donzey’s—result in death? Could that be it?
Were sickness and accidents merely phenomena that gave man the power to
see death? And was that sight the thing that took their life force out
of their now useless bodies? And—

_Would seeing Death in the machine kill a man?_

Donzey looked respectfully at the machine and thought, “I could easy
enough try it and find out,” without making the slightest move to do so.

Farrel arrived that evening, and for once the grim old man looked
benignly happy. He clapped Donzey on the back, smiled, and sat down
wordlessly.

“If I know you, Farrel,” said Donzey, “all that showing of the teeth
means that you are about to be real unkind to someone. It wouldn’t be
me, would it?”

“In a way,” said the sheriff. “I’m goin’ to bust up your place a little.
You won’t mind that, will you?”

“Nah,” said Donzey, wondering what this was all about. “What are you
going to bust up, what with, and why?”

“Answerin’ your questions in order,” said Farrel, grinning hugely,
“Whatever gets in my way while I’m playing, a certain Mr. William
Kelley, and you know as well as I do.”

“Oh.” Donzey rubbed his hands together. “So he’s coming here? Or are you
having him shipped by express?”

“He’s coming of his own free will. He dropped into my office this
morning and breezed up the place with a lot of noise about my not
finding out who his wife ran away with. She’s dead and he don’t care
about that. What makes him mad is that all these years he’s been
supportin’ a woman who—You know Bill Kelley.”

Donzey felt a little sick. “How can a man be so rock-bottom lousy?”

“Aw, he’s been practicing for years. Anyhow, I calmed him down and told
him I knew a feller … that’s you … who had found out who was in the car
with his wife. I told him to come over at eight-thirty and see you. You
can shove along now or stay and see the fun. This is the one place in
town where I know I can do what I want without being interrupted.”

“Which is—”

“Just what happened to Eula. She was rushing along in her car; she
turned over and got all smashed up. I’m goin’ to turn him over and smash
him up.” Farrel’s smile was positively childlike.

“I’ll stick around and watch,” said Donzey. “By the way—” He hesitated.

“What?”

“I do know who was in the car with Eula.”

“Yeah? Who?”

Donzey told him. “You don’t say,” say Farrel. “Well, well. Skull an’ a
scythe, an’ all that?”

“Nah,” said Donzey. “That’s just a picture somebody drew. Looks as much
like Him as a political cartoon does of a presidential candidate.” The
doorbell rang. “Farrel,” said Donzey quickly, “I want him to see Eula’s
bone picture. Of all people in the world, he ought to appreciate it the
most. Please.”

Farrel said thoughtfully, “That’ll be O.K. Then I don’t have to explain
nothin’. When the machine’s through, I’ll start, and he’ll know just
why.”

Donzey went to the door and let in a superbly tailored gray sports suit
with a pin-checked topcoat which contained an overload of pig eyes,
flabby jowls and a voice like a fingernail on a piece of slate. Bill
Kelley stamped past Donzey as if he were a butler or even a
photoelectric door opener. He had apparently started griping even before
he rang the bell, because he entered in the middle of a sentence.

“—come to a hovel like this on a wild goose chase just because a fool of
a sheriff can’t get any information. I’m going to find out how much of
my taxes goes to keep that fellow in office, and get an exemption. I’m
the public, dammit, and I ought to be able to deal with a public
servant. Hello, Farrel. What’s all this nonsense, now?”

Farrel’s voice cut through Kelley’s because it was so deep and so very
quiet. “That little man behind you is the guy I was tellin’ you about.
He’s seen the man in Eu … Mrs. Kelley’s car.”

“Oh. Well? Well? Speak up, man. Who was it? If he’s in business, I’ll
break him. If he’s on relief, I’ll have him taken off. If he’s the kind
of worthless tramp Eula would probably take up with, I’ll hire some
muscles I know to take care of him. Well? Well?”

“You can see him for yourself, _Mr_. Kelley,” said Donzey evenly.

“I don’t want to see him!” stormed Kelley. “Is he here?” He peered
around.

Donzey had a flash of him grunting and wallowing in mud. “Not exactly.
Sit down over there, and I’ll show you a sort of moving picture.”

Kelley opened his mouth to protest but found himself lifted off the
floor, swung around and dropped into a chair. He squealed indignantly,
saw Farrel’s great horse face hovering close to his, turned a pinkish
shade of gray and shut his mouth.

“Easy, Farrel,” said Donzey gently, and put the earphones on Bill
Kelley. Rummaging through his new filing cabinet, he clipped a specimen
onto the machine and turned on the switch. Kelley’s eyes closed.

They stood looking at their prisoner.

“Farrel—” said Donzey smoothly. The sheriff looked up. “What I was
saying before he came … I’ve been wondering if it isn’t the sight of
Death that actually takes the … the soul out of a man.”

Farrel grunted and turned back to Kelley. He was following the man’s
mind through that tragic maze of Eula’s life. His jaw muscles kept
knotting and slackening, beating like a heart.

Kelley suddenly stiffened. His eyes opened wide—so wide that the lids
seemed about to fold back on themselves. The man’s horrified gaze was
directed at them, but they both sensed that he saw neither of them. For
a full minute no one in the room moved.

“He’s seen the show,” muttered Farrel. “What’s he doing—stalling?” Then
he realized that Kelley’s staring eyes weren’t looking at anything any
more.

Donzey nodded. “Yup,” he said, “it’s seeing Him does it.”

“What’s the matter with him?”

“Why,” said Donzey, “I reckon he climbed into that car with Eula. You
see, I didn’t set the time switch.”

“Oh,” said Farrel. He went and lifted up Kelley’s wrist. “_Tsk, tsk_.
Whaddye know. This here guy’s up an’ died on us. Heh! In a automobile
accident that happened more’n a week ago!”



THE HAG SÉLEEN


IT WAS WHILE we were fishing one afternoon, Patty and I, that we first
met our friend the River Spider. Patty was my daughter and Anjy’s.
Tacitly, that is. Figuratively she had originated in some hot corner of
hell and had left there with such incredible violence that she had taken
half of heaven with her along her trajectory and brought it with her.

I was sprawled in the canoe with the nape of my neck on the conveniently
curved cedar stern piece of the canoe, with a book of short stories in
my hands and my fish pole tucked under my armpit. The only muscular
energy required to fish that way is in moving the eyes from the page to
the float and back again, and I’d have been magnificently annoyed if I’d
had a bite. Patty was far more honest about it; she was fast asleep in
the bilges. The gentlest of currents kept my mooring line just less than
taut between the canoe and a half-sunken snag in the middle of the
bayou. Louisiana heat and swampland mosquitoes tried casually to annoy
me, and casually I ignored them both.

There was a sudden thump on the canoe and I sat upright just as a slimy
black something rose out of the muddy depths. It came swiftly until the
bow of the canoe rested on it, and then more slowly. My end of the
slender craft sank and a small cascade of blood-warm water rushed on,
and down, my neck. Patty raised her head with a whimper; if she moved
suddenly I knew the canoe would roll over and dump us into the bayou.
“Don’t move!” I gasped.

She turned puzzled young eyes on me, astonished to find herself looking
downward. “Why, daddy?” she asked, and sat up. So the canoe did roll
over and it did dump us into the bayou.

I came up strangling, hysterical revulsion numbing my feet and legs
where they had plunged into the soft ooze at the bottom. “Patty!” I
screamed hoarsely.

She popped up beside me, trod water while she knuckled her eyes. “I
thought we wasn’t allowed to swim in the bayou, daddy,” she said.

I cast about me. Both banks presented gnarled roots buried in rich green
swamp growth, and I knew that the mud there was deep and sticky and
soft. I knew that that kind of mud clutches and smothers. I knew that
wherever we could find a handhold we could also find cottonmouth
moccasins. So I knew that we had to get into our canoe again, but fast!

Turning, I saw it, one end sunken, the other high in the air, one thwart
fouled in the black tentacles of the thing that had risen under us. It
was black and knotted and it dripped slime down on us, and for one
freezing second I thought it was alive. It bobbed ever so slowly,
sluggishly, in the disturbed water. It was like breathing. But it made
no further passes at us. I told Patty to stay where she was and swam
over to what I could reach of the canoe and tugged. The spur that held
it came away rottenly and the canoe splashed down, gunwale first, and
slowly righted itself half full of water. I heard a shriek of insane
laughter from somewhere in the swamp but paid no attention. I could
attend to that later.

We clung to the gunwales while I tried to think of a way out. Patty kept
looking up and down the bayou as if she thought she hadn’t enough eyes.
“What are you looking for, Patty?”

“Alligators,” she said.

Yeah, I mused, that’s a thought. We’ve got to get out of here! I felt as
if I were being watched and looked quickly over my shoulder. Before my
eyes could focus on it, something ducked behind a bush on the bank. The
bush waved its fronds at me in the still air. I looked back at Patty—

_“Patty! Look out!”_

The twisted black thing that had upset us was coming down, moving faster
as it came, and as I shrieked my warning its tangled mass came down on
the child. She yelped and went under, fighting the slippery fingers.

I lunged toward her. “Patty!” I screamed. “Pat—”

The bayou bubbled where she had been. I dived, wrenching at the filthy
thing that had caught her. Later—it seemed like minutes later, but it
couldn’t have been more than five seconds—my frantic hand closed on her
arm. I thrust the imprisoning filth back, hauled her free, and we broke
surface. Patty, thank Heaven, remained perfectly still with her arms as
far around me as they would go. Lord knows what might have happened if
she had struggled.

We heard the roar of a bull alligator and that was about all we needed.
We struck out for the bank, clawed at it. Fortunately Patty’s hands fell
on a root, and she scuttled up it like a little wet ape. I wasn’t so
lucky—it was fetid black mud that I floundered through. We lay gasping,
at last on solid ground.

“Mother’s gonna be mad,” said Patty after a time.

“Mother’s going to gnash her teeth and froth at the mouth,” I said with
a good deal more accuracy. We looked at each other and one of the
child’s eyes closed in an eloquent wink. “Oh, yeah,” I said, “and how
did we lose the canoe?”

Patty thought hard. “We were paddling along an’ a big fella scared you
with a gun and stoled our canoe.”

“How you talk! I wouldn’t be scared!”

“Oh, _yes_ you would,” she said with conviction.

I repressed an unpaternal impulse to throw her back into the bayou.
“That won’t do. Mother would be afraid to have a man with a gun stompin’
around the bayou. Here it is. We saw some flowers and got out to pick
them for mother. When we came back we found the canoe had drifted out
into the bayou, and we knew she wouldn’t want us to swim after it, so we
walked home.”

She entered into it with a will. “Silly of us, wasn’t it?” she asked.

“Sure was,” I said. “Now get those dungarees off so’s I can wash the mud
out of ’em.”

A sun suit for Patty and bathing trunks for me were our household garb;
when we went out for the afternoon we pulled on blue denim shirts and
slacks over them to ward off the venomous mosquitoes. We stripped off
the dungarees and I searched the bank and found a root broad enough for
me to squat on while I rinsed off the worst of the filth we had picked
up in our scramble up the bank. Patty made herself comfortable on a bed
of dry Spanish moss that she tore out of the trees. As I worked, a
movement in midstream caught my eye. A black tentacle poked up out of
the water, and, steadily then, the slimy branches of the thing that had
foundered us came sloshing into the mottled sunlight. It was a horrible
sight, the horror of which was completely dispelled by the sight of the
sleek green flank of the canoe which bobbed up beside it.

I ran back up my root, tossed the wet clothes on a convenient branch,
broke a long stick off a dead tree and reached out over the water. I
could just reach one end of the canoe. Slowly I maneuvered it away from
its black captor and pulled it to me. I went into mud up to my knees in
the process but managed to reach it; and then it was but the work of a
moment to beach it, empty out the water and set it safely with its stern
on the bank. Then I pegged out our clothes in a patch of hot sunlight
and went back to Patty.

She was lying on her back with her hands on her eyes, shielding them
from the light. Apparently she had not seen me rescue the canoe. I
glanced at it and just then saw the slimy mass in mid-bayou start
sinking again.

“Daddy,” she said drowsily, “what was that awful thing that sinked us?”

“What they call a sawyer,” I said. “It’s the waterlogged butt of a
cypress tree. The bottom is heavy and the top is light, and when the
roots catch in something on the bottom the current pushes the top under.
Then one of the branches rots and falls off, and the top end gets light
again and floats up. Then the current will push it down again. It’ll
keep that up for weeks.”

“Oh,” she said. After a long, thoughtful pause she said, “Daddy—”

“What?”

“Cover me up.” I grinned and tore down masses of moss with which I
buried her. Her sleepy sigh sounded from under the pile. I lay down in
the shade close by, switching lazily at mosquitoes.

I must have dozed for a while. I woke with a start, fumbling through my
mind for the thing that had disturbed me. My first glance was at the
pile of moss; all seemed well there. I turned my head. About eight
inches from my face was a pair of feet.

I stared at them. They were bare and horny and incredibly scarred. Flat,
too—splayed. The third toe of each foot was ever so much longer than any
of the others. They were filthy. Attached to the feet was a scrawny pair
of ankles; the rest was out of my range of vision. I debated sleepily
whether or not I had seen enough, suddenly realized that there was
something not quite right about this, and bounced to my feet.

I found myself staring into the blazing eye of the most disgusting old
hag that ever surpassed imagination. She looked like a Cartier
illustration. Her one good eye was jaundiced and mad; long,
slanted—feline. It wasn’t until long afterward that I realized that her
pupil was not round but slitted—but not vertically like a cat’s eyes,
but horizontally. Her other eye looked like—well, I’d rather not say. It
couldn’t possibly have been of any use to her. Her nose would have been
hooked if the tip were still on it. She was snaggle-toothed, and her
fangs were orange. One shoulder was higher than the other, and the
jagged lump on it spoke of a permanent dislocation. She had enough skin
to adequately cover a sideshow fat lady, but she couldn’t have weighed
more than eighty pounds or so. I never saw great swinging wattles on a
person’s upper arms before. She was clad in a feathered jigsaw of bird
and small animal skins. She was diseased and filthy and—and evil.

And she spoke to me in the most beautiful contralto voice I have ever
heard.

“How you get away from River Spider?” she demanded.

“River Spider?”

She pointed, and I saw the sawyer rising slowly from the bayou.
“Oh—that.” I found that if I avoided that baleful eye I got my speech
back. I controlled an impulse to yell at her, chase her away. If Patty
woke up and saw that face—

“What’s it to you?” I asked quietly, just managing to keep my voice
steady.

“I send River Spider for you,” she said in her Cajun accent.

“Why?” If I could mollify her—she was manifestly furious at something,
and it seemed to be me—perhaps she’d go her way without waking the
child.

“Because you mus’ go!” she said. “This my countree. This swamp belong
Séleen. Séleen belong this swamp. Wan man make _p’tit cabane_ in bayou,
Séleen _l’enchante_. Man die far away, smash.”

“You mean you haunted the man who had my cabin built and he died?” I
grinned. “Don’t be silly.”

“Man is dead, no?”

I nodded. “That don’t cut ice with me, old lady. Now look—we aren’t
hurting your old swamp. We’ll get out of it, sure; but we’ll go when
we’re good and ready. You leave us alone and we’ll sure as hell”—I
shuddered, looking at her—“leave you alone.”

“You weel go _now—ce jour!”_ She screamed the last words, and the pile
of moss behind me rustled suddenly.

“I won’t go today or tomorrow or next week,” I snapped. I stepped toward
her threateningly. “Now beat it!”

She crouched like an animal, her long crooked hands half raised. From
behind me the moss moved briskly, and Patty’s voice said, “Daddy,
what … oh. _Ohh!”_

That does it, I said to myself, and lunged at the old woman with some
crazy idea of shoving her out of the clearing. She leaped aside like a
jackrabbit and I tripped and fell on my two fists, which dug into my
solar plexus agonizingly. I lay there mooing “uh! uh! u-u-uh!” trying to
get some wind into my lungs, and finally managed to get an elbow down
and heave myself over on my side. I looked, and saw Séleen crouched
beside Patty. The kid sat there, white as a corpse, rigid with terror,
while the old nightmare crooned to her in her lovely voice.

_“Ah! C’est une jolie jeune-fille, ça! Ah, ma petite, ma fleur douce,
Séleen t’aime, trop, trop_—_”_ and she put out her hand and stroked
Patty’s neck and shoulder.

When I saw the track of filth her hand left on the child’s flesh, a
white flame exploded in my head and dazzled me from inside. When I could
see again I was standing beside Patty, the back of one hand aching and
stinging; and Séleen was sprawled eight feet away, spitting out blood
and yellow teeth and frightful curses.

“Go away.” I whispered it because my throat was all choked up.
“Get—out—of—here—before—I—kill you!”

She scrambled to her knees, her blazing eye filled with hate and terror,
shook her fist and tottered swearing away into the heavy swamp growth.

When she had gone I slumped to the ground, drenched with sweat, cold
outside, hot inside, weak as a newborn babe from reaction. Patty crawled
to me, dropped her head in my lap, pressed the back of my hand to her
face and sobbed so violently that I was afraid she would hurt herself. I
lifted my hand and stroked her hair. “It’s all right, now, Patty—don’t
be a little dope, now—come on,” I said more firmly, lifting her face by
its pointed chin and holding it until she opened her eyes. “Who’s
Yehudi?”

She gulped bravely. “Wh-who?” she gasped.

“The little man who turns on the light in the refrigerator when you open
the door,” I said. “Let’s go find out what’s for dinner.”

“I … I—” She puckered all up the way she used to do when she slept in a
bassinet—what I used to call “baby’s slow burn.” And then she wailed the
same way. “I don’ want dinno-o-o!”

I thumped her on the back, picked her up and dropped her on top of her
dungarees. “Put them pants on,” I said, “and be a man.” She did, but she
cried quietly until I shook her and said gently, “Stop it now. I didn’t
carry on like that when I was a little girl.” I got into my clothes and
dumped her into the bow of the canoe and shoved off.

All the way back to the cabin I forced her to play one of our pet games.
I would say something—anything—and she would try to say something that
rhymed with it. Then it would be her turn. She had an extraordinary
rhythmic sense, and an excellent ear.

I started off with “We’ll go home and eat our dinners.”

“An’ Lord have mercy on us sinners,” she cried. Then, “Let’s see you
find a rhyme for ‘month’!”

“I bet I’ll do it … jutht thith onthe,” I replied. “I guess I did it
then, by cracky.”

“Course you did, but then you’re wacky. Top that, mister funny-lookin’!”

I pretended I couldn’t, mainly because I couldn’t, and she soundly
kicked my shin as a penance. By the time we reached the cabin she was
her usual self, and I found myself envying the resilience of youth. And
she earned my undying respect by saying nothing to Anjy about the
afternoon’s events, even when Anjy looked us over and said, “Just look
at you two filthy kids! What have you been doing—swimming in the bayou?”

“Daddy splashed me,” said Patty promptly.

“And you had to splash him back. Why did he splash you?”

“ ’Cause I spit mud through my teeth at him to make him mad,” said my
outrageous child.

“Patty!”

“Mea culpa,” I said, hanging my head. “ ’Twas I who spit the mud.”

Anjy threw up her hands. “Heaven knows what sort of a woman Patty’s
going to grow up to be,” she said, half angrily.

“A broad-minded and forgiving one like her lovely mother,” I said
quickly.

“Nice work, bud,” said Patty.

Anjy laughed. “Outnumbered again. Come in and feed the face.”

On my next trip into Minette I bought a sweet little S. & W. ̣ 38 and
told Anjy it was for alligators. She was relieved.

I might have forgotten about the hag Séleen if it were not for the
peculiar chain of incidents which had led to our being here. We had
started with some vague idea of spending a couple of months in Natchez
or New Orleans, but a gas station attendant had mentioned that there was
a cabin in the swamps for rent very cheap down here. On investigation we
found it not only unbelievably cheap, but deep in real taboo country.
Not one of the natives, hardened swamp runners all, would go within a
mile of it. It had been built on order for a very wealthy Northern
gentleman who had never had a chance to use it, due to a swift argument
he and his car had had one day when he turned out to pass a bridge. A
drunken rice farmer told me that it was all the doing of the Witch of
Minette, a semimythological local character who claimed possession of
that corner of the country. I had my doubts, being a writer of voodoo
stories and knowing therefore that witches and sech are nonsense.

After my encounter with Séleen I no longer doubted her authenticity as a
horrid old nightmare responsible for the taboo. But she could rant,
chant, and ha’nt from now till a week come Michaelmas—when _is_
Michaelmas, anyway?—and never pry me loose from that cabin until I was
ready to go. She’d have to fall back on enchantment to do it, too—of
that I was quite, quite sure. I remembered her blazing eye as it had
looked when I struck her, and I knew that she would never dare to come
within my reach again. If she as much as came within my sight with her
magics I had a little hocus-pocus of my own that I was sure was more
powerful than anything she could dream up. I carried it strapped to my
waist, in a holster, and while it couldn’t call up any ghosts, it was
pretty good at manufacturing ’em.

As for Patty, she bounced resiliently away from the episode. Séleen she
dubbed the Witch of Endor, and used her in her long and involved games
as an archvillain in place of Frankenstein’s monster, Adolf Hitler, or
Miss McCauley, her schoolteacher. Many an afternoon I watched her from
the hammock on the porch, cooking up dark plots in the witch’s behalf
and then foiling them in her own coldbloodedly childish way. Once or
twice I had to put a stop to it, like the time I caught her hanging the
Witch of Endor in effigy, the effigy being a rag doll, its poor throat
cut with benefit of much red paint. Aside from these games she never
mentioned Séleen, and I respected her for it. I saw to it that she
didn’t stray alone into the swamp and relaxed placidly into my role of
watchful skeptic. It’s nice to feel oneself superior to a credulous
child.

Foolish, too. I didn’t suspect a thing when Patty crept up behind me and
hacked off a lock of my hair with my hunting knife. She startled me and
I tumbled out of the hammock onto my ear as she scuttled off. I muttered
imprecations at the little demon as I got back into the hammock, and
then comforted myself by the reflection that I was lucky to have an ear
to fall on—that knife was sharp.

A few minutes later Anjy came out to the porch. Anjy got herself that
name because she likes to wear dresses with masses of tiny pleats and
things high on her throat, and great big picture hats. So _ingenue_ just
naturally became Anjy. She is a beautiful woman with infinite faith and
infinite patience, the proof of which being that: a—she married me, and
b—she stayed married to me.

“Jon, what sort of crazy game is your child playing?” She always said
“your child” when she was referring to something about Patty she didn’t
like.

“S’matter?”

“Why, she just whipped out that hog-sticker of yours and made off with a
hank of my hair.”

“No! Son of a gun! What’s she doing—taking up barbering? She just did
the same thing to me. Thought she was trying to scalp me and
miscalculated, but I must have been wrong—she wouldn’t miss twice in a
row.”

“Well, I want you to take that knife away from her,” said Anjy. “It’s
dangerous.”

I got out of the hammock and stretched. “Got to catch her first. Which
way’d she go?”

After a protracted hunt I found Patty engaged in some childish ritual of
her own devising. She pushed something into a cleft at the foot of a
tree, backed off a few feet, and spoke earnestly. Neither of us could
hear a word she said. Then she backed still farther away and squatted
down on her haunches, watching the hole at the foot of the tree
carefully.

Anjy clasped her hands together nervously, opened her mouth. I put my
hands over it. “Let me take care of it,” I whispered, and went out.

“Whatcha doin’, bud?” I called to Patty as I came up. She started
violently and raised one finger to her lips. “Catchin’ rabbits?” I asked
as loudly as I could without shouting. She gestured me furiously away. I
went and sat beside her.

“Please, daddy,” she said. “I’m making a magic. It won’t work if you
stay here. Just this once—please!”

“Nuts,” I said bluntly. “I chased all the magic away when I moved here.”

She tried to be patient. “Will you _please_ go away? Oh, daddy. Daddy,
PLEASE!”

It was rough but I felt I had to do it. I lunged for her, swept her up,
and carried her kicking and squalling back to the cabin. “Sorry, kiddo,
but I don’t like the sort of game you’re playing. You ought to trust
your dad.”

I meant to leave her with Anjy while I went out to confiscate that
bundle of hair. Not that I believe in such nonsense. But I’m the kind of
unsuperstitious apple that won’t walk under a ladder _just in case_
there’s something in the silly idea. But Patty really began to throw a
whingding, and there was nothing for me to do but to stand by until it
had run its course. Patty was such a good-natured child, and only
good-natured children can work themselves up into that kind of froth.
She screamed and she bit, and she accused us of spoiling everything and
we didn’t love her and she wished she was dead and why couldn’t we leave
her alone—“Let me alone,” she shrieked, diving under the double bed and
far beyond our reach. “Take your _hands_ off me!” she sobbed when she
was ten feet away from us and moving fast. And then her screams became
wordless and agonized when we cornered her in the kitchen. We had to be
rough to hold her, and her hysteria was agony to us. It took more than
an hour for her fury to run its course and leave her weeping weak
apologies and protestations of love into her mother’s arms. Me, I was
bruised outside and in, but inside it hurt the worst. I felt like a
heel.

I went out then to the tree. I reached in the cleft for the hair but it
was gone. My hand closed on something far larger, and I drew it out and
stood up to look at it.

It was a toy canoe, perhaps nine inches long. It was an exquisite piece
of work. It had apparently been carved painstakingly from a solid piece
of cedar, so carefully that nowhere was the wood any more than an eighth
of an inch thick. It was symmetrical and beautifully finished in
brilliant colors. They looked to me like vegetable stains—dyes from the
swamp plants that grew so riotously all around us. From stem to stern
the gunwales were pierced, and three strips of brilliant bark had been
laced and woven into the close-set holes. Inside the canoe were four
wooden spurs projecting from the hull, the end of each having a hole
drilled through it, apparently for the purpose of lashing something
inside.

I puzzled over it for some minutes, turning it over and over in my
hands, feeling its velvet smoothness, amazed by its metrical delicacy.
Then I laid it carefully on the ground and regarded the mysterious tree.

Leafless branches told me it was dead. I got down on my knees and
rummaged deep into the hole between the roots. I couldn’t begin to touch
the inside wall. I got up again, circled the tree. A low branch
projected, growing sharply upward close to the trunk before it turned
and spread outward. And around it were tiny scuff marks in the bark. I
pulled myself up onto the branch, cast about for a handhold to go
higher. There was none. Puzzled, I looked down—and there, completely
hidden from the ground, was a gaping hole leading into the hollow trunk!

I thrust my head into it and then clutched the limb with both arms to
keep from tottering out of the tree. For that hole reeked with the most
sickly, noisome smell I had encountered since … since Patty and I—

_Séleen!_

I dropped to the ground and backed away from the tree. The whole world
seemed in tune with my revulsion. What little breeze there had been had
stopped, and the swampland was an impossible painting in which only I
moved.

Never taking my eyes off the tree, I went back step by step, feeling
behind me until my hand touched the wall of the cabin. My gaze still
riveted to the dead bole of the tree, I felt along the wall until I came
to the kitchen door. Reaching inside, I found my ax and raced back. The
blade was keen and heavy, and the haft of it felt good to me. The wood
was rotten, honeycombed, and the clean blade bit almost noiselessly into
it. _Thunk!_ How dare she, I thought. What does she mean by coming so
near us! _Thunk!_ I prayed that the frightful old hag would try to
fight, to flee, so that I could cut her down with many strokes. It was
my first experience with the killer instinct and I found it good.

The sunlight faded out of the still air and left it hotter.

At the uppermost range of my vision I could see the trunk trembling with
each stroke of the ax. Soon, now—soon! I grinned and my lips cracked;
every other inch of my body was soaking wet. She who would fill Patty’s
clean young heart with her filthy doings! Four more strokes would do it;
and then I remembered that skinny hand reaching out, touching Patty’s
flesh; and I went cold all over. I raised the ax and heard it hiss
through the thick air; and my four strokes were one. Almost without
resistance that mighty stroke swished into and through the shattered
trunk. The hurtling ax head swung me around as the severed tree settled
onto its stump. It fell, crushing its weight into the moist earth,
levering itself over on its projecting root; and the thick bole slid
toward me, turned from it as I was, off balance. It caught me on the
thigh, kicking out at me like a sentient, vicious thing. I turned over
and over in the air and landed squashily at the edge of the bayou. But I
landed with my eyes on the tree, ready to crawl, if need be, after
whatever left it.

Nothing left it. Nothing. There had been nothing there, then, but the
stink of her foul body. I lay there weakly, weeping with pain and
reaction. And when I looked up again I saw Séleen again—or perhaps it
was a crazed vision. She stood on a knoll far up the bayou, and as I
watched she doubled up with silent laughter. Then she straightened and
lifted her arm; and, dangling from her fingers, I saw the tiny bundle of
hair. She laughed again though I heard not a sound. I knew then that she
had seen every bit of it—had stood there grinning at my frantic
destruction of her accursed tree. I lunged toward her, but she was far
away, and across the water; and at my movement she vanished into the
swamp.

I dragged myself to my feet and limped toward the cabin. I had to pass
the tree, and as I did the little canoe caught my eye. I tucked it under
my arm and crept back to the cabin. I tripped on the top step of the
porch and fell sprawling, and I hadn’t strength to rise. My leg was an
agony, and my head spun and spun.

Then I was inside and Anjy was sponging off my head, and she laughed
half hysterically when I opened my eyes. “Jon, Jon, beloved, what have
you done? Who did this to you?”

“Who … heh!” I said weakly. “A damn fool, sweetheart. Me!” I got up and
stood rockily. “How’s Pat?”

“Sleeping,” said Anjy. “Jon, what on earth is happening?”

“I don’t know,” I said slowly, and looked out through the window at the
fallen tree. “Anjy, the kid took that hair she swiped and probably some
of her own and poked it all into that tree I just cut down. It—seems
important for me to get it back. Dunno why. It … anyway, I got out there
as soon as we had Pat quieted, but the hair had disappeared in the
meantime. All I found was this.” I handed her the canoe.

She took it absently. “Pat told me her story. Of course it’s just silly,
but she says that for the past three days that tree has been talking to
her. She says it sang to her and played with her. She’s convinced it’s a
magic tree. She says it promised her a lovely present if she would poke
three kinds of hair into a hole at the roots, but if she told anyone the
magic wouldn’t work.” Anjy looked down at the little canoe and her
forehead puckered. “Apparently it worked,” she whispered.

I couldn’t comment without saying something about Séleen, and I didn’t
want that on Anjy’s mind, so I turned my back on her and stood looking
out into the thick wet heat of the swamp.

Behind me I heard Patty stir, shriek with delight as she saw the canoe.
“My present … my pretty present! It was a _real_ magic!” And Anjy gave
it to her.

I pushed down an impulse to stop her. As long as Séleen had the hair the
harm was done.

Funny, how suddenly I stopped being a skeptic.

The silence of the swamp was shattered by a great cloud of birds—birds
of every imaginable hue and size, screaming and cawing and chuckling and
whirring frantically. They startled me and I watched them for many
minutes before it dawned on me that they were all flying one way. The
air grew heavier after they had gone. Anjy came and stood beside me.

And then it started to rain.

I have never seen such rain, never dreamed of it. It thundered on the
shingles, buckshotted the leaves of the trees, lashed the mirrored bayou
and the ground alike, so that the swamp was but one vast brown stream of
puckered mud.

Anjy clutched my arm. “Jon, I’m frightened!” I looked at her and knew
that it wasn’t the rain that had whitened her lips, lit the fires of
terror in her great eyes. “Something out there_—hates_ us,” she said
simply.

I shook her off, threw a poncho over me. “Jon—you’re not—”

“I got to,” I gritted. I went to the door, hesitated, turned back and
pressed the revolver into her hand. “I’ll be all right,” I said, and
flung out into the storm. Anjy didn’t try to stop me.

I knew I’d find the hag Séleen. I knew I’d find her unharmed by the
storm, for was it not a thing of her own devising? And I knew I must
reach her—quickly, before she used that bundle of hair. Why, and how did
I know? Ask away. I’m still asking myself, and I have yet to find an
answer.

I stumbled and floundered, keeping to the high ground, guided, I think,
by my hate. After a screaming eternity I reached a freakish rocky knoll
that thrust itself out of the swamp. It was cloven and cracked, full of
passages and potholes; and from an opening high on one side I saw the
guttering glare of firelight. I crept up the rough slope and peered
within.

She crouched over the flames, holding something to her withered breast
and crooning to it. The rock walls gathered her lovely, hateful voice
and threw it to me clear and strong—to me and to the turgid bayou that
seethed past the cleft’s lower edge.

She froze as my eyes fell upon her, sensing my presence; but like many
another animal she hadn’t wit enough to look upward. In a moment she
visibly shrugged off the idea, and she turned and slid and shambled down
toward the bayou. Above her, concealed by the split rock, I followed her
until we were both at the water’s edge with only a four-foot stone
rampart between us. I could have reached her easily then, but I didn’t
dare attack until I knew where she had hidden that bundle of hair.

The wind moaned, rose an octave. The rain came in knives instead of
sheets. I flattened myself against the rock while Séleen shrank back
into the shelter of the crevice. I will never know how long we were
there, Séleen and I, separated by a few boulders, hate a tangible thing
between us. I remember only a shrieking hell of wind and rubble, and
then the impact of something wet and writhing and whimpering against me.
It had come rolling and tumbling down the rocky slope and it lodged
against me. I was filled with horror until I realized that it sheltered
me a little against the blast. I found the strength to turn and look at
it finally. It was Patty.

I got her a little under me and stuck it out till the wind had done its
work and was gone, and with it all the deafening noise—all but the rush
of the bayou and Séleen’s low chuckle.

“Daddy—” She was cut and battered. “I brought my little boat!” She held
it up weakly.

“Yes, butch. Sure. That’s dandy. Patty—what happened to mother?”

“She’s back there,” whimpered Patty. “The cabin sagged, like, an’ began
m-movin’, an’ then it just fell apart an’ the bits all flew away. I
couldn’ find her so I came after you.”

I lay still, not breathing. I think even my heart stopped for a little
while.

Patty’s whisper sounded almost happy. “Daddy—I—hurt—all—over—”

Anjy was gone then. I took my hatred instead, embraced it and let it
warm me and give me life and hope and strength the way she used to. I
crawled up the rock and looked over. I could barely see the hag, but she
was there. Something out in the bayou was following the rhythmic
movement of her arms. Something evil, tentacled, black. Her twisted
claws clutched a tiny canoe like the one she had left in the tree for
Patty. And she sang:

River Spider, black and strong,

Folks ’bout here have done me wrong.

Here’s a gif’ I send to you,

Got some work for you to do.

If Anjy-woman miss the flood,

River Spider, drink her blood.

Little one was good to me,

Drown her quick and let her be.

River Spider, Jon you know,

Kill that man, and—kill—him—slow!

And Séleen bent and set the canoe on the foaming brown water. Our hair
was tied inside it.

Everything happened fast then. I dived from my hiding place behind and
above her, and as I did so I sensed that Patty had crept up beside me,
and that she had seen and heard it all. And some strange sense warned
Séleen, for she looked over her crooked shoulder, saw me in midair, and
leaped into the bayou. I had the terrified, malevolent gleam of her
single eye full in my face, but I struck only hard rock, and for me even
that baleful glow went out.

Patty sat cross-legged with my poor old head in her lap. It was such a
gray morning that the wounds on her face and head looked black to me. I
wasn’t comfortable, because the dear child was rolling my head back and
forth frantically in an effort to rouse me. The bones in my neck creaked
as she did it and I knew they could hear it in Scranton, Pennsylvania. I
transmitted a cautionary syllable but what she received was a regular
houn’-dawg howl.

“Owoo! Pat—”

“Daddy! Oh, you’re awake!” She mercifully stopped gyrating the world
about my tattered ears.

“What happened?” I moaned, half sitting up. She was so delighted to see
my head move that she scrambled out from under so that when the ache
inside it pounded it back down, it landed stunningly on the rock.

“Daddy darling, I’m sorry. But you got to stop layin’ around like that.
It’s time to get up!”

“Uh. How you know?”

“I’m hungry, that’s how, so there.”

I managed to sit up this time. I began to remember things and they hurt
so much that the physical pain didn’t matter any more. “Patty! We’ve got
to get back to the cabin!”

She puckered up. I tried to grin at her and she tried to grin back, and
there is no more tragedy left in the world for me after having seen
that. I did a sort of upward totter and got what was left of my feet and
legs under me. Both of us were a mess, but we could navigate.

We threaded our way back over a new, wrecked landscape. It was mostly
climbing and crawling and once when Patty slipped and I reached for her
I knocked the little canoe out of her hand. She actually broke and ran
to pick it up. “Daddy! You got to be careful of this!”

I groaned. It was the last thing in the world I ever wanted to see. But
then—Anjy had said that she should have it. And when she next dropped it
I picked it up and handed it back to her. And then snatched it again.

“Patty! What’s this?” I pointed to the little craft’s cargo: a tiny
bundle of hair.

“That’s the little bag from the tree, silly.”

“But how … where … I thought—”

“I made a magic,” she said with finality. “Now please, daddy, don’t
stand here and talk. We have to get back to … y-you know.”

If you don’t mind, I won’t go into detail about how we dragged trees and
rubbish away to find what was left of our cabin, and how we came upon
the pathetic little heap of shingles and screening and furniture and
how, wedged in the firm angle of two mortised two-by-fours, we found
Anjy. What I felt when I when I lifted her limp body away from the
rubble, when I kissed her pale lips—that is mine to remember. And what I
felt when those lips returned my kiss—oh, so faintly and so
tenderly—that, too, is mine.

We rested, the three of us, for five days. I found part of our store of
canned goods and a fishing line, though I’m sorry now that we ate any of
the fish, after what happened. And when the delirium was over, I got
Patty’s part of the story. I got it piecemeal, out of sequence, and only
after the most profound cross-questioning. But the general drift was
this:

She had indeed seen that strange performance in the rocky cleft by the
bayou; but what is more, by her childish mysticism, she understood it.
At least, her explanation is better than anything I could give. Patty
was sure that the River Spider that had attacked us that time in the
bayou was sent by Séleen, to whom she always referred as the Witch of
Endor. “She did it before, daddy, I jus’ betcha. But she didn’t have
anythin’ strong enough for to put on the canoe.” I have no idea what she
did use—flies, perhaps, or frogs or crayfish. “She hadda have some part
of us to make the magic, an’ she made me get it for her. She was goin’
to put that li’l ol’ hair ball in a canoe, an’ if a River Spider caught
it then the Spider would get us, too.”

When I made that crazed leap for the old woman she had nowhere to go but
into the bayou. Pat watched neither of us. She watched the canoe. She
always claimed that she hooked it to shore with a stick, but I have a
hunch that the little idiot plunged in after it. “They was one o’ those
big black sawyer things right there,” she said, “an’ it almos’ catched
the canoe. I had a lot of trouble.” I’ll bet she did.

“You know,” she said pensively, “I was mad at that ol’ Witch of Endor.
That was a mean thing she tried to do to us. So I did the same thing to
her. I catched the ugliest thing I could find—all crawly and nasty an’
bad like the Witch of Endor. I found a nice horrid one, too, you betcha.
An’ I tied him into my canoe with your shoelaces, daddy. You di’n’ say
not to. An’ I singed to it:

Ol’ Witch of Endor is your name,

An’ you an’ Witchie is the same;

Don’t think it’s a game.

She showed me later what sort of creature she had caught for her little
voodoo boat. Some call it a mud puppy and some call it a hellbender, but
it is without doubt the homeliest thing ever created. It is a sort of
aquatic salamander, anywhere from three inches to a foot and a half in
length. It has a porous, tubercular skin with two lateral streamers of
skin on each side; and these are always ragged and torn. The creature
always looks as if it is badly hurt. It has almost infinitesimal
fingered legs, and its black shoe-button eyes are smaller than the head
of a hatpin. For the hag Séleen there could be no better substitute.

“Then,” said Patty complacently, “I singed that song the way the Witch
of Endor did:

River Spider, black an’ strong,

Folks ’bout here have done me wrong.

Here’s a gif’ I send to you,

Got some work for you to do.

“The rest of the verse was silly,” said Pat, “but I had to think real
fast for a rhyme for ‘Witch of Endor’ an’ I used the first thing that I
could think of quicklike. It was somepin I read on your letters, daddy,
an’ it was silly.”

And that’s all she would say for the time being. But I do remember the
time she called me quietly down to the bayou and pointed out a sawyer to
me, because it was the day before Carson came in a power launch from
Minette to see if we had survived the hurricane; and Carson came six
days after the big blow. Patty made absolutely sure that her mother was
out of hearing, and then drew me by the hand down to the water’s edge.
“Daddy,” she said, “we got to keep this from mother on account of it
would upset her,” and she pointed.

Three or four black twisted branches showed on the water, and as I
watched they began to rise. A huge sawyer, the biggest I’d ever seen,
reared up and up—and tangled in its coils was a … a _something_.

Séleen had not fared well, tangled in the whips of the River Spider
under water for five days, in the company of all those little minnows
and crawfish.

Patty regarded it critically while my stomach looped itself around
violently and finally lodged between my spine and the skin of my back.
“She ain’t pretty a_-tall!”_ said my darling daughter. “She’s even
homelier’n a mud puppy, I betcha.”

As we walked back toward the lean-to we had built, she prattled on in
this fashion: “Y’know, daddy, that was a real magic. I thought my verse
was a silly one but I guess it worked out right after all. Will you
laugh if I tell you what it was?”

I said I did not feel like laughing.

“Well,” said Patty shyly, “I said:

Spider, kill the Witch of Endor

If five days lapse, return to sender.

That’s my daughter.



KILLDOZER!


_Before the race was the deluge, and before the deluge another race,
whose nature it is not for mankind to understand. Not unearthly, not
alien, for this was their earth and their home_.

_There was a war between this race, which was a great one, and another.
The other was truly alien, a sentient cloudform, an intelligent grouping
of tangible electrons. It was spawned in mighty machines by some
accident of a science beyond our aboriginal conception of technology.
And then the machines, servants of the people, became the people’s
masters, and great were the battles that followed. The electron-beings
had the power to warp the delicate balances of atom-structure, and their
life-medium was metal, which they permeated and used to their own ends.
Each weapon the people developed was possessed and turned against them,
until a time when the remnants of that vast civilization found a
defense—_

_An insulator. The terminal product or by-product of all energy
research—neutronium_.

_In its shelter they developed a weapon. What it was we shall never
know, and our race will live—or we shall know, and our race will perish
as theirs perished. Sent to destroy the enemy, it got out of hand and
its measureless power destroyed them with it, and their cities, and
their possessed machines. The very earth dissolved in flame, the crust
writhed and shook and the oceans boiled. Nothing escaped it, nothing
that we know as life, and nothing of the pseudo-life that had evolved
within the mysterious force-fields of their incomprehensible machines,
save one hardy mutant_.

_Mutant it was, and ironically this one alone could have been killed by
the first simple measures used against its kind—but it was past time for
simple expediences. It was an organized electron-field possessing
intelligence and mobility and a will to destroy, and little else.
Stunned by the holocaust, it drifted over the grumbling globe, and in a
lull in the violence of the forces gone wild on Earth, sank to the
steaming ground in its half-conscious exhaustion. There it found
shelter—shelter built by and for its dead enemies. An envelope of
neutronium. It drifted in, and its consciousness at last fell to its
lowest ebb. And there it lay while the neutronium, with its strange
constant flux, its interminable striving for perfect balance, extended
itself and closed the opening. And thereafter in the turbulent eons that
followed, the envelope tossed like a gray bubble on the surface of the
roiling sphere, for no substance on Earth would have it or combine with
it_.

_The ages came and went, and chemical action and reaction did their
mysterious work, and once again there was life and evolution. And a
tribe found the mass of neutronium, which is not a substance but a
static force, and were awed by its aura of indescribable chill, and they
worshiped it and built a temple around it and made sacrifices to it. And
ice and fire and the seas came and went, and the land rose and fell as
the years went by, until the ruined temple was on a knoll, and the knoll
was an island. Islanders came and went, lived and built and died, and
races forgot. So now, somewhere in the Pacific to the west of the
archipelago called Islas Revillagigeda, there was an uninhabited island.
And one day—_

CHUB HORTON AND Tom Jaeger stood watching the _Sprite_ and her squat tow
of three cargo lighters dwindle over the glassy sea. The big ocean-going
towboat and her charges seemed to be moving out of focus rather than
traveling away. Chub spat cleanly around the cigar that grew out of the
corner of his mouth.

“That’s that for three weeks. How’s it feel to be a guinea pig?”

“We’ll get it done.” Tom had little crinkles all around the outer ends
of his eyes. He was a head taller than Chub and rangy, and not so tough,
and he was a real operator. Choosing him as a foreman for the experiment
had been wise, for he was competent and he commanded respect. The theory
of airfield construction that they were testing appealed vastly to him,
for here were no officers-in-charge, no government inspectors, no
time-keeping or reports. The government had allowed the company a
temporary land grant, and the idea was to put production-line techniques
into the layout and grading of the project. There were six operators and
two mechanics and more than a million dollars’ worth of the best
equipment that money could buy. Government acceptance was to be on a
partially completed basis, and contingent on government standards. The
theory obviated both goldbricking and graft, and neatly sidestepped the
man-power problem. “When that black-topping crew gets here, I reckon
we’ll be ready for ’em,” said Tom.

He turned and scanned the island with an operator’s vision and saw it as
it was, and in all the stages it would pass through, and as it would
look when they had finished, with five thousand feet of clean-draining
runway, hard-packed shoulders, four acres of planepark, the access road
and the short taxiway. He saw the lay of each lift that the power shovel
would cut as it brought down the marl bluff, and the ruins on top of it
that would give them stone to haul down the salt-flat to the little
swamp at the other end, there to be walked in by the dozers.

“We got time to run the shovel up there to the bluff before dark.”

They walked down the beach toward the outcropping where the equipment
stood surrounded by crates and drums of supplies. The three tractors
were ticking over quietly, the two-cycle Diesel chuckling through their
mufflers and the big D-7 whacking away its metronomic compression knock
on every easy revolution. The Dumptors were lined up and silent, for
they would not be ready to work until the shovel was ready to load them.
They looked like a mechanical interpretation of Dr. Dolittle’s
“Pushme-pullyou,” the fantastic animal with two front ends. They had two
large driving wheels and two small steerable wheels. The motor and the
driver’s seat were side by side over the front—or smaller—wheels; but
the driver faced the dump body between the big rear wheels, exactly the
opposite of the way he would sit in a dump truck. Hence, in traveling
from shovel to dumping-ground, the operator drove backwards, looking
over his shoulder, and in dumping he backed the machine up but he
himself traveled forward—quite a trick for fourteen hours a day! The
shovel squatted in the midst of all the others, its great hulk looming
over them, humped there with its boom low and its iron chin on the
ground, like some great tired dinosaur.

Rivera, the Puerto Rican mechanic, looked up grinning as Tom and Chub
approached, and stuck a bleeder wrench into the top pocket of his
coveralls.

“She says ‘Sigalo,’ ” he said, his white teeth flashlighting out of the
smear of grease across his mouth. “She says she wan’ to get dirt on dis
paint.” He kicked the blade of the Seven with his heel.

Tom sent the grin back—always a surprising thing in his grave face.

“That Seven’ll do that, and she’ll take a good deal off her bitin’ edge
along with the paint before we’re through. Get in the saddle, Goony.
Build a ramp off the rocks down to the flat there, and blade us off some
humps from here to the bluff yonder. We’re walking the dipper up there.”

The Puerto Rican was in the seat before Tom had finished, and with a
roar the Seven spun in its length and moved back along the outcropping
to the inland edge. Rivera dropped his blade and the sandy marl curled
and piled up in front of the dozer, loading the blade and running off in
two even rolls at the ends. He shoved the load toward the rocky edge,
the Seven revving down as it took the load, _blat blat blatting_ and
pulling like a supercharged ox as it fired slowly enough for them to
count the revolutions.

“She’s a hunk of machine,” said Tom.

“A hunk of operator, too,” gruffed Chub, and added, “for a mechanic.”

“The boy’s all right,” said Kelly. He was standing there with them,
watching the Puerto Rican operate the dozer, as if he had been there all
along, which was the way Kelly always arrived places. He was tall, slim,
with green eyes too long and an easy stretch to the way he moved, like
an attenuated cat. He said, “Never thought I’d see the day when
equipment was shipped set up ready to run like this. Guess no one ever
thought of it before.”

“There’s times when heavy equipment has to be unloaded in a hurry these
days,” Tom said. “If they can do it with tanks, they can do it with
construction equipment. We’re doin’ it to build something instead, is
all. Kelly, crank up the shovel. It’s oiled. We’re walking it over to
the bluff.”

Kelly swung up into the cab of the big dipper-stick and, diddling the
governor control, pulled up the starting handle. The Murphy Diesel
snorted and settled down into a thudding idle. Kelly got into the
saddle, set up the throttle a little, and began to boom up.

“I still can’t get over it,” said Chub. “Not more’n a year ago we’d a
had two hundred men on a job like this.”

Tom smiled. “Yeah, and the first thing we’d have done would be to build
an office building, and then quarters. Me, I’ll take this way. No
timekeepers, no equipment-use reports, no progress and yardage
summaries, no nothin’ but eight men, a million bucks worth of equipment,
an’ three weeks. A shovel an’ a mess of tool crates’ll keep the rain off
us, an’ army field rations’ll keep our bellies full. We’ll get it done,
we’ll get out and we’ll get paid.”

Rivera finished the ramp, turned the Seven around and climbed it,
walking the new fill down. At the top he dropped his blade, floated it,
and backed down the ramp, smoothing out the rolls. At a wave from Tom he
started out across the shore, angling up toward the bluff, beating out
the humps and carrying fill into the hollows. As he worked, he sang,
feeling the beat of the mighty motor, the micro-metric obedience of that
vast implacable machine.

“Why doesn’t that monkey stick to his grease guns?”

Tom turned and took the chewed end of a match stick out of his mouth. He
said nothing, because he had for some time been trying to make a habit
of saying nothing to Joe Dennis. Dennis was an ex-accountant, drafted
out of an office at the last gasp of a defunct project in the West
Indies. He had become an operator because they needed operators badly.
He had been released with alacrity from the office because of his
propensity for small office politics. It was a game he still played, and
completely aside from his boiled-looking red face and his slightly
womanish walk, he was out of place in the field; for boot-licking and
back-stabbing accomplish even less out on the field than they do in an
office. Tom, trying so hard to keep his mind on his work, had to admit
to himself that of all Dennis’ annoying traits the worst was that he was
as good a pan operator as could be found anywhere, and no one could deny
it.

Dennis certainly didn’t.

“I’ve seen the day when anyone catching one of those goonies so much as
sitting on a machine during lunch would kick his fanny,” Dennis groused.
“Now they give ’em a man’s work and a man’s pay.”

_“Doin’_ a man’s work, ain’t he?” Tom said.

“He’s a damn Puerto Rican!”

Tom turned and looked at him levelly. “Where was it you said you come
from,” he mused. “Oh yeah. Georgia.”

“What do you mean by that?”

Tom was already striding away. “Tell you as soon as I have to,” he flung
back over his shoulder. Dennis went back to watching the Seven.

Tom glanced at the ramp and then waved Kelly on. Kelly set his
housebrake so the shovel could not swing, put her into travel gear, and
shoved the swing lever forward. With a crackling of drive chains and a
massive scrunching of compacting coral sand, the shovel’s great flat
pads carried her over and down the ramp. As she tipped over the peak of
the ramp the heavy manganese steel bucket-door gaped open and closed,
like a hungry mouth, slamming up against the bucket until suddenly it
latched shut and was quiet. The big Murphy Diesel crooned hollowly under
compression as the machine ran downgrade and then the sensitive governor
took hold and it took up its belly-beating thud.

Peebles was standing by one of the dozer-pan combines, sucking on his
pipe and looking out to sea. He was grizzled and heavy, and from under
the bushiest gray brows looked the calmest gray eyes Tom had ever seen.
Peebles had never gotten angry at a machine—a rare trait in a born
mechanic—and in fifty-odd years he had learned it was even less use
getting angry at a man. Because no matter what, you could always fix
what was wrong with a machine. He said around his pipestem:

“Hope you’ll give me back my boy, there.”

Tom’s lips quirked in a little grin. There had been an understanding
between old Peebles and himself ever since they had met. It was one of
those things which exists unspoken—they knew little about each other
because they had never found it necessary to make small talk to keep
their friendship extant. It was enough to know that each could expect
the best from the other, without persuasion.

“Rivera?” Tom asked. “I’ll chase him back as soon as he finishes that
service road for the dipper-stick. Why—got anything on?”

“Not much. Want to get that arc welder drained and flushed and set up a
grounded table in case you guys tear anything up.” He paused. “Besides,
the kid’s filling his head up with too many things at once. Mechanicing
is one thing; operating is something else.”

“Hasn’t got in his way much so far, has it?”

“Nope. Don’t aim t’ let it, either. ’Less you need him.”

Tom swung up on the pan tractor. “I don’t need him that bad, Peeby. If
you want some help in the meantime, get Dennis.”

Peebles said nothing. He spat. He didn’t say anything at all.

“What’s the matter with Dennis?” Tom wanted to know.

“Look yonder,” said Peebles, waving his pipestem. Out on the beach
Dennis was talking to Chub, in Dennis’ indefatigable style, standing
beside Chub, one hand on Chub’s shoulder. As they watched they saw
Dennis call his side-kick, Al Knowles.

“Dennis talks too much,” said Peebles. “That most generally don’t amount
to much, but that Dennis, he sometimes says too much. Ain’t got what it
takes to run a show, and knows it. Makes up for it by messin’ in between
folks.”

“He’s harmless,” said Tom.

Still looking up the beech, Peebles said slowly:

“Is, so far.”

Tom started to say something, then shrugged. “I’ll send you Rivera,” he
said, and opened the throttle. Like a huge electric dynamo, the
two-cycle motor whined to a crescendo. Tom lifted the dozer with a small
lever by his right thigh and raised the pan with the long control
sprouting out from behind his shoulder. He moved off, setting the rear
gate of the scraper so that anything the blade bit would run off to the
side instead of loading into the pan. He slapped the tractor into sixth
gear and whined up to and around the crawling shovel, cutting neatly in
under the boom and running on ahead with his scraper blade just touching
the ground, dragging to a fine grade the service road Rivera had cut.

Dennis was saying, “It’s that little Hitler stuff. Why should I take
that kind of talk? ‘You come from Georgia,’ he says. What is he—a Yankee
or something?”

“A crackah f’m Macon,” chortled Al Knowles, who came from Georgia, too.
He was tall and stringy and round-shouldered. All of his skill was in
his hands and feet, brains being a commodity he had lived without all
his life until he had met Dennis and used him as a reasonable facsimile
thereof.

“Tom didn’t mean nothing by it,” said Chub.

“No, he didn’t mean nothin’. Only that we do what he says the way he
says it, specially if he finds a way we don’t like it. _You_ wouldn’t do
like that, Chub. Al, think Chub would carry on thataway?”

“Sure wouldn’t,” said Al, feeling it expected of him.

“Nuts,” said Chub, pleased and uncomfortable, and thinking, what have I
got against Tom?—not knowing, not liking Tom as well as he had. “Tom’s
the man here, Dennis. We got a job to do—let’s skit and git. Man can
take anything for a lousy six weeks.”

“Oh, sho’,” said Al.

“Man can take just so much,” Dennis said. “What they put a man like that
on top for, Chub? What’s the matter with you? Don’t you know grading and
drainage as good as Tom? Can Tom stake out a side hill like you can?”

“Sure, sure, but what’s the difference, long as we get a field built?
An’ anyhow, hell with bein’ the boss-man. Who gets the blame if things
don’t run right, anyway?”

Dennis stepped back, taking his hand off Chub’s shoulder, and stuck an
elbow in Al’s ribs.

“You see that, Al? Now there’s a smart man. That’s the thing Uncle Tom
didn’t bargain for. Chub, you can count on Al and me to do just that
little thing.”

“Do just what little thing?” asked Chub, genuinely puzzled.

“Like you said. If the job goes wrong, the boss gets blamed. So, if the
boss don’t behave, the job goes wrong.”

“Uh-huh,” agreed Al with the conviction of mental simplicity.

Chub double-took this extraordinary logical process and grasped wildly
at anger as the conversation slid out from under him. “I didn’t say any
such thing! This job is goin’ to get done, no matter what! There’ll be
no damn goldbrick badge on me or anybody else around here if I can help
it.”

“Tha’s the ol’ fight,” feinted Dennis. “We’ll show that guy what we
think of his kind of slowdown.”

“You talk too much,” said Chub and escaped with the remnants of
coherence. Every time he talked with Dennis he walked away feeling as if
he had an unwanted membership card stuck in his pocket that he couldn’t
throw away with a clear conscience.

Rivera ran his road up under the bluff, swung the Seven around, punched
out the master clutch and throttled down, idling. Tom was making his
pass with the pan, and as he approached, Rivera slipped out of the seat
and behind the tractor, laying a sensitive hand on the final drive
casing and sprocket bushings, checking for overheating. Tom pulled
alongside and beckoned him up on the pan tractor.

“Que _pase_, Goony? Anything wrong?”

Rivera shook his head and grinned. “Nothing wrong. She is perfect, that
_‘De Siete.’_ She—”

“That what? ‘Daisy Etta’?”

“_De siete_. In Spanish, D-7. It means something in English?”

“Got you wrong,” smiled Tom. “But Daisy Etta is a girl’s name in
English, all the same.”

He shifted the pan tractor into neutral and engaged the clutch, and
jumped off the machine. Rivera followed. They climbed aboard the Seven,
Tom at the controls.

Rivera said “Daisy Etta,” and grinned so widely that a soft little
clucking noise came from behind his back teeth. He reached out his hand,
crooked his little finger around one of the tall steering clutch levers,
and pulled it all the way back. Tom laughed outright.

“You got something there,” he said. “The easiest runnin’ cat ever built.
Hydraulic steerin’, clutches and brakes that’ll bring you to a dead stop
if you spit on ’em. Forward an’ reverse lever so’s you got all your
speeds front and backwards. A little different from the old jobs. They
had no booster springs, eight-ten years ago; took a sixty-pound pull to
get a steerin’ clutch back. Cuttin’ a side-hill with an angle-dozer
really was a job in them days. You try it sometime, dozin’ with one
hand, holdin’ her nose out o’ the bank with the other, ten hours a day.
And what’d it get you? Eighty cents an hour an’ ”—Tom took his cigarette
and butted the fiery end out against the horny palm of his hand—“these.”

_“Santa Maria!”_

“Want to talk to you, Goony. Want to look over the bluff, too, at the
stone up there. It’ll take Kelly pret’ near an hour to get this far and
sumped in, anyhow.”

They growled up the slope, Tom feeling the ground under the four-foot
brush, taking her up in a zigzag course like a hairpin road on a
mountainside. Though the Seven carried a muffler on the exhaust stack
that stuck up out of the hood before them, the blat of the four big
cylinders hauling fourteen tons of steel upgrade could outshout any
man’s conversation, so they sat without talking. Tom driving, Rivera
watching his hands flick over the controls.

The bluff started in a low ridge running almost the length of the little
island, like a lopsided backbone. Toward the center it rose abruptly,
sent a wing out toward the rocky outcropping at the beach where their
equipment had been unloaded, and then rose again to a small, almost
square plateau area, half a mile across. It was humpy and rough until
they could see all of it, when they realized how incredibly level it
was, under the brush and ruins that covered it. In the center—and
exactly in the center they realized suddenly—was a low, overgrown mound.
Tom threw out the clutch and revved her down.

“Survey report said there was stone up here,” Tom said, vaulting out of
the seat. “Let’s walk around some.”

They walked toward the knoll, Tom’s eyes casting about as he went. He
stooped down into the heavy, short grass and scooped up a piece of
stone, blue-gray, hard and brittle.

“Rivera—look at this. This is what the report was talking about.
See—more of it. All in small pieces, though. We need big stuff for the
bog if we can get it.”

“Good stone?” asked Rivera.

“Yes, boy—but it don’t belong here. Th’ whole island’s sand and marl and
sandstone on the outcrop down yonder. This here’s a bluestone, like a
diamond clay. Harder’n blazes. I never saw this stuff on a marl hill
before. Or near one. Anyhow, root around and see if there is any big
stuff.”

They walked on. Rivera suddenly dipped down and pulled grass aside.

“Tom—here’s a beeg one.”

Tom came over and looked down at the corner of stone sticking up out of
the topsoil. “Yeh. Goony, get your girlfriend over here and we’ll root
it out.”

Rivera sprinted back to the idling dozer and climbed aboard. He brought
the machine over to where Tom waited, stopped, stood up and peered over
the front of the machine to locate the stone, then sat down and shifted
gears. Before he could move the machine Tom was on the fender beside
him, checking him with a hand on his arm.

“No, boy—no. Not third. First. And half throttle. That’s it. Don’t try
to bash a rock out of the ground. Go on up to it easy; set your blade
against it, lift it out, don’t boot it out. Take it with the middle of
your blade, not the corner—get the load on both hydraulic cylinders. Who
told you to do like that?”

“No one tol’ me, Tom. I see a man do it, I do it.”

“Yeah? Who was it?”

“Dennis, but—”

“Listen, Goony, if you want to learn anything from Dennis, watch him
while he’s on a pan. He dozes like he talks. That reminds me—what I
wanted to talk to you about. You ever have any trouble with him?”

Rivera spread his hands. “How I have trouble when he never talk to me?”

“Well, that’s all right then. You keep it that way. Dennis is O.K., I
guess, but you better keep away from him.”

He went on to tell the boy then about what Peebles had said concerning
being an operator and a mechanic at the same time. Rivera’s lean dark
face fell, and his hand strayed to the blade control, touching it
lightly, feeling the composition grip and the machined locknuts that
held it. When Tom had quite finished he said:

“O.K., Tom—if you want, you break ’em, I feex ’em. But if you wan’ help
some time, I run _Daisy Etta_ for you, no?”

“Sure, kid, sure. But don’t forget, no man can do everything.”

“You can do everything,” said the boy.

Tom leaped off the machine and Rivera shifted into first and crept up to
the stone, setting the blade gently against it. Taking the load, the
mighty engine audibly bunched its muscles; Rivera opened the throttle a
little and the machine set solidly against the stone, the tracks
slipping, digging into the ground, piling loose earth up behind. Tom
raised a fist, thumb up, and the boy began lifting his blade. The Seven
lowered her snout like an ox pulling through mud; the front of the
tracks buried themselves deeper and the blade slipped upward an inch on
the rock, as if it were on a ratchet. The stone shifted, and suddenly
heaved itself up out of the earth that covered it, bulging the sod aside
like a ship’s slow bow-wave. And the blade lost its grip and slipped
over the stone. Rivera slapped out the master clutch within an ace of
letting the mass of it poke through his radiator core. Reversing, he set
the blade against it again and rolled it at last into daylight.

Tom stood staring at it, scratching the back of his neck. Rivera got off
the machine and stood beside him. For a long time they said nothing.

The stone was roughly rectangular, shaped like a brick with one end cut
at about a thirty-degree angle. And on the angled face was a square-cut
ridge, like the tongue on a piece of milled lumber. The stone was 3 × 3
× 2 feet, and must have weighed six or seven hundred pounds.

“Now that,” said Tom, bug-eyed, “didn’t grow _here_, and if it did it
never grew that way.”

“_Una piedra de una casa,”_ said Rivera softly. “Tom, there was a
building here, no?”

Tom turned suddenly to look at the knoll.

“There is a building here—or what’s left of it. Lord on’y knows how
old—”

They stood there in the slowly dwindling light, staring at the knoll;
and there came upon them a feeling of oppression, as if there were no
wind and no sound anywhere. And yet there was a wind, and behind them
_Daisy Etta_ whacked away with her muttering idle, and nothing had
changed and—was that it? That nothing had changed? That nothing would
change, or could, here?

Tom opened his mouth twice to speak, and couldn’t, or didn’t want to—he
didn’t know which. Rivera slumped down suddenly on his hunkers, back
erect, and his eyes wide.

It grew very cold. “It’s cold,” Tom said, and his voice sounded harsh to
him. And the wind blew warm on them, the earth was warm under Rivera’s
knees. The cold was not a lack of heat, but a lack of something
else—warmth, but the specific warmth of life-force, perhaps. The feeling
of oppression grew, as if their recognition of the strangeness of the
place had started it, and their increasing sensitivity to it made it
grow.

Rivera said something, quietly, in Spanish.

“What are you looking at?” asked Tom.

Rivera started violently, threw up an arm, as if to ward off the crash
of Tom’s voice.

“I … there is nothin’ to see, Tom. I feel this way wance before. I
dunno—” He shook his head, his eyes wide and blank. “An’ after, there
was being wan hell of a thunderstorm—” His voice petered out.

Tom took his shoulder and hauled him roughly to his feet. “Goony! You
slap-happy?”

The boy smiled, almost gently. The down on his upper lip held little
spheres of sweat. “I ain’ nothin’, Tom. I’m jus’ scare like hell.”

“You scare yourself right back up there on that cat and git to work,”
Tom roared. More quietly then, he said, “I know there’s
something—wrong—here, Goony, but that ain’t goin’ to get us a runway
built. Anyway, I know what to do about a dawg ‘at gits gun-shy. Ought to
be able to do as much fer you. Git along to th’ mound now and see if it
ain’t a cache o’ big stone for us. We got a swamp down there to fill.”

Rivera hesitated, started to speak, swallowed and then walked slowly
over to Seven. Tom stood watching him, closing his mind to the
impalpable pressure of something, somewhere near, making his guts cold.

The bulldozer nosed over to the mound, grunting, reminding Tom suddenly
that the machine’s Spanish slang name was _puerco_—pig, boar. Rivera
angled into the edge of the mound with the cutting corner of the blade.
Dirt and brush curled up, fell away from the mound and loaded from the
bank side, out along the moldboard. The boy finished his pass along the
mound, carried the load past it and wasted it out on the flat, turned
around and started back again.

Ten minutes later Rivera struck stone, the manganese steel screaming
along it, a puff of gray dust spouting from the cutting corner. Tom
knelt and examined it after the machine had passed. It was the same kind
of stone they had found out on the flat—and shaped the same way. But
here it was a wall, the angled faces of the block ends obviously tongued
and grooved together.

Cold, cold as—

Tom took one deep breath and wiped sweat out of his eyes.

“I don’t care,” he whispered, “I got to have that stone. I got to fill
me a swamp.” He stood back and motioned to Rivera to blade into a
chipped crevice in the buried wall.

The Seven swung into the wall and stopped while Rivera shifted into
first, throttled down and lowered his blade. Tom looked up into his
face. The boy’s lips were white. He eased in the master clutch, the
blade dipped and the corner swung neatly into the crevice.

The dozer blatted protestingly and began to crab sideways, pivoting on
the end of the blade. Tom jumped out of the way, ran around behind the
machine, which was almost parallel with the wall now, and stood in the
clear, one hand raised ready to signal, his eyes on the straining blade.
And then everything happened at once.

With a toothy snap the block started and came free, pivoting outward
from its square end, bringing with it its neighbor. The block above them
dropped, and the whole mound seemed to settle. And _something_ whooshed
out of the black hole where the rocks had been. Something like a fog,
but not a fog that could be seen, something huge that could not be
measured. With it came a gust of that cold which was not cold, and the
smell of ozone, and the prickling crackle of a mighty static discharge.

Tom was fifty feet from the wall before he knew he had moved. He stopped
and saw the Seven suddenly buck like a wild stallion, once, and Rivera
turning over twice in the air. Tom shouted some meaningless syllable and
tore over to the boy, where he sprawled in the rough grass, lifted him
in his arms, and ran. Only then did he realize that he was running from
the machine.

It was like a mad thing. Its moldboard rose and fell. It curved away
from the mound, howling governor gone wild, controls flailing. The blade
dug repeatedly into the earth, gouging it up in great dips through which
the tractor plunged, clanking and bellowing furiously. It raced away in
a great irregular arc, turned and came snorting back to the mound, where
it beat at the buried wall, slewed and scraped and roared.

Tom reached the edge of the plateau sobbing for breath, and kneeling,
laid the boy gently down on the grass.

“Goony, boy … hey—”

The long silken eyelashes fluttered, lifted. Something wrenched in Tom
as he saw the eyes, rolled right back so that only the whites showed.
Rivera drew a long quivering breath which caught suddenly. He coughed
twice, threw his head from side to side so violently that Tom took it
between his hands and steadied it.

_“Ay … Maria madre … que me pasado_, Tom—w’at has happen to me?”

“Fell off the Seven, stupid. You … how you feel?”

Rivera scrabbled at the ground, got his elbows half under him, then sank
back weakly. “Feel O.K. Headache like hell. W-w’at happen to my feets?”

“Feet? They hurt?”

“No hurt—” The young face went gray, the lips tightened with effort. “No
nothin’, Tom.”

“You can’t move ’em?”

Rivera shook his head, still trying. Tom stood up. “You take it easy.
I’ll go get Kelly. Be right back.”

He walked very quickly and when Rivera called to him he did not turn
around. Tom had seen a man with a broken back before.

At the edge of the little plateau Tom stopped, listening. In the
deepening twilight he could see the bulldozer standing by the mound. The
motor was running; she had not stalled herself. But what stopped Tom was
that she wasn’t idling, but revving up and down as if an impatient hand
were on the throttle—_hroom hrooom_, running up and up far faster than
even a broken governor should permit, then coasting down to near
silence, broken by the explosive punctuation of sharp and irregular
firing. Then it would run up and up again, almost screaming, sustaining
a r.p.m. that threatened every moving part, shaking the great machine
like some deadly ague.

Tom walked swiftly toward the Seven, a puzzled and grim frown on his
weather-beaten face. Governors break down occasionally, and once in a
while you will have a motor tear itself to pieces, revving up out of
control. But it will either do that or it will rev down and quit. If an
operator is fool enough to leave his machine with the master clutch
engaged, the machine will take off and run the way the Seven had—but it
will not turn unless the blade corner catches in something unresisting,
and then the chances are very strong that it will stall. But in any
case, it was past reason for any machine to act this way, revving up and
down, running, turning, lifting and dropping the blade.

The motor slowed as he approached, and at last settled down into
something like a steady and regular idle. Tom had the sudden crazy
impression that it was watching him. He shrugged off the feeling, walked
up and laid a hand on the fender.

The Seven reacted like a wild stallion. The big Diesel roared, and Tom
distinctly saw the master clutch lever snap back over center. He leaped
clear, expecting the machine to jolt forward, but apparently it was in a
reverse gear, for it shot backwards, one track locked, and the near end
of the blade swung in a swift vicious arc, breezing a bare fraction of
an inch past his hip as he danced back out of the way.

And as if it had bounced off a wall, the tractor had shifted and was
bearing down on him, the twelve-foot blade rising, the two big
headlights looming over him on their bow-legged supports, looking like
the protruding eyes of some mighty toad. Tom had no choice but to leap
straight up and grasp the top of the blade in his two hands, leaning
back hard to brace his feet against the curved moldboard. The blade
dropped and sank into the soft topsoil, digging a deep little swale in
the ground. The earth loading on the moldboard rose and churned around
Tom’s legs; he stepped wildly, keeping them clear of the rolling drag of
it. Up came the blade then, leaving a four-foot pile at the edge of the
pit; down and up the tractor raced as the tracks went into it; up and up
as they climbed the pile of dirt. A quick balance and overbalance as the
machine lurched up and over like a motorcycle taking a jump off a ramp,
and then a spine-shaking crash as fourteen tons of metal smashed
blade-first into the ground.

Part of the leather from Tom’s tough palms stayed with the blade as he
was flung off. He went head over heels backwards, but had his feet
gathered and sprang as they touched the ground; for he knew that no
machine could bury its blade like that and get out easily. He leaped to
the top of the blade, got one hand on the radiator cap, vaulted.
Perversely, the cap broke from its hinge and came away in his hand, in
that split instant when only that hand rested on anything. Off balance,
he landed on his shoulder with his legs flailing the air, his body
sliding off the hood’s smooth shoulder toward the track now churning the
earth beneath. He made a wild grab at the air intake pipe, barely had it
in his fingers when the dozer freed itself and shot backwards up and
over the hump. Again that breathless fight pivoting over the top, and
the clanking crash as the machine landed, this time almost flat on its
tracks.

The jolt tore Tom’s hand away, and as he slid back over the hood the
crook of his elbow caught the exhaust stack, the dull red metal biting
into his flesh. He grunted and clamped the arm around it. His momentum
carried him around it, and his feet crashed into the steering clutch
levers. Hooking one with his instep, he doubled his legs and whipped
himself back, scrabbling at the smooth warm metal, crawling frantically
backward until he finally fell heavily into the seat.

“Now,” he gritted through the red wall of pain, “you’re gonna git
operated.” And he kicked out the master clutch.

The motor wailed, with the load taken off so suddenly. Tom grasped the
throttle, his thumb down on the ratchet release, and he shoved the lever
forward to shut off the fuel.

It wouldn’t shut off; it went down to a slow idle, but it wouldn’t shut
off.

“There’s one thing you can’t do without,” he muttered, “compression.”

He stood up and leaned around the dash, reaching for the
compression-release lever. As he came up out of the seat, the engine
revved up again. He turned to the throttle, which had snapped back into
the “open” position. As his hand touched it the master clutch lever
snapped in and the howling machine lurched forward with a jerk that
snapped his head on his shoulders and threw him heavily back into the
seat. He snatched at the hydraulic blade control and threw it to “float”
position; and then as the falling moldboard touched the ground, into
“power down.” The cutting edge bit into the ground and the engine began
to labor. Holding the blade control, he pushed the throttle forward with
his other hand. One of the steering clutch levers whipped back and
struck him agonizingly on the kneecap. He involuntarily let go of the
blade control and the moldboard began to rise. The engine began to turn
faster and he realized that it was not responding to the throttle.
Cursing, he leaped to his feet; the suddenly flailing steering clutch
levers struck him three times in the groin before he could get between
them.

Blind with pain, Tom clung gasping to the dash. The oil-pressure gauge
fell off the dash to his right, with a tinkling of broken glass, and
from its broken quarter-inch line scalding oil drenched him. The shock
of it snapped back his wavering consciousness. Ignoring the blows of the
left steering clutch and the master clutch which had started the same
mad punching, he bent over the left end of the dash and grasped the
compression lever. The tractor rushed forward and spun sickeningly, and
Tom knew he was thrown. But as he felt himself leave the decking his
hand punched the compression lever down. The great valves at the
cylinder heads opened and locked open; atomized fuel and superheated air
chattered out, and as Tom’s head and shoulders struck the ground the
great wild machine rolled to a stop, stood silently except for the
grumble of water boiling in the cooling system.

Minutes later Tom raised his head and groaned. He rolled over and sat
up, his chin on his knees, washed by wave after wave of pain. As they
gradually subsided, he crawled to the machine and pulled himself to his
feet, hand over hand on the track. And groggily he began to cripple the
tractor, at least for the night.

He opened the cock under the fuel tank, left the warm yellow fluid
gushing out on the ground. He opened the drain on the reservoir by the
injection pump. He found a piece of wire in the crank box and with it
tied down the compression release lever. He crawled up on the machine,
wrenched the hood and ball jar off the air intake precleaner, pulled off
his shirt and stuffed it down the pipe. He pushed the throttle all the
way forward and locked it with the locking pin. And he shut off the fuel
on the main line from the tank to the pump.

Then he climbed heavily to the ground and slogged back to the edge of
the plateau where he had left Rivera.

They didn’t know Tom was hurt until an hour and a half later—there had
been too much to do—rigging a stretcher for the Puerto Rican, building
him a shelter, an engine crate with an Army pup tent for a roof. They
brought out the first-aid-kit and the medical books and did what they
could—tied and splinted and dosed with an opiate. Tom was a mass of
bruises, and his right arm, where it had hooked the exhaust stack, was a
flayed mass. They fixed him up then, old Peebles handling the sulfa
powder and bandages like a trained nurse. And only then was there talk.

“I’ve seen a man thrown off a pan,” said Dennis, as they sat around the
coffee urn munching C rations. “Sittin’ up on the arm rest on a cat,
looking backwards. Cat hit a rock and bucked. Threw him off on the
track. Stretched him out ten feet long.” He in-whistled some coffee to
dilute the mouthful of food he had been talking around, and masticated
noisily. “Man’s a fool to set up there on the side of his butt even on a
pan. Can’t see why th’ goony was doin’ it on a dozer.”

“He wasn’t,” said Tom.

Kelly rubbed his pointed jaw. “He set flat on th’ seat an’ was th’owed?”

“That’s right.”

After an unbelieving silence Dennis said, “What was he doin’—drivin’
over sixty?”

Tom looked around the circle of faces lit up by the over-artificial
brilliance of a pressure lantern, and wondered what the reaction would
be if he told it all just as it was. He had to say something, and it
didn’t look as if it could be the truth.

“He was workin’,” he said finally. “Bucking stone out of the wall of an
old building up on the mesa there. One turned loose an’ as it did the
governor must’ve gone haywire. She bucked like a loco hoss and run off.”

“Run off?”

Tom opened his mouth and closed it again, and just nodded.

Dennis said, “Well, reckon that’s what happens when you put a mechanic
to operatin’.”

“That had nothin’ to do with it,” Tom snapped.

Peebles spoke up quickly. “Tom—what about the Seven? Broke up any?”

“Some,” said Tom. “Better look at the steering clutches. An’ she was
hot.”

“Head’s cracked,” said Harris, a burly young man with shoulders like a
buffalo and a famous thirst.

“How do you know?”

“Saw it when Al and me went up with the stretcher to get the kid while
you all were building the shelter. Hot water runnin’ down the side of
the block.”

“You mean you walked all the way out to the mound to look at that
tractor while the kid was lyin’ there? I told you where he was!”

“Out to the mound!” Al Knowles’ pop eyes teetered out of their sockets.
“We found that cat stalled twenty feet away from where the kid was!”

“What!”

“That’s right, Tom,” said Harris. “What’s eatin’ you? Where’d you leave
it?”

“I told you … by the mound … the ol’ building we cut into.”

“Leave the startin’ motor runnin’?”

“Starting motor?” Tom’s mind caught the picture of the small,
two-cylinder gasoline engine bolted to the side of the big Diesel’s
crankcase, coupled through the Bendix gear and clutch to the flywheel of
the Diesel to crank it. He remembered his last glance at the still
machine, silent but for the sound of water boiling. “Hell no!”

Al and Harris exchanged a glance. “I guess you were sort of slap-happy
at the time, Tom,” Harris said, not unkindly. “When we were halfway up
the hill we heard it, and you know you can’t mistake that racket.
Sounded like it was under a load.”

Tom beat softly at his temples with his clenched fists. “I left that
machine dead,” he said quietly. “I got compression off her and tied down
the lever. I even stuffed my shirt in the intake. I drained the tank.
But—I didn’t touch the starting motor.”

Peebles wanted to know why he had gone to all that trouble. Tom just
looked vaguely at him and shook his head. “I shoulda pulled the wires. I
never thought about the starting motor,” he whispered. Then, “Harris—you
say you found the starting motor running when you got to the top?”

“No—she was stalled. And hot—awmighty hot. I’d say the startin’ motor
was seized up tight. That must be it, Tom. You left the startin’ motor
runnin’ and somehow engaged the clutch an’ Bendix.” His voice lost
conviction as he said it—it takes seventeen separate motions to start a
tractor of this type. “Anyhow, she was in gear an’ crawled along on the
little motor.”

“I done that once,” said Chub. “Broke a con rod on a Eight, on a highway
job. Walked her about three-quarters of a mile on the startin’ motor
that way. Only I had to stop every hundred yards and let her cool down
some.”

Not without sarcasm, Dennis said, “Seems to me like the Seven was out to
get th’ goony. Made one pass at him and then went back to finish the
job.”

Al Knowles haw-hawed extravagantly.

Tom stood up, shaking his head, and went off among the crates to the
hospital they had jury-rigged for the kid.

A dim light was burning inside, and Rivera lay very still, with his eyes
closed. Tom leaned in the doorway—the open end of the engine crate—and
watched him for a moment. Behind him he could hear the murmur of the
crew’s voices; the night was otherwise windless and still. Rivera’s face
was the peculiar color that olive skin takes when drained of blood. Tom
looked at his chest and for a panicky moment thought he could discern no
movement there. He entered and put a hand over the boy’s heart. Rivera
shivered, his eyes flew open, and he drew a sudden breath which caught
raggedly at the back of his throat. “Tom … Tom!” he cried weakly.

“O.K., Goony … _que pase?”_

“She comeen back … Tom!”

“Who?”

_“El de siete.”_

_Daisy Etta_—“She ain’t comin’ back, kiddo. You’re off the mesa now.
Keep your chin up, fella.”

Rivera’s dark, doped eyes stared up at him without expression. Tom moved
back and the eyes continued to stare. They weren’t seeing anything. “Go
to sleep,” he whispered. The eyes closed instantly.

Kelly was saying that nobody ever got hurt on a construction job unless
somebody was dumb. “An’ most times you don’t realize how dumb what
you’re doin’ is until somebody does get hurt.”

“The dumb part was gettin’ a kid, an’ not even an operator at that, up
on a machine,” said Dennis in his smuggest voice.

“I heard you try to sing that song before,” said old Peebles quietly. “I
hate to have to point out anything like this to a man because it don’t
do any good to make comparisons. But I’ve worked with that fella Rivera
for a long time now, an I’ve seen ’em as good but doggone few better. As
far as you’re concerned, you’re O.K. on a pan, but the kid could give
you cards and spades and still make you look like a cost accountant on a
dozer.”

Dennis half rose and mouthed something filthy. He looked at Al Knowles
for backing and got it. He looked around the circle and got none.
Peebles lounged back, sucking on his pipe, watching from under those
bristling brows. Dennis subsided, running now on another tack.

“So what does that prove? The better you say he is, the less reason he
had to fall off a cat and get himself hurt.”

“I haven’t got the thing straight yet,” said Chub, in a voice whose tone
indicated “I hate to admit it, but—”

About this time Tom returned, like a sleepwalker, standing with the
brilliant pressure lantern between him and Dennis. Dennis rambled right
on, not knowing he was anywhere near: “That’s something you never will
find out. That Puerto Rican is a pretty husky kid. Could be Tom said
something he didn’t like an’ he tried to put a knife in Tom’s back. They
all do, y’know. Tom didn’t get all that bashin’ around just stoppin’ a
machine. They must of went round an’ round for a while an’ the goony
wound up with a busted back. Tom sets the dozer to walk him down while
he lies there and comes on down here and tries to tell us—” His voice
fluttered to a stop as Tom loomed over him.

Tom grabbed the pan operator up by the slack of his shirt front with his
uninjured arm and shook him like an empty burlap bag.

“Skunk,” he growled. “I oughta lower th’ boom on you.” He set Dennis on
his feet and backhanded his face with the edge of his forearm. Dennis
went down—cowered down, rather than fell. “Aw, Tom, I was just talkin’.
Just a joke, Tom, I was just—”

“Yellow, too,” snarled Tom, stepping forward, raising a solid Texan
boot. Peebles barked “Tom!” and the foot came back to the ground.

“Out o’ my sight,” rumbled the foreman. “Git!”

Dennis got. Al Knowles said vaguely, “Naow, Tom, y’all cain’t—”

“You, y’wall-eyed string-bean!” Tom raved, his voice harsh and strained.
“Go ‘long with your Siamese twin!”

“O.K., O.K.,” said Al, white-faced, and disappeared into the dark with
Dennis.

“Nuts to this,” said Chub. “I’m turnin’ in.” He went to a crate and
hauled out a mosquito-hooded sleeping bag and went off without another
word. Harris and Kelly, who were both on their feet, sat down again. Old
Peebles hadn’t moved.

Tom stood staring out into the dark, his arms straight at his sides, his
fists knotted.

“Sit down,” said Peebles gently. Tom turned and stared at him.

“Sit down. I can’t change that dressing ’less you do.” He pointed at the
bandage around Tom’s elbow. It was red, a widening stain, the tattered
tissues having parted as the big Georgian bunched his infuriated
muscles. He sat down.

“Talkin’ about dumbness,” said Harris calmly, as Peebles went to work,
“I was about to say that I got the record. I done the dumbest thing
anybody ever did on a machine. You can’t top it.”

“I could,” said Kelly. “Runnin’ a crane dragline once. Put her in boom
gear and started to boom her up. Had an eighty-five-foot stick on her.
Machine was standing on wooden mats in the middle of a swamp. Heard the
motor miss and got out of the saddle to look at the filter-glass. Messed
around back there longer than I figured, and the boom went straight up
in the air and fell backwards over the cab. Th’ jolt tilted my mats an’
she slid backwards slow and stately as you please, butt-first into the
mud. Buried up to the eyeballs, she was.” He laughed quietly. “Looked
like a ditching machine!”

“I still say I done the dumbest thing ever, bar none,” said Harris. “It
was on a river job, widening a channel. I come back to work from a
three-day binge, still rum-dumb. Got up on a dozer an’ was workin’
around on the edge of a twenty-foot cliff. Down at the foot of the cliff
was a big hickory tree, an’ growin’ right along the edge was a great big
limb. I got the dopey idea I should break it off. I put one track on the
limb and the other on the cliff edge and run out away from the trunk. I
was about halfway out, an’ the branch saggin’ some, before I thought
what would happen if it broke. Just about then it did break. You know
hickory—if it breaks at all it breaks altogether. So down we go into
thirty feet of water—me an’ the cat. I got out from under somehow. When
all them bubbles stopped comin’ up I swum around lookin’ down at it. I
was still paddlin’ around when the superintendent came rushin’ up. He
wants to know what’s up. I yell at him, ‘Look down there, the way that
water is movin’ an’ shiftin’, looks like the cat is workin’ down
there.’ ” He pursed his lips and _tsk tsked_. “My, that man said some
nasty things to me.”

“Where’d you get your next job?” Kelly exploded.

“Oh, he didn’t fire me,” said Harris soberly. “Said he couldn’t afford
to fire a man as dumb as that. Said he wanted me around to look at
whenever he felt bad.”

Tom said, “Thanks, you guys. That’s as good a way as any of sayin’ that
everybody makes mistakes.” He stood up, examining the new dressing,
turning his arm in front of his lantern. “You all can think what you
please, but I don’t recollect there was any dumbness went on that mesa
this evenin’. That’s finished with, anyway. Do I have to say that
Dennis’ idea about it is all wet?”

Harris said one foul word that completely disposed of Dennis and
anything he might say.

Peebles said, “It’ll be all right. Dennis an’ his popeyed friend’ll hang
together, but they don’t amount to anything. Chub’ll do whatever he’s
argued into.”

“So you got ’em all lined up, hey?” Tom shrugged. “In the meantime, are
we going to get an airfield built?”

“We’ll get it built,” Peebles said. “Only—Tom, I got no right to give
you any advice, but go easy on the rough stuff after this. It does a lot
of harm.”

“I will if I can,” said Tom gruffly. They broke up and turned in.

Peebles was right. It did do harm. It made Dennis use the word “murder”
when they found, in the morning, that Rivera had died during the night.

The work progressed in spite of everything that had happened. With
equipment like that, it’s hard to slow things down. Kelly bit two cubic
yards out of the bluff with every swing of the big shovel, and Dumptors
are the fastest short haul earth movers yet devised. Dennis kept the
service road clean for them with his pan, and Tom and Chub spelled each
other on the bulldozer they had detached from its pan to make up for the
lack of the Seven, spending their alternate periods with transit and
stakes. Peebles was rod-man for the surveys, and in between times worked
on setting up his field shop, keeping the water cooler and battery
chargers running, and lining up his forge and welding tables. The
operators fueled and serviced their own equipment, and there was little
delay. The rocks and marl that came out of the growing cavity in the
side of the central mesa—a whole third of it had to come out—were spun
down to the edge of the swamp, which lay across the lower end of the
projected runway, in the hornet-howling dump-tractors, their big driving
wheels churning up vast clouds of dust, and were dumped and spread and
walked in by the whining two-cycle dozer. When muck began to pile up in
front of the fill, it was blasted out of the way with carefully placed
charges of sixty percent dynamite and the craters filled with rocks and
stone from the ruins, and surfaced with easily compacting marl, run out
of a clean deposit by the pan.

And when he had his shop set up, Peebles went up the hill to get the
Seven. When he got it he just stood there for a moment scratching his
head, and then, shaking his head, he ambled back down the hill and went
for Tom.

“Been looking at the Seven,” he said, when he had flagged the moaning
two-cycle and Tom had climbed off.

“What’d you find?”

Peebles held out an arm. “A list as long as that.” He shook his head.
“Tom, what really happened up there?”

“Governor went haywire and she run away,” Tom said promptly, deadpan.

“Yeah, but—” For a long moment he held Tom’s eyes. Then he sighed.
“O.K., Tom. Anyway, I can’t do a thing up there. We’ll have to bring her
back and I’ll have to have this tractor to tow her down. And first I
have to have some help—the track idler adjustment bolt’s busted and the
right track is off the track rollers.”

“Oh-h-h. So that’s why she couldn’t get to the kid, running on the
starting motor. Track would hardly turn, hey?”

“It’s a miracle she ran as far as she did. That track is really jammed
up. Riding right up on the roller flanges. And that ain’t the half of
it. The head’s gone, like Harris said, and Lord only knows what I’ll
find when I open her up.”

“Why bother?”

“What?”

“We can get along without that dozer,” said Tom suddenly. “Leave her
where she is. There’s lots more for you to do.”

“But what for?”

“Well, there’s no call to go to all that trouble.”

Peebles scratched the side of his nose and said, “I got a new head,
track master pins—even a spare starting motor. I got tools to make what
I don’t stock.” He pointed at the long row of dumps left by the hurtling
dump-tractors while they had been talking. “You got a pan tied up
because you’re using this machine to doze with, and you can’t tell me
you can’t use another one. You’re gonna have to shut down one or two o’
those Dumptors if you go on like this.”

“I had all that figured out as soon as I opened my mouth,” Tom said
sullenly. “Let’s go.”

They climbed on the tractor and took off, stopping for a moment at the
beach outcropping to pick up a cable and some tools.

_Daisy Etta_ sat at the edge of the mesa, glowering out of her stilted
headlights at the soft sward which still bore the impression of a young
body and the tramplings of the stretcher-bearers. Her general aspect was
woebegone—there were scratches on her olive-drab paint and the bright
metal of the scratches was already dulled red by the earliest
powder-rust. And though the ground was level, she was not, for her right
track was off its lower rollers, and she stood slightly canted, like a
man who has had a broken hip. And whatever passed for consciousness
within her mulled over that paradox of the bulldozer that every operator
must go through while he is learning his own machine.

It is the most difficult thing of all for the beginner to understand,
that paradox. A bulldozer is a crawling powerhouse, a behemoth of noise
and toughness, the nearest thing to the famous irresistible force. The
beginner, awed and with the pictures of unconquerable Army tanks printed
on his mind from the newsreels, takes all in his stride and with a sense
of limitless power treats all obstacles alike, not knowing the fragility
of a cast-iron radiator core, the mortality of tempered manganese, the
friability of over-heated babbitt, and most of all, the ease with which
a tractor can bury itself in mud. Climbing off to stare at a machine
which he has reduced in twenty seconds to a useless hulk, or which was
running a half-minute before on ground where it now has its tracks out
of sight, he has that sense of guilty disappointment which overcomes any
man on having made an error in judgment.

So, as she stood, _Daisy Etta_ was broken and useless. These soft
persistent bipeds had built her, and if they were like any other race
that built machines, they could care for them. The ability to reverse
the tension of a spring, or twist a control rod, or reduce to zero the
friction in a nut and lock-washer, was not enough to repair the crack in
a cylinder head nor bearings welded to a crankshaft in an over-heated
starting motor. There had been a lesson to learn. It had been learned.
_Daisy Etta_ would be repaired, and the next time—well, at least she
would know her own weaknesses.

Tom swung the two-cycle machine and edged in next to the Seven, with the
edge of his blade all but touching _Daisy Etta’s_ push-beam. They got
off and Peebles bent over the drum-tight right track.

“Watch yourself,” said Tom.

“Watch what?”

“Oh—nothin’, I guess.” He circled the machine, trained eyes probing over
frame and fittings. He stepped forward suddenly and grasped the
fuel-tank drain cock. It was closed. He opened it; golden oil gushed
out. He shut it off, climbed up on the machine and opened the fuel cap
on top of the tank. He pulled out the bayonet gauge, wiped it in the
crook of his knee, dipped and withdrew it.

The tank was more than three quarters full.

“What’s the matter?” asked Peebles, staring curiously at Tom’s drawn
face.

“Peeby, I opened the cock to drain this tank. I left it with oil runnin’
out on the ground. She shut herself off.”

“Now, Tom, you’re lettin’ this thing get you down. You just thought you
did. I’ve seen a main-line valve shut itself off when it’s worn bad, but
only ’Cause the fuel pump pulls it shut when the motor’s runnin’. But
not a gravity drain.”

“Main-line valve?” Tom pulled the seat up and looked. One glance was
enough to show him this one was open.

“She opened this one, too.”

“O.K.—O.K. Don’t look at me like that!” Peebles was as near to
exasperation as he could possibly get. “What difference does it make?”

Tom did not answer. He was not the type of man who, when faced with
something beyond his understanding, would begin to doubt his own sanity.
His was a dogged insistence that what he saw and sensed was what had
actually happened. In him was none of the fainting fear of madness that
another, more sensitive, man might feel. He doubted neither himself nor
his evidence, and so could free his mind for searching out the consuming
“why” of a problem. He knew instinctively that to share “unbelievable”
happenings with anyone else, even if they had really occurred, was to
put even further obstacles in his way. So he kept his clamlike silence
and stubbornly, watchfully, investigated.

The slipped track was so tightly drawn up on the roller flanges that
there could be no question of pulling the master pin and opening the
track up. It would have to be worked back in place—a very delicate
operation, for a little force applied in the wrong direction would be
enough to run the track off altogether. To complicate things, the blade
of the Seven was down on the ground and would have to be lifted before
the machine could be maneuvered, and its hydraulic hoist was useless
without the motor.

Peebles unhooked twenty feet of half-inch cable from the rear of the
smaller dozer, scratched a hole in the ground under the Seven’s blade,
and pushed the eye of the cable through. Climbing over the moldboard, he
slipped the eye on the big towing hook bolted to the underside of the
belly-guard. The other end of the cable he threw out on the ground in
front of the machine. Tom mounted the other dozer and swung into place,
ready to tow. Peebles hooked the cable onto Tom’s drawbar, hopped up on
the Seven. He put her in neutral, disengaged the master clutch, and put
the blade control over into “float” position, then raised an arm.

Tom perched upon the arm rest of his machine, looking backwards, moved
slowly, taking up the slack in the cable. It straightened and grew taut,
and as it did it forced the Seven’s blade upward. Peebles waved for
slack and put the blade control into “hold.” The cable bellied downward
away from the blade.

“Hydraulic system’s O.K., anyhow,” called Peebles, as Tom throttled
down. “Move over and take a strain to the right, sharp as you can
without fouling the cable on the track. We’ll see if we can walk this
track back on.”

Tom backed up, cut sharply right, and drew the cable out almost at right
angles to the other machine. Peebles held the right track of the Seven
with the brake and released both steering clutches. The left track now
could turn free, the right not at all. Tom was running at a quarter
throttle in his lowest gear, so that his machine barely crept along,
taking the strain. The Seven shook gently and began to pivot on the taut
right track, unbelievable foot-pounds of energy coming to bear on the
front of the track where it rode high up on the idler wheel. Peebles
released the right brake with his foot and applied it again in a series
of skilled, deft jerks. The track would move a few inches and stop
again, force being applied forward and sideward alternately, urging the
track persuasively back in place. Then, a little jolt and she was in,
riding true on the five truck rollers, the two track carrier rollers,
the driving sprocket and the idler.

Peebles got off and stuck his head in between the sprocket and the rear
carrier, squinting down and sideways to see if there were any broken
flanges or roller bushes. Tom came over and pulled him out by the seat
of his trousers. “Time enough for that when you get her in the shop,” he
said, masking his nervousness. “Reckon she’ll roll?”

“She’ll roll. I never saw a track in that condition come back that easy.
By gosh, it’s as if she was tryin’ to help!”

“They’ll do it sometimes,” said Tom, stiffly. “You better take the
two-tractor, Peeby. I’ll stay with this’n.”

“Anything you say.”

And cautiously they took the steep slope down, Tom barely holding the
brakes, giving the other machine a straight pull all the way. And so
they brought _Daisy Etta_ down to Peebles’ outdoor shop, where they
pulled her cylinder head off, took off her starting motor, pulled out a
burned clutch facing, had her quite helpless—

And put her together again.

“I tell you it was outright, cold-blooded murder,” said Dennis hotly.
“An’ here we are takin’ orders from a guy like that. What are we goin’
to do about it?” They were standing by the cooler—Dennis had run his
machine there to waylay Chub.

Chub Horton’s cigar went down and up like a semaphore with a short
circuit. “We’ll skip it. The blacktopping crew will be here in another
two weeks or so, an’ we can make a report. Besides, I don’t know what
happened up there any more than you do. In the meantime we got a runway
to build.”

“You don’t know what happened up there? Chub, you’re a smart man. Smart
enough to run this job better than Tom Jaeger even if he wasn’t crazy.
And you’re surely smart enough not to believe all that cock and bull
about that tractor runnin’ out from under that grease-monkey. Listen—”
he leaned forward and tapped Chub’s chest. “He said it was the governor.
I saw that governor myself an’ heard ol’ Peebles say there wasn’t a
thing wrong with it. Th’ throttle control rod had slipped off its yoke,
yeah—but you know what a tractor will do when the throttle control goes
out. It’ll idle or stall. It won’t run away, whatever.”

“Well, maybe so, but—”

“But nothin’! A guy that’ll commit murder ain’t sane. If he did it once,
he can do it again and I ain’t fixin’ to let that happen to me.”

Two things crossed Chub’s steady but not too bright mind at this. One
was that Dennis, whom he did not like but could not shake, was trying to
force him into something that he did not want to do. The other was that
under all of his swift talk Dennis was scared spitless.

“What do you want to do—call up the sheriff?”

Dennis ha-ha-ed appreciatively—one of the reasons he was so hard to
shake. “I’ll tell you what we can do. As long as we have you here, he
isn’t the only man who knows the work. If we stop takin’ orders from
him, you can give ’em as good or better. An’ there won’t be anything he
can do about it.”

“Doggone it, Dennis,” said Chub, with sudden exasperation. “What do you
think you’re doin’—handin’ me over the keys to the kingdom or something?
What do you want to see me bossin’ around here for?” He stood up.
“Suppose we did what you said? Would it get the field built any quicker?
Would it get me any more money in my pay envelope? What do you think I
want—glory? I passed up a chance to run for councilman once. You think
I’d raise a finger to get a bunch of mugs to do what I say—when they do
it anyway?”

“Aw, Chub—I wouldn’t cause trouble just for the fun of it. That’s not
what I mean at all. But unless we do something about that guy we ain’t
safe. Can’t you get that through your head?”

“Listen, windy. If a man keeps busy enough he can’t get into trouble.
That goes for Tom—you might keep that in mind. But it goes for you, too.
Get back up on that rig an’ get back to the marl pit.” Dennis,
completely taken by surprise, turned to his machine.

“It’s a pity you can’t move earth with your mouth,” said Chub as he
walked off. “They could have left you do this job singlehanded.”

Chub walked slowly toward the outcropping, switching at beach pebbles
with a grade stake and swearing to himself. He was essentially a simple
man and believed in the simplest possible approach to everything. He
liked a job where he could do everything required and where nothing
turned up to complicate things. He had been in the grading business for
a long time as an operator and survey party boss, and he was remarkable
for one thing—he had always held aloof from the cliques and internecine
politics that are the breath of life to most construction men. He was
disturbed and troubled at the back-stabbing that went on around him on
various jobs. If it was blunt, he was disgusted, and subtlety simply
left him floundering and bewildered. He was stupid enough so that his
basic honesty manifested itself in his speech and actions, and he had
learned that complete honesty in dealing with men above and below him
was almost invariably painful to all concerned, but he had not the wit
to act otherwise, and did not try to. If he had a bad tooth, he had it
pulled out as soon as he could. If he got a raw deal from a
superintendent over him, that superintendent would get told exactly what
the trouble was, and if he didn’t like it, there were other jobs. And if
the pulling and hauling of cliques got in his hair, he had always said
so and left. Or he had sounded off and stayed; his completely selfish
reaction to things that got in the way of his work had earned him a lot
of regard from men he had worked under. And so, in this instance, he had
no hesitation about choosing a course of action. Only—how did you go
about asking a man if he was a murderer?

He found the foreman with an enormous wrench in his hand, tightening up
the new track adjustment bolt they had installed in the Seven.

“Hey, Chub! Glad you turned up. Let’s get a piece of pipe over the end
of this thing and really bear down.” Chub went for the pipe, and they
fitted it over the handle of the four-foot wrench and hauled until the
sweat ran down their backs, Tom checking the track clearance
occasionally with a crowbar. He finally called it good enough and they
stood there in the sun gasping for breath.

“Tom,” panted Chub, “did you kill that Puerto Rican?”

Tom’s head came up as if someone had burned the back of his neck with a
cigarette.

“Because,” said Chub, “if you did you can’t go on runnin’ this job.”

Tom said, “That’s a lousy thing to kid about.”

“You know I ain’t kiddin’. Well, did you?”

“No!” Tom sat down on a keg, wiped his face with a bandanna. “What’s got
into you?”

“I just wanted to know. Some of the boys are worried about it.”

Tom’s eyes narrowed. “Some of the boys, huh? I think I get it. Listen to
me, Chub. Rivera was killed by that thing there.” He thumbed over his
shoulder at the Seven, which was standing ready now, awaiting only the
building of a broken cutting corner on the blade. Peebles was winding up
the welding machine as he spoke. “If you mean, did I put him up on the
machine before he was thrown, the answer is yes. That much I killed him,
and don’t think I don’t feel it. I had a hunch something was wrong up
there, but I couldn’t put my finger on it and I certainly didn’t think
anybody was going to get hurt.”

“Well, what was wrong?”

“I still don’t know.” Tom stood up. “I’m tired of beatin’ around the
bush, Chub, and I don’t much care any more what anybody thinks. There’s
somethin’ wrong with that Seven, something that wasn’t built into her.
They don’t make tractors better’n that one, but whatever it was happened
up there on the mesa has queered this one. Now go ahead and think what
you like, and dream up any story you want to tell the boys. In the
meantime you can pass the word—nobody runs that machine but me,
understand? Nobody!”

“Tom—”

Tom’s patience broke. “That’s all I’m going to say about it! If anybody
else gets hurt, it’s going to be me, understand? What more do you want?”

He strode off, boiling. Chub stared after him, and after a long moment
reached up and took the cigar from his lips. Only then did he realize
that he had bitten it in two; half the butt was still inside his mouth.
He spat and stood there shaking his head.

“How’s she going, Peeby?”

Peebles looked up from the welding machine. “Hi, Chub, have her ready
for you in twenty minutes.” He gauged the distance between the welding
machine and the big tractor. “I should have forty feet of cable,” he
said, looking at the festoons of arc and ground cables that hung from
the storage hooks in the back of the welder. “Don’t want to get a
tractor over here to move the thing, and don’t feel like cranking up the
Seven just to get it close enough.” He separated the arc cable and threw
it aside, walked to the tractor, paying the ground cable off his arms.
He threw out the last of his slack and grasped the ground clamp when he
was eight feet from the machine. Taking it in his left hand, he pulled
hard, reaching out with his right to grasp the moldboard of the Seven,
trying to get it far enough to clamp on to the machine.

Chub stood there watching him, chewing on his cigar, absent-mindedly
diddling with the controls on the arc-welder. He pressed the
starter-button, and the six-cylinder motor responded with a purr. He
spun the work-selector dials idly, threw the arc generator switch—

A bolt of incredible energy, thin, searing, blue-white, left the
rodholder at his feet, stretched itself _fifty feet_ across to Peebles,
whose fingers had just touched the moldboard of the tractor. Peebles’
head and shoulders were surrounded for a second by a violet nimbus, and
then he folded over and dropped. A circuit breaker clacked behind the
control board of the welder, but too late. The Seven rolled slowly
backward, without firing, on level ground, until it brought up against
the road-roller.

Chub’s cigar was gone, and he didn’t notice it. He had the knuckles of
his right hand in his mouth, and his teeth sunk into the pudgy flesh.
His eyes protruded; he crouched there and quivered, literally frightened
out of his mind. For old Peebles was burned almost in two.

They buried him next to Rivera. There wasn’t much talk afterwards; the
old man had been a lot closer to all of them than they had realized
until now. Harris, for once in his rum-dumb, lightheaded life, was quiet
and serious, and Kelly’s walk seemed to lose some of its litheness. Hour
after hour Dennis’ flabby mouth worked, and he bit at his lower lip
until it was swollen and tender. Al Knowles seemed more or less
unaffected, as was to be expected from a man who had something less than
the brains of a chicken. Chub Horton had snapped out of it after a
couple of hours and was very nearly himself again. And in Tom Jaeger
swirled a black, furious anger at this unknowable curse that had struck
the camp.

And they kept working. There was nothing else to do. The shovel kept up
its rhythmic swing and dig, swing and dump, and the Dumptors screamed
back and forth between it and the little that was left of the swamp. The
upper end of the runway was grassed off; Chub and Tom set grade stakes
and Dennis began the long job of cutting and filling the humpy surface
with his pan. Harris manned the other and followed him, a cut behind.
The shape of the runway emerged from the land, and then that of the
paralleling taxiway; and three days went by. The horror of Peebles’
death wore off enough so that they could talk about it, and very little
of the talk helped anybody. Tom took his spells at everything, changing
over with Kelly to give him a rest from the shovel, making a few rounds
with a pan, putting in hours on a Dumptor. His arm was healing slowly
but clean, and he worked grimly in spite of it, taking a perverse sort
of pleasure from the pain of it. Every man on the job watched his
machine with the solicitude of a mother with her first-born; a serious
break-down would have been disastrous without a highly skilled mechanic.

The only concession that Tom allowed himself in regard to Peebles’ death
was to corner Kelly one afternoon and ask him about the welding machine.
Part of Kelly’s rather patchy past had been spent in a technical
college, where he had studied electrical engineering and women. He had
learned a little of the former and enough of the latter to get him
thrown out on his ear. So, on the off-chance that he might know
something about the freak arc, Tom put it to him.

Kelly pulled off his high-gauntlet gloves and batted sandflies with
them. “What sort of an arc was that? Boy, you got me there. Did you ever
hear of a welding machine doing like that before?”

“I did not. A welding machine just don’t have that sort o’ push. I saw a
man get a full jolt from a 400-amp welder once, an’ although it sat him
down it didn’t hurt him any.”

“It’s not amperage that kills people,” said Kelly, “it’s voltage.
Voltage is the pressure behind a current, you know. Take an amount of
water, call it amperage. If I throw it in your face, it won’t hurt you.
If I put it through a small hose you’ll feel it. But if I pump it
through them tiny holes on a Diesel injector nozzle at about twelve
hundred pounds, it’ll draw blood. But a welding arc generator just is
not wound to build up that kind of voltage. I can’t see where any short
circuit anywhere through the armature or field windings could do such a
thing.”

“From what Chub said, he had been foolin’ around with the work selector.
I don’t think anyone touched the dials after it happened. The selector
dial was run all the way over to the low current application segment,
and the current control was around the halfway mark. That’s not enough
juice to get you a good bead with a quarter-inch rod, let alone kill
somebody—or roll a tractor back thirty feet on level ground.”

“Or jump fifty feet,” said Kelly. “It would take thousands of volts to
generate an arc like that.”

“Is it possible that something in the Seven could have pulled that arc?
I mean, suppose the arc wasn’t driven over, but was drawn over? I tell
you, she was hot for four hours after that.”

Kelly shook his head. “Never heard of any such thing. Look, just to have
something to call them, we call direct current terminals positive and
negative, and just because it works in theory we say that current flows
from negative to positive. There couldn’t be any more positive
attraction in one electrode than there is negative drive in the other;
see what I mean?”

“There couldn’t be some freak condition that would cause a sort of
oversize positive field? I mean one that would suck out the negative
flow all in a heap, make it smash through under a lot of pressure like
the water you were talking about through an injector nozzle?”

“No, Tom. It just don’t work that way, far as anyone knows. I dunno,
though—there are some things about static electricity that nobody
understands. All I can say is that what happened couldn’t happen and if
it did it couldn’t have killed Peebles. And you know the answer to
that.”

Tom glanced away at the upper end of the runway, where the two graves
were. There was bitterness and turbulent anger naked there for a moment,
and he turned and walked away without another word. And when he went
back to have another look at the welding machine, _Daisy Etta_ was gone.

Al Knowles and Harris squatted together near the water cooler.

“Bad,” said Harris.

“Nevah saw anythin’ like it,” said Al. “Ol’ Tom come back f’m the shop
theah just raisin’ Cain. ‘Weah’s ’at Seven gone? Weah’s ’at Seven?’ I
never heered sech cah’ins on.”

“Dennis did take it, huh?”

“Sho’ did.”

Harris said. “He came spoutin’ around to me a while back, Dennis did.
Chub’d told him Tom said for everybody to stay off that machine. Dennis
was mad as a wet hen. Said Tom was carryin’ that kind o’ business too
far. Said there was probably somethin’ about the Seven Tom didn’t want
us to find out. Might incriminate him. Dennis is ready to say Tom killed
the kid.”

“Reckon he did, Harris?”

Harris shook his head. “I’ve known Tom too long to think that. If he
won’t tell us what really happened up on the mesa, he has a reason for
it. How’d Dennis come to take the dozer?”

“Blew a front tire on his pan. Came back heah to git anothah rig—maybe a
Dumptor. Saw th’ Seven standin’ theah ready to go. Stood theah lookin’
at it and cussin’ Tom. Said he was tired of bashin’ his kidneys t’pieces
on them othah rigs an’ bedamned if he wouldn’t take suthin’ that rode
good fo’ a change. I tol’ him ol’ Tom’d raise th’ roof when he found him
on it. He had a couple mo’ things t’say ’bout Tom then.”

“I didn’t think he had the guts to take the rig.”

“Aw, he talked hisself blind mad.”

They looked up as Chub Horton trotted up, panting. “Hey, you guys, come
on. We better get up there to Dennis.”

“What’s wrong?” asked Harris, climbing to his feet.

“Tom passed me a minute ago lookin’ like the wrath o’ God and
hightailin’ it for the swamp fill. I asked him what was the matter and
he hollered that Dennis had taken the Seven. Said he was always talkin’
about murder and he’d get his fill of it foolin’ around that machine.”
Chub went wall-eyed, licked his lips beside his cigar.

“Oh-oh,” said Harris quietly. “That’s the wrong kind o’ talk for just
now.”

“You don’t suppose he—”

_“Come on!”_

They saw Tom before they were halfway there. He was walking slowly, with
his head down. Harris shouted. Tom raised his face, stopped, stood there
waiting with a peculiarly slumped stance.

“Where’s Dennis?” barked Chub.

Tom waited until they were almost up to him and then weakly raised an
arm and thumbed over his shoulder. His face was green.

“Tom—is he—”

Tom nodded, and swayed a little. His granite jaw was slack.

“Al, stay with him. He’s sick. Harris, let’s go.”

Tom was sick, then and there. Very. Al stood gaping at him, fascinated.

Chub and Harris found Dennis. All of twelve square feet of him, ground
and churned and rolled out into a torn-up patch of earth. _Daisy Etta_
was gone.

Back at the outcropping, they sat with Tom while Al Knowles took a
Dumptor and roared away to get Kelly.

“You saw him?” he said dully after a time.

Harris said, “Yeh.”

The screaming Dumptor and a mountainous cloud of dust arrived, Kelly
driving, Al holding on with a death-grip to the dump-bed guards. Kelly
flung himself off, ran to Tom. “Tom—what is all this? Dennis dead? And
you … you—”

Tom’s head came up slowly, the slackness going out of his long face, a
light suddenly coming into his eyes. Until this moment it had not
crossed his mind what these men might think.

“I—what?”

“Al says you killed him.”

Tom’s eyes flicked at Al Knowles, and Al winced as if the glance had
been a quirt.

Harris said, “What about it, Tom?”

“Nothing about it. He was killed by that Seven. You saw that for
yourself.”

“I stuck with you all along,” said Harris slowly. “I took everything you
said and believed it.”

“This is too strong for you?” Tom asked.

Harris nodded. “Too strong, Tom.”

Tom looked at the grim circle of faces and laughed suddenly. He stood
up, put his back against a tall crate. “What do you plan to do about
it?”

There was a silence. “You think I went up there and knocked that windbag
off the machine and ran over him?” More silence. “Listen. I went up
there and saw what you saw. He was dead before I got there. That’s not
good enough either?” He paused and licked his lips. “So after I killed
him I got up on the tractor and drove it far enough away so you couldn’t
see or hear it when you got there. And then I sprouted wings and flew
back so’s I was halfway here when you met me—_ten minutes_ after I spoke
to Chub on my way up!”

Kelly said vaguely, “Tractor?”

“Well,” said Tom harshly to Harris, “was the tractor there when you and
Chub went up and saw Dennis?”

“No—”

Chub smacked his thigh suddenly. “You could of drove it into the swamp,
Tom.”

Tom said angrily, “I’m wastin’ my time. You guys got it all figured out.
Why ask me anything at all?”

“Aw, take it easy,” said Kelly. “We just want the facts. Just what did
happen? You met Chub and told him that Dennis would get all the
murderin’ he could take if he messed around that machine. That right?”

“That’s right.”

“Then what?”

“Then the machine murdered him.”

Chub, with remarkable patience, asked, “What did you mean the day
Peebles was killed when you said that something had queered the Seven up
there on the mesa?”

Tom said furiously, “I meant what I said. You guys are set to crucify me
for this and I can’t stop you. Well, listen. Something’s got into that
Seven. I don’t know what it is and I don’t think I ever will know. I
thought that after she smashed herself up that it was finished with. I
had an idea that when we had her torn down and helpless we should have
left her that way. I was dead right but it’s too late now. She’s killed
Rivera and she’s killed Dennis and she sure had something to do with
killing Peebles. And my idea is that she won’t stop as long as there’s a
human being alive on this island.”

“Whaddaya know!” said Chub.

“Sure, Tom sure,” said Kelly quietly. “That tractor is out to get us.
But don’t worry; we’ll catch it and tear it down. Just don’t you worry
about it any more; it’ll be all right.”

“That’s right, Tom,” said Harris. “You just take it easy around camp for
a couple of days till you feel better. Chub and the rest of us will
handle things for you. You had too much sun.”

“You’re a swell bunch of fellows,” gritted Tom, with the deepest
sarcasm. “You want to live,” he shouted, “git out there and throw that
maverick bulldozer!”

“That maverick bulldozer is at the bottom of the swamp where you put
it,” growled Chub. His head lowered and he started to move in. “Sure we
want to live. The best way to do that is to put you where you can’t kill
anybody else. Get him!”

He leaped. Tom straightened him with his left and crossed with his
right. Chub went down, tripping Harris. Al Knowles scuttled to a toolbox
and dipped out a fourteen-inch crescent wrench. He circled around,
keeping out of trouble, trying to look useful. Tom loosened a haymaker
at Kelly, whose head seemed to withdraw like a turtle’s; it whistled
over, throwing Tom badly off balance. Harris, still on his knees,
tackled Tom’s legs; Chub hit him in the small of the back with a meaty
shoulder, and Tom went flat on his face. Al Knowles, holding the wrench
in both hands, swept it up and back like a baseball bat; at the top of
its swing Kelly reached over, snatched it out of his hands and tapped
Tom delicately behind the ear with it. Tom went limp.

It was late, but nobody seemed to feel like sleeping. They sat around
the pressure lantern, talking idly. Chub and Kelly played an
inconsequential game of casino, forgetting to pick up their points;
Harris paced up and down like a man in a cell, and Al Knowles was
squinched up close to the light, his eyes wide and watching, watching—

“I need a drink,” said Harris. “Tens,” said one of the casino players.

Al Knowles said, “We shoulda killed him. We oughta kill him now.”

“There’s been too much killin’ already,” said Chub. “Shut up, you.” And
to Kelly, “With big casino,” sweeping up cards.

Kelly caught his wrist and grinned. “Big casino’s ten of diamonds, not
the ten of hearts. Remember?”

“Oh.”

“How long before the blacktopping crew will be here?” quavered Al
Knowles.

“Twelve days,” said Harris. “And they better bring some likker.”

“Hey, you guys.”

They fell silent.

“Hey!”

“It’s Tom,” said Kelly. “Building sixes, Chub.”

“I’m gonna go kick his ribs in,” said Knowles, not moving.

“I heard that,” said the voice from the darkness. “If I wasn’t hogtied—”

“We know what you’d do,” said Chub. “How much proof do you think we
need?”

“Chub, you don’t have to do any more to him!” It was Kelly, flinging his
cards down and getting up. “Tom, you want water?”

“Yes.”

“Siddown, siddown,” said Chub.

“Let him lay there and bleed,” Al Knowles said.

“Nuts!” Kelly went and filled a cup and brought it to Tom. The big
Georgian was tied thoroughly, wrists together, taut rope between elbow
and elbow behind his back, so that his hands were immovable over his
solar plexus. His knees and ankles were bound as well, although Knowles’
little idea of a short rope between ankles and throat hadn’t been used.

“Thanks, Kelly.” Tom drank greedily, Kelly holding his head. “Goes
good.” He drank more. “What hit me?”

“One of the boys. ’bout the time you said the cat was haunted.”

“Oh, yeah.” Tom rolled his head and blinked with pain.

“Any sense asking you if you blame us?”

“Kelly, does somebody else have to get killed before you guys wake up?”

“None of us figure there will be any more killin’—now.”

The rest of the men drifted up. “He willing to talk sense?” Chub wanted
to know.

Al Knowles laughed, “Hyuk! hyuk! Don’t he look dangerous now.”

Harris said suddenly, “Al, I’m gonna hafta tape your mouth with the skin
off your neck.”

“Am I the kind of guy that makes up ghost stories?”

“Never have that I know of, Tom.” Harris kneeled down beside him. “Never
killed anyone before, either.”

“Oh, get away from me. Get away,” said Tom tiredly.

“Get up and make us,” jeered Al.

Harris got up and backhanded him across the mouth. Al squeaked, took
three steps backward and tripped over a drum of grease. “I told you,”
said Harris almost plaintively. “I _told_ you, Al.”

Tom stopped the bumble of comment. “Shut up!” he hissed. “SHUT UP!” he
roared.

They shut.

“Chub,” said Tom, rapidly, evenly. “What did you say I did with that
Seven?”

“Buried it in the swamp.”

“Yeh. Listen.”

“Listen at what?”

“Be quiet and listen!”

So they listened. It was another still, windless night, with a thin
crescent of moon showing nothing true in the black and muffled silver
landscape. The smallest whisper of surf drifted up from the beach, and
from far off to the right, where the swamp was, a scandalized frog
croaked protest at the manhandling of his mudhole. But the sound that
crept down, freezing their bones, came from the bluff behind their camp.

It was the unmistakable staccato of a starting engine.

“The Seven!”

“ ’At’s right, Chub,” said Tom.

‘Wh-who’s crankin’ her up?”

“Are we all here?”

“All but Peebles and Dennis and Rivera,” said Tom.

“It’s Dennis’ ghost,” moaned Al.

Chub snapped, “Shut up, lamebrain.”

“She’s shifted to Diesel,” said Kelly, listening.

“She’ll be here in a minute,” said Tom. “Y’know, fellas, we can’t all be
crazy, but you’re about to have a time convincin’ yourself of it.”

“You like this, doncha?”

“Some ways. Rivera used to call that machine _Daisy Etta_, ’Cause she’s
_de siete_ in Spig. _Daisy Etta_, she wants her a man.”

“Tom,” said Harris. “I wish you’d stop that chatterin’. You make me
nervous.”

“I got to do somethin’. I can’t run,” Tom drawled.

“We’re going to have a look,” said Chub. “If there’s nobody on that cat,
we’ll turn you loose.”

“Mighty white of you. Reckon you’ll get back before she does?”

“We’ll get back. Harris, come with me. We’ll get one of the pan
tractors. They can outrun a Seven. Kelly, take Al and get the other
one.”

“Dennis’ machine has a flat tire on the pan,” said Al’s quivering voice.

“Pull the pin and cut the cables, then! Git!” Kelly and Al Knowles ran
off.

“Good huntin’, Chub.”

Chub went to him, bent over. “I think I’m goin’ to have to apologize to
you, Tom.”

“No you ain’t. I’d a done the same. Get along now, if you think you got
to. But hurry back,”

“I got to. An’ I’ll hurry back.”

Harris said, “Don’t go ’way, boy.” Tom returned the grin, and they were
gone. But they didn’t hurry back. They didn’t come back at all.

It was Kelly who came pounding back, with Al Knowles on his heels, a
half hour later. “Al—gimme your knife.”

He went to work on the ropes. His face was drawn.

“I could see some of it,” whispered Tom. “Chub and Harris?”

Kelly nodded. “There wasn’t nobody on the Seven like you said.” He said
it as if there was nothing else in his mind, as if the most rigid
self-control was keeping him from saying it over and over.

“I could see the lights,” said Tom. “A tractor angling up the hill.
Pretty soon another, crossing it, lighting up the whole slope.”

“We heard it idling up there somewhere,” Kelly said. “Olive-drab
paint—couldn’t see it.”

“I saw the pan tractor turn over—oh, four, five times down the hill. It
stopped, lights still burning. Then something hit it and rolled it
again. That sure blacked it out. What turned it over first?”

“The Seven. Hanging up there just at the brow of the bluff. Waited until
Chub and Harris were about to pass, sixty, seventy feet below. Tipped
over the edge and rolled down on them with her clutches on. Must’ve been
going thirty miles an hour when she hit. Broadside. They never had a
chance. Followed the pan as it rolled down the hill and when it stopped
booted it again.”

“Want me to rub yo’ ankles?” asked Al.

“You! Get outa my sight!”

“Aw, Tom—” whimpered Al.

“Skip it, Tom,” said Kelly. “There ain’t enough of us left to carry on
that way. Al, you mind your manners from here on out, hear?”

“Ah jes’ wanted to tell y’all. I knew you weren’t lyin’ ’bout Dennis,
Tom, if only I’d stopped to think. I recollect when Dennis said he’d
take that tractuh out … ’membah, Kelly?… He went an’ got the crank and
walked around to th’ side of th’ machine and stuck it in th’ hole. It
was barely in theah befo’ the startin’ engine kicked off. “Whadda ya
know!” he says t’me. “She started by herse’f! I nevah pulled that
handle!” And I said, “She sho’ rarin’ to go!’ ”

“You pick a fine time to ‘recollec’ something,” gritted Tom.
“C’mon—let’s get out of here.”

“Where to?”

“What do you know that a Seven can’t move or get up on?”

“That’s a large order. A big rock, maybe.”

“Ain’t nothing that big around here,” said Tom.

Kelly thought a minute, then snapped his fingers. “Up on the top of my
last cut with the shovel,” he said. “It’s fourteen feet if it’s an inch.
I was pullin’ out small rock an’ topsoil, and Chub told me to drop back
and dip out marl from a pocket there. I sumped in back of the original
cut and took out a whole mess o’ marl. That left a big neck of earth
sticking thirty feet or so out of the cliff. The narrowest part is only
about four feet wide. If _Daisy Etta_ tries to get us from the top,
she’ll straddle the neck and hang herself. If she tries to get us from
below, she can’t get traction to climb; it’s too loose and too steep.”

“And what happens if she builds herself a ramp?”

“We’ll be gone from there.”

“Let’s go.”

Al agitated for the choice of a Dumptor because of its speed, but was
howled down. Tom wanted something that could not get a flat tire and
that would need something really powerful to turn it over. They took the
two-cycle pan tractor with the bulldozer blade that had been Dennis’
machine and crept out into the darkness.

It was nearly six hours later that _Daisy Etta_ came and woke them up.
Night was receding before a paleness in the east, and a fresh ocean
breeze had sprung up. Kelly had taken the first lookout and Al the
second, letting Tom rest the night out. And Tom was far too tired to
argue the arrangement. Al had immediately fallen asleep on his watch,
but fear had such a sure, cold hold on his vitals that the first faint
growl of the big Diesel engine snapped him erect. He tottered on the
edge of the tall neck of earth that they slept on and squeaked as he
scrabbled to get his balance.

“What’s giving?” asked Kelly, instantly wide awake.

“It’s coming,” blubbered Al. “Oh my, oh my—”

Kelly stood up and stared into the fresh, dark dawn. The motor boomed
hollowly, in a peculiar way heard twice at the same time as it was
thrown to them and echoed back by the bluffs under and around them.

“It’s coming and what are we goin’ to do?” chanted Al. “What is going to
happen?”

“My head is going to fall off,” said Tom sleepily. He rolled to a
sitting position, holding the brutalized member between his hands. “If
that egg behind my ear hatches, it’ll come out a full-sized
jack-hammer.” He looked at Kelly. “Where is she?”

“Don’t rightly know,” said Kelly. “Somewhere down around the camp.”

“Probably pickin’ up our scent.”

“Figure it can do that?”

“I figure it can do anything,” said Tom. “Al, stop your moanin’.”

The sun slipped its scarlet edge into the thin slot between sea and sky,
and rosy light gave each rock and tree a shape and a shadow. Kelly’s
gaze swept back and forth, back and forth, until, minutes later, he saw
movement.

“There she is!”

“Where?”

“Down by the grease rack.”

Tom rose and stared. “What’s she doin’?”

After an interval Kelly said, “She’s workin’. Diggin’ a swale in front
of the fuel drums.”

“You don’t say. Don’t tell me she’s goin’ to give herself a grease job.”

“She don’t need it. She was completely greased and new oil put in the
crankcase after we set her up. But she might need fuel.”

“Not more’n half a tank.”

“Well, maybe she figures she’s got a lot of work to do today.” As Kelly
said this Al began to blubber. They ignored him.

The fuel drums were piled in a pyramid at the edge of the camp, in
forty-four-gallon drums piled on their sides. The Seven was moving back
and forth in front of them, close up, making pass after pass, gouging
earth up and wasting it out past the pile. She soon had a huge pit
scooped out, about fourteen feet wide, six feet deep and thirty feet
long, right at the very edge of the pile of drums.

“What you reckon she’s playin’ at?”

“Search me. She seems to want fuel, but I don’t … look at that! She
stopped in the hole;… turnin’ … smashing the top corner of the moldboard
into one of the drums on the bottom!’

Tom scraped the stubble on his jaw with his nails. “An’ you wonder how
much that critter can do! Why, she’s got the whole thing figured out.
She knows if she tried to punch a hole in a fuel drum that she’d only
kick it around. If she did knock a hole in it, how’s she going to lift
it? She’s not equipped to handle hose, so … see? Look at her now! She
just get herself lower than the bottom drum on the pile, and punches a
hole. She can do that then, with the whole weight of the pile holding it
down. Then she backs her tank under the stream of fuel runnin’ out!”

“How’d she get the cap off?”

Tom snorted and told them how the radiator cap had come off its hinges
as he vaulted over the hood the day Rivera was hurt.

“You know,” he said after a moment’s thought, “if she knew as much then
as she does now, I’d be snoozin’ beside Rivera and Peebles. She just
didn’t know her way around then. She run herself like she’d never run
before. She’s learned plenty since.”

“She has,” said Kelly, “and here’s where she uses it on us. She’s headed
this way.”

She was. Straight out across the roughed-out runway she came, grinding
along over the dew-sprinkled earth, yesterday’s dust swirling up from
under her tracks. Crossing the shoulder line, she took the tougher
ground skillfully, angling up over the occasional swags in the earth,
by-passing stones, riding free and fast and easily. It was the first
time Tom had actually seen her clearly running without an operator, and
his flesh crept as he watched. The machine was unnatural, her outline
somehow unreal and dreamlike purely through the lack of the small
silhouette of a man in the saddle. She looked hulked, compact,
dangerous.

“What are we gonna do?” wailed Al Knowles.

“We’re gonna sit and wait,” said Kelly, “and you’re gonna shut your
trap. We won’t know for five minutes yet whether she’s going to go after
us from down below or from up here.”

“If you want to leave,” said Tom gently, “go right ahead.” Al sat down.

Kelly looked ruminatively down at his beloved power shovel, sitting
squat and unlovely in the cut below them and away to their right. “How
do you reckon she’d stand up against the dipper stick?”

“If it ever came to a rough-and-tumble,” said Tom, “I’d say it would be
just too bad for _Daisy Etta_. But she wouldn’t fight. There’s no way
you could get the shovel within punchin’ range; _Daisy_’d just stand
there and laugh at you.”

“I can’t see her now,” whined Al.

Tom looked. “She’s taken the bluff. She’s going to try it from up here.
I move we sit tight and see if she’s foolish enough to try to walk out
here over that narrow neck. If she does, she’ll drop on her belly with
one truck on each side. Probably turn herself over trying to dig out.”

The wait then was interminable. Back over the hill they could hear the
laboring motor; twice they heard the machine stop momentarily to shift
gears. Once they looked at each other hopefully as the sound rose to a
series of bellowing roars, as if she were backing and filling; then they
realized that she was trying to take some particularly steep part of the
bank and having trouble getting traction. But she made it; the motor
revved up as she made the brow of the hill, and she shifted into fourth
gear and came lumbering out into the open. She lurched up to the edge of
the cut, stopped, throttled down, dropped her blade on the ground and
stood there idling. Al Knowles backed away to the very edge of the
tongue of earth they stood on, his eyes practically on stalks.

“O.K.—put up or shut up,” Kelly called across harshly.

“She’s looking the situation over,” said Tom. “That narrow pathway don’t
fool her a bit.”

_Daisy Etta’s_ blade began to rise, and stopped just clear of the
ground. She shifted without clashing her gears, began to back slowly,
still at little more than an idle.

“She’s gonna jump!” screamed Al. “I’m gettin’ out of here!”

“Stay here, you fool,” shouted Kelly. “She can’t get us as long as we’re
up here! If you go down, she’ll hunt you down like a rabbit.”

The blast of the Seven’s motor was the last straw for Al. He squeaked
and hopped over the edge, scrambling and sliding down the almost sheer
face of the cut. He hit the bottom running.

_Daisy Etta_ lowered her blade and raised her snout and growled forward,
the blade loading. Six, seven, seven and a half cubic yards of dirt
piled up in front of her as she neared the edge. The loaded blade bit
into the narrow pathway that led out to their perch. It was almost all
soft, white, crumbly marl, and the great machine sank nose down into it,
the monstrous overload of topsoil spilling down on each side.

“She’s going to bury herself!” shouted Kelly.

“No—wait.” Tom caught his arm. “She’s trying to turn—she made it! She
made it! She’s ramping herself down to the flat!”

“She is—and she’s cut us off from the bluff!”

The bulldozer, blade raised as high as it could possibly go, the
hydraulic rod gleaming clean in the early light, freed herself of her
tremendous load, spun around and headed back upward, sinking her blade
again. She made one more pass between them and the bluff, making a cut
now far too wide for them to jump, particularly to the crumbly footing
at the bluff’s edge. Once down again, she turned to face their haven,
now an isolated pillar of marl, and revved down, waiting.

“I never thought of this,” said Kelly guiltily. “I knew we’d be safe
from her ramping up, and I never thought she’d try it the other way!”

“Skip it. In the meantime, here we sit. What happens—do we wait up here
until she idles out of fuel, or do we starve to death?”

“Oh, this won’t be a siege, Tom. That thing’s too much of a killer.
Where’s Al? I wonder if he’s got guts enough to make a pass near here
with our tractor and draw her off?”

“He had just guts enough to take our tractor and head out,” said Tom.
“Didn’t you know?”

“He took our—_what?”_ Kelly looked out toward where they had left their
machine the night before. It was gone. “Why the dirty little yellow
rat!”

“No sense cussin’,” said Tom steadily, interrupting what he knew was the
beginning of some really flowery language. “What else could you expect?”

_Daisy Etta_ decided, apparently, how to go about removing their
splendid isolation. She uttered the snort of too-quick throttle, and
moved into their peak with a corner of her blade, cutting out a huge
swipe, undercutting the material over it so that it fell on her side and
track as she passed. Eight inches disappeared from that side of their
little plateau.

“Oh-oh. That won’t do a-tall,” said Tom.

“Fixin’ to dig us down,” said Kelly grimly. “Take her about twenty
minutes. Tom, I say leave.”

“It won’t be healthy. You just got no idea how fast that thing can move
now. Don’t forget, she’s a good deal more than she was when she had a
man runnin’ her. She can shift from high to reverse to fifth speed
forward like that”—he snapped his fingers—“and she can pivot faster’n
you can blink and throw that blade just where she wants it.”

The tractor passed under them, bellowing, and their little table was
suddenly a foot shorter.

“Awright,” said Kelly. “So what do you want to do? Stay here and let her
dig the ground out from under our feet?”

“I’m just warning you,” said Tom. “Now listen. We’ll wait until she’s
taking a load. It’ll take her a second to get rid of it when she knows
we’re gone. We’ll split—she can’t get both of us. You head out in the
open, try to circle the curve of the bluff and get where you can climb
it. Then come back over here to the cut. A man can scramble off a
fourteen-foot cut faster’n any tractor ever built. I’ll cut in close to
the cut, down at the bottom. If she takes after you, I’ll get clear all
right. If she takes after me, I’ll try to make the shovel and at least
give her a run for her money. I can play hide an’ seek in an’ around and
under that dipper-stick all day if she wants to play.”

“Why me out in the open?”

“Don’t you think those long laigs o’ yours can outrun her in that
distance?”

“Reckon they got to,” grinned Kelly. “O.K., Tom.”

They waited tensely. _Daisy Etta_ backed close by, started another pass.
As the motor blatted under the load, Tom said, “Now!” and they jumped.
Kelly, catlike as always, landed on his feet. Tom, whose knees and
ankles were black and blue with rope bruises, took two staggering steps
and fell. Kelly scooped him to his feet as the dozer’s steel prow came
around the bank. Instantly she was in fifth gear and howling down at
them. Kelly flung himself to the left and Tom to the right, and they
pounded away, Kelly out toward the runway, Tom straight for the shovel.
_Daisy Etta_ let them diverge for a moment, keeping her course, trying
to pursue both; then she evidently sized Tom up as the slower, for she
swung toward him. The instant’s hesitation was all Tom needed to get the
little lead necessary. He tore up to the shovel, his legs going like
pistons, and dived down between the shovel’s tracks.

As he hit the ground, the big manganese-steel moldboard hit the right
track of the shovel, and the impact set all forty-seven tons of the
great machine quivering. But Tom did not stop. He scrabbled his way
under the rig, stood up behind it, leaped and caught the sill of the
rear window, clapped his other hand on it, drew himself up and tumbled
inside. Here he was safe for the moment; the huge tracks themselves were
higher than the Seven’s blade could rise, and the floor of the cab was a
good sixteen inches higher than the top of the track. Tom went to the
cab door and peeped outside. The tractor had drawn off and was idling.

“Study away,” gritted Tom, and went to the big Murphy Diesel. He
unhurriedly checked the oil with the bayonet gauge, replaced it, took
the governor cut-out rod from its rack and inserted it in the governor
casing. He set the master throttle at the halfway mark, pulled up the
starter-handle, twitched the cut-out. The motor spat a wad of blue smoke
out of its hooded exhaust and caught. Tom put the rod back, studied the
fuel-flow glass and pressure gauges, and then went to the door and
looked out again. The Seven had not moved, but it was revving up and
down in the uneven fashion it had shown up on the mesa. Tom had the
extraordinary idea that it was gathering itself to spring. He slipped
into the saddle, threw the master clutch. The big gears that half-filled
the cab obediently began to turn. He kicked the brake-locks loose with
his heels, let his feet rest lightly on the pedals as they rose.

Then he reached over his head and snapped back the throttle. As the
Murphy picked up he grasped both hoist and swing levers and pulled them
back. The engine howled; the two-yard bucket came up off the ground with
a sudden jolt as the cold friction grabbed it. The big machine swung
hard to the right; Tom snapped his hoist lever forward and checked the
bucket’s rise with his foot on the brake. He shoved the crowd lever
forward; the bucket ran out to the end of its reach, and the heel of the
bucket wiped across the Seven’s hood, taking with it the exhaust stack,
muffler and all, and the pre-cleaner on the air intake. Tom cursed. He
had figured on the machine’s leaping backward. If it had, he would have
smashed the cast-iron radiator core. But she had stood still, making a
split-second decision.

Now she moved, though, and quickly. With that incredibly fast shifting,
she leaped backwards and pivoted out of range before Tom could check the
shovel’s mad swing. The heavy swing-friction blocks smoked acridly as
the machine slowed, stopped and swung back. Tom checked her as he was
facing the Seven, hoisted his bucket a few feet, and rehauled, bringing
it about halfway back, ready for anything. The four great dipper-teeth
gleamed in the sun. Tom ran a practiced eye over cables, boom and
dipper-stick, liking the black polish of crater compound on the sliding
parts, the easy tension of well-greased cables and links. The huge
machine stood strong, ready and profoundly subservient for all its brute
power.

Tom looked searchingly at the Seven’s ruined engine hood. The gaping end
of the broken air-intake pipe stared back at him. “Aha!” he said. “A few
cupfuls of nice dry marl down there’ll give you something to chew on.”

Keeping a wary eye on the tractor, he swung into the bank, dropped his
bucket and plunged it into the marl. He crowded it deep, and the Murphy
yelled for help but kept on pushing. At the peak of the load a terrific
jar rocked him in the saddle. He looked back over his shoulder through
the door and saw the Seven backing off again. She had run up and
delivered a terrific punch to the counterweight at the back of the cab.
Tom grinned tightly. She’d have to do better than that. There was
nothing back there but eight or ten tons of solid steel. And he didn’t
much care at the moment whether or not she scratched his paint.

He swung back again, white marl running away on both sides of the heaped
bucket. The shovel rode perfectly now, for a shovel is counterweighted
to balance true when standing level with the bucket loaded. The hoist
and swing frictions and the brake linings had heated and dried
themselves of the night’s condensation moisture, and she answered the
controls in a way that delighted the operator in him. He handled the
swing lever lightly, back to swing to the right, forward to swing to the
left, following the slow dance the Seven had started to do, stepping
warily back and forth like a fighter looking for an opening. Tom kept
the bucket between himself and the tractor, knowing that she could not
hurt a tool that was built to smash hard rock for twenty hours a day and
like it.

_Daisy Etta_ bellowed and rushed in. Tom snapped the hoist lever back
hard, and the bucket rose, letting the tractor run underneath. Tom
punched the bucket trip, and the great steel jaw opened, cascading marl
down on the broken hood. The tractor’s fan blew it back in a huge
billowing cloud. The instant that it took Tom to check and dump was
enough, however, for the tractor to dance back out of the way, for when
he tried to drop it on the machine to smash the coiled injector tubes on
top of the engine block, she was gone.

The dust cleared away, and the tractor moved in again, feinted to the
left, then swung her blade at the bucket, which was just clear of the
ground. Tom swung to meet her, her feint having gotten her in a little
closer than he liked, and bucket met blade with a shower of sparks and a
clank that could be heard for half a mile. She had come in with her
blade high, and Tom let out a wordless shout as he saw that the A-frame
brace behind the blade had caught between two of his dipper-teeth. He
snatched at his hoist lever and the bucket came up, lifting with it the
whole front end of the bulldozer.

_Daisy Etta_ plunged up and down and her tracks dug violently into the
earth as she raised and lowered her blade, trying to shake herself free.
Tom rehauled, trying to bring the tractor in closer, for the boom was
set too low to attempt to lift such a dead weight. As it was, the
shovel’s off track was trying its best to get off the ground. But the
crowd and rehaul frictions could not handle her alone; they began to
heat and slip.

Tom hoisted a little; the shovel’s off track came up a foot off the
ground. Tom cursed and let the bucket drop, and in an instant the dozer
was free and running clear. Tom swung wildly at her, missed. The dozer
came in on a long curve; Tom swung to meet her again, took a vicious
swipe at her which she took on her blade. But this time she did not
withdraw after being hit, but bored right in, carrying the bucket before
her. Before Tom realized what she was doing his bucket was around in
front of the tracks and between them, on the ground. It was as swift and
skillful a maneuver as could be imagined, and it left the shovel without
the ability to swing as long as _Daisy Etta_ could hold the bucket
trapped between the tracks.

Tom crowded furiously, but that succeeded only in lifting the boom
higher in the air since there is nothing to hold a boom down but its own
weight. Hoisting did nothing but make his frictions smoke and rev the
engine down dangerously close to the stalling point.

Tom swore again and reached down to the cluster of small levers at his
left. These were the gears. On this type of shovel, the swing lever
controls everything except crowd and hoist. With the swing lever, the
operator, having selected his gear, controls the travel—that is, power
to the tracks—in forward and reverse; booming up and booming down; and
swinging. The machine can do only one of these things at a time. If she
is in travel gear, she cannot swing. If she is in swing gear, she cannot
boom up or down. Not once in years of operating would this inability
bother an operator; now, however, nothing was normal.

Tom pushed the swing gear control down and pulled up on the travel. The
clutches involved were jaw clutches, not frictions, so that he had to
throttle down to an idle before he could make the castellations mesh. As
the Murphy revved down, _Daisy Etta_ took it as a signal that something
could be done about it, and she shoved furiously into the bucket. But
Tom had all controls in neutral and all she succeeded in doing was to
dig herself in, her sharp new cleats spinning deep into the dirt.

Tom set his throttle up again and shoved the swing lever forward. There
was a vast crackling of drive chains; and the big tracks started to
turn.

_Daisy Etta_ had sharp cleats; her pads were twenty inches wide and her
tracks were fourteen feet long, and there were fourteen tons of steel on
them. The shovel’s big flat pads were three feet wide and twenty feet
long, and forty-seven tons aboard. There was simply no comparison. The
Murphy bellowed the fact that the work was hard, but gave no indications
of stalling. _Daisy Etta_ performed the incredible feat of shifting into
forward gear while she was moving backwards, but it did her no good.
Round and round her tracks went, trying to drive her forward, gouging
deep; and slowly and surely she was forced backward toward the cut wall
by the shovel.

Tom heard a sound that was not part of a straining machine; he looked
out and saw Kelly on top of the cut, smoking, swinging his feet over the
edge, making punching motions with his hands as if he had a ringside
seat at a big fight—which he certainly had.

Tom now offered the dozer little choice. If she did not turn aside
before him, she would be borne back against the bank and her fuel tank
crushed. There was every possibility that, having her pinned there, Tom
would have time to raise his bucket over her and smash her to pieces.
And if she turned before she was forced against the bank, she would have
to free Tom’s bucket. This she had to do.

The Murphy gave him warning, but not enough. It crooned as the load came
off, and Tom knew that the dozer was shifting into a reverse gear. He
whipped the hoist lever back, and the bucket rose as the dozer backed
away from him. He crowded it out and let it come smashing down—and
missed. For the tractor danced aside—and while he was in travel gear he
could not swing to follow it. _Daisy Etta_ charged then, put one track
on the bank and went over almost on her beam-ends, throwing one end of
her blade high in the air. So totally unexpected was it that Tom was
quite unprepared. The tractor flung itself on the bucket, and the
cutting edge of the blade dropped between the dipper teeth. This time
there was the whole weight of the tractor to hold it there. There would
be no way for her to free herself—but at the same time she had trapped
the bucket so far out from the center pin of the shovel that Tom
couldn’t hoist without overbalancing and turning the monster over.

_Daisy Etta_ ground away in reverse, dragging the bucket out until it
was checked by the bumper-blocks. Then she began to crab sideways, up
against the bank and when Tom tried tentatively to rehaul, she shifted
and came right with him, burying one whole end of her blade deep into
the bank.

Stalemate. She had hung herself up on the bucket, and she had
immobilized it. Tom tried to rehaul, but the tractor’s anchorage in the
bank was too solid. He tried to swing, to hoist. All the overworked
frictions could possibly give out was smoke. Tom grunted and throttled
to an idle, leaned out the window. _Daisy Etta_ was idling too, loudly
without her muffler, the stackless exhaust giving out an ugly flat
sound. But after the roar of the two great motors the partial silence
was deafening.

Kelly called down, “Double knockout, hey?”

“Looks like it. What say we see if we can’t get close enough to her to
quiet her down some?”

Kelly shrugged. “I dunno. If she’s really stopped herself, it’s the
first time. I respect that rig, Tom. She wouldn’t have got herself into
that spot if she didn’t have an ace up her sleeve.”

“Look at her, man! Suppose she was a civilized bulldozer and you had to
get her out of there. She can’t raise her blade high enough to free it
from those dipper-teeth, y’know. Think you’d be able to do it?”

“It might take several seconds,” Kelly drawled. “She’s sure high and
dry.”

“O.K., let’s spike her guns.”

“Like what?”

“Like taking a bar and prying out her tubing.” He referred to the coiled
brass tubing that carried the fuel, under pressure, from the pump to the
injectors. There were many feet of it, running from the pump reservoir,
stacked in expansion coils over the cylinder head.

As he spoke _Daisy Etta’s_ idle burst into that maniac revving up and
down characteristic of her.

“What do you know!” Tom called above the racket. “Eavesdropping!”

Kelly slid down the cut, stood up on the track of the shovel and poked
his head in the window. “Well, you want to get a bar and try?”

“Let’s go!”

Tom went to the toolbox and pulled out a pinch bar that Kelly used to
replace cables on his machine, and swung to the ground. They approached
the tractor warily. She revved up as they came near, began to shudder.
The front end rose and dropped and the tracks began to turn as she tried
to twist out of the vise her blade had dropped into.

“Take it easy, sister,” said Tom. “You’ll just bury yourself. Set still
and take it, now, like a good girl. You got it comin’.”

“Be careful,” said Kelly. Tom hefted the bar and laid a hand on the
fender.

The tractor literally shivered, and from the rubber hose connection at
the top of the radiator, a blinding steam of hot water shot out. It
fanned and caught them both full in the face. They staggered back,
cursing.

“You O.K., Tom?” Kelly gasped a moment later. He had got most of it
across the mouth and cheek. Tom was on his knees, his shirt tail out,
blotting his face.

“My eyes … oh, my eyes—”

“Let’s see!” Kelly dropped down beside him and took him by the wrists,
gently removing Tom’s hands from his face. He whistled. “Come on,” he
gritted. He helped Tom up and led him away a few feet. “Stay here,” he
said hoarsely. He turned, walked back toward the dozer, picking up the
pinch-bar. “You dirty—!” he yelled, and flung it like a javelin at the
tube coils. It was a little high. It struck the ruined hood, made a deep
dent in the metal. The dent promptly inverted with a loud _thung-g-g!_
and flung the bar back at him. He ducked; it whistled over his head and
caught Tom in the calves of his legs. He went down like a poled ox, but
staggered to his feet again.

“Come on!” Kelly snarled, and taking Tom’s arm, hustled him around the
turn of the cut. “Sit down! I’ll be right back.”

“Where are you going? Kelly—be careful!”

“Careful and how!”

Kelly’s long legs ate up the distance back to the shovel. He swung into
the cab, reached back over the motor and set up the master throttle all
the way. Stepping up behind the saddle, he opened the running throttle
and the Murphy howled. Then he hauled back on the hoist lever until it
knuckled in, turned and leaped off the machine in one supple motion.

The hoist drum turned and took up slack; the cable straightened as it
took the strain. The bucket stirred under the dead weight of the
bulldozer that rested on it; and slowly, then, the great flat tracks
began to lift their rear ends off the ground. The great obedient mass of
machinery teetered forward on the tips of her tracks, the Murphy revved
down and under the incredible load, but it kept the strain. A strand of
the two-part hoist cable broke and whipped around, singing; and then she
was balanced—over-balanced—

And the shovel had hauled herself right over and had fallen with an
earth-shaking crash. The boom, eight tons of solid steel, clanged down
onto the blade of the bulldozer, and lay there, crushing it down tightly
onto the imprisoning row of dipper-teeth.

_Daisy Etta_ sat there, not trying to move now, racing her motor
impotently. Kelly strutted past her, thumbing his nose, and went back to
Tom.

“Kelly! I thought you were never coming back! What happened?”

“Shovel pulled herself over on her nose.”

“Good boy! Fall on the tractor?”

“Nup. But the boom’s laying across the top of her blade. Caught like a
rat in a trap.”

“Better watch out the rat don’t chew its leg off to get out,” said Tom,
dryly. “Still runnin’, is she?”

“Yep. But we’ll fix that in a hurry.”

“Sure. Sure. How?”

“How? I dunno. Dynamite, maybe. How’s the optics?”

Tom opened one a trifle and grunted. “Rough. I can see a little, though.
My eyelids are parboiled, mostly. Dynamite, you say? Well, let’s think
first. Think.”

Tom sat back against the bank and stretched out his legs. “I tell you,
Kelly, I been too blessed busy these last few hours to think much, but
there’s one thing that keeps comin’ back to me—somethin’ I was mullin’
over long before the rest of you guys knew anything was up at all,
except that Rivera had got hurt in some way I wouldn’t tell you all
about. But I don’t reckon you’ll call me crazy if I open my mouth now
and let it all run out?”

“From now on,” Kelly said fervently, “nobody’s crazy. After this I’ll
believe anything.” He sat down.

“O.K. Well, about that tractor. What do you suppose has got into her?”

“Search me. I dunno.”

“No—don’t say that. I just got an idea we can’t stop at ‘I dunno.’ We
got to figure all the angles on this thing before we know just what to
do about it. Let’s just get this thing lined up. When did it start? On
the mesa. How? Rivera was opening an old building with the Seven. This
thing came out of there. Now here’s what I’m getting at. We can dope
these things out about it: It’s intelligent. It can only get into a
machine and not into a man. It—”

“What about that? How do you know it can’t?”

“Because it had the chance to and didn’t. I was standing right by the
opening when it kited out. Rivera was up on the machine at the time. It
didn’t directly harm either of us. It got into the tractor, and the
tractor did. By the same token, it can’t hurt a man when it’s out of a
machine, but that’s all it wants to do when it’s in one. O.K.?

“To get on: once it’s in the machine it can’t get out again. We know
that because it had plenty of chances and didn’t take them. That scuffle
with the dipper-stick, f’r instance. My face woulda been plenty red if
it had taken over the shovel—and you can bet it would have if it could.”

“I got you so far. But what are we going to do about it?”

“That’s the thing. You see, I don’t think it’s enough to wreck the
tractor. We might burn it, blast it, and still not hurt whatever it was
that got into it up on the mesa.”

“That makes sense. But I don’t see what else we can do than just break
up the dozer. We haven’t got a line on actually what the thing is.”

“I think we have. Remember I asked you all those screwy questions about
the arc that killed Peebles. Well, when that happened, I recollected a
flock of other things. One—when it got out of that hole up there, I
smelled that smell that you notice when you’re welding; sometimes when
lightning strikes real close.”

“Ozone,” said Kelly.

“Yeah—ozone. Then, it likes metal, not flesh. But most of all, there was
that arc. Now, that was absolutely screwy. You know as well as I
do—better—that an arc generator simply don’t have the push to do a thing
like that. It can’t kill a man, and it can’t throw an arc no fifty feet.
But it did. An’ that’s why I asked you if there could be something—a
field, or some such—that could _suck_ current out of a generator, all at
once, faster than it could flow. Because this thing’s electrical; it
fits all around.”

“Electronic,” said Kelly doubtfully, thoughtfully.

“I wouldn’t know. Now then. When Peebles was killed, a funny thing
happened. Remember what Chub said? The Seven moved back—straight back,
about thirty feet, until it bumped into a road-roller that was standing
behind it. It did that with no fuel in the starting engine—without even
using the starting engine, for that matter—and with the compression
valves locked open!

“Kelly, that thing in the dozer can’t do much, when you come right down
to it. It couldn’t fix itself up after that joyride on the mesa. It
can’t make the machine do too much more than the machine can do
ordinarily. What it actually can do, seems to me, is to make a spring
push instead of pull, like the control levers, and make a fitting slip
when it’s supposed to hold, like the ratchet on the throttle lever. It
can turn a shaft, like the way it cranks its own starting motor. But if
it was so all-fired high-powered, it wouldn’t have to use the starting
motor! The absolute biggest job it’s done so far, seems to me, was when
it walked back from that welding machine when Peebles got his. Now, why
did it do that just then?”

“Reckon it didn’t like the brimstone smell, like it says in the Good
Book,” said Kelly sourly.

“That’s pretty close, seems to me. Look, Kelly—this thing _feels_
things. I mean, it can get sore. If it couldn’t it never woulda kept
driving in at the shovel like that. It can think. But if it can do all
those things, then it can be _scared!”_

“Scared? Why should it be scared?”

“Listen. Something went on in that thing when the arc hit it. What’s
that I read in a magazine once about heat—something about molecules
runnin’ around with their heads cut off when they got hot?”

“Molecules do. They go into rapid motion when heat is applied. But—”

“But nothin’. That machine was hot for four hours after that. But she
was hot in a funny way. Not just around the place where the arc hit,
like as if it was a welding arc. But hot all over—from the moldboard to
the fuel-tank cap. Hot everywhere. And just as hot behind the final
drive housings as she was at the top of the blade where the poor guy put
his hand.

“And look at this.” Tom was getting excited, as his words crystallized
his ideas. “She was scared—scared enough to back off from that welder,
putting everything she could into it, to get back from that welding
machine. And after that, she was sick. I say that because in the whole
time she’s had that what-ever-ya-call-it in her, she’s never been near
men without trying to kill them, except for those two days after the arc
hit her. She had juice enough to start herself when Dennis came around
with the crank, but she still needed someone to run her till she got her
strength back.”

“But why didn’t she turn and smash up the welder when Dennis took her?”

“One of two things. She didn’t have the strength, or she didn’t have the
guts. She was scared, maybe, and wanted out of there, away from that
thing.”

“But she had all night to go back for it!”

“Still scared. Or … oh, _that’s_ it! She had other things to do first.
Her main idea is to kill men—there’s no other way you can figure it.
It’s what she was built to do. Not the tractor—they don’t build ’em
sweeter’n that machine; but the thing that’s runnin’ it.”

“What _is_ that thing?” Kelly mused. “Coming out of that old
building—temple—what have you—how old is it? How long was it there? What
kept it in there?”

“What kept it in there was some funny gray stuff that lined the inside
of the buildin’,” said Tom. “It was like rock, an’ it was like smoke.

“It was a color that scared you to look at it, and it gave Rivera and me
the creeps when we got near it. Don’t ask me what it was. I went up
there to look at it, and it’s gone. Gone from the building, anyhow.
There was a little lump of it on the ground. I don’t know whether that
was a hunk of it, or all of it rolled up into a ball. I get the creeps
again thinkin’ about it.”

Kelly stood up. “Well, the heck with it. We been beatin’ our gums up
here too long anyhow. There’s just enough sense in what you say to make
me want to try something nonsensical, if you see what I mean. If that
welder can sweat the Ol’ Nick out of that tractor, I’m on. Especially
from fifty feet away. There should be a Dumptor around here somewhere;
let’s move from here. Can you navigate now?”

“Reckon so, a little.” Tom rose and together they followed the cut until
they came on the Dumptor. They climbed on, cranked it up and headed
toward camp.

About half way there Kelly looked back, gasped, and putting his mouth
close to Tom’s ear, bellowed against the scream of the motor. “Tom!
‘Member what you said about the rat in the trap biting off a leg?”

“Well, _Daisy_ did too! She’s left her blade an’ pushbeams an’ she’s
followin’ us in!”

They howled into the camp, gasping against the dust that followed when
they pulled up by the welder.

Kelly, said, “You cast around and see if you can find a drawpin to hook
that rig up to the Dumptor with. I’m goin’ after some water an’ chow!”

Tom grinned. Imagine old Kelly forgetting that a Dumptor had no drawbar!
He groped around to a toolbox, peering out of the narrow slit beneath
swollen lids, felt behind it and located a shackle. He climbed up on the
Dumptor, turned it around and backed up to the welding machine. He
passed the shackle through the ring at the end of the steering tongue of
the welder, screwed in the pin and dropped the shackle over the front
towing hook of the Dumptor. A Dumptor being what it is, having no real
front and no real rear, and direct reversing gears in all speeds, it was
no trouble to drive it “backwards” for a change.

Kelly came pounding back, out of breath. “Fix it? Good. Shackle? No
drawbar! _Daisy’s_ closin’ up fast; I say let’s take the beach. We’ll be
concealed until we have a good lead out o’ this pocket, and the going’s
pretty fair, long as we don’t bury this jalopy in the sand.”

“Good,” said Tom as they climbed on and he accepted an open tin of K.
“Only go easy; bump around too much and the welder’ll slip off the hook.
An’ I somehow don’t want to lose it just now.”

They took off, zooming up the beach. A quarter of a mile up, they
sighted the Seven across the flat. It immediately turned and took a
course that would intercept them.

“Here she comes,” shouted Kelly, and stepped down hard on the
accelerator. Tom leaned over the back of the seat, keeping his eye on
their tow. “Hey! Take it easy! Watch it!

_“Hey!”_

But it was too late. The tongue of the welding machine responded to that
one bump too many. The shackle jumped up off the hook, the welder
lurched wildly, slewed hard to the left. The tongue dropped to the sand
and dug in; the machine rolled up on it and snapped it off, finally
stopped, leaning crazily askew. By a miracle it did not quite turn over.

Kelly tramped on the brakes and both their heads did their utmost to
snap off their shoulders. They leaped off and ran back to the welder. It
was intact, but towing it was now out of the question. “If there’s going
to be a showdown, it’s gotta be here.”

The beach here was about thirty yards wide, the sand almost level, and
undercut banks of sawgrass forming the landward edge in a series of
little hummocks and headlands. While Tom stayed with the machine,
testing starter and generator contacts, Kelly walked up one of the
little mounds, stood up on it and scanned the beach back the way he had
come. Suddenly he began to shout and wave his arms.

“What’s got into you?”

“It’s Al!” Kelly called back. “With the pan tractor!”

Tom dropped what he was doing, and came to stand beside Kelly. “Where’s
the Seven? I can’t see.”

“Turned on the beach and followin’ our track. Al! Al! You little skunk,
c’mere!”

Tom could now dimly make out the pan tractor cutting across directly
toward them and the beach.

“He don’t see _Daisy Etta,”_ remarked Kelly disgustedly, “or he’d sure
be headin’ the other way.”

Fifty yards away Al pulled up and throttled down. Kelly shouted and
waved to him. Al stood up on the machine, cupped his hands around his
mouth. “Where’s the Seven?”

“Never mind that! Come here with that tractor!”

Al stayed where he was. Kelly cursed and started out after him. “You
stay away from me,” he said when Kelly was closer.

“I ain’t got time for you now,” said Kelly. “Bring that tractor down to
the beach.”

“Where’s that _Daisy Etta?”_ Al’s voice was oddly strained.

“Right behind us.” Kelly tossed a thumb over his shoulder. “On the
beach.”

Al’s pop eyes clicked wide almost audibly. He turned on his heel and
jumped off the machine and started to run. Kelly uttered a wordless
syllable that was somehow more obscene than anything else he had ever
uttered, and vaulted into the seat of the machine. “Hey!” he bellowed
after Al’s rapidly diminishing figure. “You’re runnin’ right into her.”
Al appeared not to hear, but went pelting down the beach.

Kelly put her into fifth gear and poured on the throttle. As the tractor
began to move he whacked out the master clutch, snatched the overdrive
lever back to put her into sixth, rammed the clutch in again, all so
fast that she did not have time to stop rolling. Bucking and jumping
over the rough ground the fast machine whined for the beach.

Tom was fumbling back to the welder, his ears telling him better than
his eyes how close the Seven was—for she was certainly no nightingale,
particularly without her exhaust stack. Kelly reached the machine as he
did.

“Get behind it,” snapped Tom. “I’ll jamb the tierod with the shackle,
and you see if you can’t bunt her up into that pocket between those two
hummocks. Only take it easy—you don’t want to tear up that generator.
Where’s Al?”

“Don’t ask me. He run down the beach to meet _Daisy.”_

“He _what?”_

The whine of the two-cycle drowned out Kelly’s answer, if any. He got
behind the welder and set his blade against it. Then in a low gear,
slipping his clutch in a little, he slowly nudged the machine toward the
place Tom indicated. It was a little hollow in between two projecting
banks. The surf and the high-tide mark dipped inland here to match it;
the water was only a few feet away.

Tom raised his arm and Kelly stopped. From the other side of the
projecting shelf, out of their sight now, came the flat roar of the
Seven’s exhaust. Kelly sprang off the tractor and went to help Tom, who
was furiously throwing out coils of cable from the rack of the welder.
“What’s the game?”

“We got to ground that Seven some way,” panted Tom. He threw the last
bit of cable out to clear it of kinks and turned to the panel.

“How was it—about sixty volts and the amperage on ‘special
application’?” He spun the dials, pressed the starter button. The motor
responded instantly. Kelly scooped up ground clamp and rod holder and
tapped them together. The solenoid governor picked up the load and the
motor hummed as a good live spark took the jump.

“Good,” said Tom, switching off the generator. “Come on, Lieutenant
General Electric, figure me out a way to ground that maverick.”

Kelly tightened his lips, shook his head. “I dunno—unless somebody
actually claps this thing on her.”

“No, boy, can’t do that. If one of us gets killed—”

Kelly tossed the ground clamp idly, his lithe body taut. “Don’t give me
that, Tom. You know I’m elected because you can’t see good enough yet to
handle it. You know you’d do it if you could. You—”

He stopped short, for the steadily increasing roar of the approaching
Seven had stopped, was blatting away now in that extraordinary irregular
throttling that _Daisy Etta_ affected.

“Now, what’s got into her?”

Kelly broke away and scrambled up the bank. “Tom!” he gasped. “Tom—come
up here!”

Tom followed, and they lay side by side, peering out over the top of the
escarpment at the remarkable tableau.

_Daisy Etta_ was standing on the beach, near the water, not moving.
Before her, twenty or thirty feet away, stood Al Knowles, his arms out
in front of him, talking a blue streak. _Daisy_ made far too much racket
for them to hear what he was saying.

“Do you reckon he’s got guts enough to stall her off for us?” said Tom.

“If he has, it’s the queerest thing that’s happened yet on this old
island,” Kelly breathed, “an’ that’s saying something.”

The Seven revved up till she shook, and then throttled back. She ran
down so low then that they thought she had shut herself down, but she
caught on the last two revolutions and began to idle quietly. And then
they could hear.

Al’s voice was high, hysterical. “—I come t’ he’p you, I come t’ he’p
you, don’ kill me, I’ll he’p you—” He took a step forward; the dozer
snorted and he fell to his knees. “I’ll wash you an’ grease you and
change yo’ ile,” he said in a high singsong.

“The guy’s not human,” said Kelly wonderingly.

“He ain’t housebroke either,” Tom chuckled.

“—lemme he’p you. I’ll fix you when you break down. I’ll he’p you kill
those other guys—”

“She don’t need any help!” said Tom.

“The louse,” growled Kelly. “The rotten little double-crossing polecat!”
He stood up. “Hey, you Al! Come out o’ that. I mean now! If she don’t
get you I will, if you don’t move.”

Al was crying now. “Shut up!” he screamed. “I know who’s bawss
hereabouts, an’ so do you!” He pointed at the tractor. “She’ll kill us
all iff’n we don’t do what she wants!” He turned back to the machine.
“I’ll k-kill ’em fo’ you. I’ll wash you and shine you up and f-fix yo’
hood. I’ll put yo’ blade back on.… ”

Tom reached out and caught Kelly’s legs as the tall man started out,
blind mad. “Git back here,” he barked. “What you want to do—get killed
for the privilege of pinnin’ his ears back?”

Kelly subsided and came back, threw himself down beside Tom, put his
face in his hands. He was quivering with rage.

“Don’t take on so,” Tom said. “The man’s plumb loco. You can’t argue
with him any more’n you can with _Daisy_, there. If he’s got to get his,
_Daisy’ll_ give it to him.”

“Aw, Tom, it ain’t that. I know he ain’t worth it, but I can’t sit up
here and watch him get himself killed. I can’t, Tom.”

Tom thumped him on the shoulder, because there were simply no words to
be said. Suddenly he stiffened, snapped his fingers.

“There’s our ground,” he said urgently, pointing seaward. “The water—the
wet beach where the surf runs. If we can get our ground clamp out there
and her somewhere near it—”

“Ground the pan tractor. Run it out into the water. It ought to
reach—partway, anyhow.”

“That’s it—c’mon.”

They slid down the bank, snatched up the ground clamp, attached it to
the frame on the pan tractor.

“I’ll take it,” said Tom, and as Kelly opened his mouth, Tom shoved him
back against the welding machine. “No time to argue,” he snapped, swung
on to the machine, slapped her in gear and was off. Kelly took a step
toward the tractor, and then his quick eyes saw a bight of the ground
cable about to foul a wheel of the welder. He stopped and threw it off,
spread out the rest of it so it would pay off clear. Tom, with the
incredible single-mindedness of the trained operator, watched only the
black line of the trailing cable on the sand behind him. When it
straightened he stopped. The front of the tracks were sloshing in the
gentle surf. He climbed off the side away from the Seven and tried to
see. There was movement, and the growl of her motor now running at a bit
more than idle, but he could not distinguish much.

Kelly picked up the rod holder and went to peer around the head of the
protruding bank. Al was on his feet, still crooning hysterically,
sidling over toward _Daisy Etta_. Kelly ducked back, threw the switch on
the arc generator, climbed the bank and crawled along through the
sawgrass paralleling the beach until the holder in his hand tugged and
he knew he had reached the end of the cable. He looked out at the beach;
measured carefully with his eye the arc he would travel if he left his
position and, keeping the cable taut, went out on the beach. At no point
would he come within seventy feet of the possessed machine, let alone
fifty. She had to be drawn in closer. And she had to be maneuvered out
to the wet sand, or in the water—

Al Knowles, encouraged by the machine’s apparent decision not to move,
approached, though warily, and still running off at the mouth. “—we’ll
kill ’em off an’ then we’ll keep it a secret and th’ bahges’ll come an’
take us offen th’ island and we’ll go to anothah job an’ kill us lots
mo’ … an’ when yo’ tracks git dry an’ squeak we’ll wet ’em with blood,
and you’ll be rightly king o’ the hill … look yondah, look yondah,
_Daisy Etta_, see them theah, by the otheh tractuh, theah they are, kill
’em, _Daisy_, kill ’em, _Daisy_, an’ lemme he’p … heah me. _Daisy_, heah
me, say you heah me—” and the motor roared in response. Al laid a timid
hand on the radiator guard, leaning far over to do it, and the tractor
still stood there grumbling but not moving. Al stepped back, motioned
with his arm, began to walk off slowly toward the pan tractor, looking
backwards as he did so like a man training a dog. “C’mon, c’mon, theah’s
one theah, le’s _kill’m, kill’m, kill’m …”_

And with a snort the tractor revved up and followed.

Kelly licked his lips without effect because his tongue was dry, too.
The madman passed him, walking straight up the center of the beach, and
the tractor, now no longer a bulldozer, followed him; and there the sand
was bone dry, sun-dried, dried to powder. As the tractor passed him,
Kelly got up on all fours, went over the edge of the bank onto the
beach, crouched there.

Al crooned, “I love ya, honey, I love ya, ’deed I do—”

Kelly ran crouching, like a man under machine-gun fire, making himself
as small as possible and feeling as big as a barn door. The torn-up sand
where the tractor had passed was under his feet now; he stopped, afraid
to get too much closer, afraid that a weakened, badly grounded arc might
leap from the holder in his hand and serve only to alarm and infuriate
the thing in the tractor. And just then Al saw him.

“There!” he screamed; and the tractor pulled up short. “Behind you!
Get’m, _Daisy! Kill’m, kill’m, kill’m.”_

Kelly stood up almost wearily, fury and frustration too much to be
borne. “In the water,” he yelled, because it was what his whole being
wanted. “Get’er in the water! Wet her tracks, Al!”

_“Kill’m, kill’m—”_

As the tractor started to turn, there was a commotion over by the pan
tractor. It was Tom, jumping, shouting, waving his arms, swearing. He
ran out from behind his machine, straight at the Seven. _Daisy Etta_’s
motor roared and she swung to meet him, Al barely dancing back out of
the way. Tom cut sharply, sand spouting under his pumping feet, and ran
straight into the water. He went out to about waist deep, suddenly
disappeared. He surfaced, spluttering, still trying to shout. Kelly took
a better grip on his rod holder and rushed.

_Daisy Etta_, in following Tom’s crazy rush, had swung in beside the pan
tractor, not fifteen feet away; and she, too, was now in the surf. Kelly
closed up the distance as fast as his long legs would let him; and as he
approached to within that crucial fifty feet, Al Knowles hit him.

Al was frothing at the mouth, gibbering. The two men hit full tilt; Al’s
head caught Kelly in the midriff as he missed a straightarm, and the
breath went out of him in one great _whoosh!_ Kelly went down like tall
timber, the whole world turned to one swirling red-gray haze. Al flung
himself on the bigger man, clawing, smacking, too berserk to ball his
fists.

“Ah’m go’ to kill you,” he gurgled. “She’ll git one, I’ll git t’other,
an’ then she’ll know—”

Kelly covered his face with his arms, and as some wind was sucked at
last into his laboring lungs, he flung them upward and sat up in one
mighty surge. Al was hurled upward and to one side, and as he hit the
ground Kelly reached out a long arm, and twisted his fingers into the
man’s coarse hair, raised him up, and came across with his other fist in
a punch that would have killed him had it landed square. But Al managed
to jerk to one side enough so that it only amputated a cheek. He fell
and lay still. Kelly scrambled madly around in the sand for his
welding-rod holder, found it and began to run again. He couldn’t see Tom
at all now, and the Seven was standing in the surf, moving slowly from
side to side, backing out, ravening. Kelly held the rod-clamp and its
trailing cable blindly before him and ran straight at the machine. And
then it came—that thin, soundless bolt of energy. But this time it had
its full force, for poor old Peebles’ body had not been the ground that
this swirling water offered. _Daisy Etta_ literally leaped backwards
toward him, and the water around her tracks spouted upward in hot steam.
The sound of her engine ran up and up, broke, took on the rhythmic,
uneven beat of a swing drummer. She threw herself from side to side like
a cat with a bag over its head. Kelly stepped a little closer, hoping
for another bolt to come from the clamp in his hand, but there was none,
for—

“The circuit breaker!” cried Kelly.

He threw the holder up on the deck plate of the Seven in front of the
seat, and ran across the little beach to the welder. He reached behind
the switchboard, got his thumb on the contact hinge and jammed it down.

_Daisy Etta_ leaped again, and then again, and suddenly her motor
stopped. Heat in turbulent waves blurred the air over her. The little
gas tank for the starting motor went out with a cannon’s roar, and the
big fuel tank, still holding thirty-odd gallons of Diesel oil, followed.
It puffed itself open rather than exploded, and threw a great curtain of
flame over the ground behind the machine. Motor or no motor, then, Kelly
distinctly saw the tractor shudder convulsively. There was a crawling
movement of the whole frame, a slight wave of motion away from the fuel
tank, approaching the front of the machine, and moving upward from the
tracks. It culminated in the crown of the radiator core, just in front
of the radiator cap; and suddenly an area of six or seven square inches
literally _blurred_ around the edges. For a second, then, it was normal,
and finally it slumped molten, and liquid metal ran down the sides,
throwing out little sparks as it encountered what was left of the
charred paint. And only then was Kelly conscious of agony in his left
hand. He looked down. The welding machine’s generator had stopped,
though the motor was still turning, having smashed the friable coupling
on its drive shaft. Smoke poured from the generator, which had become
little more than a heap of slag. Kelly did not scream, though, until he
looked and saw what had happened to his hand—

When he could see straight again, he called for Tom, and there was no
answer. At last he saw something out in the water, and plunged in after
it. The splash of cold salt water on his left hand he hardly felt, for
the numbness of shock had set in. He grabbed at Tom’s shirt with his
good hand, and then the ground seemed to pull itself out from under his
feet. That was it, then—a deep hole right off the beach. The Seven had
run right to the edge of it, had kept Tom there out of his depth and—

He flailed wildly, struck out for the beach, so near and so hard to get
to. He gulped a stinging lungful of brine, and only the lovely shock of
his knee striking solid beach kept him from giving up to the luxury of
choking to death. Sobbing with effort, he dragged Tom’s dead weight
inshore and clear of the surf. It was then that he became conscious of a
child’s shrill weeping; for a mad moment he thought it was he himself,
and then he looked and saw that it was Al Knowles. He left Tom and went
over to the broken creature.

“Get up, you,” he snarled. The weeping only got louder. Kelly rolled him
over on his back—he was quite unresisting—and belted him back and forth
across the mouth until Al began to choke. Then he hauled him to his feet
and led him over to Tom.

“Kneel down, scum. Put one of your knees between his knees.” Al stood
still. Kelly hit him again and he did as he was told.

“Put your hands on his lower ribs. There. O.K. Lean, you rat. Now sit
back.” He sat down, holding his left wrist in his right hand, letting
the blood drop from the ruined hand. “Lean. Hold it—sit back. Lean. Sit.
Lean. Sit.”

Soon Tom sighed and began to vomit weakly, and after that he was all
right.

This is the story of _Daisy Etta_, the bulldozer that went mad and had a
life of its own, and not the story of the missile test that they don’t
talk about except to refer to it as the missile test that they don’t
talk about. But you may have heard about it for all that—rumors, anyway.
The rumor has it that an early IRBM tested out a radically new controls
system by proving conclusively that it did not work. It was a big bird
and contained much juice, and flew far, far afield. Rumor goes on to
assert that a) it alighted somewhere in the unmapped rain forests of
South America and that b) there were no casualties. What they _really_
don’t talk about is the closely guarded report asserting that both a)
and b) are false. There are only two people (aside from yourself, now)
who know for sure that though a) is certainly false, b) is strangely
true, and there were indeed no casualties.

Al Knowles may well know too, but he doesn’t count.

It happened two days after the death of _Daisy Etta_, as Tom and Kelly
sat in (of all places) the coolth of the ruined temple. They were poring
over paper and pencil, trying to complete the impossible task of making
a written statement of what had happened on the island, and why they and
their company had failed to complete their contract. They had found Chub
and Harris, and had buried them next to the other three. Al Knowles was
back in the shadows, tied up, because they had heard him raving in his
sleep, and it seemed he could not believe _Daisy_ was dead and he still
wanted to go around killing operators for her. They knew that there must
be an investigation, and they knew just how far their story would go;
and having escaped a monster like _Daisy Etta_, they found life too
sweet to want any part of it spent under observation or in jail.

The warhead of the missile struck near the edge of their camp, just
between the pyramid of fuel drums and the dynamite stores. The second
stage alighted a moment later two miles away, in the vicinity of the
five graves. Kelly and Tom stumbled out to the rim of the mesa, and for
a long while watched the jetsam fall and the flotsam rise. It was Kelly
who guessed what must have happened, and “Bless their clumsy little
hearts,” he said happily. And he took the scribbled papers from Tom and
tore them across.

But Tom shook his head, and thumbed back at the mound. “He’ll talk.”

“Him?” said Kelly, with such profound eloquence in his tone that he
clearly evoked the image of Al Knowles, with his mumbling voice and his
drooling mouth and his wide glazed eyes. “Let him,” Kelly said, and tore
the papers again.

So they let him.



ABREACTION


I SAT AT the controls of the big D-8 bulldozer, and I tried to remember.
The airfield shoulder, built on a saltflat, stretched around me. Off to
the west was a clump of buildings—the gas station and grease rack. Near
it was the skeletal silhouette of a temporary weather observation post
with its spinning velocimeter and vane and windsock. Everything seemed
normal, but there was something _else.…_

I could remember people, beautiful people in shining, floating garments.
I remembered them as if I had seen them just a minute ago, and yet at a
distance; but the memories were of faces close—close. One face—a golden
girl; eyes and skin and hair three different shades of gold.

I shook my head so violently that it hurt. I was a bulldozer operator. I
was—what was I supposed to be doing? I looked around me, saw the gravel
spread behind me, the bare earth ahead; knew, then, that I was spreading
gravel with the machine. But I seemed to—to—Look, without the physical
fact of the half-done job around me, I wouldn’t have known why I was
there at all!

I knew where I had seen that girl, those people. I thought I knew … but
the thought was just where I couldn’t reach it. My mind put out
searching tendrils for that knowledge of place, that was so certainly
there, and the knowledge receded so that the tendrils stretched out thin
and cracked with the effort, and my head ached from it.

A big trailer-type bottom-dump truck came hurtling and howling over the
shoulder toward me, the huge fenderless driving wheels throwing clots of
mud high in the air. The driver was a Puerto Rican, a hefty middle-aged
fellow. I knew him well. Well—didn’t I? He threw out one arm, palm up,
signaling “Where do you want it?” I pointed vaguely to the right, to the
advancing edge of the spread gravel. He spun his steering wheel with one
hand, put the other on the trip-lever on his steering column, keeping
his eyes on my face. As he struck the edge of the gravel fill with his
wheels I dropped my hand; he punched the lever and the bottom of the
trailer opened up, streaming gravel out in a windrow thirty feet long
and a foot deep—twelve cubic yards of it, delivered at full speed. The
driver waved and headed off, the straight-gut exhaust of his high-speed
Diesel snorting and snarling as the rough ground bounced the man’s foot
on the accelerator.

I waved back at the Puerto Rican—what was his name? I knew him, didn’t
I? He knew me, the way he waved as he left. His name—was it Paco? Cruz?
Eulalio? Damn it, no, and I knew it as well as I knew my own—

_But I didn’t know my own name!_

Oh hell, oh hell, I’m crazy. I’m scared. I’m scared crazy. What had
happened to my head?… Everything whirled around me and without effort I
remembered about the people in the shining clothes and as my mind closed
on it, it evaporated again and there was nothing there.

Once when I was a kid in school I fell off the parallel bars and knocked
myself out, and when I came to it was like this. I could see everything
and feel and smell and taste anything, but I couldn’t remember anything.
Not for a minute. I would ask what had happened, and they would tell me,
and five minutes later I’d ask again. They asked me my address so they
could take me home, and I couldn’t remember it. They got the address
from the school files and took me home, and my feet found the way in and
up four flights of stairs to our apartment—I didn’t remember which way
to go, but my feet did. I went in and tried to tell my mother what was
the matter with me and I couldn’t remember, and she put me to bed and I
woke four hours later perfectly all right again.

In a minute, there on the bulldozer, I didn’t get over being scared but
I began to get used to it, so I could think a little. I tried to
remember everything at first, but that was too hard, so I tried to find
something I could remember. I sat there and let my mind go quite blank.
Right away there was something about a bottom-dump truck and some
gravel. It was there, clear enough, but I didn’t know where it fit nor
how far back. I looked around me and there was the windrow of gravel
waiting to be spread. Then that was what the truck was for; and—had it
just been there, or had I been sitting there for long, for ever so long,
waiting to remember that I must spread it?

Then I saw that I could remember ideas, but not events. Events were
there, yes, but not in order. No continuity. A year ago—a second
ago—same thing. Nothing clear, nothing very real, all mixed up. Ideas
were there whatever, and continuity didn’t matter. That I could remember
an idea, that I could know that a windrow of gravel meant that gravel
must be spread: _that_ was an idea, a condition of things which I could
recognize. The truck’s coming and going and dumping, that was an event.
I knew it had happened because the gravel was there, but didn’t know
when, or if anything had happened in between.

I looked at the controls and frowned. Could I remember what to do with
them? This lever and that pedal—what did they mean to me? Nothing, and
nothing again.…

I mustn’t think about that. I don’t have to think about that. I must
think about _what_ I must do and not how I must do it. I’ve got to
spread the stone. Here there is spread stone and there there is none,
and at the edge of the spread stone is the windrow of gravel. So,
watching it, seeing how it lay, I let my hands and feet remember about
the levers and pedals. They throttled up, raised the blade off the
ground, shifted into third gear, swung the three-ton moldboard and its
twelve-foot cutting edge into the windrow. The blade loaded and gravel
ran off the ends in two even rolls, and my right hand flicked to and
away from me on the blade control, knowing how to raise it enough to let
the gravel run out evenly underneath the cutting edge, not too high so
that it would make a bobble in the fill for the tracks to teeter on when
they reached it—for a bulldozer builds the road it walks on, and if the
road is rough the machine see-saws forward and the blade cuts and fills
to make waves which, when the tracks reach them, makes the machine
see-saw and cut waves, which, when the tracks reach them … anyway, my
hands knew what to do, and my feet; and they did it all the time when I
could only see what was to be done, and could not understand the events
of doing it.

_This won’t do_, I thought desperately. I’m all right, I guess, because
I can do my work. It’s all laid out in front of me and I know what has
to be done and my hands and feet know how to do it; but suppose somebody
comes and speaks to me or tells me to go somewhere else, I who can’t
even remember my own name. My hands and my feet have more sense than my
head.

So I thought that I had to inventory everything I could trust,
everything I knew positively. What were the things I knew?

The machine was there and true, and the gravel, and the bottom-dump that
brought it. My being there was a real thing. You have to start
everything with the belief that you yourself exist.

The job, the work, they were true things.

Where was I?

I must be where I should be, where I belonged, for the bottom-dump
driver knew me, knew I was there, knew I was waiting for stone to
spread. The airfield was there, and the fact that it was unfinished.
“Airfield” was like a corollary to me, with the runway and the windsock
its supporting axioms, and I had no need to think further. The people in
the shining garments, and the girl—

But there was nothing about them here. Nothing at all.

To spread stone was a thing I had to do. But was that all? It wasn’t
just spreading stone. I had to spread it to—to—

Not to help finish the airfield. It wasn’t that. It was something else,
something—

Oh. Oh! I had to spread stone to _get_ somewhere.

I didn’t want to get anywhere, except maybe to a place where I could
think again, where I could know what was happening to me, where I could
reach out with my mind and grasp those important things, like my name,
and the name of the bottom-dump driver, Paco, or Cruz, or Eulalio or
maybe Emanualo von Hachmann de la Vega, or whatever. But being able to
think straight again and know all these important things was arriving at
a _state_ of consciousness, not at a _place_. I knew, I knew, somehow I
knew truly, that to arrive at that state I had to arrive at a point.

Suddenly, overwhelmingly, I had a flash of knowledge about the point—not
what it was, but how it was, and I screamed and hurt my throat and fell
blindly back in the seat of the tractor trying to push away _how_ it
was.

My abdomen kneaded itself with the horror of it. I put my hands on my
face and my hands and face were wet with sweat and tears. Afraid? Have
you ever been afraid to die, seeing Death looking right at you; closer
than that; have you seen Death turn away from you because He knows you
must follow Him? Have you seen that, and been afraid?

Well, this was worse. For this I’d hug Death to me, for He alone could
spare me what would happen to me when I reached the place I was going
to.

So I wouldn’t spread stone.

I wouldn’t do anything that would bring me closer to reaching the place
where that thing would happen to me. _Had happened_ to me.… I wouldn’t
do it. That was an important thing.

There was one other important thing. I must not go on like this, not
knowing my name, and what the name of the bottom-dump driver was, and
where this airfield and this base were, and all those things.

These two things were the most important things in the world. In _this_
world.… THIS world.…

This world, this world—_other_ world.…

There was a desert all around me.

Ha! So the airfield wasn’t real, and the bottom-dump wasn’t real, and
the anemometer and the grease racks weren’t real. Ha! (Why worry about
the driver’s name if he wasn’t real?)

The bulldozer was real, though. I was sitting on it. The six big
cylinders were ticking over, and the master-clutch lever was twitching
rhythmically as if its lower end were buried in something that breathed.
Otherwise—just desert, and some hills over there, and a sun which was
too orange.

Think, now, think. This desert means something important. I wasn’t
surprised at being in the desert. That was important. This place in the
desert was near something, near an awful something that would hurt me.

I looked all around me. I couldn’t see it, but it was there, the
something that would hurt so. I wouldn’t go through that again—

Again.

Again—that was an important thing. I wouldn’t spread stone and reach
that place. I wouldn’t go through that which had happened to me even if
I stayed crazy like I was for the rest of eternity. Let them put me away
and tie me up and shake their heads over me and walk away and leave me,
and put bars on the window to slice the light of the crooked moon into
black and silver bars on the floor of my cell. I didn’t care about all
that. I could face the ache of wanting to know about my name and the
name of the driver of the bottom-dump (he was a Puerto Rican so his name
must be Villamil or Roberto, not Bucyrus-Erie or Caterpillar Thirteen
Thousand) and the people in the shining clothes; I _was_ facing all
that, and I knew how it hurt, but I would not go through that place
again and be hurt so much more. Not again. Not again.

_Again_. Again again again. What is the again-ness of everything?
Everything I am doing I am doing again. I could remember that feeling
from before—years ago it used to happen to me every once in a while.
You’ve never been to a certain village before, we’ll say, and you come
up over the crown of the hill on your bicycle and see the way the church
is and the houses, and the turn of that crooked cobblestoned street, the
shape and tone of the very flower stems. You know that if you were
asked, you could say how many pickets were in the white gate in the
blue-and-white fence in the little house third from the corner. All the
scientists nod and smile and say you did see it for the second time—a
twentieth of a second after the first glimpse; and that the impact of
familiarity was built up in the next twentieth of a second. And you nod
and smile too and say well, whaddaye know. But you know, you _know_
you’ve seen that place before, no matter what they say.

That’s the way I knew it, sitting there on my machine in the desert and
not surprised, and having that feeling of again-ness; because I was
remembering the last time the bottom-dump came to me there on the
airfield shoulder, trailing a plume of blue smoke from the exhaust
stack, bouncing and barking as it hurtled toward me. It meant nothing at
first, remembering, that it came, nor that it was the same driver, the
Puerto Rican; and of course he was carrying the same-sized load of the
same material. All trips of the bottom-dump were pretty much the same.
But there was one thing I remembered—_now_ I remembered—

There was a grade-stake driven into the fill, to guide the depth of the
gravel, and _it was no nearer to me than it had ever been_. So that
hadn’t been the same bottom-dump, back another time. It was the _same
time_, all over again! The last time was wiped out. I was on a kind of
escalator and it carried me up until I reached the place where I
realized about what I had to go through, and screamed. And then I was
snatched back and put on the bottom again, at the place where the Puerto
Rican driver Señor What’s-his-name dumped the gravel and went away
again.

And this desert, now. This desert was a sort of landing at the side of
escalator, where I might fall sometimes instead of going all the way to
the bottom where the truck came. I had been here before, and I was here
again. I had been at the unfinished air base again and again. And there
was the other place, with the shining people, and the girl with all
those kinds of gold. That was the same place with the crooked moon.

I covered my eyes with my hands and tried to think. The clacking Diesel
annoyed me, suddenly, and I got up and reached under the hood and pulled
the compression release. Gases chattered out of the ports, and a bubble
of silence formed around me, swelling, the last little sounds scampering
away from me in all directions, leaving me quiet.

There was a soft thump in the sand beside the machine. It was one of the
shining people, the old one, whose forehead was so broad and whose hair
was fine, fine like a cobweb. I knew him. I knew his name, too, though I
couldn’t think of it at the moment.

He dismounted from his flying-chair and came to me.

“Hello,” I said. I took my shirt from the seat beside me and hung it on
my shoulder. “Come on up.”

He smiled and put up his hand. I took it and helped him climb up over
the cat. His hands were very strong. He stepped over me and sat down.

“How do you feel?” Sometimes he spoke aloud, and sometimes he didn’t,
but I always understood him.

“I feel—mixed up.”

“Yes, of course,” he said kindly. “Go on. Ask me about it.”

I looked at him. “Do I_—always_ ask you about it?”

“Every time.”

“Oh.” I looked all around, at the desert, at the hills, at the dozer, at
the sun which was too orange. “Where am I?”

“On Earth,” he said; only the word he used for Earth meant Earth only to
him. It meant _his_ earth.

“I know that,” I said. “I mean, where am I really? Am I on that air
base, or am I here?”

“Oh, you are here,” he said.

Somehow I was vastly relieved to hear it. “Maybe you’d better tell me
all about it again.”

“You said ‘again’,” he said, and put his hand on my arm. “You’re
beginning to realize … good, lad. Good. All right. I’ll tell you once
more.

“You came here a long time ago. You followed a road with your big noisy
machine, and came roaring down out of the desert to the city. The people
had never seen a noisy machine before, and they clustered around the
gate to see you come. They stood aside to let you pass, and wondered,
and you swung the machine and crushed six of them against the
gate-posts.”

“I _did?”_ I cried. Then I said, “I did. Oh, I did.”

He smiled at me again. “Shh. Don’t. It was a long time ago. Shall I go
on?

“We couldn’t stop you. We have no weapons. We could do nothing in the
face of that monster you were driving. You ranged up and down the
streets, smashing the fronts of buildings, running people down, and
laughing. We had to wait until you got off the machine, and then we
overpowered you. You were totally mad. It was,” he added thoughtfully,
“a very interesting study.”

“Why did I do it?” I whispered. “How could I do such things to_—you?”_

“You had been hurt. Dreadfully hurt. You had come here, arriving
somewhere near this spot. You were crazed by what you had endured.
Later, we followed the tracks of your machine back. We found where you
had driven it aimlessly over the desert, and where, once, you had left
the machine and lived in a cave, probably for weeks. You ate desert
grasses and the eight-legged crabs. You killed everything you could,
through some strange, warped revenge motivation.

“You were crazed with thirst and revenge, and you were very thin, and
your face was covered with hair, of all extraordinary things, though
analysis showed that you had a constant desire for a hairless face.
After treatment you became almost rational. But your time-sense was
almost totally destroyed. And you had two almost unbreakable
psychological blocks—your memory of how you came here, and your sense of
identity.

“We did what we could for you, but you were unhappy. The moons had an
odd effect on you. We have two, one well inside the other in its orbit,
but both with the same period. Without instruments they appear to be an
eclipse when they are full. The sight of what you called that crooked
moon undid a lot of our work. And then you would get attacks of an
overwhelming emotion you term ‘remorse,’ which appeared to be something
like cruelty and something like love and included a partial negation of
the will to survive … and you could not understand why we would not
punish you. Punish you—when you were sick!”

“Yes,” I said. “I—remember most of it now. You gave me everything I
could want. You even gave me—gave me—”

“Oh—that. Yes. You had some deep-seated convictions about love, and
marriage. We felt you would be happier—”

“I was, and then I wasn’t. I—I wanted—”

“I know. I know,” he said soothingly. “You wanted your name again, and
somehow you wanted your own earth.”

I clenched my fists until my forearms hurt. “I should be satisfied,” I
cried. “I should be. You are all so kind, and she—and she—she’s been—” I
shook my head angrily. “I must be crazy.”

“You generally ask me,” he said smiling, “at this point, how you came
here.”

“I do?”

“You do. I’ll repeat it. You see, there are irregularities in the fabric
of space. No—not space, exactly. We have a word for it—” (he spoke it)
“—which means, literally, ‘space which is time which is psyche.’ It is a
condition of space which by its nature creates time and thought and
matter. Your world, relative to ours, is in the infinitely great, or in
the infinitely small, or perhaps in the infinitely distant, either in
space or in time—it does not matter, for they are all the same thing in
their ultimate extensions … but to go on:

“While you were at your work, you ran your machine into a point of
tension in this fabric—a freak, completely improbable position in—” (he
spoke the word again) “—in which your universe and ours were tangential.
You—went through.”

I tensed as he said it.

“Yes, that was the thing. It caused you inconceivable agony. It drove
you mad. It filled you full of vengeance and fear. Well, we—cured you of
everything but the single fear of going through that agony again, and
the peculiar melancholy involving the loss of your ego—your desire to
know your own name. Since we failed there—” he shrugged “—we have been
doing the only thing left to us. We are trying to send you back.”

“Why? Why bother?”

“You are not content here. Our whole social system, our entire
philosophy, is based on the contentment of the individual. So we must do
what we can … in addition, you have given us a tremendous amount of
research material in psychology and in theoretical cosmogony. We are
grateful. We want you to have what you want. Your fear is great. Your
desire is greater. And to help you achieve your desire, we have put you
on this course of abreaction.”

“Abreaction?”

He nodded. “The psychological re-enactment, or retracing, of everything
you have done since you came here, in an effort to return you to the
entrance-point in exactly the same frame of mind as that in which you
came through it. We cannot find that point. It has something to do with
your particular psychic matrix. But if the point is still here, and if,
by hypnosis, we can cause you to do exactly what you did when you first
came through—why, then, you’ll go back.”

“Will it be—dangerous?”

“Yes,” he said, unhesitatingly. “Even if the point of tangency is still
here, where you emerged, it may not be at the same point on your earth.
Don’t forget—you have been here for eleven of your years.… And then
there’s the agony—bad enough if you do go through, infinitely worse if
you do not, for you may drift in—in _somewhere_ forever, quite
conscious, and with no possibility of release.

“You know all this, and yet you still want us to try.… “He sighed. “We
admire you deeply, and wonder too; for you are the bravest man we have
ever known. We wonder most particularly at your culture, which can
produce such an incredible regard for the ego.… Shall we try again?”

I looked at the sun which was too orange, and at the hills, and at his
broad, quiet, beautiful face. If I could have spoken my name then, I
think I should have stayed. If I could have seen _her_ just at that
moment, I think I should have waited a little longer, at least.

“Yes,” I said. “Let’s try it again.”

I was so afraid that I couldn’t remember my name or the name of Gracias
de Nada, or something, the fellow who drove the bottom-dump. I couldn’t
remember how to run the machine; but my hands remembered, and my feet.

Now I sat and looked at the windrow; and then I pulled back the throttle
and raised the blade. I swung into the windrow, and the gravel loaded
clean onto the blade and cleanly ran off in two even rolls at the sides.
When I sensed that the gravel was all off the blade, I stopped, shifted
into high reverse, pulled the left steering clutch to me, let in the
master clutch, stamped the left brake.…

That was the thing, then. Back-blading that roll out—the long small
windrow of gravel that had run off the ends of my blade. As I backed
over it, the machine straddling it, I dropped the blade on it and
floated it so that it smoothed out the roll. Then it was that I looked
back—force of habit, for a bulldozer that size can do real damage
backing into powerpoles or buildings—and I saw the muzzy bit of fill.

It was a patch of spread gravel that seemed whirling, blurred at the
edges. Look into the sun and then suddenly at the floor. There will be a
muzzy patch there, whirling and swirling like that. I thought something
funny had happened to my eyes. But I didn’t stop the machine, and then
suddenly I was in it.

Again.

It built up slowly, the agony. It built up in a way that promised more
and then carefully fulfilled the promise, and made of the peak of pain a
further promise. There was no sense of strain, for everything was poised
and counterbalanced and nothing would break. All of the inner force was
as strong as all the outer forces, and all of me was the point of
equilibrium.

Don’t try to think about it. Don’t try to imagine for a second. A second
of that, unbalanced, would crush you to cosmic dust. There were years of
it for me; years and years.… I was in an unused stockpile of years,
somewhere in a hyperspace, and the weight of them all was on me and in
me, consecutively, concurrently.

I woke up very slowly. I hurt all over, and that was an excruciating
pleasure, because the pain was only physical.

I began to forget right away.

A company doctor came in and peeped at me. I said, “Hi.”

“Well, well,” he said, beaming. “So the flying catskinner is with us
again.”

“What flying catskinner? What happened? Where am I?”

“You’re in the dispensary. You, my boy, were working your bulldozer out
on the fill and all of a sudden took it into your head to be a flying
kay-det at the same time. That’s what they say, anyhow. I do know that
there wasn’t a mark around the machine where it lay—not for sixty feet.
You sure didn’t drive it over there.”

“What are you talking about?”

“That, son, I wouldn’t know. But I went and looked myself. There lay the
Cat, all broken up, and you beside it with your lungs all full of your
own ribs. Deadest looking man I ever saw get better.”

“I don’t get it. Did anybody see this happen? Are you trying to—”

“Only one claims to have seen it was a Puerto Rican bottom-dump driver.
Doesn’t speak any English, but he swears on every saint in the calendar
that he looked back after dumping a load and saw you and twenty tons of
bulldozer _forty feet in the air_, and then it was coming down!”

I stared. “Who was the man?”

“Heavy-set fellow. About forty-five. Strong as a rhino and seemed sane.”

“I know him,” I said. “A good man.” Suddenly, then, happily: “Doc—you
know what his name is?”

“No. Didn’t ask. Some flowery Spanish moniker, I guess.”

“No, it isn’t,” I said. “His name is Kirkpatrick. Alonzo Padin de
Kirkpatrick.”

He laughed. “The Irish are a wonderful people. Go to sleep. You’ve been
unconscious for nearly three weeks.”

“I’ve been unconscious for eleven years,” I said, and felt foolish as
hell because I hadn’t meant to say anything like that and couldn’t
imagine what put it into my head.



POOR YORICK


IF YOU DON’T want to read an unpleasant story, we are even. Because I
didn’t want to write it either.

It can be told because it’s doubtful whether June will ever get hold of
it because she doesn’t read the way you do. She is one of those who
flatter themselves that they are too busy to waste time reading. She
talks a great deal instead, and is only one-third of a person, the other
two-thirds being entertainment-receptors for the radio and the movies
respectively.

But she is inordinately pretty. She is very very blond and her lips are
full and red, and her eyes are the color of grape juice, but bright. Her
skin has indirect lighting and the lobes of her ears are always pink.
She has a fiance, as she calls him in two syllables, in the South
Pacific. He is a nice fellow and entirely suited to her. He and her kid
brother had been inducted together and managed to stay together, and
were buddies the way they always had been. She called him her kid
brother because she was three-eighths of an inch taller than he,
although he was older. So it was all nice and cosy, with them to watch
over each other and with her to stay at home and be proud of them both.
The fiance, whose name was Hal, wrote all the time, and her kid brother
never wrote, which was all right too, as long as one of them did.

There was a lot of hard work and rough stuff out there but Hal found
time to wrap up and send a present for her, and by hook or by crook it
got to her. She opened it with two oh’s and an ooh, in the presence of
both of her elderly and very gentle parents, and as the last of the
wrapping fell away her mouth tried to “Eeek!” while she swallowed her
gum, and her father spun on his heel and started to walk out but had to
come right back to fix up her mother, who had silently fainted. The
present was a Japanese skull.

After her mother was quiet and comfortable June went back into the front
parlor—not a living-room, a parlor—and she and the skull stared at each
other for quite a while. All the courage she had concentrated in the
gingerly tip of one index finger which went out and touched it and
jumped back as if the thing were hot. But it wasn’t hot. It wasn’t cold
either. It was just smooth, and quite as clean-looking as anything could
be. It was as clean as a kitchen sink. She touched it again, and
gradually she saw that it was just ugly, that was all. She put out both
hands and put one on each side of the skull and lifted it. She almost
dropped it then because it was so light and she wasn’t prepared for
that. But she held it and she had it and it was of value because Hal had
sent it. And war was like that anyway, and it is good to have us at home
care a little less about how we used to think about such things. All
this she thought while she held the skull and it grinned quietly at her.
After all, we all got one like it behind our face, she thought. She
carried it upstairs and put it in her kid brother’s room, because that
was the only place where no one would have to sleep with it, and after
all they all ate in the parlor.

It was in the house for two days. The rest of that first day she kept it
to herself but after that it was too good to keep, so the parade of her
young contemporaries was called up and filed in awed and low-toned
morbidity past the skull. Each of them was shocked and in a few minutes
began to get raucous and crack wise to cover it up, and it made June
feel good to see how scared they all were. It belonged to her and she
wasn’t scared—any more.

One of them put her kid brother’s new top-hat, that he had gotten for a
present with his tuxedo three months before he was drafted, on the
skull, and that seemed to take the curse off it because it sure looked
comical. It wasn’t a bad fit either because her brother was a little bit
of a fellow too.

After a while there wasn’t anybody new to call up and show off the skull
to. June racked her brains and suddenly thought of Doc Winningen. Doc
Winninger was the dentist and he was the only man she knew of that had a
skull. It perched up on top of his chiffonnierthing in his office, that
held all the drills and picks and things, high up, right up where you
could see it when he was working on you. Only hardly anybody ever
noticed it. She called up Doc Winninger and he promised to come around
because she made it so urgent although she didn’t tell him what for; she
wanted to surprise him.

When he came she took his hat and coat and led him right upstairs. She
got him lined up just right in front of her kid brother’s room and said,
“Here’s the Jap that Hal sent me,” and threw the door open. Doc
Winninger took two steps into the room and then saw the skull and
stopped and said, “Good God!” And the shocked expression on his broad
red face with the heavy jowls and the brilliant oval spectacles was all
that she could have wished. “Isn’t he a beaut?” she said. The skull was
wearing her kid brother’s topper and sure was a scream.

“Hal sent you that?”

“He sure did. Isn’t he the one, though? The big crazy.”

Doc turned his back on the skull and faced her. She didn’t know why his
face looked the way it did, but whatever it was it made her stop
smiling. “A fine trophy,” he said.

He made her defensive. “That little yellow rat is prettier now than he
ever was when he was alive. That’s what Hal calls a good Jap!”

“Those Burma nurses … are we fighting that kind of war now? Is that what
this means?” he said, thumbing over his shoulder at the skull.

“Do you mean is Hal shooting little kids? Gee, Doc, you know better than
that.”

“Oh. Well—I have to go.” He started out but June blocked him. She felt
somehow cheated. “Wait. You didn’t even take a good look.”

“I saw enough, Junie.” He sounded as if he was sorry for her or
something. As if she was sick.

“Aw, now wait. There is something you’d want to look at. That Jap’s had
teeth filled. Don’t you want to see if the Japs do as good a job as you
do?”

She had hit him where he felt it. He turned back into the room and
picked up the skull. He glanced at the two fillings in the upper lateral
incisors, suddenly stared. June had the feeling that he stopped
breathing. When he turned around his old face was working. “June—this
is—is …” He stopped and swallowed and then sort of grinned at her.
“June, could I take this along and keep it for a couple of days? There’s
something very interesting that I—I want to show to somebody.”

June was annoyed with him but she could see he was so excited about it
that she couldn’t refuse him. She laughed. “I knew I’d get you going!
Sure, go ahead. But be careful of it. It means a lot to me.”

“I can see it would.” He walked out the door and down the stairs,
carrying the skull, and making small talk over his shoulder. “What do
you hear from Hal?”

“Him! He’s well and fighting mad. Him and my kid brother got separated a
while back on little mopping-up patrols, but we’ll hear about the kid
when Hal joins up with him again. That little monkey never writes.”

June’s parents were glad to see the skull go out of the house although
they didn’t say anything about it. But they were just as mad as June
when Doc Winninger called up two days later and said he was sorry but he
had left the skull in a taxi and when he located the taxi the skull was
gone. They were so mad about it that they got another dentist and never
went to him again. Even if he had been their dentist since before the
kids were born.

Which was all right with Doc Winninger. He knew the family too well. He
knew every filling in their mouths. He didn’t lose the skull, he took it
right to the middle of the bridge and threw it into the river. He didn’t
take it to a doctor to find out for sure if it was an oriental skull or
not. He didn’t want to know. He liked to think the whole thing about the
fillings was a coincidence, even if June’s kid brother was such a tiny
little fellow.



CROSSFIRE


2 July 1944

DEAR—

Before me is a bottle of cognac … half full. I have drunk half the
bottle. It is young. It burns. It is good. I sit now in a large kitchen,
the most important room of this particular farm house, and look out to a
yard that is quite active, in a natural sort of way … i.e., a boar is
presently servicing a sow, and I find it most diverting, or, to say the
least … distracting. It is now a question of will … mind over country
matters, in order for me to take advantage of the last moments of light
to type a word or two to you. I am disappointed in the lazy performance
of this boar whose seed will turn to sucklings, and many of them, no
doubt. How unjust. My wildest efforts amount to nothing!—that is,
nothing but a transitory sense of satisfaction. I must interrupt this
biological scribendi to partake of more cognac. That pig depresses me. I
must have a drink. He’s unmindful of 88’s bursting seeds of death about
his cycle of natural functions … but I’m not. I, alone and feeling a
neuter entity whilst this boar exercises his male root, must have done
with this nonsense.…

A short while ago I prevailed upon the owner of this farm to fix me up
with a bucket of hot water … so I could take what the boys call, “A
whore’s bath.” Such a bath is, perhaps, more commonly known as a “sponge
bath” … but that latter denomination lacks oomph. You, in your 16-room
house, probably have a shower-bath and proper tub with the best of
plumbing. A bath is commonplace to you. Aha! … but you don’t have pigs
to pork shop over!

I sent to London for some water colors and sketch pads. There are pastel
colors in the brick and slate of the farm buildings that are exciting to
me for I have seen nothing like them except at art exhibitions and in
_Vogue_ and _Harper’s Bazaar_. I can believe Toulouse-Lautrec and others
pastel-minded. They seem no more out of harmony during these last rounds
of sun than the red of a rose to the green of its leaf. It’s French to
the very soil; it’s beautifully real, for the visual sensation tells me
so. I have no talent for painting; all I have is the urge to try and
daub a bit here and there. There is noise and destruction about me and
the lazy, peaceful business of brush and pencil seems the right thing to
do. Were it quiet and peaceful I’d probably like to wage waste and the
noisy business of destruction. (the cognac is good)

Did I tell you about my first day in this hellzapoppin’ place? I had
quite an unforgettable experience. You’ve probably read about the
abundance of snipers during the initial stages of this European
operation. I had personal contact with one when I was on shore about one
hour. At first I felt there was something unreal about my being on
shore … like being on a movie set. The houses didn’t look real. The
first civilians I saw looked like extra players milling about for some
De Mille production. The houses, shell-torn and strangely colored,
looked more like prop buildings on the back lot at MGM. The sound and
effects department was doing one helluva good job with shell bursts and
smoke. Then it dawned on me that this was no Hollywood scene. People
lying dead in the road more like wax effigies were really very dead
people who a short while ago were very much alive. The smells attested
to the truth of it all … smells of powder, burnt wood, scorched flesh,
and strange new odors that told me here was something all too real. I
was alone at first. Don’t ask me why. I wouldn’t know. I was alone until
I got to a large farm some distance away from the beach, and there I met
a couple of enlisted men that I had seen a few times before. Because of
wild firing we kept low in a squat-walk. I knew I had to cross the large
yard of this farm because 88’s (or something like ’em) were trained on
the road. A bullet sang past my face … so I did the easy thing. Ha. I
ducked. I tho’t it politic to crawl a little more and keep all ten of my
eyes glued to the side quadrants and toward the sky. Another bullet
zizzed by me too goddamned close, so I bellied it over to a farm wagon
for cover. Yet another bullet came my way from the house and then one of
the boys swore he saw a female firing from an open window on the ground
floor. I turned and edged my way to the sight end of the wagon when I
heard and felt my heel get clipped. It didn’t frighten me. It made me
mad as hell. I released the safety on my .45 and sent a slug at a
movement in the curtain from whence all this lethal nonsense was coming.
The boys hurled hand grenades in the upstairs windows and then we all
made a rush to the main house. I soon found myself in the kitchen,
where, sure enough, there was a female lying on the floor. From the door
she looked young and slim. The rifle was a few feet away from her … so
there was little danger from that gadget. Closer inspection showed her
to be about twenty years old and too darned pretty for this kind of
monkey business. She was conscious and able to talk despite a wicked
hole through her shoulder (there’s no doubt that a .45 makes a mean
hole. I’ve seen what they do to jack rabbits when I was at Fort Bliss,
Texas.) She spoke to me in French, tho’ she could have been from almost
anywhere. I doubt that she was French, tho’. She asked me why I shot
her. Huh! I pointed at the rifle lying beside her and asked her why she
shot at me. I got no answer for that. Fact is, I was in no mood to hang
around since this spot was getting a little too hot for comfort. Anyway,
she won’t be shooting Yanks any more. It’s a helluva mess, isn’t it? I
won’t forget that as long as I live. On that same day we accounted for
several other snipers. One was in a tree; another was in a church tower;
and another was firing from the top floor of a barn. They were men,
tho’.

I’ll have a few tid-bits for you another time. Right now I am of a mind
to make my daily pilgrimage to the local curate’s brick outhouse where I
can function with a modicum of security from German artillery. A couple
of days ago this ancient outhouse, with me in it, seemed the
target … for a shell went through the garden wall and burst close enough
that my hind cheeks felt the hot breath and blast. I tho’t my favorite
part(s) would be missing and, had this been a less sturdily built house
of contemplation and human passage, I have no doubt but that I would now
be a cipher in masculine dress, a nullity fit for some ladies’ bath
house as an attendant, or something equally frustrating.

Write soon, my favorite people, and tell me all about life on Euclid
Park Drive.

Love,



NOON GUN


JOE LOOKED DOWN at Mousie, walking so sedately beside him, and he
thought, you’re a second-rater, and so am I. Her name wasn’t Mousie, but
Sara Nell. He always called her Sara Nell except when he thought about
her, and then she was Mousie. It was her hair, maybe, or the nose that
was so very well shaped only one and a half sizes too large for her
face. She had a little pointed face. Anyway it was Mousie, and it wasn’t
affectionate.

“What’s the matter, Joe?” Her voice was lovely, though. And her eyes.
She always seemed to be interested in what she was saying, and her eyes
widened all the time she talked. In between times they never seemed to
narrow, but got longer.

“Nothin’. Thinking.”

Thinking about the kind of girls you saw so often in taxis, so seldom on
the bus. So often on TV or in the movies, never in a store or bowling or
anyplace around. On TV and the movies you can watch big good-looking
guys soften ’em up, push ’em over. The big good-looking guys talk fast
and they always have the right answer, and they just mow them down. You
never saw a movie about a guy didn’t have enough chin, who never had the
right words at the right time and who had none at all when he was mad,
or afraid, or when he really meant what he was saying. What kind of a
chick would look the second time at a guy like that? If that’s what you
are, you wind up walking along the street with Mousie because you can’t
do better.

She was watching him, not looking where she was going, holding his arm
very tight and close the way she always did. He liked that, but he never
could figure it with the way she turned away when he tried to kiss her.
He said, “I was thinking about the picture we saw, the second one.”

“Oh. Didn’t you like it?”

“Sure I did. Sure. It was swell. It didn’t seem too phony either. I
mean, the way he wiped out those two machine-gun nests, it could happen
that way, I guess. And when he helped move all those wounded, and then
dropped, and you realized he had a bullet in him all that time, that
really sat me up. Only—”

“Only what, Joe?”

“Oh—nothing. Nothing much, just that I don’t see him making all those
wisecracks to that army nurse when he was hurt. Did you ever know
anybody like that, Sara Nell? Are there guys like that, that don’t ever
get scared, and grin when they fight, and like say something funny when
they get hurt?”

“I imagine so. I’ve seen—well, anyway, they wouldn’t pay any attention
to _me_.”

Oh, Joe thought. But I do. I do, but one of those guys wouldn’t. You
take the next best thing. He took his arm from her suddenly, so quickly
that she opened up her long eyes and stared at him. They walked on, a
little apart.

“I’m sorry, Joe.”

“For what?”

“I don’t know,” she said very softly. “I just suddenly felt sorry.”

Mousie! he thought furiously. You make me mad. You watch me all the
time. You never say what you see. Why did I have to meet up with you?
What good are you doing me? You’re just as bad as I am. Why don’t you
tell me to go jump in the drink? … But heck, she didn’t mean anything.
She was just trying to be—“Let’s go in here and have a drink before we
go home.”

She looked up into the neon glare above the entrance. “They ask how old
you are.”

“Not here they don’t.”

“All right, Joe.” All right, Joe. All the time, all right, Joe.

They went into the place. It split the difference between a twist ’n’
fizz joint and a real bar. It was mobbed. There were tables and booths
and imitation morocco and all kinds of noise. “There’s some seats,” said
Sara Nell as Joe hesitated.

“But there’s a girl—”

“Nonsense,” said Sara Nell. “One girl in a booth that is s’posed to be
for four. Come on.”

Joe thought he ought to be the one to find the seats, but why make
anything of it? They slid side by side into the booth. Joe slung his hat
up and out and for once it landed on a hook. Sara Nell laughed and
patted his shoulder and the girl opposite smiled.

“Order me what you’re having,” Sara Nell said. She burrowed into her
black handbag and came up with a compact. “I’ll be right back.”

When she was gone Joe fixed his mind and the base of his tongue on a
Cuba libre and let his eyes wander over the room. The girl opposite was
watching him; he sensed it rather than saw it. It made him acutely
uncomfortable. He tried hard not to look at her and very nearly
succeeded. She was blonde and bigger than Mousie; that he could see out
of the corner of his eye.… But if he was with Mousie he didn’t feel that
he should—But heck, he could look at her, couldn’t he? She wouldn’t
think he was crawling up her leg if she’d seen him come in with another
girl. He obeyed his usual reflex when he felt confused, and took out his
cigarettes.

“Please—”

The voice was husky, throaty. He looked across the table, right straight
at her.

She was incredible. Her hair was long and thick, golden with firelights.
He thought her eyes were green. Her face was round, the skin very white
and flawless, and the lobes of her ears were altogether pink. She was
dangling an unlit cigarette in her fingers, and was looking at his
battered lighter.

“Oh, excuse me,” Joe said, and dropped his own lit cigarette into his
lap. He flapped and plucked and got it, and corralled it in the ash
tray, fumbled up his lighter, and spun the wheel. It caught with its
usual bonfire effect.

The girl yelped, recoiled, then laughed and leaned forward. She watched
him as she lit up, instead of the flame. He saw that her eyes weren’t
green at all. They were blue, with a little crooked golden ring around
each pupil. In the light of the booth’s little table lamp, the movement
of her mouth on the cigarette showed up a fine line of down on her upper
lip. He had an impulse to touch it.

He snapped the lighter shut and displayed it. “Swedish,” he announced.
“I got it off a guy on a ship. You can’t get ’em here. It’s sort of beat
up now. It dropped out of my pocket one day and I ran a bulldozer over
it.”

“A bulldozer? You run a bulldozer?”

He nodded eagerly. “You ever watch one work?”

“Oh yes,” she said. “I rode on one once, for a couple minutes. They’re
the biggest, strongest—”

“I know.” He nodded. He knew, too. He thought she had run out of words.
Couldn’t find words for the blatting of those mighty engines, the
unspeakable power of twenty-one tons of steel and racket and brute
force, the whole thing obedient as cadets on parade. He looked across at
her, at the miracle that had happened to her face to make it interested
in his work, and in him. In _him_—and she with that calendar face, that
TV Hollywood face.

“My girl fr—the girl I’m with, she never saw a bulldozer,” he said.

“Well, I have. Is it hard to run one of those things?”

So Joe talked about it. Something inside him filled up and burst warmly,
and spilled out in words. He had never been able to talk to a girl like
this before. There was a time in high school, a girl called Peggy, and
he suddenly found himself talking about her, because this blonde miracle
understood about him and the bulldozer.

“You remind me of a girl called Peggy, when I was a kid,” he told her.
“Once I had a class with her, she sat right next to me, well I never
could bring myself to say a word to her. You know how it is with kids.
Well she passed and I flunked and after that I never saw her but on
Wednesdays. On Wednesdays she would carry the flag in assembly. I used
to live from one Wednesday to the next, just waiting for her. Just to
watch. I never did speak a word to her. Well that went on for three
years until the senior prom and she came with a friend of mine. And me
stag. And he came over and said, ‘Hi, Joe, you know Peggy.’ I just
nodded my head yes and she smiled at me. Know what I did? I left the
dance,” he said in recalled wonderment, “I left and went straight on
home.” He looked up from his kneading fingers to see the blonde girl’s
eyes fixed on his face. He blushed. “I guess I was a dope. As a kid.”

“I think that was cute,” said the blonde warmly. “Did you say your name
was Joe? Mine’s Bette.”

“Oh,” said Joe. “Pleased t’ meecha. Mine’s Joe, all right. Betty.”

“Bette, with an E, not Betty. Betty’s such a common name, don’t you
think?”

Joe, by now too far away from bulldozing and feeling lost, didn’t know
what he thought, and didn’t have to, for he suddenly became conscious of
two square hands with stubby fingers and an oversized signet ring on the
table beside him. He looked up and saw that they terminated thick arms
which in turn supported a pair of wide shoulders wearing an overpadded
sports jacket. From a pink-cheeked baby face, a mean little pair of eyes
leered viciously at him. One side of the mouth opened and said harshly,
“Hiya, Bette. Who’s yer friend?”

“Oh! Gordon. Gordon, meet Joe. Joe’s just waiting for his girl. She’s
powdering her nose.” There was an urgency in her deep sweet voice, and,
looking up at the man’s little eyes, Joe felt a miserable cold lump form
in his stomach.

“Yeh?” Gordon slid in next to Bette and said heavily, “Let’s jest sit
here and help him wait for her.”

“He doesn’t believe it!” said Bette, and laughed with her mouth.
“Gordon, where you been? I been waiting for you thirty minutes.”

“Hadda stop an’ paste a guy said he was going to make time with you,
hon,” said Gordon, winking at Joe. Joe smiled weakly. There was
something wrong about all this, and he wished suddenly that Sara Nell
would hurry up.

“He’s a bulldozer operator,” said Bette, nodding at Joe, who nodded back
like a marionette. And for just a fraction of a second the arrogance
slipped off Gordon’s face, leaving it bland, years younger. Then he
caught it again: “_He_ is? Well—long as he din’t bring his bulldozer.”

Joe said, “Ha. Ha,” and was appalled at how hollow it sounded.

Sara Nell had slid in beside him before he fully realized she was back.
She was saying something about she hoped she hadn’t been too long.

You have been, Joe thought. He said, “Sara Nell, this’s uh, Bette and
Gordon.” Sara Nell bobbed her head as each name was mentioned. Bette
said “Hello!” and smiled.

Gordon glanced briefly at Sara Nell’s face, intently at the front of her
dress, shrugged his shoulders and turned in his seat to face Bette more
directly. He said not a word.

Joe sat silent and miserable. A waitress scuffed up. “Cuba libre,” Joe
said. Sara Nell shook her head. “I don’t want anything now.”

“Coke,” said Bette. Surprise slanted into Joe’s mind. She should have
said “Champagne cocktail,” or something. Didn’t they always?

“I’ll have a drink with you,” Gordon said pointedly to Bette, “when you
and him are finished.” The waitress shuffled off again.

“Aw, Gordon, don’t be like that. Joe didn’t mean anything, did you, Joe?
Does he look like a wolf or something?”

Gordon flicked a glance, not at Joe, but at Sara Nell. He said, “Hell
no.”

“Well, he isn’t,” said Bette complacently. “I know. He was telling me
just before you came—”

Oh no, Joe thought, holy smoke, don’t tell him _that_! I didn’t tell you
that about Peggy so you would—

But she was. In her own way, which wasn’t like what he had told her. She
made it different. She made it as if he was still the same kind of a
cube he was when he was a kid. She made it sound as if it had happened
just yesterday, instead of three whole years ago, nearly four. He opened
his mouth to say something, and nothing would come. He felt Sara Nell’s
hand on his arm and realized he was half out of his seat, hanging there
clumsily. He dropped back and closed his eyes and let the silly little
anecdote come pouring over him like hot oil from a busted hydraulic
line.

When Bette was quite finished, finished also with an expansion of how
_very_ cute she thought it all was, Gordon said,

“Shee—_yit.”_

It made Joe jump. Bette apparently noticed nothing. Joe didn’t have to
look at Sara Nell.

Joe said, “Aw, Bette, you shouldn’t’ve told about that.”

“Why not?” Gordon grated. “She can say what she wants. It’s a free
country, ain’t it?”

“Sure, but—”

“But nothin’, who do you think you are, Nicky Khruschev or something?”

“Gordon,” said Bette, “will you leave the kid alone?”

“Aw, it’s all right,” said Joe.

Sara Nell said suddenly, “Joe, will you take me home? I have an awful
headache.”

Joe looked at her in amazement. He had never heard her voice be shrill
before. “You got a headache?”

“Sure she has,” said Gordon. “Name’s Joe.” He brought his thick hand
down on the table and guffawed.

“Very f—” Joe began, but something choked him. He had to swallow before
he could say, “Very funny.” To Sara Nell he said desperately, “I ordered
a _drink.”_

“Please Joe …” she said. The face she had now, this was new to him too.
“Please. Now. I feel sick.”

Joe opened his mouth, but before he could say anything Sara Nell was up
and walking away. He rose, tried a smile and a shrug that somehow didn’t
quite come off, reached for his hat and started off after her.

“Hey. _You_!”

He stopped. Gordon said, “Who’s supposed to pay for the drinks,
deadbeat? Me?”

Infuriatingly, Sara Nell came back to him, accompanied him to the table.
He said to her, “If it wasn’t for you—” He got his wallet out. Gordon
was sitting back making his little eyes even smaller. Joe took out a
bill and tossed it to him. “Here. When she comes. With the drinks. We
got to. Go.”

Bette said goodbye, but Joe couldn’t answer. He took Sara Nell’s arm and
hurried her out. “Joe! Your change!”

“Skip it. I got plenty of money.”

Outside it was red and dark, red and dark with the neon, and the cool
air took the hot fuzziness that filled him and compressed it into a
fiery ball. _“You!”_ he gritted. “What’d you want to rush me out like
that for? You want that guy to think I was afraid of him?”

Sara Nell made a strange little sound and snatched her arm away from
him. They stopped walking. Joe said, “One more crack outta him and I’d’a
had to paste him one.”

“Joe!” she cried as if she had been stabbed, “don’t talk out of the side
of your mouth!”

“What’s the matter with you?”

She placed her hands carefully together and looked down at them. Her bag
swung from her left wrist, and from its wide gilded clasp. The neon
letter B, reversed, appeared and disappeared. B for Bar. B for
Backwards. B for Bette. She spoke to him carefully, and at last in her
own full voice again. “Joe … I don’t want you to be mad at me. I have no
claim on you, and you can do what you want. But—”

“What are you talking about?”

“Please don’t throw your money away. You work too hard for it.”

“For God’s sake, I told you. I got plenty.”

“All right, Joe. But … ten dollars is a lot for a drink you didn’t even
have.”

“Ten—did I put ten dollars on that table?”

“That’s what you took out of your wallet.”

Joe whipped out his wallet and fanned through it. “Holy smoke.” he
looked up at the pulsing glare, and back at his wallet.

Sara Nell said, probably to herself, “Those awful people …”

“Aw, they’re okay,” Joe said. He put away his wallet. “He just talks too
much for his own good, that’s all.… Well,” he demanded suddenly, “we
just going to stand here?”

She just stood there.

“Come on,” he growled.

“All right, Joe,” she said. They walked away from the bar. After a while
she said, “Let’s walk all the way.”

“I got enough mon—”

“I want to,” she said.

They walked in too much silence after it had been normally dark for a
time, and he lashed out, “All right, so you didn’t like them! So they’re
not your type, that’s all. So forget them!”

“All right, Joe.”

All the time, all right Joe. And watching him. She had always been
watching him, ever since he met her. She watched him eat. She watched
him walk. Did she … did she _think_ while she watched? She never said.
He had such an abrupt vision of the crooked golden ring on blue pupils
that he blinked; the vision jagged along with him, fading no faster than
the afterimage of a flash bulb. Oh God, no matter what, this Mousie
would never do that to him, or anything like it.

He found, after a while, that she had his arm again. He had not been
aware of her taking it. She said, “Joe. Did I ever tell you about my
brother Jackie and the noon gun?”

“What about it?”

“We used to live near the fort. Every time they shot that cannon at noon
Jackie would start to cry, even when he was a baby. Everybody knew about
it. Everybody used to laugh at him, to kid him out of it. They used to
look at their watches and hang around him waiting. And sure enough when
the gun went off he’d jump and start to cry.

“Well, one summer when he was about thirteen, my uncle John and Aunt
Helen were visiting, and Jackie cried like that, and Uncle John gave me
two dollars but he said to Jackie he was ashamed they had the same name.
I—I guess he was only trying to help. But anyway, at night Jackie told
me he would never cry at the noon gun again. The way he said it, Joe, he
scared me. I was so worried, the way he acted, I kept my eye on him all
the next morning.

“Well, about eleven-thirty he sort of slid out of the yard without
saying anything and I waited a second and went after him. He took the
hill road and went right up to the fort, and jumped over the road wall
at the top and went on around the side of the building and sat down on
the grass with his back to the wall. And there right over his head was
that cannon.” She was quiet for so long that he nudged her.

“What’d he do?”

“Nothing. He just sat there looking out at the sea. At five minutes to
twelve he could hear the voices of the gun crew. I could too, where I
was hiding. Then he sort of squinched up his face and dug his fingers
into the dirt. And he started to cry. He didn’t try to wipe his face. He
kept his hands in the dirt. It must have been to keep him from putting
his fingers in his ears. Finally the gun went off—_blam!_—and he jumped
like a jack-in-the-box. Afterwards, he sat there for a minute until he
stopped crying, and he wiped off his face with his handkerchief and
wiped his hands on his pants.

“What’d you say to him?”

“Oh—nothing. I ran home. He never did know I saw him.”

“Now why did he want to do a thing like that?”

Sara Nell looked up at him. “He was a funny kid. You know, he never did
cry at that noon gun any more. For a couple of weeks he’d sort of
tighten up when it went off, but after a while he stopped doing that
even. And then he’d just grin.”

They reached her gate. Joe said, “That’s the craziest story I ever
heard.”

She reached behind her, opened the gate, slid through and closed it
between them. “Well … goodnight, Joe. Thanks for the show and all.” She
turned and went up the steps. At the top she looked back and saw him
still standing there. She said good night again and when he didn’t
answer she went into the house.

At the click of the door Joe started, took a step toward the gate. There
was something so very final about the click; it left him alone, and it
told him what he hadn’t known until then—that he didn’t want to be
alone. He stared at the lighted windows for a moment, and finally
shrugged. “That dame,” he said out of the corner of his mouth. He turned
and started downtown.

“I guess I shoulda pasted that guy one,” he muttered. He put his hands
in his pockets and hunched his shoulders. In the back of his mind, a
most intimate possession of his, a sort of private movie projector,
began reeling off a new feature, in technicolor. He saw himself in the
bar, striding up to the table, a thin smile on his merciless lips.
Gordon looked up and turned pale. “Well, wise guy?” said Joe out of the
corner of his mouth. Gordon said, “Now, looka, a joke’s a joke, huh?”
Joe slowly extended his hand. Gordon said, “Okay, okay,” and put the
change from Joe’s ten into it. Joe put the money in his pocket and stood
there rocking on the balls of his feet, -staring Gordon down. “Punk!” he
spat. Bette rose and ran to him and threw her arms around him. “Don’t
hit him, Joe!” Joe gently disengaged her and shoved her carelessly
aside.

Fadeout.

Joe took his hands out of his pockets and walked a little faster.

Another reel. Joe and Gordon standing toe to toe, slugging it out. Bette
shouting, “Come on, Joey!” A right, a left, another right, and Gordon
was down, blood streaming from his nose and mouth. “Oh, Joe, my Joe …”
and as he turned to face her and the hot promise of her parted lips, he
saw too late that the coward on the floor had a gun. _Blam!_ But with
the explosion, Bette’s tear-filled face was blanked out by the
superimposed picture of a kid sitting in a swirl of smoke under the
muzzle of a cannon, digging his hands into the dirt and crying.

Joe shook his head in annoyance. He tried to get a close-up of Bette,
whose dress was torn somehow, saying, “You’ve killed him, you rat!
You’ve killed my Joe!”—flinging herself down beside him as he gasped his
life out; but it couldn’t jell.

Gordon, he thought bitterly. Gordon is the guy who grins when he fights.
A tough guy. Smack him one in the nose. He grins. When the noon gun goes
off, he grins. Pump him full of lead, and he cracks wise with the Army
nurse. The blonde Army nurse.

I’ll get him out on the fill where I’m working, Joe thought. I’ll be up
on my dozer, and I’ll run him down. I’ll slap her in sixth gear. Just a
touch on the steering clutches. He can’t dodge _me_. I got twenty-one
tons at my fingertips. Blade him under. Lock a track and spin him into
the dirt and spread him out and backblade him into nothing but a stain
in the mud. In technicolor again, he pictured himself up on the machine,
approaching the bar. He dropped his blade and swung into the front of
the building. _Blam!_ But instead of people running and screaming,
instead of chrome-pipe chairs bouncing and scattering off the blade,
instead of a sweaty Gordon crying, “He brought his bulldozer!” there was
just the kid under the gun again, crying without trying to wipe his
face.

“I got to do it,” Joe said suddenly in a strained voice. He thought,
what right have I to horn in on them? and replied instantly, I can just
ask for my change.

Ahead of him the lurid neon over the bar made the street and housefronts
alternately blood and black, blood and black. He crossed over toward it
and stumbled on the curbstone. His heart was pounding so hard that he
had to catch his breath in between beats. He went in.

There were not many people left. He thought suddenly, maybe they’ve
gone. He craned his neck toward the booths and instantly saw Bette’s
beacon of hair.

He wiped his palms on the sides of his trousers. The waitress was behind
the bar. Maybe she’d have the change. Maybe he wouldn’t have to ask
Gordon at all. He went over to her. She looked tireder than she had
before.

“I gave you ten dollars for a Cuba libre and a Coke a while back,” he
said. “I was sitting over there. Have you got the change?”

“Oh—you’re the feller ordered and then went out. Was that your ten? I
give the change to your friend there. Ask him about it.”

“Thanks.” Joe swallowed. “I—I guess I will.” He looked at the waitress.
She was numbly mopping the bar with a grey towel. “I’ll go ask him about
it right now.” It didn’t seem to make any difference to her; she just
went on mopping. “Yes,” said Joe. “Well, thanks.”

He walked away from the bar. Maybe he ought to have a little drink
first. As the thought occurred to him it was canceled by a reaction
against any more stalling that jolted him to his ankles. He was
trembling ever so slightly, all over, when he walked back to the booths.

I’ll just say “Hi,” easy-like, he told himself. But when he got there he
couldn’t say anything at all. He put his hands down on the table and
leaned on them. He looked at Gordon and wished that little muscle in his
cheek would stop twitching.

“Well, will you look what crept in!” said Gordon. “What do _you_ want?”

“My money,” whispered Joe. He cleared his throat. “My money,” he said.

“You lose some money?” Gordon nudged Bette. “He lost his money.”

“Better forget it, kid,” said Bette.

Joe said, “I left ten dollars here to pay for drinks.”

“That’s your hard luck,” said Gordon. “I don’t know nothing about it.
Why’n’t you save yourself some bad trouble and beat it?

“Give it to me.”

“Look, son—ain’t it worth ten bucks to you to keep me from feeding you
your teeth? How’re you gonna prove anything?”

Joe was suddenly certain that his mouth would form just one more
statement before it dried up altogether. He said the only thing that
would come into his mind. “Give it to me.”

Gordon carefully and ostentatiously adjusted his heavy signet ring. Joe
became fearfully aware of what that big ring could do. “I guess I gotta
give it to him,” said Gordon. He got up and stepped so close to Joe that
Joe could smell the liquor on his breath. “Now get outta here,” rasped
Gordon. He put his open palm against Joe’s face and shoved.

Joe stepped backwards, his arms flailing for balance, until his knees
brought up against a chair, and he fell over it backwards and crashed to
the floor on his head and shoulders. He rolled over and tried to get up.
Gordon stepped over and kicked him in the stomach, and when he put his
hands down, kicked him in the head.

It made a noise inside his head like nothing he had ever heard. Just
_blam!_ and then the whole world was full of roiling smoke. It began to
clear, and he became conscious of a bleating noise—the waitress. He
raised his head and looked past the thick columns of Gordon’s legs, and
saw Bette’s face. She was not saying, “Oh, Joe, my Joe …” She was
smiling, with her mouth half open. He could see almost all her upper
teeth. She was smiling at Gordon.

Gordon stepped back as he got to his knees and then to his feet. “You
kicked me,” he said inanely, and then rushed.

He felt his hands close around Gordon’s forearms. They felt almost
squashy in his grip. He forgot all about dream-fights, movie and TV
fights, the one-two, the feint and duck and right cross. He bent
Gordon’s arms until the square hands were fluttering under the baby
chin, and he bore down with all the power that ten hours a day pulling
steering clutches can give. Gordon went to his knees. “Money,” said Joe.
He pulled Gordon back on his feet, released his arms, grabbed a handful
of hair and hauled Gordon’s head back until he could see the skin on the
pink throat stretching. Holding him like that, he swung at Gordon’s jaw,
cheek, nose, eye, mouth, jaw. He kept swinging until Bette screamed.
Then he let go, and Gordon came down and over and around his feet like
something dumped out of a truck.

The waitress was saying, “Stop it! Stop it!” Joe said, to his own
astonishment, “You stop it. You’re making all the racket,” and went over
to Bette. “I want my money,” he said.

“I got it,” she said. “Gosh, Joe, we were only having fun with you.” She
opened her pocketbook and took out a ten, the whole ten, and put it on
the table. Joe picked it up and slid it into his wallet, and took out a
dollar and gave it to the waitress. “Throw some water on him,” he said.

Bette looked at the feebly stirring figure on the floor. “You didn’t
need to get mad like that,” she said. “Now when he comes to he’s going
to take it out on me. I’m gettin’ out of here.” She walked off.

Joe found his hat, picked it up, dusted it off, put it on. Bette was
waiting for him outside on the sidewalk. The blinking neon did strange
things to the color of her hair.

“Are you going my way?” she asked him, holding his arm.

“What’s your way?”

She pointed. He shook his head. She said, “I could go the other way.”

He took her hand off his arm. “I got a date,” he said.

His head hurt.

He went straight to Sara Nell’s house, thinking about what he should say
when he saw her. He thought up plenty, but when he stood in the light of
her opened door, he forgot it all and said only, “I got the money. They
had it, all right.”

“Joe! You’re hurt!”

“I feel fine.” How she got into his arms he couldn’t imagine. He held
her close and stroked her hair. She didn’t turn her face away. His eyes
were hot. He said, “You’re so _little!_ You’re no bigger’n a little old
mouse. I oughta call you Mousie.”

She said, “All right, Joe.”

He held her close, but he was careful, because his arms were so strong
he didn’t want to hurt her.



BULLDOZER IS A NOUN


IN SPITE OF the resilient walls and acoustabsorbing floors, Jay
Scanlon’s startled _“What?”_ carried through four different offices,
causing three typing errors, one inadvertent subtotal and two cases of
mild profanity. The erg-per-worker meter on his desk, wired to every
business machine in the place, chalked up eighteen man-minutes lost
time, divided that by the number of office employees, and advanced the
quitting-time gong relays by two-tenths of a second.

“I’m sorry, Jay,” said Pellit. He unfolded out of his chair and helped
himself to a cigarette, which he struck on his thumbnail. “We’ve got to
have the guy, and on his terms. There isn’t any other way out.”

Jay’s contorted features relaxed into their usual expression of
undershot wistfulness. “It’s not right. It’s—sacreligious, practically.
The man’s an iconoclast. This is a technological culture and has been
for the past three thousand years. I’ll admit the necessity for going
back to techniques that were in use practically in the dawn of time, but
I don’t see where we can’t get along without a crackpot who says right
out loud that he’d rather live in the past.”

“Yeah, he talks too much. But he’s a topnotch researcher. Universal
Synthetics has come a long way by its policy of buying, making, and
hiring the best. And he’s the best there is.”

Jay snorted. He pointed at his unlovely but appealing head and said,
“See that face? That’s the best I’ve got too. For the same reason. Sure
he’s the best. There’s no other human on the three planets who is crazy
enough to have wasted his whole life in digging up useless information.
It’s—it’s—” he searched for the strongest word he could find, lowered
his voice to be sure the stenos couldn’t hear him, and said, “It’s
_inefficient!”_

Pellit started. “Please, Jay. It doesn’t call for foul language. The
trend of events has proved that his work is of some use, or we wouldn’t
be seeing him this afternoon.”

Jay sighed. “I know. I know. But he couldn’t have known of that. Not
thirty years ago when he started burrowing in the Archives. It’s
_unplanned_, don’t you see? It’s _sinful!_ What’s funny?”

Pellit turned loose the smile that had been puckering his cheeks. “I
can’t help it, Jay. The beautiful paradox! The complete stasis of
progress! Onward and Upward—that’s what we’ve been fed since we were
children, and ninety generations before us. We’ve lived by it and worked
by it, and we have progressed. We’re moving onward and upward all right,
but at such a uniform rate that we’re completely hidebound. As a unit we
progress; within the unit we’re in complete and utter stasis. By going
backward to the Metal Age techniques in this thing, our social unit
takes a big jump upward, but within it violates all our conventions, and
we throw up our hands in holy horror like a pack of Monday-school
teachers finding a steam-engine on the Altar at Willow Run Sanctuary.”

“It isn’t funny. And you’re almost as bad as Mauritius the Drip … why
does he call himself that, anyway?”

“Oh, some idea of his that he feels identifies him with his work. ‘Drip’
was a widely used term back there somewhere in the umpteenth century, so
he says; a widely used descriptive term of a typical period in which he
considers himself an expert. Ask him about it.”

“What’d it describe?”

“He claims that all the great men of the pre- Fourth and Last era were
called drips at one time or another—the peace-making statesmen, the
theoretical scientists, the advanced artists, and so on. So he figures
he’s a drip too.”

“The guy should have a number,” Jay said glumly. “All right; send him
in.”

The Anson dilator in the wall opposite opened, adding a cubicle of the
waiting compartment to Jay’s office. Mauritius the Drip was not sitting
in the luxurious chair provided but was on the floor with his feet on
the seat and his back to the wall. “In protest,” he explained,
indicating his pose, “as I must protest all of the artificialities of
this effeminate culture.”

Jay stared open-mouthed at the lanky apparition, with its rough
beard-stubble, its anachronistic clothes, its long bony face on which
was mounted an antediluvian pair of eye-lenses in thick mottled-amber
frames. “What,” said Jay with something like horror in his voice, “is
that?”

“Mauritius the Drip,” said Pellit. “This is Jay Scanlon.”

“No, no,” said Jay. “I mean all that—on his face.”

Mauritius ran the edge of a thumbnail raspingly down his cheek. “That,”
he said hollowly, “is a beer. Every normal male would have one were it
not for the effect of your ridiculous Rites of pubertescence, where the
skin of the face is irradiated in the name of efficiency.”

“Oh yes,” said Pellit suddenly. “I seem to have heard of a legend to
that effect. In the pre- Fourth and Last era that facial pilosity was
cultivated by scratching with a sharp blade, wasn’t it? they called it
‘raising with a shaver,’ didn’t they?”

“You have been studious,” said Mauritius loftily, “but careless. Your
sources were at fault. It wasn’t ‘raising with a shaver,’ but ‘shaving
with a razor.’ A razor was the instrument used, and must have been the
object meant by repeated references in the contemporary press to ‘a
check for a short beer.’ ”

“An expert was what I asked for,” mourned Jay, “and an expert was what I
got. Is there any possibility that we can get down to business?”

“Yes,” said the Drip. “What is it that caused you irreverent
progressives to summon me?”

“Irreverent,” wailed Jay. The customary pathos in his face dissolved
into a grieved sort of numbness. “Irreverent! And who’s talking?”

Mauritius the Drip uncoiled and stood up, startlingly tall. “Yes,
irreverent!” he said, stalking across to Jay’s desk. “Look at me! What
am I, besides the greatest antiquarian on the three planets?” He flung
out a bony forefinger. “A true representative of a race, and faithful to
it—all of it. What are you? A piddling example of a passing phase. Who,
presented to an impartial interstellar being, would be the truest
example of our genus—you, who glance lightly at today and concentrate
forever on tomorrow and tomorrow—or I—” (every time the Drip used the
nominative pronoun he got a quarter of an inch taller) “who live and
think and work in everything humanity is and has been in seven thousand
years? You, who base your faith on logic—does this logic tell you you
have seven thousand years of _future_ to back up your faith?”

“You spit when you talk,” said Jay.

Pellit raised his fists to his temples and pounded softly. “Business,
for heaven’s sake, business.… Jay, whittle that stuff away and let’s get
down to it.”

Mauritius the Drip turned to Pellit. “That,” he said, “is a very
interesting phrase. Would you like to know its origin?”

“No.”

“It is derived from the name of the man who first developed jet
propulsion for aircraft, a Captain George Whittle; the colloquial phrase
referred to ‘whittling down distances’ because of the vast increase in
speed that was then possible. Date, about nineteen sixty, toward the
close of the Second War. The phrase, like everything else, has been
corrupted since those noble days.”

“Fascinating,” mourned Jay Scanlon. “I find this whole conversation
unproductive, to say the very least. I am sorry to say that we need your
services. Would you care to have me say something further about it?”

“Jay,” said Pellit frantically, reading the signs, “Don’t throw him
out!”

“I can’t,” moaned Jay, his eyes fixed on the erg-per-worker meter as if
it were some sort of triptych. “Mauritius, we need your advices on a
matter concerning which you just might be able to help us.”

“That is self-evident, or I wouldn’t be here. You’re wasting time,” said
the Drip.

“Your fault,” said Jay. “I never saw anything like it. You radiate
procrastination.” He drew a deep breath, and, rocking sideways in his
chair, sat on his hands. Pellit grinned at him sympathetically.

“We are building a ship,” said Jay, his sad voice quivering with
enforced gentleness. “Interstellar, but big. The biggest thing that man
has ever built. The keel is being laid in mile-long sections in Chicago
Center and is being floated out into Lake Michigan as each deadrise
bilge-plate is fitted. Floating it saves us thousands of cradling
operations. The superstructures are being added to the floating section.
Except for electrical, electronic, and magnetronic installations, the
ship will be entirely built of synthetics.”

“The first successful synthetics, or plastics, as they were then known,”
said the Drip didactically, “were bakelite (so called because as a
thermosetting plastic it was baked, and it was light) and celluloid.
They were inv—”

“THE REASON WE—” shouted Jay over this local interference, “—called you
in is that we have run into a logistic problem. We can synthesize any
element—most in commercial quantities—and with them we can compound any
synthetic. But almost without exception, our transmutatory processes are
exothermic. Theoretically we can absorb a good part of this excess heat
in compounding and treating our thermosetting materials; but even under
ideal conditions—are you listening?”

“No,” said the Drip. “I was, but I can’t see the bearing of all this on
my work. If you’ll excuse me, and give me another appointment, I’ll come
back when you’ve gotten to the point.”

Jay puckered up slowly and completely like a two-year-old just realizing
that mother meant it when she said no dessert. “Pellit,” he whispered,
“why does he _do_ that?”

“That,” beamed the Drip, “is rudeness. It was the basic tone of the
entire pre- Fourth and Last age. Men were men in those days. Friction
between ego and ego, between nation and nation—that was a holy
tradition. In those golden days, ‘the common weal’ could not be
presented as an unanswerable argument to the desired action of man or
state, as it is among you pantywaists. The man who earned the respect of
the people was the man who forcibly bent the public mind to his own
will. I will not freely co-operate with the internal stasis of this
effeminately harmonious culture. I must be bludgeoned and forced into it
against my will. I _will_ uphold my position as a social misfit. I am
the most offensive man in the known universe, and I hold my
offensiveness as a sacred trust.” He leaned over and smashed his fist
down on the yielding synthetic of Jay’s desktop. “What your forebears
had during their glorious history, the one constant in the ebb and flow
of their social evolution was the ‘underdog.’ The underdog was the
minority group, the constant author of change through strife, the source
of the magnificently gruesome virility of the age. I am the underdog. I
_will_ be exploited. I _will_ be oppressed, whether you like it or not.
See?”

“This,” said Jay Scanlon faintly, “is not reasonable.”

“A strong term to use,” said Pellit. “Remember, ‘That which exists is
reasonable.’ Second Book, G.E. Schenectady.”

“Thank you, Pellit. The Scriptures help.”

“G.E. Schenectady,” said the Drip gratuitously, “was, it may surprise
you to learn, merely a pseudonym for the pamphleteer who composed your
precious Edicts of Efficiency. The name originally applied to a
corporation organized for private profit, circa—”

_“Stop it!”_ Jay screamed. “I will not have another word of your
iconoclastic semanticism in my office!”

“The Basic Tenet,” said Mauritius suavely. “ ‘Freedom of utterance in
gatherings of three or more.’ ”

“I yield,” said Jay, with the traditional conditioned reflex. “I ask
that you restate and contin—”

“No, No!” cried the Drip eagerly. “Don’t retract! Stop that uncerebrated
mouthing! Don’t you see that at last you are oppressing me? I’m
persecuted. I’m ground under your heel. What was it you were saying
about heat?”

Feeling that the enemy had encircled him only to reinforce his lines of
supply, Jay sat and gaped. Pellit grabbed the opportunity.

“What Jay was getting at,” he said, “was that although it is perfectly
possible for us to transmute and synthesize all of our raw materials for
this project, most of the processes involved are exothermic. What are we
going to do with all the excess heat we can’t use? We could circulate
lake water, up to a point; but what to do when the lake warms up? In
this one job alone we will release enough heat to raise _all_ of the
Great Lakes over 90°C—let alone just Lake Michigan.”

“You’ll kill all the fish.”

“Fish? That’s the least of it! Have you any idea of how long it would
take for those bodies of water to cool? Fifty-eight trillion cubic
meters of water at 90°? Over ten years. I think we could hypothesize an
annual average loss of a possible 6.5°. It would be anyway twelve,
possibly fifteen years. That’s pasteurization with a vengeance! The
lakes would be completely sterile. All of the bacteria of decomposition,
all of the algae necessary to the carbon-oxygen cycle would perish. Can
you imagine the windstorms, the rain, over those millions of square
kilometers of hot area?” He shook his head. “And I’m just fooling with
theory. All that would be true if we could distribute the heat evenly
all over all of the lakes simultaneously. We can’t. We couldn’t hope to
construct circulators which would do more than concentrate our surplus
heat over more than the southern half of Lake Michigan. And then what
would we have? In two months, a steaming swamp around Chicago Center,
with a constant holocaust going on two hundred miles north as the cold
water rushed in to compensate for our vaporization loss. Where is our
advantage then, of floating the hull? What of the men who will have to
work on it?”

“Why don’t you use the ocean?”

“For the same reason. Too much heat locally distributed. You know our
synthetics. Strong, but very light. That hull, big as it will be, won’t
displace much. Can you imagine the winds we’d generate offshore in the
sea? Can you imagine what the windage stresses on a hull of that size
would be? At least, in Lake Michigan, we can train repulsors from the
hull to the shore on both sides at all times and in all stages of
construction. And we won’t have ocean storms to fight.”

“Very fine,” said the Drip. “So your precious efficient technology has
fallen down!” He leered delightedly. “That, my friend, is the price of
technical skill when it advances out of proportion to its milieu. As
long as a machine civilization accomplishes nothing which could not be
duplicated by muscle-power, however inefficiently, then it cannot start
anything it is impossible to finish.”

“All right,” said Pellit resignedly. “We’ve substituted skill for
strength to such a degree that when we need material in volume, we find
that our techniques have outpaced themselves. How did a business
discussion get turned into this ‘you rub my nose in it and I’ll rub
yours,’ anyway?”

“We need carbon,” said Jay desperately, recovering from his own
speechlessness, as Pellit relapsed exasperatedly into his. “We need it
in bulk. And silicon. And boron. Of all the elements, those are the
three which are easiest to compound into synthetic molecules. As I have
said, we can synthesize what we need from lake water, air, and the
surrounding earth, but it is impracticable. The alternative is to locate
large deposits of specifically what we need, and extract it in bulk from
the earth.”

“That’s mining,” said the Drip. “There is a twenty-third century legend
that youth was conscripted to work in mines. Anyhow, all young people
were known as miners at one period.”

“Mining? All right; call it that. And what we want from you is an idea
of the equipment and techniques used when mass extraction of natural
resources was an industry.”

Mauritius the Drip pulled at his lower lip and looked at the ceiling.
“That might be hard to get. My sources in the Archives are mixed,
incomplete, and hopelessly jumbled by fools who, through the ages, have
superimposed one filing system after another on the material. But I
think I know …” He snapped his fingers suddenly and sat upright.
“Bulldozer!” he roared. “Bulldozer!”

Jay’s breath caught with such violence that he inhaled two cc of saliva
and fell back choking. Pellit blanched and stood up. “Mauritius! You
forget where you are! A roomful of stenos right through that open door,
work to be—” He leaned over and looked at the meter. “Forty-three
minutes lost time. Oh Lord—four ‘show cause’ requests and two
resignations. Why can’t you keep your offensiveness inside this office?”

Jay, red-eyed and gasping, said thinly, “He couldn’t,” with the
two-tenths of a voice that was left him. “I fell against the general
annunciator control. That w-word of his went all over this section.”

Mauritius grinned jovially. “Ah, the power of semantics! Isn’t it
wonderful? Jay Scanlon, I sincerely wish I had meant to do that, but I
didn’t. So help me, that was the name of the machine they used; and a
remarkable machine it was. I can see its ideological impact on the
times, and its legendary quality through the Thousand-Year Dark. From a
mechanical quintessence of primal brute power, the word became
associated with any basic force, or driving urge. And then it became
particularized. So nowadays bad children write it on fences. Dear dear.”
He rose. “I’m going to the Archives now and see what I can dig up on it.
By the way. I just thought of another way to be offensive. I am a
historical purist. I refuse to have anything to do with your project
unless you agree to use the proper names of the machines involved. That
means every requisition, every shop order, every transcription, every
job schedule.” He laughed. His bony face was startlingly presentable
when he did that. “And if you don’t you bulldozers can go bulldoze
yourselves.” He strode through the Anson dilator, which blinked shut
behind him.

“Oh …” said Jay Scanlon; and it probably the most eloquent syllable he
had ever uttered. He looked sadly at Pellit and shook his head. “Pellit,
_can’t_ we get somebody else?”

Pellit shook his head too. “Can’t do it, Jay. He’s the only one. He
lives in the Archives, you know. He’s the only man alive who knows
anything about them. He’s willfully broken a two-thousand-year old
tradition by his work. You know that. You know that after the Fourth and
Last humanity slipped into the Thousand-Year Dark and went static. What
few men that were left had enormous resources; there was no further
cause for the age-old frictions that had culminated in the Fourth and
Last. Their heritage was blood and force and death, and they turned
their backs on it. All we are taught about that desperate period of
human history has come to us through legend—and through the rare efforts
of Mauritius and his few predecessors.”

“And Segundo Revenir.”

“Ah—Segundo was different. What an extraordinary man he must have been!
Can you imagine yourself doing what he did? Can you imagine him, musing
about his tragic and suicidal culture, fired with such a driving,
burning faith in humanity and its future? It was his belief in the
future that has become the basic philosophy of modern society. that is
Onward and Upward. It was his lifetime of labor that built the Vaults of
Constructive Culture, and the Call.”

“Just what was the nature of the Call, Pellit? I don’t think I ever
thought much about it, except as one those things you learn about when
you are very young and accept for life.”

“Can’t tell you precisely; it’s out of my technology. But as I
understand it, it was a gravitonic torsion-field set up over the Vaults,
which as you know were buried in the center of the South American
continent. The field varied regularly in intensity, enough to set up a
signal detectable anywhere on Earth—_when_ humans had shaken off enough
of their stasis to build a machine which would detect it. The genius of
the man! For a thousand lost years, mankind lived its useless,
scavenging life in the great automatic cities—lived on the stored
resources of the billions who died in the Fourth and Last—and around
them beat ceaselessly the undetected Call. Only when Mickle and Bruder,
two thousand years ago, discovered—or rediscovered—the principles of
magnetronics and detected it, only then did men know that the Call
existed. It was Svoboda who build the direction-finders which located
the Vaults, and discovered Segundo Revenir’s work.

“Segundo! Could mankind produce such a man again? We work and build for
the future, on Segundo’s precept that all our history is in tomorrow,
and the morrow of tomorrow; but is there a man alive who could do what
he did? He _knew_ his tomorrows. He predicted the Third, and the Fourth
and Last and the Thousand-Year Dark; and when he had reasoned it out he
began to build the Vaults. He knew that only a handful would survive,
and that for centuries they would have resources, and that while they
had they would not progress. So in his Vaults he put basic examples of
all mankind’s Constructive Technology; not the fumbling, imperfect
commercial applications, but careful and concise demonstrations of the
principles involved in each science, clear and simple graphs and models
of the three nuclear theories—gravitic, electronic, magnetic—and an
indication of the few possible lines of research beyond which even he
could not go at the time. He gave us a universal language so that we
could understand what he had done.”

“This is doing me good,” said Jay, figuratively smoothing the feathers
Mauritius had ruffled. “How on earth did you get the story as detailed
as that?”

“I like it. Anybody can get it; few do, because it’s traditional, basic,
and—well, right. I—studied for the priesthood, you know.”

“No, I didn’t know. Then you’re—”

“A misfit? Yes, Jay. Don’t look so shocked! It happens, you know. Of
course, I’m not like Mauritius. He’s an extreme and probably hopeless
case. I simply developed, belatedly, a bent for research too powerful to
exist in the carefully balanced priestly mind. So my training was
changed to public relations research, to the greater glory of the Wholly
Efficient.”

“I’m sorry. I’m not used to unusual things—who is? Go on about Segundo.”

“Segundo … He was obviously a superb technologist; but his greatest
brilliance was in his prophetic ability. All of his stupendous work was
predicated on the belief that when the bulk of humanity killed itself
off, the tiny remainder would at last learn what it had refused to learn
in all its previous history: the fear of mankind. And he was right. Only
man’s fear of mankind, and the infinite resources available, checked the
ancient cycle of race suicide. The design of the Call was part of this.
What magnificent reasoning! If any social unit survived, it would exist
on the principles of sharing, and it would unite in an attitude of shame
and horror of the past. As long as it could live on the stored resources
of the dead, it would not progress. The one danger-point would be when
the end of the resources was in sight; then man’s brutal acquisitiveness
might assert itself. But Segundo’s faith in humanity told him that when
that happened someone would take the technological step necessary to
develop magnetronics, the key technique of transmutation. Mickle and
Bruder did it—and the Vaults were found. Can you see it? If humanity
were to die, Segundo was ready to let it die in ignorance. If it wanted
to live, it would help itself and when it helped itself, Segundo’s great
gift would fall at its feet, and humanity need never want for anything
again.”

“And what of Segundo himself? Is it really true that nothing is known of
the man?”

“Quite true. Whether Segundo Revenir was a man or a group of men is
something we shall never know. Certainly one man alone could not have
built and filled the vaults. And it’s very unlikely, though possible,
that any one man could have had such a detailed grasp of all the
sciences. In any case, Segundo’s effacement of himself was only part of
his faith. He had culled the best of his culture, and the worst was
dead. But he obviously felt that he himself was a part of the worst,
since he had lived in that tragic time. He did not do his work to
perpetuate himself, but purely to immortalize what was constructive in
humanity. So when he had finished his work, after he had designed the
Call mechanism—a mechanism technologically centuries ahead of his
contemporary science—he activated it, closed the vaults and went off
into the jungle to die. He must have been very old, and he probably went
unarmed. Did he return to civilization, to watch the frightful
fulfillment of his prophecies? Probably not; I don’t think he would
trust his secret even to himself should he grow into a cackling and
incautious senility. We know only that his secret was kept, and I think
we can assume that he simply gave himself up to the jungle, for what
value the jungle could get out of such an infinitesimal and unimportant
package of tainted hydrocarbons.”

Jay stared thoughtfully at the erg-per-worker meter. “And he never knew
whether he succeeded.”

“Nonsense!” snapped Pellit. “He was a prophet. He knew.”

Jay flashed him an understanding glance. “And that’s why, in his only
message, he expressly forbade us to worship a man, and instead reverence
the ideals of Efficiency and the History of the Future.”

“That’s right. Mankind’s achievements outside of what was in the Vaults
were hardly representative of anything that could be worshipped.”

“What about the Inconsistencies?”

“I wish something could be done about that name! They weren’t
inconsistencies, by any means, those two precepts. Segundo asked that we
retain the old calendar, at the same time he asked us to turn our backs
on our history. Can’t you see why? The date—any day’s date—is a written
phrase with a semantic impact. No human being ever disregards the date
for very long. Therefore, if only subconsciously, we realize when we
read or write or speak the date that human history is a little over two
thousand years older than we, with our stability and progress, care to
remember with pride. It’s a reminder as constant and directional as the
Call itself, and it helps to keep alive the one thing of value we
learned from the Fourth and Last—man’s fear of mankind. It reminds us
that our origins were in horror and pain and shame, and it says a dozen
times a day to millions of human beings, _‘don’t_ let it happen again.’
The other so-called inconsistency is the thing that started this
discussion—good grief, it’s getting late—I’m sorry, Jay.”

“I can’t think this is lost time. Go ahead.”

“The existence of the Archives. Segundo warned against past human
history in the strongest possible terms, in everything he did, including
the way he died. He made it logically possible to ignore the past, by
the gateways of achievement he opened for the future. And then he gave
the location of the Archives, asked that they be opened and that free
access to them be permitted. It does seem inconsistent, doesn’t it?

“Well, it isn’t. For those with strong stomachs, there is proof there
galore that Segundo was right in every way. That’s unimportant. The
primary thing is that Segundo knew that someday someone—a sociologist, a
technologist—anybody—would perhaps doubt the validity of Segundo’s
precepts, or get the idea that Segundo’s researches had not been
inclusive. In the Archives the doubter can find out how wrong he is.
That’s why I say that the important thing isn’t _what_ the proof might
be, but the fact that it’s there. Segundo has always been right. A visit
to the Archives will convince anybody that nothing in there is
applicable to the Wholly Efficient.” He shuddered. “I was there once. A
horrible place. Piles and bales and racks of scattered, fragmentary and
now useless information—recordings on brittle acetate and clumsily
magnetized wire, great chunks of wood-pulp rolled flat and printed and
bound together at one edge so that you have to turn the sheets as you
read. All of it opinionated, inaccurate, emotional. There is no system
there. I asked Mauritius about it, and he said that most of it was
deposited there by some forgotten idealist, probably during the Third
War, as a feeble attempt to do the same thing that Segundo did
perfectly, so much later. The stuff is shovelled in there—tons of
it—apparently to await an editing and filing that was never done. Much
of it was destroyed during the Third. What is left is a potpourri of
opinionated trash, historical rationalization, prejudicial texts of what
should be exact sciences, instruction pamphlets on machine operation and
manufacturing techniques based on inefficient—beg pardon,
Jay—principles; anything and everything. But there is nothing there of
benefit to us, who have progressed so far. Even their art-forms are puny
and puerile—and by the way, did it ever occur to you that Segundo’s
complete lack of art-form demonstrations in the Vaults was a studied
oversight?”

“I always assumed that he ignored artistic accomplishment because he was
a scientist—and that perhaps he thought art forms were not necessary to
a functional culture.”

“My eyeball! He knew that like religion, art is a self-perpetuating
thing; that while sociology and technology can slip into the doldrums,
art _will_ go on, if it’s no more than a new way a man finds of humming
to himself. And he knew also that his researches were based on
unchanging, natural laws. It was those laws and their application that
he wanted to leave for us. But any and all art-forms he chose to leave
for us would be chosen by his personal opinion and that of his group.
Segundo left personalities out. Our art is necessary to us, as it must
be to any culture, and he saw to it that it was _our_ art, not his. And
they talk about inconsistencies!”

“He seems to have thought of everything,” mused Jay. “I—I wonder if he
thought of Mauritius?”

“The Drip _is_ different. Just how, I don’t know—yes I do. The hunger
for research is a strange and wonderful thing. Part of it is ingrained
in our culture and condition—namely, the part that diverts research to
the good of the Wholly works. But there is a part of the research
psychosis that is self-energizing—the desire to do research for
research’s own sweet sake. That seems to be what Mauritius has to the
exclusion of everything else. It is probably the basis of his social
imbalance. I doubt that Segundo overlooked the possibility of a warping
of that sort, but I think he probably trusted the inertia of a stable
society to dissipate any harmful effect it might have.”

“There’s plenty about that guy that needs dissipating,” growled Jay.
“Unimportant or not, though, he doesn’t fit into my conception of
Segundo’s idea that everything has its constructive social function, if
that function can only be found.”

Pellit spread his hands. “We need him now, don’t we?” He laughed
suddenly.

“Now what?”

“I was just thinking of the circular you’re going to have to write,”
Pellit said. “Mauritius won’t back down about the use of the word
bul—ah, that word. I know him. It’ll require a semantic defense. The
situation will have to be explained to the personnel, and your circular
will have to follow the 46-C program. There isn’t any other way.”

“You mean it has to be flashed on the public-address teletype every five
minutes? Included in office correspondence? Used by the office force as
a greeting?”

“All that.”

“We’ll be the laughingstock of the entire Wholly Union!”

“That’s right. And you’d better do some laughing yourself first, or
you’ll never put over a 46-C.”

OFFICE CIRCULAR

  ---------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  TO:        All Personnel, Universal Synthetics, and all subcontractors on Star Ship project, Chicago Center
  FROM:      Jay Scanlon, Executive Director
  SUBJECT:   Use of term BULLDOZER
  ---------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Circumstances force this office to unearth ancient techniques for
moving raw material in bulk. In connection with this work, it is
necessary to study, design or redesign, manufacture and operate several
of the machines known to the ancients as BULLDOZER.

2. This word will of necessity occur repeatedly in connection with its
preparation and work, in all departments. In the interest of the Wholly
Efficient, its modern connections must be suppressed and, as far as
possible, forgotten.

3. This end will be accomplished best if all personnel make a determined
effort to remove its present undesirable effect, to lessen the semantic
impact of its current definition.

4. It is therefore directed that all personnel make every effort toward
a truly casual use of this term. BULLDOZER is a noun. BULLDOZE and TO BE
BULLDOZED are its active and passive verb-forms. There are innumerable
ways in which it may be employed. To begin this effort, it is directed
that all personnel greet each other as follows:

“Good morning, Bulldozer.”

5. The subject matter of this circular is not to be construed as carte
blanche in the use of bad language in these offices.



AUGUST SIXTH 1945


(THERE IS MUSIC; it is sibelius and bach, it is richness and exactitude,
a rushing bass and a wrenching treble, the bass aimed for the belly and
the treble for the tear ducts …

there is a man asleep. he walks and moves and builds but he is asleep.
his eyes are closed because he is asleep. he does not know how big he is
because he is asleep. he is made of scar tissue.

there are voices. they are all his voice. the places where the voices
are heard are all here where he is.)

Magazine Store:

who buys this crap?

that kind of thing is ridiculous. just to settle it for once and for
all, where would they get the power?

(the echo begins. it whispers “power power power” until the whisper is a
sheet, a screen, a thing all one color getting brighter. it never stops
again. it gets behind the music and brings the music forward.)

School:

i am trying to be reasonable about this, children. i must make you
understand that it harms you to escape into such tripe. confine
yourselves to the books i give you. you must not clutter up your minds
with such impossible nonsense.

Home:

pulp magazines again! must you read stories

about rockets

about space flight

about time travel

about space warps

about new sociologies

silly! where would they get the power?

(the echo deepens)

Cemetery:

 … to finally prove the impossibility of the railroad’s replacing the
canal. how can you expect the smooth wheels of a locomotive resting with
only the locomotive’s weight on a smooth track—only one point for each
wheel, gentlemen—to yield traction enough to move a train? who wants a
means of transportation which would prohibit a man’s using his own
carriage as he now may use his own canal boat?

 … these dreamers who want to build flying machines heavier than the air
that supports them have not faced the issue. what would be the status of
shipping today if ships depended upon their engines, not only to drive
them, but to keep them afloat?

(from somewhere, the fingers of Langley, Lilienthal, Stephenson, Fulton
touch the man’s sealed eyelids. he rubs them, and rubs again, and finds
that scars have not covered his eyes. he is afraid and keeps them
closed.)

News Stand:

who writes this crap?

Places with Typewriters:

i wrote a story about decentralization, because cities could not dare
exist when each city had bombs that …

i wrote a story about a meteor detector that worked controls when it
received the reflection of a radio signal …

i wrote a story about a reaction engine …

i wrote a story about a rocket projectile …

i wrote a story about a robot flying bomb …

Subway:

the heck with that stuff. i druther read stories about real life. i
druther read something that has to do with me.

A Place with a Typewriter:

i am afraid. i tell you that deep down inside i have a cold lump about
this thing. i know we must be doing something about it because although
it is old stuff to us we have been asked not to mention it in our
stories for security reasons. it is too big for us. it can be good—it
can give us power so cheap it would be free. it can give us a four-day
work week, five hours a day. it can give us riches. but we are not old
enough for it yet. i pray god that it will be discovered and used before
this war is finished, so that everyone will know how big it is, how
good, how horrible … atomic power

(the “atomic” finds its place in the echo, in the interstices between
“power power power” and gives a staccato tone to the sheet of sound. the
man’s eyes open a crack and now he sees, but he sees death, because
death came to stand before him when his eyes opened. he is afraid and
tries to close them but a whisper, a transparent whisper, creeps between
his eyelids and holds them open.)

Whisper:

on december seventh, nineteen forty four, the newspaper said there was
no bombing activity over japan. somewhere else the newspaper said there
was a small b-29 reconnaissance flight off the japanese coast, just
where the japan deep is. the japanese islands sit on the edge of the
japan deep like houses on the edge of a cliff. somewhere else the
newspaper said there was a hell of an earthquake that day. that day was
december the seventh, december the seventh, remember?

(the whisper slips away to the figure of death, and the man who can see
now realizes that death is transparent like the whisper, and through
death he can see how big he is. he stretches his body and feels how
strong he is. he opens his eyes a little more.)

Radio:

the president says that the bomb that struck hiroshima on august the
sixth nineteen forty five was atomic. the president does not call it
atomic explosive. the president calls it atomic power. (the echo is
greater than the music now; greater than anything else but the man now.)

Places with Typewriters:

we are writing stories about the future

about machines that can think creatively

about interstellar flight

about the psychological fulfillment of mankind

about mutations caused by hard radiation from atomic bombs

about empathy, second-order space. contra-terrene matter, levitation,
astral separation, telepathy, the intuitive mutation, universal
synthesis, time-travel, silicon life, and the evolution of intelligence
in rats.

Street Corner:

why do you read that crap?

(but the man with the open eyes does not hear that. he is looking at
himself, on the other side of death. he knows—he learned on august the
sixth nineteen forty five that he alone is big enough to kill himself,
or to live forever.)



THE CHROMIUM HELMET


“DADDY,” SAID THE Widget.

“Yes, dear,” I said, without detaching my eyes or my mind from the
magazine I was reading.

“When was the time I had a great big doll, bigger’n me, and she suddenly
laughed at me and gave me a handful of jellybeans?”

“Yes, dear,” I said.

“Well, when was it?”

“When was what?”

The Widget clucked her tongue in disapproval. “I said, when was it I had
a doll bigger’n me, that could laugh and talk and give me jelly beans?”

“Doll?” I said vaguely. “You never had a doll like that. You had one two
years ago that said not only ‘Mama’ but ‘Papa’.”

“I stinkly remember about the jelly beans.”

I sighed, feeling that this conversation was a little unproductive. “Why
do you talk all the time?” I asked. It was a rhetorical question, but
she cocked her head on one side and considered it carefully.

“I think it’s ’Cause I don’t know any big words, like you and Mummy,”
she said, just in time to pull me out of my magazine again, “so I have
to use lots and lots of little ones.”

I grinned at her, and she nodded to herself, acknowledging her success
in getting between me and what I was reading. She removed the conquest
from the abstract by running and jumping up on one knee, sitting on the
magazine. “Now tell me about the doll with the jelly beans.”

“Widget, you never had a doll like that.”

“Oh yes I did.”

“Oh no—” I checked myself. That could go on for hours. “Tell me about
it. Maybe I’ll remember.”

“She was a big doll. I put her to bed in Susie’s crib.” Susie was the
Widget’s Number One toy, a horrible pale-blue monolith of an earless
rabbit. “The doll was so big her feet stuck out. I singed her to sleep
and all of a sudden she threw up her hands and threw all the covers off,
and she laughed at me and said I had a funny nose. I jumped up and
started to ran away, but she called me. She said, ‘Here’s a pres-net for
you.’ And she reached into her pocket and gave me the presnet. It was
jelly beans. She had on a red giggum pifanore.”

“She had on a red gingham pinafore, and she gave you some jelly beans.
What do you know. And I sup—oh!” In the time it took me to get that “oh”
enunciated, I had seen my wife standing just inside the living-room
door, with flour on her hands and on the tip of her nose, her bright
head cocked to one side, listening; I had met her eye and caught her
signal to go on talking to the Widget. I grinned; Carole was always
poking and prying into what the Widget said, and coming up with starling
conclusions culled from Freud and Jung and Watson. “And I suppose,” I
went on, “that the doll told you her name?”

“I didn’t ask her.”

“Darling, you always have names for your dolls,” said Carole.

“Wh—Oh, hello, Mummy. No, this doll was differ-net. She wasn’t _my_ doll
so much. It was like I was _her_ doll.”

Carole looked at me, puzzled. “Widget, you really remember about this?”

“Oh, yes.”

“You’re just pretending.”

“No, Mummy, it isn’t a pretend. I really and _truly_ remember. Only I
can’t remember just when.” She sounded very patient. “So that’s why I
asked Daddy.”

I started to speak, but Carole checked me. “Was it a long time ago?”

“The doll?” The Widget’s round little face wrinkled in concentration. “I
don’t know.”

“Widget. Listen. You say you put her to bed in Susie’s crib.”

“Yes, in Susie’s crib, an’ she was so big her feet stuck out.”

I suddenly realized the line Carole was taking. The Widget had gotten
the crib for her birthday, nine months ago. “What were you wearing?”
Carole asked.

The Widget closed her eyes. “It … was … mmm. Oh yes; it was my Aunt
Marie dress, the one with the pink squirl.”

“Marie sent that about four months ago, didn’t she?” I asked. Carole
nodded, and asked, “When did you first remember about the doll?”

“Oh, ‘safternoon,” said the Widget, without hesitation. “When I was
having my hair dried under the cormium hemlet.”

“Translate that,” I said.

“Chromium helmet,” said Carole. “I took her to the beauty parlor and had
her shampooed while I finished the shopping. She loved it. And she went
fast asleep under the drier. I was interested in all this because, for
once in her young life, she hasn’t said ten consecutive words all
afternoon until now.”

“Oh, heck, she obviously dreamed the whole thing.”

“Oh heck, I obverlously did not,” said the Widget with composure.
“Dreams is all fuzzy. But I stinkly _remember_ about that doll.”

“Drop it, Godfrey,” Carole said swiftly as I came up out my chair. I
don’t like to be flatly contradicted by anybody, even my infant
daughter. “Widget, run on outside. Don’t go away from the house. And
don’t contradict your father.”

The Widget skipped across the room. “Yes Mummy. I’m sorry, Daddy.” She
opened the door, letting her body walk out while she kept her head
inside. “But he contra-dicted me first,” she said, and was gone.

“Parthian shot,” I laughed. “Also, _touché_. Carole, why all the third
degree?”

“Oh … I dunno, Godfrey. It isn’t like her to make up tall tales.”

“Nonsense! Every kid does it.”

“Every kid doesn’t, only most kids. The Widget never has.”

“O.K. So she’s started. It’s perfectly normal. Darling,” I said, going
to her, “wipe off that troubled look! You women amaze me. You really do.
Fond as I am of my own kid, I’ve never been able to understand how a
woman can study a baby’s face literally by the hour, and always seem to
find something new and different in it. You’ve always done that, and now
you’re doing it with her mind. What’s wrong in a child’s being
imaginative?”

She shook her head. “All right. Maybe I’m silly. But there’s a
difference between imagination and an actual remembrance of something
which couldn’t have happened.”

“Don’t be fooled because the Widget can’t express herself any better
than she does. I don’t—”

Carole jumped up. “My cake!” and ran into the kitchen.

It began just as simply as that.

It was only a couple of days later that I got to the lab to find Henry
straddling a chair, with the back holding his chin up, staring out of
the window. I spoke to him twice before he heard me at all. Henry is a
regular guy. Not only that, but he’s married to my one and only sister.

“What’s the matter, sadpan?” I asked.

“Nothin’.”

I looked at him carefully. There’s generally only one cause for such a
beat-up expression. “Honeymoon over?” I asked.

“That’s a lousy thing to say,” Henry snapped. And it was. He and Marie
had only been married four months or so. I shrugged. “Don’t let me horn
in,” I said. “Only—I’ve known youse guys for a long time.”

He got up out of the chair and kicked it. “Godfrey, did Marie ever have
anything to do with Wickersham?”

“Wickersham!” I said in astonishment. “Good gosh no! You know better
than that!” Wickersham was the man we worked for. He wasn’t famous for
anything because he didn’t want to be. He was remarkable in many ways.
His firm manufactured psychological and psychiatric precision
equipment—reflex timers, hypnotic mirrors, encephalographs, and the
like. Wickersham kept himself to himself; we hardly ever saw him at all.
Once every few days he would circulate around the shops and labs, his
wide shoulders hunched, his black eyes everywhere. I always had the
impression that his eyes were camera lenses, and that he would develop
all he had seen later, spread the proofs out in front of him on his desk
and study them. Few of us had been in his office—there was no need. If
we wanted to see him we pressed a button—there was one in each lab,
office and shop in the building. He had an annunciator, and he would
show up eventually, in his own time. And Lord help the button-pusher if
Wickersham didn’t think the problem in hand required a consultation! But
as far as Marie was concerned—as far as any woman was concerned—that was
nonsense. The woman didn’t live who could move an icicle like that.
“Henry—don’t be dopey. They never even met.”

“Yes they did,” said Henry glumly. “Don’t you remember the union
banquet?”

“Oh—that. Yeah, but he … I mean, he wasn’t there for any high jinks. He
wanted to see how many of his men were in the union, that’s all. Not
that he cares. He pays way above the union scale. But what’s this about
Marie?”

Henry shook his head. “Somebody’s nuts. Me, maybe. Marie comes drifting
in about an hour after I got home last night. She’s walking on air. She
is plenty affectionate always, but—” he ran his finger around his
collar—_“whew!_ Not like that. She was all over me. Says she guessed she
never appreciated me before. Says it was so brave of me to … to punch
hell out of Wickersham, and spoil that Rock of Gibraltar face of his.”
His voice went vague. “Took me about five minutes to get all that on a
slow double-take. I finally asked her to start from the beginning. I got
it piecemeal, but the pitch is that Wickersham was down on one knee
pouring his heart out to her, reciting Keats—”

“_Wickersham_ was?”

He nodded dismally. “And I came in, hauled him to his feet, spun him
around with the old one-two, and pitched him out on his ear.”

“And where did all this happen?”

He looked up at me dazedly. “In a private room at Altair House.”

“Altair House? You mean that gold-plated eatery on Sixty-fourth Street?”

“Yeh. And that’s the craziest part of it all, because—I was never there
in my life.”

“Was she?”

“I asked her. She said sure she was—that one time; and didn’t I
remember?”

“She’s kidding you, Henry.”

“Nuts. You know your sister better than that. She kids around some, but
not in that way. No; she—well, she _says_ she remembers about it. I
asked her when it happened—before or after we were married. That stopped
her. _She didn’t know!_ She chewed on that for a while and then
apparently decided I was kidding _her_. She said, ‘All right, darling,
if you don’t want to talk about it,’ and dropped the subject. Godfrey,
what’s happening to her?”

“She never came out with anything like that before,” I said. “Marie’s a
pretty cool-headed gal. Always was, anyway. Maybe she dreamed it.”

Henry snorted. “Dreamed it? Godfrey, there’s a heck of a difference
between a good healthy dream and an actual remembrance of something
which couldn’t happen.”

And where had I heard something like that recently?

That was the same day that I looked up from my bench and saw Wickersham.
The late afternoon sun streaming through the laboratory windows
high-lighted his huge, strange face, making velvet hollows of his eyes.
There was a nervous ripple along his slab-sided jaw; otherwise he was as
always, carven, unnaturally still. Henry’s wild story that same morning
returned to me with shocking clarity, as I pictured my little,
good-natured puppy of a brother-in-law smashing a fist into that great
dark unreadable face.

“Oh!” I said. “I didn’t see you.”

I was standing in front of my work, but he seemed to look down through
me and examine it lying there on the bench. “That’s the Hardin
contract?” he said.

“Yes. The tone generators with the secondary amplifier for building up
the supersonic beat.”

He moved his hand slowly up, pulled his lower lip, slowly put his hand
down again, and I remember thinking that that was the first time I had
ever seen him make anything approaching a nervous gesture. Then, “Hardin
can wait,” he said. “I want to put you on another job.”

I blinked. This wasn’t Wickersham’s style at all. He did good work for
his customers—the best. But once a job was started, it was kept in
production until it was finished, no matter who came along with a rush
order. His reputation was such that he could tell anyone to go fly it if
they didn’t like it. “What’s the job?” I asked.

He looked at me. He had black eyes, and they seemed to be all pupil. He
seemed to be daring me to look surprised. “It’s a burglar alarm,” he
said.

“But we don’t manufac … I mean,” I said, “What kind of a burglar alarm?”

“An alarm with a psychological appeal,” he said. “One that will not only
announce that there is or has been an intruder, but will lead that
intruder into being caught.”

“You mean take his picture?”

“I mean, take _him.”_

“What sort of an installation? I mean, will it cover a room, or a house,
or what?”

“A large room, about forty by thirty, with two outside walls. Four
windows, one outside door, two inside. Run up any kind of cost you like,
but get it done and get it done fast. Use any man or machine in the
shop; you have absolute priority. I’ll bring you a floor plan in an
hour. I want your preliminary layouts by then. Can you stay here
tonight?”

That last was like asking a jailed convict to stick around for a while.
Wickersham had other ways besides his customary double time for overtime
to persuade his staff to do what he wanted. Oh well, I could use the
money. “I’ll have to call my wife,” I said.

Wickersham apparently took that for acquiescence, for he turned and
stalked off without another word. I watched him go. He walked as if he
were keeping time with slow music; as if he were holding himself back
from breaking into a run.

Henry’s jeweler’s lathe whined to a stop and he came over.

“D’ you hear that?” I asked.

“Most of it,” he said. “What’s eatin’ him?”

“You noticed it too?” I shook my head. “He looks like a dope addict.
Only I can’t say just how. Henry, I’ve known him and worked close to him
for nearly six years now, and I don’t know the first thing about him.
What makes him tick anyway?”

“Search me,” said Henry. “I don’t know how he does it. Old George, the
night watchman, told me once that the Wick comes in before the sun is
up, more often than not, and doesn’t leave until midnight. Sometimes
he’s here, day and night, for three days at a stretch. He doesn’t seem
to talk to anybody but us, ever, and that’s only occasionally, about the
work. A guy just interested in making money don’t carry on like that.”

“He’s making money all right,” I said. “He knows more about applied
psychology than most of his clients, and they’re all tops in the field.
Most times he gets his orders by clapping together a new gadget for
controlled hypnosis or something, and calling in the doctors who’d be
most interested. He don’t wait for their orders. They come when he calls
them, and glad to.” I began to clear a space on my bench. “Maybe he is
cracking; I dunno. I wouldn’t be surprised; only—Henry, I just don’t see
a guy like that cracking.”

“Maybe he’s human, after all,” said Henry, unhappily, and I knew he was
thinking of Marie’s wild tale. “Let’s get to this alarm thing. What’d he
say about the building?”

So we got to work on it. At five I called Carole. She wasn’t happy about
it, but you’d have to know her as well as I do to guess it. I marry the
nicest people.

The alarm we doped out was a nice set-up, and I pitied the burglar who
would come up against it—though I couldn’t know how much I would pity
him later. The come-on that the Wick wanted was an iron window-grating
kept ajar over an unlocked window. The window was free to slide up only
six inches, where it was stopped by a chrome-plated and highly visible
catch. The catch was so stiff that it would require both hands to
release it. The burglar would have to squeeze up close to the wall, put
both arms into the half-open window, and reach up with his arms bent to
get to the catch. As soon as he swiveled the catch—_bang!_—the sash came
down on his biceps. No bells would ring, nor lights; the alarm was
turned in at a remote station and the police could come and get their
pigeon at their leisure. The whole layout was put on the ready by a
black-light installation; that is, the building was surrounded on its
two accessible sides by a lawn and a high stone wall, without a gate.
The wall was topped by the beams; another two crossed the gateless
doorway in the wall in an invisible X. When anyone approached the
building with honest intentions, as for instance, the cop on the beat on
his way to try the door, he would be timed by relays. If he went in and
stayed inside the wall longer than three minutes, the grating over the
side window would unlock and swing ajar. If he tried the door and came
right back, the side window would stay locked, and would not tempt
investigation. And if anyone climbed over the wall when it was so easy
to walk in, then, of course, the trick grating would do its stuff
immediately.

Wickersham came in to watch Henry and me about nine o’clock that night,
and I handed him the sketch of the installation I had superimposed on
his plan of the building. He glanced at it and tossed it on the bench,
saying nothing, which was his way of dealing out a compliment. He stayed
about half an hour, and we didn’t hear a sound out of him except when
Henry stopped working, wiped the sweat out of his eyes, and lit a
cigarette. Then Wickersham heaved a sigh, a sigh which was ten times
worse than if he had barked at Henry to get back to work. Henry hunched
his shoulders and did.

At about half-past one in the morning I finished the window catch and
got it mounted on a conventional flush fitting. I went over to Henry’s
bench; he was adjusting the focus on the last of the little UV
projectors.

“That about all?”

“Yep,” he said. “Buzz the Wick.” He yawned. “And me for bed.”

I pushed Wickersham’s call-button, and we heard his office door crash
open. “Jee-hosaphat!” said Henry. “He must’ve been in a racing crouch!”

“Finished?” said Wickersham as he came in. He might have added, “Good!”
but it wouldn’t occur to him. “Give me a hand with the parts, down to my
car.”

Henry said, “You want us to help with the installation?”

The Wick shook his head impatiently. “That’s taken care of.”

We gathered up everything the plans called for and a bunch of spare
cable and fittings besides, and carried them down. As soon as the stuff
was loaded, Wickersham swung in behind the wheel and roared off like a
P-38.

“Funny business,” I said, watching the car pull into a screaming turn at
the first corner.

“Everything he does is funny business,” said Henry, and yawned again.
“Take me home and put me to bed.”

I dropped Henry off and went home. The bedroom light went on as I
wheeled into the drive, and the kitchen light was on as I locked the
garage doors. There was never a time, early or late, when Carole wasn’t
up to see that I had something to nosh on when I came home. Which is the
way a guy gets spoiled.

“Hi, Muscles,” I said, slinging my hat at her. She caught it deftly,
only to throw it over her shoulder and come and kiss me. “How’s the
Widget?”

“Talkative,” said Carole, heading for the stove, where water was already
heating the coffee. “Still going on about the talking doll in the giggum
pinafore.”

“Carole!” I went to her, put my face in the back of her shining hair.
“You’re _worried_ about it!” I sniffed. “Mm. You smell good.”

“Wave set,” she said. “Don’t muss me, darling. Yes I am a little
worried.” She was quiet a moment, her hands deftly cutting and spreading
bread, her mind far from them. “Marie came today.”

“Oh?”

“Henry tell you anything?”

“Yes. He—”

Carole began to cry.

“Darling! Carole, what the … stop it, and tell me what’s wrong!”

She didn’t stop it. Carole doesn’t cry very well. I don’t think she
really knows how. “I’ve been too happy, I guess, Godfrey. I feel … I
don’t know, darling. Ashamed. I gloated at Marie.”

“Too happy? A heck of a thing to cry about.” I squeezed her. “Don’t cry
all over the liverwurst, honey.”

“It isn’t being too happy. I … I don’t really know what it is.” She put
down the knife, turned in my arms, and hid her face in my coat. “I’m
frightened, Godfrey, I’m _frightened!”_

“But what are you afraid of?”

“I don’t know,” she whispered. She trembled suddenly, violently, and
then was still. “I’m afraid of something, and I don’t know what that
something is. That’s part of it. And part of it is that I’m frightened
_because_ I don’t know what it is. There’s a difference, do you see?”

“Sure I see.” Suddenly I felt about her the way I do about the Widget.
She seemed so tiny; there was so much she couldn’t understand yet,
somehow. I talked to her as if she were a child. I said, “What kind of a
something is it, darling? Is it something that can hurt you?”

She nodded.

“How can it hurt you?” She was still so long that I thought she hadn’t
heard. “How can it hurt, darling? Can it jump out at you and knock you
down? Is it that kind of a something?”

She shook her head promptly.

“Can it hurt—us?”

She nodded. I said, “How, Carole? How can it do something to us? Can it
take something away from us?”

“It did take something away.”

“What?”

“I don’t know. I don’t know. I don’t know. I don’t know,” she mumbled.

I held her and stroked her shoulder, and I felt lost. After a while I
went and sat at the table and she finished making sandwiches for me.

It didn’t stop there. In three days I was in the shape Henry had been in
when Marie first came out with that fantasy of hers—and in three days
Henry was worse. Working, we did little more than to interrupt each
other with accounts of the strange goings-on of our wives, and it wasn’t
fun.

“She won’t forget it,” said Henry, staring blindly at his bench. His
production was way off—the little guy was a worker, but this thing had
got between him and his work. “If I’d only known how serious it would be
to her, I’d have grinned and said, ‘yes, yes, go on.’ But I couldn’t
then, and it’s no use trying now. I’ve done my best to persuade her the
thing between her and the Wick never happened, but it’s no use. The more
I persuade, the more upset she gets. If she believes me, she begins to
doubt her own sanity. If she doesn’t believe me, she can’t figure out
what motive I might have for lying about slugging the man.” He spread
his hands, his eyebrows coming up sorrowfully. He looked more than ever
like a little lost puppy. “Dead end. What can you do?”

“You’re lucky. At least Marie can put a name to what’s worrying her.
Carole can’t. She’s afraid, because she doesn’t know what she’s afraid
of. She feels she’s lost something, something important, and she is
frightened because she doesn’t know what it is. Where Marie’s worried
and—shall I say jealous, maybe?—and generally upset, Carole’s scared
silly. I’ve seen Marie worried before. I’ve never seen Carole scared.”

Henry gave up his pretense of working and came around to my bench.
“Carole is the coolest head I think I’ve ever run across,” he said
thoughtfully. “Maybe I am lucky. I … don’t feel lucky though—Godfrey,
let’s quit griping about the effects and try to figure out causes. Do
the two of them have the same trouble, or is it a coincidence?”

“Coincidence? Of course, Henry. The symptoms, if you want to call them
that, are totally different.”

“Oh, are they?”

“Well, what have they in common?” I said.

“Yeah,” said Henry doubtfully. “Um—Nothing, I guess. Except—they’ve both
lost something and it worries them.”

“Lost something? Carole has, but what has Marie—oh. Oh, I think I see
what you mean. Marie has a memory of an event which is itself lost, as
far as placing it in her life is concerned. Like the Widget’s doll with
the giggum pinafore.”

“Like what?”

I told him about it. “I have a feeling that’s what sent Carole off the
deep end, when you come to think about it,” I said. “She worried
about … hey! the Widget’s trouble is the same as Marie’s when you break
it down. She had a vivid memory of something that never happened, too.
And she frets because she thinks she’s lost it.” I stared at him.

“For that matter, you and I both have the same trouble,” said Henry
suddenly. “We’ve certainly lost something.”

I knew what he meant—particularly for himself. There is a certain
something about being newly married that shouldn’t be spoiled. His was
being spoiled suddenly, which was so much worse. “No, Henry, I don’t
know why, but I think that’s a side issue. Marie, the Widget, Carole.
They have something. It’s because they have something that we’re in the
state we’re in.” I suddenly noticed the remarkable fact that Henry
wasn’t even pretending to work. “Henry—we’ve got a deadline to meet on
this job. Wickersham—”

Henry uttered one brief syllable that adequately disposed of Wickersham
and the deadline. “All right—who had it first?”

“Why … Ma … no. Not Marie. The Widget and her doll. Then Marie and her
melodrama. Then Carole and her … then Carole.”

“The Widget, huh?”

“What are you driving at?” I snapped, seeing the vitreous sheen of
stubbornness slip over Henry’s eyes.

“Marie’s always going over to your place, isn’t she?”

“Henry, you’re crazy! Contagion, for a … mental disorder?”

“She had it first, didn’t she?”

“She’s just a kid!”

Henry looked at me levelly. “Just a kid. Would you say that if the three
of them came down with scarlet fever and she was the first to have it,
and the three of them had been together so much?”

“Now look,” I said, trying to keep my voice down. “I hope I’m wrong
about what you’re driving at. But there’s nothing wrong with my kid,
see?”

“You fellows lose something?” said Wickersham.

We literally jumped, used as we were to the Wick’s cat-footing
techniques. Henry stared at the big man, and his feet carried him back
to his bench by pure reflex.

Wickersham stood there, teetering a bit on the balls of his feet, his
big hands behind him. Suddenly his great still face broke, and his
white, even teeth showed in a grin. Then he turned and walked out.

“To him,” muttered Henry, “something is funny.”

I said, “Sometimes I’m sorry he pays the kind of money he does.”

We worked, then. If the Wick had tried, he couldn’t have picked a
sweeter moment to interrupt us. I was just on the point of achieving a
thorough-going burn at Henry, with his goofy insinuations about the kid.
Henry’s glum and steady concentration at his bench kept me just under
the blow-off point until it really began to hurt. Not another word
passed between us, although I did drive him home as usual. But his words
stuck.

“Widget,” I said after dinner, “you’re being very silly about this
doll.”

“Hm-m-m?” she said innocently.

“You know what I mean. Mummy says you’ve been talking her ears off about
it.”

“I want my doll again, that’s all. Mrs. Wilton told Mummy that whenever
she wanted anything from her old man, she just talked and talked about
it until he gave it to her to shut her up.”

“Widget! You shouldn’t listen to that kind of thing!”

“Listen? Did you ever hear Mrs. Wilton talk, daddy?”

I laughed in spite of myself. Mrs. Wilton whispered at about a hundred
and thirty-five decibels. “Widget, don’t change the subject. If I could
get you a doll like that, I would. Don’t you know that?”

“You did, though. I had the doll.”

“Darling, you didn’t have the doll. Truly you didn’t. I would certainly
remember about it, but I _don’t.”_

She opened her mouth to speak, and I braced myself for the blast of
denial. I knew the symptoms. But instead her eyes filled with tears, and
she ran out of the room to the kitchen, where Carole was doing the
dishes.

I sat there feeling frustrated, feeling angry at myself and at the
child. I tried to piece together the murmur of voices from the
kitchen—the Widget’s high and broken, Carole’s soft and comforting—but I
couldn’t. The temptation to march in there and defend myself was
powerful, but I knew that Carole was more than competent to handle the
situation.

After what seemed like months, Carole appeared at the living-room door.
“Stay out there and eat it all up, darling. There’ll be more if you want
it,” she called back, her voice infinitely tender. Then she swung on me
with sparks flashing out of her eyes.

“Godfrey, how can you be so _stupid?”_ she said scathingly.

“What’s the matter?”

“Oh, you idiot,” she said, sinking tiredly into a chair. “It wasn’t bad
enough to have the child in the grip of a dangerous fantasy; you had to
make it worse.”

“I don’t see that it’s particularly dangerous, and I don’t see how I
made it worse,” I said warmly. “Otherwise you may be right.”

“Don’t be sardonic,” she said. “It doesn’t suit your silly face. Oh
darling, can’t you see what’s happened?” She leaned forward and spoke to
me gently. “The Widget hasn’t been unhappy about this thing. She’s been
bothered, and she’s bothered me, but that’s nothing I can’t take.”

“And what did I do?”

“You presented her with a new aspect to her problem. At first the doll
was the important thing, but it wasn’t overly important. But you have
loaded her up with an insoluble abstract.”

“What, sweetheart, are you driving at?”

“What, sweetheart,” she mimicked, “do you think the child was crying
about just now?”

“Search me. Disappointed about the final realization that her doll was a
figment, I suppose.”

“Nothing of the kind. She was crying because she had lost something more
important than the doll. You see, beloved, strangely enough she trusts
you. She believes you. She believes you now; but then if what you so
solemnly told her is the truth, she is wrong about the doll.”

“That was what I was after.”

“But she _knows_ she is right about the doll!”

“The doll idea is nonsense!”

“That doesn’t matter. It’s real enough to her. As far as she is
concerned, the doll conception is the evidence of her senses. That’s a
tangible thing. The only evidence she has against it is your word.
That’s an abstract. She wants to believe it, but to do so she would have
to deny a concrete realization. It isn’t in human nature—normal human
nature, that is—to choose, through faith, a fact when its alternative is
supported by direct evidence.”

“Oh … oh. I begin to see what you mean. So she’s lost—”

“Both. Both her doll and the completeness of her belief in you.”

Her lower lip suddenly seemed a little fuller. “The way Marie
and … and—”

I looked at her and thought of cat-footed Wickersham and his amused
“Lost something?” and about then was when the thing began to get me mad.

All morning there was a coolness between Henry and me. I kept my nose
pointed at my bench, and so did he. His suggestion that my Widget had in
some way infected Carole and then Marie still griped me, and obviously
his resentment of Marie’s condition was aimed at the Widget through me.
It wasn’t cozy.

He broke the ice. At a little after noon he came over and nudged my
elbow. “Let’s go eat.”

“I’ve got my lunch here. You know that.”

He hesitated, then went back to his locker. I suddenly felt like a heel.
“Wait up, Henry.” We usually ate in the shop, but when we wanted some
beer with it, we dropped around to O’Duff’s, around the corner. I shut
off my soldering iron and oscilloscope and joined him at the door.

After we were settled in the grill, munching sandwiches, Henry came out
with it. “Look,” he said, “I’m willing to drop what I said—_if_ you can
suggest an alternative. You ought to be able to. The whole thing’s so
crazy anyhow. It might be anything.”

I grinned at him. “Heck, Henry, I know why you picked on that contagion
angle. It was the only common denominator. Now, instead of jumping to
conclusions, suppose we figure out a solider one.”

“Suits me,” he said, and then, “Godfrey, I hate to stay mad at anyone!”

“I know, I know,” I smiled. “You’re a good apple, Henry, in spite of
your looks. Now let’s get to it. When did our women-folks get this
affliction, and how? What was it—time of day, environment, or what?”

“Hm-m-m. I dunno. Seems as if they got it outside somewhere. Marie
walked into my house with it. I think you said the kid had it when you
got home that evening?”

“Yeah, and Carole had been out. Hm-m-m, Widget in the afternoon, Carole
in the evening—what about Marie?”

“She was late home that first night, the night she climbed all over me
congratulating me for the Humphrey Bogart act.”

“Where had she been?”

“Uh? I dunno. Shopping or something, I guess.”

“Call her up and ask her.”

“O.K.—wait. No, Godfrey, I don’t want to remind her of it.”

“I see your point. Uh—maybe we don’t have to.” I thought hard. One of
the Widget’s odd little mispronunciations was running around in my head.
“Giggum pinafore,” I said vaguely.

_“What?”_ snapped Henry, startled.

I grinned. “Hold on—Uh … oh. Got it! I got it, Henry! The cormium
hemlet!”

“And I’ve got athlete’s foot. What are you gibbering about?”

I grabbed his arm excitedly and spilled his beer. “Carole took the kid
into the beauty shop for a shampoo. The Widget told me herself that she
first remembered her talking doll under the cormium hemlet—chromium
helmet. She fell fast asleep under the hair drier. And … that’s it,
Henry!… That night Carole first acted up, I started to mug around—I said
she smelled good. She drew back a little and said, ‘Wave set. Don’t muss
me.’ Now, when Marie came in late that night, hallucination and all,
could she have just come from—”

“The beauty shop!” said Henry. “Of course!” He pondered, while the beer
ran over the table and dripped onto his trousers. Suddenly he leaped to
his feet, turning over my beer. “Well, gee! What are we waiting for?”

I dropped a bill on the table, and hurtled after him, collaring him at
the door. “Hey, cut it, Jackson,” I puffed. “Wait for all the facts,
f’evven’s sakes. Unless I’m mistaken the place in question is the one
known as Francy’s—”

“Yeah, on Beverly Street. Let’s go!” He was jittering with anxiety. Only
then did I realize the pressures he had built up over this thing. But of
course—Marie never did have the tact that Carole had. She must have
pounded his ear by the hour. “But Henry—the place is closed. Out of
business. _Kaput!”_

“It is? How do you know?”

“Carole told me last week. It’s handy to both our houses—that’s why
Marie and Carole used it. But they didn’t like it. Management changing
all the time, and stuff.”

“Godfrey—what are we gonna _do?”_

I shrugged. “Get back to work, that’s all. Get on the phone there and
stay on it until we find out who owns that place, and if we can get in
to look it over.”

“But gosh—suppose they’ve shipped all the equipment out?”

“Suppose they haven’t. It only closed a couple of days ago. Anyhow—got
any other ideas?”

“Me?” said Henry sadly, and began to slouch back toward the lab.

The Widget met me at the door when I got home that night. She put a
finger on her lips and waved me back. I stopped, and she slipped out and
closed the door.

“Daddy, we’ve got to do something about Mummy.”

My stomach ran cold. “What’s happened?”

She took one of my hands in both of hers and gave Carole’s smile. “Oh,
Daddy, I didn’t mean to frighten you. Nothing’s happened, on’y”—she
puckered a little. “She cries alla time—or almost.”

“Yes, monkey, I know. Has she said anything?”

The Widget shook her head solemnly. “She won’t. She sits lookin’ out th’
windy, and when I come near she grabs me and runs tears down my neck.”

“She hasn’t been feeling very well, darling. But she’ll be all right
soon.”

“Yeah,” said the Widget. She gave a strange, up-and-sidewise glance that
brought back what Carole had said about the child’s loss. “Widget!” I
snapped: and then, seeing how startled she was, I went down on one knee
and took her shoulders. “Widget—don’t you trust me?”

“Sure, Daddy,” she said soothingly. I once heard a doctor say to a
patient, “Sure you’re Alexander the Great,” in just that tone of voice.
“So Mummy will be all right soon.”

“That doesn’t make you any happier.”

Her clear gaze was searching. “You said she would be all right,” she
said carefully. “You didn’t say _you_ would make her all right.”

“Oh,” I said. “Oh.” I stood up. “Turn off the heat, Widget, and stick
around.”

I found Carole in the kitchen, moving briskly. I could see right away
the unusual fact that the chow she was rassling up was of the
short-order variety. She probably hadn’t started on it until I wheeled
into the drive, which just wasn’t normal.

She smiled at me with the front of her face and missed my hat when I
tossed it.

“ ’Smatter, cookie?”

“Nothing,” she said, and put her arms around me and began to cry.

I put my face in her bright hair. “That I can’t take,” I said softly.
“What is it, darling? Still the thing that’s gone?”

She nodded, her face pressed deep into my shoulder. It was some time
before she could speak, and then she said, “It gets worse and worse,
Godfrey.”

“Just exactly what has changed, Carole?”

She shook her head in a tortured way, her eyes squinched shut, and
twisted away from me. She stood with her back to me and her fists on her
cheeks, and said, “Everything has changed, Godfrey. You, and I, and the
Widget, and the house, and the way people talk. Once it was all perfect,
lovely and perfect, and now it isn’t. I don’t know how, but it isn’t.
And I want it back the way it was!” The last words were a wail, the
broken voice of a youngster who has lost his jackknife and was convinced
until then that he was too old to cry.

“Come out here,” I said gently, leading her into the living room. We sat
on the couch together and I put my arms around her. “Darling, listen. I
think Henry and I are on the track of this thing. No … no; don’t. Pay
attention.” I told her all about how Henry and I seemed to have the
thing pinned down to the beauty shop. “So this afternoon we got on the
phone to find out who owned the place. We called general agents and the
Chamber of Commerce and three guys named Smith. All blanks. We may or
may not have a lead; to wit, four phone numbers that did not answer and
one that was busy. Point is, we think that this goofy business isn’t as
mysterious as it pretends to be, and we think we can crack it.”

She looked at me with all the world in her eyes, and poked my nose
gently with her forefinger. “You’re so sweet, Godfrey. You’re so darned
sweet,” she said, and without the slightest change from the shape of her
smile, she was crying again. “Whatever you do, you can’t bring back the
lost thing—mine, and the Widget’s doll with the g-giggum pinafore, and
Marie’s Henry-the-Hero. They’re gone.”

“You’ll forget that.”

She shook her head. “The farther away, the more it’s lost. It’s like
that; don’t you see?”

I leaned back a bit from her and looked at her. Her cheeks were a little
hollow. I had only known her to be sick once in all these years, and her
cheeks got like that then. I tried to look ahead, to see what would
happen; and the way she had changed in these few days was frightening;
so what would happen to her if this went on?

Almost roughly I put her by and got up. “I can’t take any more of this,”
I said. “I can’t.” I went to the telephone and dialed.

“Henry?”

“Is Henry there?” came Marie’s voice tautly.

“Oh … hello, sis. No, he isn’t.”

“Godfrey, where’s he gone?”

“Dunno. What’s up?”

“Godfrey,” she said, not answering. “Did he really hit Wickersham?”

Cautiously, I said, “If you say so.”

“I don’t know what to do,” she said desolately. “I saw him do it. But I
can’t understand why he is still working for Wickersham. I can’t
understand why Wickersham would have him, or how he can work for the man
after what happened.”

“Now look. You haven’t been trying to get him to quit?”

“Well, I—”

I saw Henry’s domestic economy going down in swift spirals. “Hands off,
kiddo. I’m telling you, sit tight, and don’t push that kid around. Hear?
He’s got enough on his mind as it is.” It was the old big-brother
rough-stuff. I knew she needed it and I knew Henry couldn’t do it.

“But where _is_ he?” She sounded petulant but quelled.

“Probably on his way over here,” I said on a wild guess. “I’ll look out
for him, don’t worry; and I’ll keep you informed. You curl up and
unlax.”

“All right, Godfrey. Thanks, honey.”

Carole looked at me quizzically. “I’m hungry,” I said. She gave me a wan
smile, and a mockery of the mock salaam she used to tease me with. “Yes,
master,” she said and went out into the kitchen.

I was suddenly conscious of the Widget’s level gaze. She stood by the
hall door with her hands behind her, teetering a bit on her toes the way
I used to before I realized she had picked it up.

“Are you just mad,” she inquired, “or are you going to do something?”

“Is there always a difference?” I asked icily.

She annoyed me by hesitating. “Mostly—not,” she said reflectively.
Suddenly she was tiny and soft and helpless. “Daddy, you _got_ to fix
this!”

“Don’t worry, bratlet. Mummy’ll be happy again. Just you see.”

“Yes,” she said slowly. “Mummy’ll be happy again.” She looked extremely
wistful as she spoke, and I suddenly got what she was driving at. “Aha!
What, young lady, do you expect to get out of this?”

“Me?”

I laughed and held out my arms, and she ran into them. “Sweetheart, I
will make you a promise about that doll. I won’t get it for you unless I
can get it for keeps. Understand? There’ll be no more of this
having-not-having, any more, ever.”

And for once in her life, she kissed me instead of saying anything.

We sat down to a snack of toasted cheese and cocoa just as a violent
knocking sound preceded Henry into the room.

“I—” he began between breaths.

Carole said clearly, “Beat it, Widget, darling. Take your plate; I’ll
take your cup. We’ll fix you a party in your room.”

Henry sent her a grateful look as she and the child left the room, and
then burst out, “Godfrey, it’s worse—much worse. Another single day of
this and Marie and I won’t have anything left. Godfrey, she won’t leave
it alone. She doesn’t think about anything else but that crazy
Wickersham deal. I’ve got to bust this thing open—or I’ll bust.”

I brought him a slug of rum. “That won’t do any good,” he said, and
drank it down as if he were washing down aspirins. He’d never done that
in his life before. “Godfrey, I’ve got to _do_ something. Can’t we go
down and case that shop, anyway?”

“That’s the first solid thing I’ve heard in a week,” I said. “Let’s go.”

Carole came downstairs just then. “Call Marie, will you, honey?” I said
half over my shoulder. “Tell her Henry is O.K. and he and I have gone to
a wedding, or to get drunk, or something clever, will you?”

She nodded, and when we got the door she said, “And where _are_ you
going?”

I blew her a kiss, and she caught it and put it in her pocket, the way
she always did. As long as I live I shall never forget her standing
there in the light, worried, and loving, and beautiful.

Out in the garage, we swung into the jalopy and I kicked the starter. As
the motor roared, Henry leaned forward and shut off the ignition. “Has
it occurred to you that we just might get into that place?” he asked.
“Just in case, don’t you think it would be smart to take a tool or two?”

“What do you know!” I said admiringly. “And I thought I was the brains
of this combo!” We climbed out and raced back to my bench. My toolbox, a
couple of wrenches, a flashlight, and a battery-operated trouble lamp
with an extension cord. The little power supply gave me an idea; I
pulled a small black case out of the rack.

“Inductance bridge,” I said. “Might be nice to have along. If that hair
drier is what’s caused this thing, it’ll use power. It must be something
new and it would be nice to know what’s in it and where it’s coming
from.”

“Good. Take your multi-tester, too. And here’s a little slice bar.”

Arms full, we staggered back to the car, loaded the gear into the back
seat, and at last ground out of the garage.

We pulled up a block from the beauty shop, parked, and strolled up to
have a look at it. The shop was on a side street. It was a
sleazy-looking brick wart stuck on the off-corner of what looked like a
block-long warehouse. There was a yard around its two open sides, and a
brick wall with a silly-looking archway of wrought iron over the gate,
forming the word “FRANCY’S” in tortured letters.

“Snazzy,” said Henry disgustedly.

We paused outside the gateway. The side street was comfortingly dark
except for a street lamp which was planted exactly in line with the
gateway and the front door of the shop, throwing a path of brilliance up
the cinder walk.

“That won’t do,” I said.

“It’ll have to.” He gave a quick look up the street. There were only two
pedestrians in sight and both of those were walking away from us.

I hesitated. “I don’t—” There was something niggling at the back of my
mind, but I couldn’t place it. Something about a wall. Heck with it.
“Come on.”

We walked up to the door as if our intentions were honorable. A sign
there said “Closed until further notice.”

“That ties it,” said Henry. “There is definitely something ungood about
this thing.”

“Why?”

“Ever see a rented place close up without some information as to who to
call for purchase or rental or emergency or something?”

“Hm-m-m. Not till now.”

The door was locked. It was a great big solid door. “The window?” Henry
breathed. We went down the couple of steps that led up to the door.
There was so much light from the street lamp outside the wall that when
we turned off the path, the darkness was like tar and seemed almost as
hard to move through. We felt along the wall, blinking, until we came to
a window.”

“Barred,” said Henry, and swore. “Godfrey—can you stand by while I get
some tools? No sense in both of us marching in and out of this place as
if it were a gentlemen’s lounge.”

“O.K. A pinch bar, screwdriver, and … oh. Get the jack out from under
the front seat, in case the window’s clinched. The flashlights, the
battery case, and the bridge.”

“Holy smoke,” said Henry. “You’re a real second-story character.”

“I’m a boy scout gone wrong, that’s all.”

He disappeared into the gloom. I lost him, then saw him silhouetted
against the bright light from the open gateway. He went swiftly to the
gateway, peered out to each side, and went through it. Behind me, in the
dark, I heard the unmistakable sound of a relay.

If it had been a hand on my shoulder it couldn’t have startled me more.
I felt my way to the window, pushed my hand through the bars. There
seemed nothing out of the ordinary about it. Feeling carefully along the
lower sash, I touched three countersunk nail heads. I listened
carefully, but could hear nothing else.

Henry got back in a couple of minutes, loaded to the ears with assorted
equipment. I realized that the little guy just had to be doing
something, whether it was useful or not. He came puffing and blowing
through the darkness toward me.

“This way, Henry,” I called softly. He bumped the side of the building
with something of a clatter, and edged along until I said whoa. “Sweet
Sue,” he gasped. “Ain’t I the eager beaver?”

“Why didn’t you just drive in with the lights on and the horn blowing?”
I griped. “You’d’ve had more fun with less effort. The blasted window’s
locked behind these bars, and nailed down to boot.”

“Give me a flashlight,” he said to himself, as he got from under his
load.

“Oh; you don’t believe me?” I asked again, and just then the relay
clicked again. Henry grunted, found the light, hooded it with his
fingers and aimed it at the window. “Did I hear a relay?”

“You did. I heard it a couple minutes ago.”

“Just fine,” said Henry. “Any second now this place will be all bells
and lights and cops. That was a burglar alarm you heard.”

I clapped a hand to my head. “Burglar alarm! How could I be such a
dope?”

“Godfrey; what are we gonna do?”

“Just say ‘Open Sesame’,” I grinned. “Watch.” He swung the light on me
and I made a magician’s pass at the window. Nothing happened.

“Well?” he said impatiently, and then the sash slid quietly up, there
was a click, and the whole section of bars swung out from the wall.

“Cut off my shorts and call me leggy!” gaped Henry, a phrase reserved
for really special occasions. “_Our_ burglar alarm!”

“Things begin to shape up,” I said slowly. “Not in any way I like.”

Henry’s mind was evidently racing off on another tangent. “Wickersham
installed this himself after we built it,” he said. “He must know who
owns the place. Hey—let’s call him up and get the score!”

“No!” I said violently. You had to be violent with Henry when he went
off half-cocked. Harder to stop than any man I ever saw. “Figure it out
for yourself. He wouldn’t let us know where this installation was going
when he put it in. So I don’t think he’d let us know now.”

“Why not?”

“That’s what I’m trying to figure out. Henry, he ties into all this
business some way. Marie’s hallucination is about him. The ‘chromium
helmet’ hair drier smells very much like one of his psychosomatic
snivvies; and here we find a device built in his shop and installed by
him, guarding that hair drier—”

“—or where that hair drier was. I see what you mean. The crumb!” Henry
clutched at my arm suddenly. “Godfrey! Remember the day he seemed to
think it was so funny when he overheard us talking about the girls?”

“I should forget that. I don’t think there’s any doubt about his knowing
something about whatever’s wrong with them.”

“The trouble we had trying to figure out who own this joint,” said Henry
reminiscently. “I’d like to corner that guy and find out what makes.”

“Tempting,” I said. “But I think it would be smarter to find out
everything we can before we do that. We’ve got to crack our own safe,
here.”

“You were psychic when you thought of bringing the jack,” Henry said.
“We can stick it under the sash and run it up. Something’s got to give,
and whatever it is it’ll let us in.”

“Yep; bust the window frame and swing a piece of it in front of the
black-light beam inside, huh?”

“I forgot about that. Let’s see; why hasn’t the alarm gone off yet,
anyhow?”

“Don’t you remember, dopey? It isn’t designed to ring an alarm until
that sash comes down—preferably on someone’s lunch hooks.”

“Oh, yes. And the beam behind is in case someone thinks to cut out the
pane instead of forcing the catch. What happens if it’s broken?”

“Conventional alarm; bell, lights, and so on. Hard to say how he’s
hooked it up. The window comes down anyway; maybe in time to catch some
part of Joe Burglar. We also don’t know exactly where in the window the
inside beam is placed. It might be horizontal, vertical, diagonal, or
any combinations of ’em. Fortunately, there’s only one projector.”

“No wires on the glass, huh?” said Henry, throwing a thin beam up to the
window. “Hm-m-m. You wouldn’t have a glass cutter in your bag of
tricks?”

“No, but I have something just as good.” I rummaged in the tool kit and
came up with a small three-cornered file. I broke it in two, cutting my
thumb in the process. “We now have six glass cutters. Henry, see if you
can find me a hacksaw.”

He fumbled for a while and finally found it. I began to work cautiously
on the bottom sash, cutting upward through the wood on each side until I
heard it nick the glass, and being careful to keep the saw well outside,
so that it would not move in across the black-light beam. Then I took a
piece of the file, and starting from one saw cut in the sash, scribed
up, across and down to the other cut.

“Bright boy,” murmured Henry. “Now you break loose the cut-out piece of
the sash, and most of the pane comes with it.”

“In one piece, if I’m lucky,” I said. “We’ll have all kinds of fun if
any of it falls inside. Window glass’ll stop UV like crazy.” I held my
breath and tugged gently at the lower part of the sash, trying to keep
the pressure even on each side. The little molding that was left came
away with a gentle crackling; and then, with a very satisfactory single
_crick!_ the pane gave. It was quite cool that night, but as I put it
gently down I wiped sweat out of my eyes. “That’s my boy did that,”
Henry said.

“Now for that beam,” I said. Wrapped in black cloth in the top tray of
my tool kit was a glass tube containing several wires coated with
fluorescin, which I used to test UV projectors. I took one out, a small
one about eighteen gauge, and holding it by the extreme end, thrust it
into the gaping window. “The wire shouldn’t block enough of the beam to
activate the alarm,” I said. “And we just might be able to find out
which is the projector side, and which the receiver.”

I moved it slowly, keeping my hand well back; and suddenly the tip of
the wire glowed greenish white, and I heard Henry’s breath whoosh out. I
circled the wire carefully, spotting the beam from edge to edge. It was,
I decided, diagonal across the window; the beam had a rectangular cross
section, and by watching the fluorescence of the coated wire very
carefully, located the projector end of the beam. It was at the top.

“Made to order,” I said. “Did you bring the … yes, you did. Good
heavens, Henry; did you leave anything in the car?”

“Did you leave anything in your shop?” he countered, grinning. “Now, is
there any way we can skin past that beam?”

“Nope. It’s too wide. We’ll have to cancel it.”

“Easy to say.”

“Easy to do.” I had been plugging in wires to the battery case.

“What is that … a little UV projector?”

“It is.”

“Oh. You’re going to aim it at the cell. But—the intensity won’t be the
same.”

“Doesn’t matter. This gizmo doesn’t measure intensity. It’s strictly an
on-off proposition.” I switched on the projector, tested it with the
fluorescent wire, and then aimed it carefully down the place where the
alarm’s black-light beam should be. I took a flashlight in the other
hand, and craning over the sill, saw the photocell built in down near
the floor of the room. I put my projector up against it, stood aside,
and said “Come on in.”

Henry, chuckling, hopped up on the sill and dropped inside. I handed up
all of the junk we had brought, and then followed him.

“Let’s find out where to shut this thing off,” whispered Henry, casting
his light around.

“No you don’t,” I said. “Shutting it off might actuate something too.
Let the silly thing sit there and watch for intruders like it was told
to.” I carefully slipped my projector aside; keeping the beam on the
cell until it was clear of the other projector, up over the window.

“Now let’s have a look at this place.” Henry swept his light around,
keeping it low.

It was a small beauty parlor, rather lavishly fixed up for its size.
There were several curtained booths, very tiny, all open, each with its
chair and mirrored cubby-hole table. A half-partition separated the
front part, which proved to be an office, from the rear; otherwise the
place was one big room. Against the back wall had been wheeled an array
of permanent-wave machines, two manicure racks, and a hose and spray
gadget for shampooing.

“And there’s the dewjaw that’s caused all this trouble,” I said,
pointing my light at a lone electric hair drier.

We pounced on it. The headpiece was simply an aluminum shell with an
open throat inside; this led down through a pipe to a casing in the
base, in which, supposedly were heating elements and a blower. “Turn it
on,” I said grimly, and went back to the window for some gear. Henry
hunted over the drier until he found the switch. The quiet room filled
with a low, rising whine which settled into a steady hum. “Better not
stay too near it,” I cautioned. I examined it from a distance. There was
a chair under the headpiece; I tried to shove it aside with my foot, but
it was bolted to the floor. “That’s funny.”

“That’s the kind of thing we have to look out for,” I said. “It wasn’t
done for nothing.” I paused. “And another thing. Seems to me that even
though this is a small place, it ought to have more than one drier. Does
that mean that the one we’re looking for has been moved out? Or is the
one we’re looking for one they couldn’t move easily?”

“By gosh, it’s bolted to the deck like the chair,” said Henry.

“Let’s do a job on it.” We switched it off, got out some tools, and
began to take the drier down. Off came the headpiece, the pipe, the
support rod. I got the bolts off the casing and lifted the cover.
Perfectly conventional blower and a half a dozen heavy nichrome
elements. The switch gear was, it seemed to me, a little heavier than it
had to be, and so was the power line; but the Underwriters would never
kick about that. The power cable looked ordinary enough, but something
prompted me to nick it with my knife. I was surprised to find that under
the flexible rubber insulation, it was web-shielded. I followed it to
the wall; it was plugged into a standard socket, but there was a
four-place receptacle next to it on the wall with two sockets unused.
Why a special outlet for the drier?

Henry sat down in the chair and mopped his face. “Looks like a false
alarm to me,” he said, leaning back.

“I dunno. There’s a couple of things—not too wrong, but—” I went back to
the motor and blower assembly. It was still hooked up. I switched it on.
It revved up, louder without the cover, a bit faster without the curved
tube to resist the air flow. I stood up and walked around it. “Nothing
wrong with it that I can see,” I said. Henry didn’t answer.

“Henry!”

No answer. I turned my light on him. He was sprawled back in the chair,
fast asleep.

“Well, I’ll be flayed and flustered. Get up out of there, you lazy ape!”
I went and shook his shoulder. His head rolled limply, and sudden panic
crawled under my belt. _“Henry!”_ I pulled him out of the chair. His
legs half took his weight, and then buckled, and he fell with a thump to
his knees. Instantly his head snapped up. He blinked foolishly into the
flashlight beam. “Wh … what goes on? Hey?”

“Are you all right?”

He climbed slowly to his feet, passed his hand over his eyes. “Must’ve
dozed off. Hm-m-m! Sorry, Godfrey.” He yawned. “My knees hurt.”

“Henry, what happened to you?”

“Hm-m-m? I’m all right. Tired, I guess. Look, let’s go home. The pursuit
of knowledge is all very jolly, but there’s no sense us getting jailed
for it.”

“Pursuit of knowledge? What are you gibbering about? Here we’re on the
track of the thing that’s possesses our wives and my kid, to say nothing
of Wickersham—”

“Aw, why be vengeful about it? _Nil nisi_, and stuff like that there.
Let’s go home.”

“_Nil nisi …_ ‘speak well of the’ … Henry, I don’t get you!”

“Well, gee; Wickersham dead, and the girls all right again—what are we
hanging around here for?”

_“What?”_

He sighed with an exaggeration of patience. “Wickersham is dead and
Marie and Carole and the Widget are all right again. So why bother?”

“Wicker … wait a minute. How do you know? Who told you?”

“Why it was—He kicked off—Well, what do you know! I can’t remember. He’s
dead, that’s all. And the girls are all right.”

“Are they though? And what was wrong with them?”

“_I_ don’t know. Something they ate, no doubt. Why the third degree?”

“Henry, it just isn’t so. If it is, you couldn’t possibly have found out
about it.”

“Are you trying to make a liar out of me?”

“Here … here, Shorter-than-me; don’t get your back hair up.”

“Well, I don’t have to stand here and listen to you tell me that
something I know isn’t so.”

“You _dreamed_ it!”

“I did no such thing!” he said hotly. “I know when I know something!”

I stared at him, and gradually I realized what had happened, though I
hadn’t the faintest idea how. The thing Henry had wanted most in the
world had come true—for him. And it was infinitely important that he
keep the memory, even if it could be proved that it never happened. Like
the Widget’s doll. Like Marie’s wish-fulfillment that the little guy
take a poke at someone bigger and stronger than himself, someone who
awed him. Like Carole’s … what _was_ Carole’s wish-fulfilling memory?

The chromium helmet.

I looked at the pieces of it, scattered over the floor and then at the
chair. A perfectly ordinary airplane-tubing chair, bolted to the
floor—why?

“I’m going home,” said Henry sullenly.

“Henry old horse, stick around a little. I’m sorry, boy; really, I was
talking nonsense; you’re right and I’m wrong. Please stay and give me a
hand. There’s something I’ve just _got_ to find out. Will you, kiddo?”

“Well—” he said, a little mollified. “Gosh, Godfrey, you never
disbelieved me before. What got into you?”

“Oh, I guess I’m excited, that’s all. I _am_ sorry, Jackson. Will you
stick around?”

“You know I will. I guess I got a little hot, too.”

“Good boy.” Inside me, growing every microsecond, was a hot, ugly hatred
of Wickersham. I didn’t know the “whys” of all this, but I grimly
determined to go on learning the “hows” until I could figure the man’s
motives. And it better be an accident that our women-folks were
affected.

I looked at the chair again. There wasn’t a single electrical connection
to it that I could see. I was tempted to run out the bolts, but the
super-caution that was growing almost as fast as the hatred, made me
stop and think. I turned to my little inductance-bridge instead. I’d
rigged it up to spot pipes and wiring in the wall between my house and
the garage, where my workshop was, for I sometimes did some rather
delicate electronic work there, and didn’t care much for stray AC and
magnetic fields that I couldn’t get rid of or locate exactly so I could
compensate for them. It was a dual-purpose rig—the bridge itself, for
detecting metallic masses, and a matched-choke circuit for finding wild
AC.

I asked Henry to find me a broomstick, and fitted together the T-shaped
probe, setting it on the stick. I plugged in earphones and the leads to
an illuminated meter which I had fixed to strap on my wrist. I hooked
the whole Rube Goldberg up to the battery pack and switched it on.

“Henry,” I said, “that power line is shielded. Rip the receptacle out of
the wall, bearing in mind that it’s hot. You’ll probably find a conduit
in the wall that’s grounded to one side of the power line. Cast it
adrift for me.”

I went over the chair carefully, looking for any induced AC. There were
a few strays—not enough to amount to anything.

Why was that chair bolted down?

To stay in one place, of course. Why?

I switched on the blower, and went over it again. Nothing, until I had
the probe over the headrest on the back of the chair. And the hum in my
earphones suddenly faded. I moved the probe; it got louder. Which was
just silly. The gadget was built so that when AC was encountered, the
sound would intensify. I moved it toward the chair, and found a spot six
inches over the headrest where my signal utterly disappeared!

“There’s something here, Henry,” I called. “Just what I don’t quite
know. It acts like a very intense multi-phase AC; but I mean
multi-phase. Some high harmonic of the sixty-cycle, phasing away like
mad. It kills my detector signal completely.

“Your department, son,” said Henry. “Don’t double-talk me back to sleep.
Tell it to Wickersham’s ghost. You were right about this grounding here.
What on earth’s that for?”

I didn’t bother to try to answer. I was puzzling myself by moving the
probe in and out of that dead spot. It didn’t make any sense at all. The
chair gave no sign of carrying a thing. I gave it up, put the probe over
my shoulder to get it out of the way, and went around the chair toward
Henry.

The phones faded and came in again as I moved.

I stopped dead and flashed my light up, moving backward until it
happened again. The probe was eight feet in the air this time, and what
I found was a weak place in the signal. I waved it around, walking back
and forth, repeating the process I had used with the fluorescent wire
when we were working on the window. I found the field—for apparently
that’s what it was—tightest at the spot over the chair, diffusing
outward and upward toward the corner of the ceiling.

“What are you doing—catching butterflies?”

“Catching something. Henry, the chair, which isn’t connected to
anything, has a field hanging over it which is beaming up into the air!”

“Wouldn’t it be the other way around?”

“What do you mean?”

“Suppose the field over the chair is a focal spot?”

“It diffuses outward … oh: I see what you mean. Hyperbolic reflector.” I
went around to the other side of the chair, and put the probe low. “You
amaze me, my child! You’re right! It diffuses downward on this side!”

I beamed my light upward to the corner of the room. It was no more
remarkable than the other corners. The ceiling was decorated in bright
gold stripes on dark cream paint. The moldings had been quarter-round
plastered to get rid of the 90° angle of the walls to the ceiling, which
gave the corners the inner surface of a quarter of a sphere. These were
decorated with a series of close, fine gold lines—all that is, except
the one that seemed to be radiating the haywire AC.

It was made of fine copper mesh.

“By all that’s putrid,” Henry gasped. “A focusing radiator!”

“And unless I’m mistaken, the inductance bridge here’ll locate a pipe
from that exclusive little receptacle in the wall, smack up to it,” I
said excitedly. I went over there so fast I jerked the cable out of the
battery pack and dropped my flashlight. Henry had left his on the floor
over by the receptacle; we were plunged in total blackness, floundering
and swearing. I heard Henry say “Here it is!” and the _click-clicking_
of the hex head on the flashlight as he fumbled it and it rolled on the
floor.

“Don’t light it!” I said. “I see something. Wait!”

Silence as thick as the darkness settled over us. Vaguely, then, as our
eyes became accustomed to the dark, we saw a purple glow down low, near
the floor.

“UV again,” Henry said, “with a cheap filter-lens.” He clicked on his
light. The place where we had seen the glow was at the base of the dim
outline of a walled-up door into the warehouse to which the beauty shop
was semidetached.

“Now, that’s silly,” I said. I went over and confirmed my first glance;
there was a small projector and an eye, the whole making a beam just
long enough to cross the walled-up door. “Who’s going to be walking
through walled-up doorways?”

“Skip it for now, Godfrey. Check that beam radiator.”

I went to the wall and began sweeping it with the inductance bridge.
Sure enough; the volume-changes in my phones told me exactly the place
where a conduit had been laid, from the receptacle to the ceiling, and
along under the quarter-round fillet to the corner and the wire-mesh
snivvy.

“I begin to get it,” Henry said. “The switch was in the drier. Start
that up, and you activate the beam, which focuses on the head of
whoever’s in the chair. Wickersham was a cute character.”

“He sure is … was, I mean.”

“Hey—was that thing on when I went to sleep in the chair?”

I thought fast. “Why no, Henry. Of course not.”

“A good thing. I thought maybe it was. I’d hate to get a postmortem kick
from old granite-puss.”

I changed the subject quickly. “Now, where’s this rig powered from?” I
got busy with the probe again, sweeping round and round the outlet. “The
rectangular AC conduit is too near … no … I got it. Hm-m-m.” Slowly I
traced the field-interruption of the conduit along the wall, where it
suddenly disappeared. “It’s gone, right here,” I said, pointing to the
wall.

“That’s right over the black-light ray—the walled-up door!”

I pulled off the phones and began to unstrap the wrist meter. “Henry,
I’d say that if that electronic watchdog is there, that door opens. If
that power line goes in there, we want to open it.”

He nodded, and went for my little black-light lamp. We set it up to fool
the photocell the way we had on the window, and then went to work on the
nearly invisible door. We felt over every inch of it. There was a floor
board in the front of the sill with a comparatively wide crack between
it and its neighbor; ordinarily it would have been in the black light
for its entire length. I rested one hand on this board as I felt the
door; the plank shifted a little under my hand, and without a sound the
door swung inward.

“Give me your gun,” I said clearly, and pounced on Henry and put my hand
over his mouth before he could say “What gun?” “There could be someone
in there,” I whispered.

He gave me the four-o with his fingers and thumb, and then aimed his
light into the open door. Slowly we entered. I plucked Henry’s sleeve,
held up a halting palm, and trotted back to get the pinch bar, with
which I jammed the door so it could not swing closed. “I’ve seen too
many Karloff pictures,” I muttered to him.

But the room was unoccupied. It was tiny—little more than a large
closet. _“Wheee—ooo!”_ Henry whistled. “Will you look at the _stuff!”_

It was a sight to gladden the heart of an electronics man. An
oscilloscope with an eight-inch screen. A vacuum-tube voltmeter. The
biggest, fanciest multimeter I have ever seen. An electronic
power-supply control. Rolls and skeins of hook-up wire and shielding of
all kinds, colors and sizes. Blank panel plates; knobs, dials; racks and
racks of tubes ranging from peanuts to doorknobs. An elaborate
transceiver. A bakelite-surfaced work table with power outlets spaced
all around it, marked for every standard voltage, AC and DC, that I ever
heard of anyone using and some I hadn’t thought about yet. A vast
color-indexed file of resistors and capacitances. A big commercial
tube-tester. Floor to ceiling, it was packed with electronic treasure.

“I love my wife,” said I archaically, “but oh you workshop!”

When we had gotten our breath back, Henry asked, “That drier rig still
running?”

“Yep.”

“Then would that be the transmitter of that beam?” He pointed to a small
chassis with a cluster of tubes which glowed, and a huge transformer
that hummed softly. “Will you look at that spaghetti,” I breathed. “All
spot-welded; not a soldered joint in sight!”

“This must be it,” said Henry, poking a device on the bench; a handle
with two tiny gray electrodes, one detachable. “Oh, what I wouldn’t give
for—”

“I know it’s tough,” I said, grinning, “but leave us keep our mind on
our business. Let’s look this thing over.”

To go into detail the tests we made of that rig would not only be
tedious; it might be dangerous. The principle, when we finally isolated
it—and only with that splendid equipment could we have done it—was
startlingly simple. I’d hate to have the job of making that hyperbolic
web transmitting antenna, but like Columbus’ egg trick, it wouldn’t be
too hard to duplicate once you got the idea. As for the beam itself, it
was transmitted at such and such a fixed frequency, with harmonics, and
with ninety and one hundred eighty degree beats to the fundamental _and_
to certain of the harmonics, at such and such a wattage, with a
so-and-so field tension at the focal point. The output stages had a
wave-form like the first act of Disney’s _Fantasia_ run off in forty
seconds.

I tell you; I feel about this thing the way I did when I was in war
work, and some of the bright boys came up with gizmos for mass
production that had been regarded as impossibilities in all the best
people’s books. Once in a while, in those days, you’d bump up against
another electronics engineer whom you knew would be absolutely
fascinated with the work you were doing. And because of military
security, you had to keep your lips buttoned. But the pressure behind
the button was something fantastic. That’s the way I feel now. But I
ardently wish I didn’t know about it, or that I would quickly forget it;
because that wave-form, at that power, at the point of focus, is the
most utterly horrible thing I can conceive of.

After hours of concentrated work—and the effort it took to keep away
from entrancing sidelines was no small part of the concentration—we got
the final output wave-form on the ’scope. “That’s it,” I said.

“And it’s all yours, Ameche my boy,” said Henry, watching the complex
thing writhe and shimmer on the screen. “All I want to do is put tomato
sauce on it and eat it. Now we’ve got it—what do we do with it?”

I stared at the thing on screen. It was hypnotic, with that
self-inverting three-dimensional effect that a cathode image has. “Only
thing I can think of is to throw it around one hundred eighty degrees
out of phase and re-radiate, focusing at the same point as the beam out
there until it cancels out. Or until it overcompensates and undoes all
the harm it has accomplished. But we’ve got to … to try it out on
someone.”

Henry’s eyes glinted. “Maybe we could snatch a body?”

“We’ve got to do something.”

“Why bother? You’ve had your education. The girls are O.K. and the Wick
is dead. And I’m hungry and sleepy and I got to work in the … work in
the—” His voice faltered. “Godfrey, I must be tuckered out. I can’t seem
to remember who we work for, now that Wickersham is—”

“Don’t worry about it, “I said gently. “We have a little more to do
here. We’ve got to knock together an inverter.”

He spread his hands. “But why?”

“Please, Henry. For me. This once,” I pleaded with him. “Holy smoke;
we’ve come so far on the thing. Let’s round it off.”

“Oh all right. Jee-hoshaphat; you’re worse than Wick used to be.” He
pulled out his watch and gaped at it. “Quarter to—” His eyes bugged.
“Godfrey! It’s quarter to _six!_ In the morning! The girls—they’ll be
half nuts!”

He scrambled to the bench. There was a dial phone there. He snatched it
off the cradle and jammed it to his ear, waiting for a dial tone. I saw
him go white, and suddenly his eyes rolled up and he slumped to the
floor, the telephone falling on the bench on a tangle of
rubber-insulated wire. I stooped and half-lifted him, looking wildly
around to find somewhere to put him. There was nowhere, so I
straightened him out on the floor, and picked up the phone.

“—and a gross of 6SJ7’s,” said the phone. “And have you made up my
silvering solutions?”

“Yes, _sir,”_ said another voice.

“All right. I expect that shipment before eleven o’clock.” The line
clicked and went dead. Carefully I hung up the phone.

Wickersham’s voice! It was obviously a bridge phone to the office; and
Henry, listening for a mere hum on the phone, had heard it—heard the
voice of a man whom he thought dead. And it was infinitely important to
Henry that he believe Wickersham dead. It was about the most important
thing there was.

I knelt beside him, pitying him more than I can find words to describe.
Poor little, cheerful, chubby Henry! The guy just didn’t deserve this
kind of thing, wasn’t equipped to handle it.

I chafed his hands, and suddenly he tossed his head restlessly and
batted his eyelids. “Go to sleep,” I said softly. “Go on.”

Perhaps he was tuckered out physically and emotionally, or perhaps he
was hyper-subject to hypnosis because of what the beam had done to him;
but he began to relax almost immediately. I put a roll of rubberfoam
cushioning under his head and he sank into it. Once he opened his eyes
very wide and said, “He’s just _got_ to be dead!” I said quietly, “Sure.
Sure. Sure.” And he went to sleep.

Then I went back to the bench and got to work.

My eyes had begun to blur, but I tried to ignore it. When it got too bad
I went out into the beauty shop and walked up and down, fast, turning
circuit diagrams over in my mind; and then I would rush back in and go
on. My feet hurt and my back hurt, and I was hungry.

But I finished the rig, and hooked it up, and hung the ’scope on it, and
it worked. The strange wave-form of the beam transmitter dwindled under
the matched out-of-phase signal of the inverter; subsided, receded; and
it looked as if I had it whipped. I had everything else I needed but a
guinea pig.

I had begun, by then, to fully understand the function of the beam. It
took the ego’s most heartfelt wish, and made it an accomplished fact; a
thing which, to that ego, had actually happened. But because it was such
a wanted—such a _needed_ thing—the inevitable reaction was a tearing
sense of loss. When contradictory evidence piled up, when the same
senses that had, subjectively, told that ego that the needed thing was
true and then that it was not true, the struggle between then was more
than a human mind could cope with. There was only one surcease—another
treatment under the beam. And then another. And never in human history
has a more torturous instrument been devised. It was worse than any
drug; for the drugs killed logic, but this thing _used_ it, in opposite
directions at the same time in the same mind; and the stronger of the
two was that which was refuted by the most evidence.

What could I do? Whom could I use the thing on, when I knew as a
technician that I had the antidote, but did not know as a physician or
psychiatrist what the result would be? There was Marie. And Carole—and
what strange battle was she fighting? And the Widget. And Henry.

I looked down at him, curled up on the floor, confined and shrouded with
the utter sleep of the exhausted. I could expose myself to the beam; but
how did I know what my deepest desire was—what the direction would be of
my wishful thinking? Did anybody really know that? Exposure to the beam
had turned Henry against any further research; apparently he had wanted
the reasons for that research removed more than anything else in the
universe. There was only one alternative to doing the work, and that was
to believe it done, which was the course his mind took. And as he lay
there sleeping, he still believed it, and would if I woke him and asked
him to handle the controls while I tested it on myself. He’d refuse. I
might be able to argue him into it; and if I did, how could I tell what
would happen to me? Would I forget my discoveries in this devilish
field, and condemn us all to the madness of some concreted dream?

No; I held too much responsibility. I couldn’t try it on myself. Carole,
then. A wave of sheer horror nearly stopped my heart at the thought.
Marie—my sister.

Oh, you just don’t do those things! No human being should be faced with
such a choice.

The Widget.

Grave and clear-eyed, and sometimes so surprisingly adult, and all the
while such a kid, such a baby, so little.

Why not the Widget? The thought came strongly—why not any of them?
Didn’t the oscilloscope say that I could negate the beam? I could start
with the gain away down out of sight, and increase it slowly,
micrometrically, with a vernier. Weren’t the chances in my favor?

I was filled then with self-disgust. I didn’t _know_ enough. Surely I
could have learned enough about the physiology of the mind to be able to
judge what would happen, have some small guide—even increase the odds in
my favor, large as they were.

This was silly. Of course they’d be all right, no matter which one I
treated first. But—failure. Any failure. Carole with dementia praecox.
The Widget a cretin. Marie a paranoid. Henry, drooling and having to be
fed.

Henry. He never did look his age, and asleep he looked like a
nine-year-old—a chubby nine-year-old with a two-day beard.

The decision came smoothly and without effort. I just suddenly knew it
would be Henry.

“Come on, boy. C’mon, old hawss.” I got him under the armpits and heaved
him up. He lolled against me, got his feet under him and walked blearily
as I led him. I took him out into the beauty parlor and said “Siddown,
you,” and grinned as I shoved his chest, and sat him in the chair.
That’s when he really woke up.

“What’sa big idea? In the chair—hey! Godfrey! What are you doing? You
dope, the beam’s going to—”

He began to struggle. He said, “You’ve gone crazy, just the way we’re
all going to go. Wickersham’s dead, you fool; you don’t have to do
this.” After that he didn’t talk. He fought. Once he got out of the
chair. I didn’t hit him until I had him back in it, although he kicked
me. When I had him in the chair again I brought up the heel of my hand
and caught him under the chin with it. It closed his mouth with an
astonishingly loud snap, as his teeth clicked together. His head went so
far back against the rest that I thought I had broken his neck. I hit
him very hard. I backed off from him, sobbing for breath, and when I had
some air, I went back and straightened him out. He moved his head a
little and moaned, and blood came from his mouth, so I knew he was all
right although he must have bitten his tongue.

I limped back into the shop and threw the master switch on the
projector. The silly little hair drier motor began to whine like wind
around eaves.

I watched the ’scope, and when the wave form of the beam was fully
formed, I switched in the plate voltage of the inverter, and started to
crank up the gain. It was a feather-touch, a very little at a time. I
had my hand braced solidly on the bench top, with my thumb and
forefinger just touching the knob; and I brought up the gain only until
the first effects got noticeable on the shimmering screen. Then I cut
the master switch and ran out to Henry.

He seemed to be asleep, quite normally asleep, and very happy. His smile
was all there more cherubic because his lower lip had started to swell,
and blood ran freely out of the corner of his mouth. I shook him, and he
awakened instantly, opened his eyes, grinned and then winced.

“Godfrey … what hap—” He put his hand to his mouth and stared at the
blood on his fingers, and then at me, and fright grew in his eyes. He
leaped to his feet and stared around him. “Godfrey! Where are we? What
are we doing here? What’s happened to me? Is this a hospit—No; it
couldn’t be. Is it morning?”

He shuddered, and I had to guide him back into the chair as his legs
started to tremble with weakness. He went back into the chair without
the slightest recognition of its being anything but a chair. The blood
on his chin looked very red as the weakness bleached his face. I found a
handkerchief and wiped it. It didn’t do much good.

“What’s the last thing you remember? I’ll tell you everything I can from
then on.”

“Remember? I can’t.… I was—” He leaned forward and put his forehead on
his hands. He spat, and grunted. “I was walking down the back road,
going to your place. Was I hit by a car?”

“What had happened before you left your house? Do you remember?”

“Yes,” he said slowly. “Marie … wouldn’t stop talking about the … time
at the Altair when I hit … when she thinks I—”

“Yes boy. I gotcha. I can tell you everything. One more question.
Where’s Wickersham?”

“Hm-m-m? Search me. The skunk. Down at the lab, most likely. Why?”

I realized I had been holding my breath, and let it out gratefully.

I had succeeded, and I had failed. My out-of-phase component wiped out
the beam effect. It had also wiped out everything else—but completely.
Like a refinement on the electric-shock treatment. Sweat ran down behind
my ears as I thought of what might have happened if I had not used such
a feather-touch on the gain of the inverter. How, without
experimentation, could you judge the relative resistance of various
minds? Would a woman’s mind resist less, or more? If less, the danger
was too great; the effective increase might be geometric, or
exponential. If more, how judge the increase? My choice was, if
anything, worse than it had been before. And yet—what could be worse
than a loved one slowly going mad before your eyes? It would take so
long.

I sat down on the floor, and Henry slumped in the chair, occasionally
touching his swollen lip tenderly, and I told him everything that had
happened. It was an astonishing thing for him, and for me too, to see
his amazement at our burglarization of the premises, and my account of
his violent contention that Wickersham was dead.

When I had quite finished, Henry said, “Well, we’ll have to try it
again.”

“On whom?”

“Me, of course. Who else?”

“Henry, you’re crazy! I can’t do that to you any more!”

“Why not? You had reasons for choosing me in the first place; they still
apply.”

“The most important one doesn’t—you weren’t responsible enough to
control the experiment, because of your fixation that the Wick was dead,
and that therefore the experiment was unnecessary.”

“Godfrey,” said Henry, grinning with the part of his mouth he could
still move, “you big lug, how am I going to handle you if you get as
violent as I did?”

“That’s right,” I said.

I didn’t decide, though, for all the time that we spent in the shop,
going over circuit diagrams, our tired minds refused to help us out
much.

“We’ve got to hit it from another angle,” signed Henry after a
particularly circular argument involving current versus impedance versus
capacitance. “If we only knew something about the mind, something that
would give us a hint as to what frequency does what to which part of the
brain, to yield a clear, undistorted hallucination like what we’re faced
with.”

“And then we’d know what we could do to distort it. Yeah.” “Distort it,”
I said again.

Suddenly I was on my feet and a banshee yell was ricocheting off the
walls. “For Heaven’s sake, Godfrey,” Henry said startled. “Don’t _do_
that! Remember the neighbors!”

“That’s it!” I chortled. “That’s it! Distortion. Distortion, you idiot!”

“Now wait. I think I—Distortion?”

“Of _course!”_ I grabbed his arm and hurried him over to the bench, and
started hauling out coils and sockets and resistors from the racks.
“Distortion’s much easier to handle than output! I can blend in any
aberration to that wave form—from this to that, from now till then!
That’s our cure: it’s got to be. Don’t you see? The hallucination is
induced by a wave—and its result is a picture with no distortion
whatsoever. Not even facts can distort it. While it lasts, it is clean,
consistent, flawless. It’s perfection—something we’re not geared to
take. Hence the sense of loss when it’s gone, and the violent
subconscious drive to rationalize it or to get it back. Distort the wave
ever so slightly, and it’s no longer perfect. It becomes more real, but
you can live with it.”

“Well, I will be … but how will you know how to distort it? I mean, what
part of the wave should you distort?”

“It doesn’t matter, don’t you see? The very nature of perfection
dictates that. It doesn’t matter where it’s spoiled—it’s still spoiled!”

Henry’s eyes glowed. “And if you distort just a little more, it’ll get
fuzzy around the edges. Out of focus. It will be a … a—”

“A dream! Of course, and can be disposed of as such. Let’s go, muscles;
I think we’ve got it!”

I rigged up a simple oscillator circuit and hooked it to the
oscilloscope. I got a spot on the screen and, carefully working the
horizontal and vertical deflectors, got a nearly perfect ring.

“Now watch,” I said. I turned up the gain. The ring expanded. I turned
it up more—a little more—suddenly the edge of the ring quivered,
zigzagged, and spread out, throwing out a little mutating finger of
fluorescence. “There she broke.” I checked with the vacuum-tube
voltmeter, and noted the reading. “That’s about the effect we want, on
the overall wave structure of that blasted beam.”

“Can do?”

“Can do,” I said, “and a darned sight easier than the inversion.”

In a very short while, with the aid of the little spot welder, we had
the rig set up and ready to roll. “It’s safer,” I said. “Bound to be.
There’s so much less to be done to get the effect.”

“Here I go,” said Henry, and started toward the chair.

“Now wait. You know I’ve got to give you a shot of the original beam
first.” “Why sure. How else you going to cure me if I don’t sicken
first?”

He went out and sat down. “Shoot the sherbet to me, Herbert,” he said
languidly.

I went to the door of the little shop. “Henry, I can’t.”

He reared up and peered around at me. “You doubtful about whether I
should do this?”

“Yes!”

“Well, I’m not. You’re of two minds; one says I shouldn’t, one says I
should. I got one only, says I should. You’re outnumbered two to one.”
He turned his back again, put his head against the rest, and closed his
eyes.

I swore violently. But what can you do with a guy like that? Finding it
a little difficult to see, I flipped on the master switch. The drier
motor began to moan. It annoyed me more than I like to admit. I had
meant to short it out half a dozen times, but never got around to it.

Henry didn’t move and when I got out to him he was asleep. I went back
and opened the switch. I dawdled. I was frankly afraid of what might
happen to him. When I got out again he hadn’t moved. He was sitting with
his eyes open, smiling happily at the far wall. When he saw me he jumped
up and took my hand warmly. “Well, you did it!”

“Did what?” I asked stupidly.

“I’m cured! I feel fine! It worked, didn’t it?”

I opened my mouth to tell him exactly what stage he was in, but decided
not to. “I have to give you the ‘clincher’ shot,” I said instead.

“What’s that?”

“Why the first one cures you; the second makes it stick,” I explained,
hoping earnestly that he wouldn’t start to think about it.

“Oh,” he said, leaned back in the chair and closed his eyes.

I nosed into the ’scope and threw up my circle. I figured that was
easier to watch than that burbled-up beam wave. I threw in the beam
projector, and after it was well warm, started to move in with the
distortion. I didn’t dare put in too much. Maybe the brain would be
insensitive to an over-distorted wave: and then again maybe Henry’d
spend the rest of his life with Lobblies following him. When the upper
edge of the circle began to flatten a little, I stopped and sweated a
while, and gradually eased it in until the ring broke. Then I cut
everything, and, frantic with worry, ran to Henry.

He lay very still. I called him softly and he didn’t move. I tentatively
touched his shoulder. To my infinite relief his eyes opened and he
grinned thickly at me through his swollen lips.

“Well, did it work?”

“What?” I asked tentatively.

“The cure.”

“What do you think?”

“I don’t know,” he said, and yawned and stretched. “I had a dream
about … Godfrey, what was my fixation that time?”

“I think you’re cured,” I said happily. “What was your dream?”

“Well, a fuzzy sort of something about being cured. But of course, if I
was going to dream at all, that would be the logical thing to dream
about.”

“Why?”

“Because it was uppermost in my mind. The most important thing.”

“That was your fixation—that you were cured. The logical thing to have a
fixation about. I had to lie to you to make you take the cure. You
believed you were cured as soon as you were ‘sick’!”

And then I phoned.

I made sure the phone was clear, and then hurriedly dialed. The phone
barely had a chance to ring before Carole answered.

“Carole, darling!”

“Oh Godfrey—are you all right, sweetheart?”

“Hungry and sleepy and tired. I love you. We’ve whipped it! We’ve fixed
it! You’ll be all right, dear. Listen. I have to get off this phone but
quick. Collect Marie and the Widget and get down to Francy’s fast like
crazy.”

“Oh, darling—all right. Right away, soon’s I can get a cab. Marie’s
here. She’s been wanting to get the police all night. I wouldn’t let
her.”

“Bless you! ’Bye!” I hung up. Henry was practically jumping up and down
in his impatience to get on the phone and talk to Marie, but I put it
behind me. “No you don’t. You’d get to billing and cooing over the phone
and Wickersham would ring in on you. We’ve got to get them taken care of
first.”

We gathered up our tools and I took them out to the car: I was no Mr.
America, but Henry looked like a meat-scrap. I took the precaution to go
in and out through the window after nullifying the U.V. I wasn’t going
to issue any invitation to Brother Wickersham, if he didn’t already know
we were here, which was doubtful.

But when the girls arrived, I felt I could forget about that. They came
running up the path from a taxi, the Widget winning by seven lengths. I
caught her up and hugged her till she grunted, and then slung her over
one shoulder while I hugged Carole. I didn’t look to see what passed
between Marie and Henry, but it must have been something similar.

We trooped into the beauty shop. “Marie first,” I said. “You’ve earned
it, Henry.”

“Aha!” grinned Henry. “It’s a privilege now!”

“I’m sure of my stuff now. Come along, Carole, Widge!” I led them into
the little laboratory. They both watched with some fascination as I
switched on the heaters.

“O.K., Godfrey,” Henry’s voice floated in. I switched on.

“Watch the ring,” I said to Carole. “When it breaks a little at the
edge, Marie will forget that that thing happened. I mean, she’ll
remember it didn’t happen. I mean—”

“I know, dear.” She sighed.

“Hm-m-m! Why the sigh?”

“I was just thinking—she has a real something to lose. So has the
Widget. Oh, I’m sorry, darling. I didn’t mean to—”

“Skip it. You’ll get a treatment. I have the littlest hunch why you
reacted the way you did to this thing … oh, I can’t explain it all now,
beloved, but I will. In a roundabout and rather agonizing way, I’ve been
paid a wonderful compliment.”

“I don’t understand.”

“You will.”

“Daddy, where’s the cormium hemlet?”

“Busted, finished, and fixed for good,” I said. “Hey you. Your Daddy did
something about it. That suit you?”

She looked me over. “S’about time.”

_“Widget!”_ said Carole.

“Mummy, every time you take to cryin’ around the place, I’m gonna be mad
at him. Mostly I don’t know why, but I knew men cause womenses tears
alla time.”

“Are you precocious, my darling daughter, or are you quoting Mrs.
Wilton?”

“Mrs. Wilton,” said the Widget. She considered for a moment, and then
said, “Maybe I’m precocious, too.”

Just then the nictating ring on the oscilloscope’s screen wobbled and
frayed at one edge. I cut the master switch. “Cut!” I called.

There wasn’t a sound from the beauty shop. I ran out there, did a quick
pivot and came back. “Marie and Henry,” I said around the tongue in my
cheek, “seem to appreciate each other again.” Carole smiled. It seemed I
had been waiting a long time for that smile. I kissed her. “Go on out
there now. Do what Henry tells you. When you come back here, I dare you
tell me you’re frightened of anything.”

Completely trusting, she went out. I held on to the child when she tried
to follow.

“O.K.!” called Henry after a minute.

“What’s Mummy doing?”

“She’s taking a two-minute nap where the helmet used to be,” I said as I
threw the switches.

“Kin I?”

“Are you good?”

“Well … I dunno. I busted your shaving mug.”

“Oh-oh.”

“But then I took care of Mummy when you stayed out all night.”

“What did you do?”

“I told her you was wonderful.”

“You did? Bless your little heart!”

“Shucks. It’s no more than you tell her yourself.”

“Think we have her fooled, Widget?” I asked, laughing.

“We wouldn’t if she thought how bad we were instead of how good we are.”

“Now there you have something.”

“Cut it,” Henry called.

“Now you beat it. G’wan; scat, now!”

“Aw. Just ’Cause you and Mummy’s going to get mushy.”

And we did. One look at those unclouded eyes, and I knew that she was
all right again.

“A dream, darling,” she murmured when I let her. “A silly dream. And I
can’t even remember what it was about. It was a dream that was—just like
all of us, you, and me, and the Widget. I can’t think why it was so
bad.”

“I know, now,” I whispered. “Tell you later.”

I went to work on the Widget’s treatment, and when I got Henry’s all
clear, I went out there with Carole. The child was fast asleep, smiling.
Carole leaned over and kissed her.

“Moh-mee?” she said with her eyes closed, the way she used to when she
was half her age.

“Hello, Widge,” I said.

“Hi.” She knuckled her eyes.

“Have any dreams, sleepyhead?”

“Mmm-hm,” she said with a rising inflection. She looked at me with eyes
suddenly wide-awake and cautious.

“Go on, kiddo. The lid is off,” I said. “You can talk about it now.”

“You know everything, don’t you, I bet. I dreamed about that ol’ doll.”

“Was it a dream?”

“Yes. It was a dream. But I’m going to pretend she was real. I wish she
_was_ real, that’s what I wish.”

Carole and I exchanged a startled glance.

_“And_ I wish Mickey Mouse was real too. Mummy!”

“Yes, darling.”

“I din’t have enough breakfuss.”

The Widget was all right.

“What’s going on here!” roared a resonant baritone.

We all froze. “Wickersham,” Henry whispered.

“Who’s in there?” bellowed the voice.

“Your man Godfrey,” I called. “Come on in.”

He came striding in, tall and wide and black. The Widget scuttled close
to her mother. Nobody else moved. Wickersham was halfway across the room
when he saw Henry. The blood on Henry’s clothes diverted him a little;
he broke stride. He seemed a little less tall, then, as he stopped and
swung around, looking at Marie, and Carole, and at the Widget, who
twitched, and then at me.

“Company,” I said. An idea crawled out of the back of my mind and out my
mouth. “They’re cured,” I said quietly.

Wickersham’s mouth sagged. His eyes darted to the women and back to me.
I saw Henry go white.

Henry said, “You knew, then. You did it to them.”

“Yes,” Wickersham said. He said it to me.

Henry stepped up to Wickersham, who towered over him. Henry had the most
extraordinary ripple running on the side of his jaw. “Put your hands
up,” he said, his voice half a plea, half a caress.

Marie said “Henry.” Carole took Marie’s arm and shook her head at her.

Wickersham glowered suddenly, reached out one long arm and put, rather
than shoved, Henry behind him.

“The cure was his idea,” I said, indicating Henry.

Wickersham turned and looked at Henry as if he had never seen him
before. “You? _I_ couldn’t do it!” he rasped.

Then Henry hit him. Just once. Very fine.

After that, Wickersham was easy to talk to. He slumped on the edge of
one of the sinks, with his chin sunk low, and he talked. I couldn’t look
at him. I didn’t know him like this. It hurt, in a way. I think I felt,
then, a thousandth part of the loss all the others had felt over their
solidified dreams.

“I didn’t mean it to come out this way,” said Wickersham. “The
wish-fulfillment synapses are what I was after, it’s true. I wanted the
brain, under that beam, to become a perfectly efficient machine. I
wanted to visualize a goal, and then under the beam, to see the whole
thing completed, with all of the intermediate steps obvious. I didn’t
know it would do what it did—and it only had to do that once. I didn’t
know it would drag something up out of the subconscious, make it real,
make it so desirable to return to and so difficult to get along without.
I hated to permit myself to go back to it again, and I couldn’t bear to
be away—I missed it so much.”

“What made you subject these women to it?”

“Because of you,” he said. “You two are the best team I have. I didn’t
feel I could persuade or drive you to the cure I needed. I didn’t feel
you would drive yourselves to the needed extent unless you had a
personal reason for doing it.”

“That may be true, Henry,” I said.

“It isn’t,” said Henry clearly. “He couldn’t bring himself to admit to
us that he was under the influence of a hellish thing like this. Isn’t
that more like it, Wickersham?”

Wickersham didn’t answer.

“What about that fantastically childish business with the burglar alarm
and all the U.V.?”

“It had to be difficult for you all the way, or you wouldn’t have had
the push to go all the way.”

“Nonsense,” said Henry. I looked at him in amazement. I’d never seen
Henry like this. He said, his voice challenging, “You tried to do it and
failed. You like to think of us as lesser men than yourself. If you
couldn’t do it at all, you didn’t want us to do it easily. Right?”

“I—didn’t think it out that way.”

Henry nodded. “And you want the cure.”

“Yes,” Wickersham whispered. “Yes—please.”

I felt ill. “Do you own this place?”

“I bought it when I saw your wives going there.”

Henry’s jaw twitched again. “The secret,” he said evenly, “is to feed
your beam signal back a hundred and eighty degrees out of phase. About
fifteen percent reverse feedback. For about fifteen minutes. Le’s go,
chillun.”

They moved away from him, all but huddled in a group, toward the door. I
stood where I was. Wickersham didn’t move. I looked and saw Carole
lingering at the door. When I turned back, Wickersham was looking out
the door—not after anybody; not at anything. He was just looking. His
great stony face was full of hollows in the wrong places and the shadows
were no longer impressive, and distinguished, and strong. The eyes were
red-rimmed, pale and yellowed.

“What was your dream, Wickersham, that you couldn’t control?”

He made a movement with his head, a very slight one; but it pointed at
Carole and answered my question. I took a step forward, furious, but he
said, “No. Not her. Just—what you have.”

And I couldn’t pity him—he was so broken.

So I left him there, looking as if there were nothing alive but his
eyes, and they were tied to the dead rest of him. I caught up with
Carole at the path, and we walked quickly until we joined Henry and
Marie. She was walking in a new way for her, not looking ahead, but
holding her husband and watching his face, because she had seen her
dream come true and was permitted to believe it. I put my hand on his
shoulder. He stopped as if he had been waiting. Carole took Marie’s arm,
for she always understood these things without being told about them,
and walked ahead.

“Henry,” I said, “You just killed a man.”

“He won’t die.”

“You know what that out-of-phase will do to him.”

“You told me what a microfraction did to me.”

“And he’ll get fifteen minutes. There won’t be anything left.”

“What’s he got now?” asked Henry.

“Very little,” I admitted.

“He’ll be better off after the treatment,” he said steadily.

“Henry, I—”

“You could have told him the other treatment,” he lashed out. “What
would he have then?”

I thought of the Wickersham we worked for; silent, morose, efficient,
and certainly not much use to himself. “I don’t know why you did it,
Henry, or why I let you. I think it’s right, though.” I also thought
that for Henry, this was fighting; it was reprisal, and he would have to
fight for everything after this. I could tell by the way he walked, by
the way Marie walked with him.

We got in the car and took Henry and Marie home; and then at last we
were alone—with the exception, of course, of the Widget, who was doing
nip-ups in the back seat.

“Godfrey—what was the matter with me?”

I grinned. “Nothing.”

“Nothing? Darling, you needn’t try to hide anything.”

“I’m not, Carole. Really I’m not. There’s only one answer to the way you
reacted to the opportunity to know your innermost desire.”

“Well?”

“You just didn’t react. You had everything you wanted. You were
completely happy with what you had. You are a very rare creature,
m’love.”

“But I don’t see why that should have made me so sickeningly sad—and
frightened.”

“The sadness wasn’t much of it. You had your happiness brought to
perfection, which is an unnatural state. But your memory of that
perfection was so close to reality that you couldn’t tell the
difference. It was a very slight difference. It was every wall in the
house without a fingermark on it. It was being able to close the oven
door without the danger of getting your skirt caught in it, ever. In
your particular fugue, only the little, unnoticeable details changed. It
was perfection itself you thought you had known, and the lack of it that
gave you the sense of loss. And when you felt you had lost something,
and couldn’t identify it, you were afraid.”

“Oh—I see,” she said thoughtfully. “Why couldn’t you tell me before?”

“Didn’t want to rub Henry’s nose in it. You see, like the Widget, who
wanted a doll, Marie wanted an aggressive husband. Marie and the Widget
were both mourning the loss of the thing they wanted. You didn’t lose
anything; you were just afraid. Your not losing anything is the
compliment I mentioned a while back. But darling, compliment me in a
less roundabout way next time!”

“I love you,” she said, with her eyes too.

“That’s what I meant,” I said, and began to drive with one arm.

There was a snort from the back seat. “What—again?” said the Widget.



MEMORIAL


_The Pit, in AD 5000, had changed little over the centuries. Still it
was an angry memorial to the misuse of great power; and because of it,
organized warfare was a forgotten thing. Because of it, the world was
free of the wasteful smoke and dirt of industry. The scream and crash of
bombs and the soporific beat of marching feet were never heard, and at
long last the earth was at peace_.

_To go near The Pit was slow, certain death, and it was respected and
feared, and would be for centuries more. It winked and blinked redly at
night, and was surrounded by a bald and broken tract stretching out and
away over the horizon; and around it flickered a ghostly blue glow.
Nothing lived there. Nothing could_.

_With such a war memorial, there could only be peace. The earth could
never forget the horror that could be loosed by war_.

_That was Grenfell’s dream_.

GRENFELL HANDED THE typewritten sheet back. “That’s it, Jack. My idea,
and—I wish I could express it like that.” He leaned back against the
littered workbench, his strangely asymmetrical face quizzical. “Why is
it that it takes a useless person adequately to express an abstract?”

Jack Roway grinned as he took back the paper and tucked it into his
breast pocket. “Interestin’ question, Grenfell, because this _is_ your
expression, the words _are_ yours. Practically verbatim. I left out the
‘er’s’ and ‘Ah’s’ that you play conversational hopscotch with, and
strung together all the effects you mentioned without mentioning any of
the technological causes. Net result: you think I did it, when you did.
You think it’s good writing, and I don’t.”

“You don’t?”

Jack spread his bony length out on the hard little cot. His relaxation
was a noticeable act, like the unbuttoning of a shirt collar. He
laughed.

“Of course I don’t. Much too emotional for my taste. I’m just a fumbling
aesthete—useless, did you say? Mm-m-m yeah. I suppose so.” He paused
reflectively. “You see, you cold-blooded characters, you scientists, are
the true visionaries. Seems to me the essential difference between a
scientist and an artist is that the scientist mixes his hopes with
patience.

“The scientist visualizes his ultimate goal, but pays little attention
to it. He is all caught up with the achievement of the next step upward.
The artist looks so far ahead that more often than not he can’t see
what’s under his feet; so he falls flat on his face and gets called
useless by scientists. But if you strip all of the intermediate steps
away from the scientist’s thinking, you have an artistic concept to
which the scientist responds distantly and with surprise, giving some
artist credit for deep perspicacity purely because the artist repeated
something the scientist said.”

“You amaze me,” Grenfell said candidly. “You wouldn’t be what you are if
you weren’t lazy and superficial. And yet you come out with things like
that. I don’t know that I understand what you just said. I’ll have to
think—but I do believe that you show all the signs of clear thinking.
With a mind like yours, I can’t understand why you don’t use it to build
something instead of wasting it in these casual interpretations of
yours.”

Jack Roway stretched luxuriously. “What’s the use? There’s more waste
involved in the destruction of something which is already built than in
dispersing the energy it would take to help build something. Anyway, the
world is filled with builders—and destroyers. I’d just as soon sit by
and watch, and feel things. I like my environment, Grenfell. I want to
feel all I can of it, while it lasts. It won’t last much longer. I want
to touch all of it I can reach, taste of it, hear it, while there’s
time. What is around me, here and now, is what is important to me. The
acceleration of human progress, and the increase of its mass—to use your
own terms—are taking humanity straight to Limbo. You, with your work,
think you are fighting humanity’s inertia. Well, you are. But it’s the
kind of inertia called momentum. You command no force great enough to
stop it, or even to change its course appreciably.”

“I have atomic power.”

Roway shook his head, smiling. “That’s not enough. No power is enough.
It’s just too late.”

“That kind of pessimism does not affect me,” said Grenfell. “You can
gnaw all you like at my foundations, Jack, and achieve nothing more than
the loss of your front teeth. I think you know that.”

“Certainly I know that. I’m not trying to. I have nothing to sell, no
one to change. I am even more impotent than you and your atomic power;
and you are completely helpless. Uh—I quarrel with your use of the term
‘pessimist’, though. I am nothing of the kind. Since I have resolved for
myself the fact that humanity, as we know it, is finished, I’m quite
resigned to it. Pessimism from me, under the circumstances, would be the
pessimism of a photophobiac predicting that the sun would rise
tomorrow.”

Grenfell grinned. ‘I’ll have to think about that, too. You’re such a
mass of paradoxes that turn out to be chains of reasoning. Apparently
you live in a world in which scientists are poets and the grasshopper
has it all over the ant.”

“I always did think that ant was a stinker.”

“Why do you keep coming here, Jack? What do you get out of it? Don’t you
realize I’m a criminal?”

Roway’s eyes narrowed. “Sometimes I think you wish you were a criminal.
The law says you are, and the chances are very strong that you’ll be
caught and treated accordingly. Ethically, you know you’re not. It sort
of takes the spice out of being one of the hunted.”

“Maybe you’re right,” Grenfell said thoughtfully. He sighed. “It’s so
completely silly. During the war years, the skills I had were snatched
up and the government flogged me into the Manhattan Project, expecting,
and getting, miracles. I have never stopped working along the same
lines. And now the government has changed the laws, and pulled legality
from under me.”

“Hardly surprising. The government deals rather severely with soldiers
who go on killing other soldiers after the war is over.” He held up a
hand to quell Grenfell’s interruption. “I know you’re not killing
anyone, and are working for the opposite result. I was only pointing out
that it’s the same switcheroo. We the people,” he said didactically,
“have, in our sovereign might, determined that no atomic research be
done except in government laboratories. We have then permitted our
politicians to allow so little for maintenance of those
laboratories—unlike our overseas friends—that no really exhaustive
research can be done in them. We have further made it a major offense to
operate such a bootleg lab as yours.” He shrugged. “Comes the end of
mankind. We’ll get walloped first. If we put more money and effort into
nuclear research than any other country, some other country would get
walloped first. If we last another hundred years—which seems
doubtful—some poor, spavined, underpaid government researcher will
stumble on the aluminum-isotope space-heating system you have already
perfected.”

“That was a little rough,” said Grenfell bitterly. “Driving me
underground just in time to make it impossible for me to announce it.
What a waste of time and energy it is to heat homes and buildings the
way they do now! Space heating—the biggest single use for
heat-energy—and I have the answer to it over there.” He nodded toward a
compact cube of lead-alloys in the corner of the shop. “Build it into a
foundation, and you have controllable heat for the life of the building,
with not a cent for additional fuel and practically nothing for
maintenance.” His jaw knotted. “Well, I’m glad it happened that way.”

“Because it got you started on your war memorial—The Pit? Yeah. Well,
all I can say is, I hope you’re right. It hasn’t been possible to scare
humanity yet. The invention of gunpowder was going to stop war, and
didn’t. Likewise the submarine, the torpedo, the airplane, and that
two-by-four bomb they pitched at Hiroshima.”

“None of that applies to The Pit,” said Grenfell. “You’re right;
humanity hasn’t been scared off war yet; but the Hiroshima bomb rocked
’em back on their heels. My little memorial is the real stuff. I’m not
depending on a fission effect, you know, with a release of one-tenth of
one percent of the energy of the atom. I’m going to disrupt it
completely, and get all the energy there is in it. And it’ll be _more_
than a thousand times as powerful as the Hiroshima bomb, because I’m
going to use twelve times as much explosive; and it’s going off on the
ground, not fifteen hundred feet above it.” Grenfell’s brow, over
suddenly hot eyes, began to shine with sweat. “And then—The Pit,” he
said softly. “The war memorial to end war, and all other war memorials.
A vast pit, alive with bubbling lava, radiating death for ten thousand
years. A living reminder of the devastation mankind has prepared for
itself. Out here on the desert, where there are no cities, where the
land has always been useless, will be the scene of the most useful thing
in the history of the race—a never-ending sermon, a warning, an example
of the dreadful antithesis of peace.” His voice shook to a whisper, and
faded.

“Sometimes,” said Roway, “You frighten me, Grenfell. It occurs to me
that I am such a studied sensualist, tasting everything I can, because I
am afraid to feel any one thing that much.” He shook himself, or
shuddered. “You’re a fanatic, Grenfell. Hyperemotional. A monomaniac. I
hope you can do it.”

“I can do it,” said Grenfell.

Two months passed, and in those two months Grenfell’s absorption in his
work had been forced aside by the increasing pressure of current events.
Watching a band of vigilantes riding over the waste to the south of his
little buildings one afternoon, he thought grimly of what Roway had
said. “Sometimes I think you wish you were a criminal.” Roway, the
sensualist, would say that. Roway would appreciate the taste of danger,
in the same way that he appreciated all the other emotions. As it
intensified, he would wait to savor it, no matter how bad it got.

Twice Grenfell shut off the instigating power of the carbon-aluminum
pile he had built, as he saw government helicopters hovering on the
craggy skyline. He knew of hard-radiation detectors; he had developed
two different types of them during the war; and he wanted no questions
asked. His utter frustration at being unable to announce the success of
his space-heating device, for fear that he would be punished as a
criminal and his device impounded and forgotten—that frustration had
been indescribable. It had canalized his mind, and intensified the
devoted effort he had put forth for the things he believed in during the
war. Every case of neural shock he encountered in men who had been hurt
by war and despised it, made him work harder on his monument—on The Pit.
For if humans could be frightened by war, humanity could be frightened
by The Pit.

And those he met who had been hurt by war and who still hated the late
enemy—those who would have been happy to go back and kill some more,
reckoning vital risk well worth it—those he considered mad, and forgot
them.

So he could not stand another frustration. He was the center of his own
universe, and he realized it dreadfully, and he had to justify his
position there. He was a humanitarian, a philanthropist in the world’s
truest sense. He was probably as mad as any man who has, through his own
efforts, moved the world.

For the first time, then, he was grateful when Jack Roway arrived in his
battered old convertible, although he was deliriously frightened at the
roar of the motor outside his laboratory window. His usual reaction to
Jack’s advent was a mixture of annoyance and gratification, for it was a
great deal of trouble to get out to his place. His annoyance was not
because of the interruption, for Jack was certainly no trouble to have
around. Grenfell suspected that Jack came out to see him partly to get
the taste of the city out of his mouth, and partly to be able to feel
superior to somebody he considered of worth.

But the increasing fear of discovery, and his race to complete his work
before it was taken from him by a hysterical public, had had the unusual
effect of making him lonely. For such a man as Grenfell to be lonely
bordered on the extraordinary; for in his daily life there were simply
too many things to be done. There had never been enough hours in a day
nor days in a week to suit him, and he deeply resented the encroachments
of sleep, which he considered a criminal waste.

“Roway!” he blurted, as he flung the door open, his tone so warm that
Roway’s eyebrows went up in surprise. “What dragged you out here?”

“Nothing in particular,” said the writer, as they shook hands. “Nothing
more than usual, which is a great deal. How goes it?”

“I’m about finished.” They went inside, and as the door closed, Grenfell
turned to face Jack. “I’ve been finished for so long I’m ashamed of
myself,” he said intently.

“Ha! Ardent confession so early in the day! What are you talking about?”

“Oh, there have been things to do,” said Grenfell restlessly. “But I
could go ahead with the … with the big thing at almost any time.”

“You hate to be finished. You’ve never visualized what it would be like
to have the job done.” His teeth flashed. “You know, I’ve never heard a
word from you as to what your plans are after the big noise. You going
into hiding?”

“I … haven’t thought much about it. I used to have a vague idea of
broadcasting a warning and an explanation before I let go with the
disruptive explosion. I’ve decided against it, though. In the first
place, I’d be stopped within minutes, no matter how cautious I was with
the transmitter. In the second place … well, this is going to be so big
that it won’t need any explanation.”

“No one will know who did it, or why it was done.”

“Is that necessary?” asked Grenfell quietly.

Jack’s mobile face stilled as he visualized The Pit, spewing its
ten-thousand-year hell. “Perhaps not,” he said. “Isn’t it necessary,
though, to you?”

“To me?” asked Grenfell, surprised. “You mean, do I care if the world
knows I did this thing, or not? No; of course I don’t. A chain of
circumstance is occurring, and it has been working through me. It goes
directly to The Pit; The Pit will do all that is necessary from then on.
I will no longer have any part in it.”

Jack moved, clinking and splashing, around the sink in the corner of the
laboratory. “Where’s all your coffee? Oh—here. Uh … I have been curious
about how much personal motive you had for your work. I think that
answers it pretty well. I think, too, that you believe what you are
saying. Do you know that people who do things for impersonal motives are
as rare as fur on a fish?”

“I hadn’t thought about it.”

“I believe that, too. Sugar? And milk. I remember. And have you been
listening to the radio?”

“Yes. I’m … a little upset, Jack,” said Grenfell, taking the cup. “I
don’t know where to time this thing. I’m a technician, not a
Machiavelli.”

“Visionary, like I said. You don’t know if you’ll throw this gadget of
yours into world history too soon or too late—is that it?”

“Exactly. Jack, the whole world seems to be going crazy. Even fission
bombs are too big for humanity to handle.”

“What else can you expect,” said Jack grimly, “with our dear friends
across the water sitting over their push buttons waiting for an excuse
to punch them?”

“And we have our own set of buttons, of course.”

Jack Roway said: “We’ve got to defend ourselves.”

“Are you kidding?”

Roway glanced at him, his dark brows plotting a V. “Not about this. I
seldom kid about anything, but particularly not about this.” And
he—shuddered.

Grenfell stared amazedly at him and then began to chuckle. “Now,” he
said, “I’ve seen everything. My iconoclastic friend Jack Roway, of all
people, caught up by a … a fashion. A national pastime, fostered by
uncertainty and fed by yellow journalism—fear of the enemy.”

“This country is not at war.”

“You mean, we have no enemy? Are you saying that the gentlemen over the
water, with their itching fingertips hovering about the push-buttons,
are not our enemies?”

“Well—”

Grenfell came across the room to his friend, and put a hand on his
shoulder. “Jack—what’s the matter? You can’t be so troubled by the
news—not _you!”_

Roway stared out at the brazen sun, and shook his head slowly.
“International balance is too delicate,” he said softly; and if a voice
could glaze like eyes, his did. “I see the nations of the world as
masses balanced each on its own mathematical point, each with its center
of gravity directly above. But the masses are fluid, shifting violently
away from the center lines. The opposing trends aren’t equal: they can’t
cancel each other; the phasing is too slow. One or the other is going to
topple, and then the whole works is going to go.”

“But you’ve known that for a long time. You’ve known that ever since
Hiroshima. Possibly before. Why should it frighten you now?”

“I didn’t think it would happen so soon.”

“Oh-ho! So that’s it! You have suddenly realized that the explosion is
going to come in your lifetime. Hm-m-m? And you can’t take that. You’re
capable of all of your satisfying aesthetic rationalizations as long as
you can keep the actualities at arm’s length.”

_“Whew!”_ said Roway, his irrepressible humor passing close enough to
nod to him. “Keep it clean, Grenfell!”

Grenfell smiled. “Y’know, Jack, you remind me powerfully of some
erstwhile friends of mine who write science-fiction. They had been
living very close to atomic power for a long time—years before the man
on the street—or the average politician, for that matter—knew an atom
from Adam. Atomic power was handy to these specialized word-merchants
because it gave them a limitless source of power for background to a
limitless source of story material. In the heyday of the Manhattan
Project, most of them suspected what was going on, some of them
knew—some even worked on it. All of them were quite aware of the
terrible potentialities of nuclear energy. Practically all of them were
scared silly of the whole idea. They were afraid for humanity, but they
themselves were not really afraid, except in a delicious drawing room
sort of way, because they couldn’t conceive of this Buck Rogers event
happening to anything but posterity. But it happened, right smack in the
middle of their own sacrosanct lifetimes.

“And I will be dog-goned if you’re not doing the same thing. You’ve
gotten quite a bang out of figuring out the doom humanity faces in an
atomic war. You’ve consciously risen above it by calling it inevitable,
and in the meantime, leave us gather rosebuds before it rains. You
thought you’d be safe home—dead—before the first drops fell. Now social
progress has rolled up a thunderhead and you find yourself a mile from
home with a crease in your pants and no umbrella. And you’re scared.”

Roway looked at the floor and said, “It’s so soon. It’s so soon.” He
looked up at Grenfell, and his cheekbones seemed too large. He took a
deep breath. “You … we can stop it, Grenfell. The war … the … this thing
that’s happening to us. The explosion that will come when the strains
get too great in the international situation. And it’s _got_ to be
stopped!”

“That’s what The Pit is for.”

“The Pit!” Roway said scornfully. “I’ve called you a visionary before.
Grenfell, you’ve got to be more practical! Humanity is not going to
learn anything by example. It’s got to be kicked and carved. Surgery.”

Grenfell’s eyes narrowed. “Surgery? What you said a minute ago about my
stopping it … do you mean what I think you mean?”

“Don’t you see it?” said Jack urgently. “What you have here—total
disruptive energy—the peak of atomic power. One or two wallops with
this, in the right place, and we can stop anybody.”

“This isn’t a weapon. I didn’t make this to be a weapon.”

“The first rock ever thrown by a prehistoric man wasn’t made to be a
weapon, either. But it was handy and it was effective, and it was
certainly used because it had to be used.” He suddenly threw up his
hands in a despairing gesture. “You don’t understand. Don’t you realize
that this country is likely to be attacked at any second—that diplomacy
is now hopeless and helpless, and the whole world is just waiting for
the thing to start? It’s probably too late even now but it’s the least
we can do.”

“What, specifically, is the least thing we can do?”

“Turn your work over to the War Department. In a few hours the
government can put it where it will do the most good.” He drew his
finger across his throat. “Anywhere we want to, over the ocean.”

There was a taut silence. Roway looked at his watch and licked his lips.
Finally Grenfell said, “Turn it over to the government. Use it for a
weapon—and what for? To stop war.”

“Of course!” blurted Roway. “To show the rest of the world that our way
of life … to scare the daylights out of … to—”

_“Stop it!”_ Grenfell roared. “Nothing of the kind. You think—you hope
anyway—that the use of total disruption as a weapon will stall off the
inevitable—at least in your lifetime. Don’t you?”

“No. I—”

“Don’t you?”

“Well, I—”

“You have some more doggerel to write,” said Grenfell scathingly. “You
have some more blondes to chase. You want to go limp over a few more
Bach fugues.”

Jack Roway said: “No one knows where the first bomb might hit. It might
be anywhere. There’s nowhere I … we … can go to be safe.” He was
trembling.

“Are the people in the city quivering like that?” asked Grenfell.

“Riots,” breathed Roway, his eyes bright with panic. “The radio won’t
announce anything about the riots.”

“Is that what you came out here for today—to try to get me to give
disruptive power to _any_ government?”

Jack looked at him guiltily. “It was the only thing to do. I don’t know
if your bomb will turn the trick, but it has to be tried. It’s the only
thing left. We’ve got to be prepared to hit first, and hit harder than
anyone else.”

“No.” Grenfell’s one syllable was absolutely unshakable.

“Grenfell—I thought I could argue you into it. Don’t make it tough for
yourself. You’ve got to do it. Please do it on your own. Please,
Grenfell.” He stood up slowly.

“Do it on my own—or what? _Keep away from me!”_

“No … I—” Roway stiffened suddenly, listening. From far above and to the
north came the whir of rotary wings. Roway’s fear-slackened lips
tightened into a grin, and with two incredibly swift strides he was
across to Grenfell. He swept in a handful of the smaller man’s shirt
front and held him half off the floor.

“Don’t try a thing,” he gritted. There was not a sound then except their
harsh breathing, until Grenfell said wearily: “There was somebody called
Judas.”

“You can’t insult me,” said Roway, with a shade of his old cockiness,
“And you’re flattering yourself.”

A helicopter sank into its own roaring dust-cloud outside the building.
Men poured out of it and burst in the door. There were three of them.
They were not in uniform.

“Dr. Grenfell,” said Jack Roway, keeping his grip, “I want you to meet—”

“Never mind that,” said the taller of the three in a brisk voice.
“You’re Roway? Hm-m-m. Dr. Grenfell. I understand you have a nuclear
energy device on the premises.”

“Why did you come by yourself?” Grenfell asked Roway softly. “Why not
just send these stooges?”

“For you, strangely enough. I hoped I could argue you into giving the
thing freely. You know what will happen if you resist?”

“I know.” Grenfell pursed his lips for a moment, and then turned to the
tall man. “Yes. I have some such thing here. Total atomic disruption. Is
that what you were looking for?”

“Where is it?”

“Here, in the laboratory, and then there’s the pile in the other
building. You’ll find—” He hesitated. “You’ll find two samples of the
concentrate. One’s over there—” he pointed to a lead case on a shelf
behind one of the benches. “And there’s another like it in a similar
case in the shed back of the pile building.”

Roway sighed and released Grenfell. “Good boy. I knew you’d come
through.”

“Yes,” said Grenfell. “Yes—”

“Go get it,” said the tall man. One of the others broke away.

“It will take two men to carry it,” said Grenfell in a shaken voice. His
lips were white.

The tall man pulled out a gun and held it idly. He nodded to the second
man. “Go get it. Bring it here and we’ll strap the two together and haul
’em to the plane. Snap it up.”

The two men went out toward the shed.

“Jack?”

“Yes, Doc.”

“You really think humanity can be scared?”

“It will be—now. This thing will be used right.”

“I hope so. Oh, I hope so,” Grenfell whispered.

The men came back. “Up on the bench,” said the leader, nodding toward
the case the men carried between them.

As they climbed up on the bench and laid hands on the second case, to
swing it down from the shelf, Jack Roway saw Grenfell’s face spurt
sweat, and a sudden horror swept over him.

“Grenfell!” he said hoarsely. “It’s—”

“Of course,” Grenfell whispered. “Critical mass.”

Then it let go.

It was like Hiroshima, but much bigger. And yet, that explosion did not
create The Pit. It was the pile that did—the boron-aluminum lattice
which Grenfell had so arduously pieced together from parts bootlegged
over the years. Right there at the heart of the fission-explosion, total
disruption took place in the pile, for that was its function. This was
slower. It took more than an hour for its hellish activity to reach a
peak, and in that time a huge crater had been gouged out of the earth, a
seething, spewing mass of volatilized elements, raw radiation, and
incandescent gases. It was—The Pit. Its activity curve was plotted
abruptly—up to peak in an hour and eight minutes, and then a gradual
subsidence as it tried to feed further afield with less and less fueling
effect; and as it consumed its own flaming wastes in an effort to reach
inactivity. Rain would help to blanket it, through energy lost in
volatilizing the drops; and each of the many elements involved went
through its respective secondary radioactivity, and passed away its
successive half-lives. The subsidence of The Pit would take between
eight and nine thousand years.

And like Hiroshima, this explosion had effects which reached into
history and into men’s hearts in places far separated in time from the
cataclysm itself.

These things happened:

The explosion could not be concealed; and there was too much hysteria
afoot for anything to be confirmed. It was easier to run headlines
saying WE ARE ATTACKED. There was an instantaneous and panicky demand
for reprisals, and the government acceded, because such “reprisals”
suited the policy of certain members who could command emergency powers.
And so the First Atomic War was touched off.

And the Second.

There were no more atomic wars after that. The Mutant’s War was a
barbarous affair, and the mutants defeated the tattered and largely
sterile remnants of humanity, because the mutants were strong. And then
the mutants died out because they were unfit. For a while there was some
very interesting material to be studied on the effects of radiation on
heredity, but there was no one to study it.

There were some humans left. The rats got most of them, after increasing
in fantastic numbers; and there were three plagues.

After that there were half-stooping, naked things whose twisted heredity
could have been traced to humankind; but these could be frightened, as
individuals and as a race, so therefore they could not progress. They
were certainly not human.

_The Pit, in AD 5000, had changed little over the centuries. Still it
was an angry memorial to the misuse of great power; and because of it,
organized warfare was a forgotten thing. Because of it, the world was
free of the wasteful smoke and dirt of industry. The scream and crash of
bombs and the soporific beat of marching feet were never heard, and at
long last the earth was at peace_.

_To go near The Pit was slow, certain death, and it was respected and
feared, and would be for centuries more. It winked and blinked redly at
night, and was surrounded by a bald and broken tract stretching out and
away over the horizon; and around it flickered a ghostly blue glow.
Nothing lived there. Nothing could_.

_With such a war memorial, there could only be peace. The earth could
never forget the horror that could be loosed by war_.

_That was Grenfell’s dream_.



MEWHU’S JET


“WE INTERRUPT THIS PROGRAM TO ANNOUNCE—”

“Jack, don’t jump like that! And you’ve dropped ashes all over your—”

“Aw, Iris, honey, let me listen to—”

_“—at first identified as a comet, the object is pursuing an erratic
course through the stratosphere, occasionally dipping as low as—”_

“You make me nervous, Jack. You’re an absolute slave to the radio. I
wish you paid that much attention to me.”

“Darling, I’ll argue the point, or pay attention to you, anything in the
wide world you like when I’ve heard this announcement; but please,
_please let me listen!”_

_“—dents of the East Coast are warned to watch for the approach of this
ob—”_

“Iris, don’t—”

_Click!_

“Well, of all the selfish, inconsiderate, discourteous—”

“That will do, Jack Garry. It’s my radio as much as yours, and I have a
right to turn it off when I want to.”

“Might I ask why you find it necessary to turn it off at this moment?”

“Because I know the announcement will be repeated any number of times if
it’s important, and you’ll shush me every time. Because I’m not
interested in that kind of thing and don’t see why I should have it
rammed down my throat. Because the only thing you ever want to listen to
is something which couldn’t possibly affect us. But mostly because you
yelled at me!”

“I did _not_ yell at you!”

“You _did!_ And you’re yelling now!”

_“Mom!_ Daddy!”

“Oh. Molly, darling, we woke you up!”

“Poor bratlet. Hey, what about your slippers?”

“It isn’t cold tonight, Daddy. What was that on the radio?”

“Something buzzing around in the sky, darling. I didn’t hear it all.”

“A space ship, I betcha.”

“You see? You and your so-called science fiction!”

At which point, something like a giant’s fist clouted off the two-room
top story of the seaside cottage and scattered it down the beach. The
lights winked out, and outside the whole waterfront lit up with a brief,
shattering blue glare.

“Jacky darling, are you hurt?”

“Mom, he’s bleedin’!”

“Jack, honey, say something. _Please_ say something.”

“Urrrrgh,” said Jack Garry obediently, sitting up with a soft clatter of
pieces of falling lath and plaster. He put his hands gently on the sides
of his head and whistled. “Something hit the house.”

His red-headed wife laughed half-hysterically. “Not really darling.” She
put her arms around him, whisked some dust out of his hair, and began
stroking his neck. “I’m … frightened, Jack.”

“You’re frightened!” He looked around shakily in the dim moonlight that
filtered in. Radiance from an unfamiliar place caught his bleary gaze,
and he clutched Iris’ arm. “Upstairs … it’s gone!” he said hoarsely,
struggling to his feet. “Molly’s room … Molly—”

“I’m here, Daddy. Hey, you’re squeezin’!”

“Happy little family,” said Iris, her voice trembling. “Vacationing in a
quiet little cottage by the sea, so Daddy can write technical articles
while Mummy regains her good disposition—without a phone, without movies
within miles, and living in a place where the roof flies away. Jack—what
hit us?”

“One of those things you were talking about,” said Jack sardonically.
“One of the things you refuse to be interested in that couldn’t possibly
affect us. Remember?”

“The thing the radio was talking about?”

“I wouldn’t be surprised. We’d better get out of here. This place may
fall in on us, or burn, or something.”

“An’ we’ll all be kilt,” crooned Molly.

“Shut up, Molly. Iris, I’m going to poke around. Better go on out and
pick us a place to pitch the tent—if I can find the tent.”

“Tent?” Iris gasped.

“Boy oh boy,” said Molly.

“Jack Garry, I’m not going to go to bed in a tent. Do you realize that
this place will be swarming with people in no time flat?”

“O.K., O.K. Only get out from under what’s left of the house. Go for a
swim. Take a walk. Or g’wan to bed in Molly’s room.”

“I’m not going out there by myself.”

Jack sighed. “I should’ve asked you to stay in here,” he muttered. “If
you’re not the contrariest woman ever to—Be quiet, Molly.”

“I didn’t say anything.”

_Meeew-w-w!_

“Aren’t you doing that caterwauling?”

“No, Daddy, truly.”

Iris said, “I’d say a cat was caught in the wreckage except that cats
are smart and no cat would ever come near this place.”

_Wuh-wuh-wuh-meeee-ew-w-w!_

“What a dismal sound!”

“Jack, that isn’t a cat.”

_Mmmmmew. Mmm—m-m-m_.

“Whatever it is,” Jack said, “it can’t be big enough to be afraid of and
make a funny little noise like that.” He squeezed Iris’ arm and,
stepping carefully over the rubble, began peering in and around it.
Molly scrambled beside him. He was about to caution her against making
so much noise, and then thought better of it. What difference would a
little racket make?

The noise was not repeated, and five minutes’ searching elicited
nothing. Garry went back to his wife, who was fumbling around the
shambles of a living room, pointlessly setting chairs and coffee tables
back on their legs.

“I didn’t find anyth—”

_“Yipe!”_

“Molly! What is it?”

Molly was just outside, in the shrubbery. “Daddy, you better come
quick!”

Spurred by the urgency of her tone, he went crashing outside. He found
Molly standing rigid, trying to cram both her fists in her mouth at the
same time. And at her feet was a man with silver-gray skin and a broken
arm, who mewed at him.

_“—Guard and Navy Department have withdrawn their warnings. The pilot of
a Pan-American transport has reported that the object disappeared into
the zenith. It was last seen eighteen miles east of Normandy Beach, New
Jersey. Reports from the vicinity describe it as traveling very slowly,
with a hissing noise. Although it reached within a few feet of the
ground several times, no damage has been reported. Inves—”_

“Think of that,” said Iris, switching off the little three-way portable.
“No damage.”

“Yeah. And if no one saw the thing hit, no one will be out here to
investigate. So you can retire to your downy couch in the tent without
fear of being interviewed.”

“Go to sleep? Are you mad? Sleep in that flimsy tent with that mewing
monster lying there?”

“Oh, heck, Mom, he’s sick! He wouldn’t hurt anybody.”

They sat around a cheerful fire, fed by roof shingles. Jack had set up
the tent without much trouble. The silver-gray man was stretched out in
the shadows, sleeping lightly and emitting an occasional moan.

Jack smiled at Iris. “Y’know, I love your silly chatter, darling. The
way you turned to and set his arm was a pleasure to watch. You didn’t
think of him as a monster while you were tending to him.”

“Didn’t I, though? Maybe monster was the wrong word to use. Jack, he has
only one bone in his forearm!”

“He has what? Oh, nonsense, honey! ‘Tain’t scientific. He’d have to have
a ball-and-socket joint in his wrist.”

“He _has_ a ball-and-socket joint in his wrist.”

“This I have to see,” Jack muttered. He picked up a flash lantern and
went over to the long prone figure.

Silver eyes blinked up at the light. There was something queer about
them. He turned the beam closer. The pupils were not black in that
light, but dark green. They all but closed—from the sides, like a cat’s.
Jack’s breath wheezed out. He ran the light over the man’s body. It was
clad in a bright-blue roomy bathrobe effect, with a yellow sash. The
sash had a buckle which apparently consisted of two pieces of yellow
metal; there seemed to be nothing to keep them together. They just
stayed. When the man had fainted, just as they found him, it had taken
almost all Jack’s strength to pull them apart.

“Iris.”

She got up and came over to him. “Let the poor devil sleep.”

“Iris, what color was his robe?”

“Red, with a … but it’s _blue!”_

“Is now. Iris, what on earth have we got here?”

“I don’t know. I don’t know. Some poor thing that escaped from an
institution for—for—”

“For what?”

“How should I know?” she snapped. “There must be some place where they
send creatures that get born like that.”

“Creatures don’t get born like that, he isn’t deformed. He’s just
different.”

“I see what you mean. I don’t know why I see what you mean, but I’ll
tell you something.” She stopped, and was quiet for so long that he
turned to her, surprised. She said slowly, “I ought to be afraid of him,
because he’s strange, and ugly, but—I’m not.”

“Me too.”

“Molly, go back to bed.”

“He’s a leprechaun.”

“Maybe you’re right. Go on to bed, chicken, and in the morning you can
ask him where he keeps his crock of gold.”

“Gee.” She went off a little way and stood on one foot, drawing a small
circle in the sand with the other. “Daddy?”

“Yes, Molly m’love.”

“Can I sleep in the tent tomorrow, too?”

“If you’re good.”

“Daddy obviously means,” said Iris acidly, “that if you’re not good
he’ll have a roof on the house by tomorrow night.”

“I’ll be good.” She disappeared into the tent.

The gray man mewed.

“Well, old guy, what is it?”

The man reached over and fumbled at his splinted arm.

“It hurts him,” said Iris. She knelt beside him and, taking the wrist of
his good arm, lifted it away from the splint, where he was clawing. The
man did not resist, but lay and looked at her with pain-filled, slitted
eyes.

“He has six fingers,” Jack said. “See?” He knelt beside his wife and
gently took the man’s wrist. He whistled. “It _is_ a ball-and-socket.”

“Give him some aspirin.”

“That’s a good … wait.” Jack stood pulling his lip in puzzlement. “Do
you think we should?”

“Why not?”

“We don’t know where he comes from. We know nothing of his body
chemistry, or what any of our medicines might do to him.”

“He … what do you mean, where he comes from?”

“Iris, will you open up your mind just a little? In the face of evidence
like this, are you going to even attempt to cling to the idea that this
man comes from anywhere on this earth?” Jack said with annoyance. “You
know your anatomy. Don’t tell me you ever saw a human freak with skin
and bones like that! That belt buckle, that material in his
clothes … come on, now. Drop your prejudices and give your brains a
chance.”

“You’re suggesting things that simply don’t _happen!”_

“That’s what the man in the street said—in Hiroshima. That’s what the
old-time aeronaut said from the basket of his balloon when they told him
about heavier-than-air craft. That’s what—”

“All right, all right, Jack. I know the rest of the speech. If you want
dialectics instead of what’s left of a night’s sleep, I might point out
that the things you have mentioned have all concerned human endeavors.
Show me any new plastic, a new metal, a new kind of engine, and though I
may not begin to understand it, I can accept it because it is of human
origin. But this, this man, or whatever he is—”

“I know,” said Jack, more gently. “It’s frightening because it’s
strange, and away down underneath we feel that anything strange is
necessarily dangerous. That’s why we wear our best manners for strangers
and not for our friends. But I still don’t think we should give this
character any aspirin.”

“He seems to breathe the same air we do. He perspires, he talks … I
think he talks.”

“You have a point. Well, if it’ll ease his pain at all, it may be worth
trying. Give him just one.”

Iris went to the pump with a collapsible cup from her first-aid kit, and
filled it. Kneeling by the silver-skinned man, she propped up his head,
gently put the aspirin between his lips, and brought the cup to his
mouth. He sucked the water in greedily, and then went completely limp.

“Oh-oh. I was afraid of that.”

Iris put her hand over the man’s heart. _“Jack!”_

“Is he … what is it, Iris?”

“Not dead, if that’s what you mean. Will you feel this?”

Jack put his hand beside Iris’. The heart was beating with massive, slow
blows, about eight to the minute. Under it, out of phase completely with
the main beat, was another, an extremely fast, sharp beat, which felt as
if it were going about three hundred.

“He’s having some sort of palpitation,” Jack said.

“And in two hearts at once!”

Suddenly the man raised his head and uttered a series of ululating
shrieks and howls. His eyes opened wide, and across them fluttered a
translucent nictitating membrane. He lay perfectly still with his mouth
open, shrieking and gargling. Then with a lightning movement he snatched
Jack’s hand to his mouth. A pointed tongue, light orange and four inches
longer than it had any right to be, flicked out and licked Jack’s hand.
Then the strange eyes closed, the shrieks died to a whimper and faded
out, and the man relaxed.

“Sleeping now,” said Iris. “Oh, I hope we haven’t done anything to him!”

“We’ve done something. I just hope it isn’t serious. Anyhow, his arm
isn’t bothering him any. That’s all we were worried about in the first
place.”

Iris put a cushion under the man’s oddly planed head and touched the
beach mattress he was lying on. “He has a beautiful mustache,” she said.
“Like silver. He looks very old and wise.”

“So does an owl. Let’s go to bed.”

Jack woke early, from a dream in which he had bailed out of a flying
motorcycle with an umbrella that turned into a candy cane as he fell. He
landed in the middle of some sharp-toothed crags which gave like sponge
rubber. He was immediately surrounded by mermaids who looked like Iris
and who had hands shaped like spur gears. But nothing frightened him. He
awoke smiling, inordinately happy.

Iris was still asleep. Outside somewhere he heard the tinkle of Molly’s
laugh. He sat up and looked at Molly’s camp cot. It was empty. Moving
quietly, so as not to disturb his wife, he slid his feet into moccasins
and went out.

Molly was on her knees beside their strange visitor, who was squatting
on his haunches and—

They were playing patty-cake.

_“Molly!”_

“Yes, Daddy.”

“What are you trying to do? Don’t you realize that that man has a broken
arm?”

“Oh, gosh, I’m sorry. Do you s’pose I hurt him?”

“I don’t know. It’s very possible,” said Jack Garry testily. He went to
the alien, took his good hand.

The man looked up at him and smiled. His smile was peculiarly engaging.
All of his teeth were pointed, and they were very widely spaced.
“Eeee-yu mow madibu Mewhu,” he said.

“That’s his name,” Molly said excitedly. She leaned forward and tugged
at the man’s sleeve. “Mewhu. Hey, Mewhu!” And she pointed at her chest.

“Mooly,” said Mewhu. “Mooly—Geery.”

“See, Daddy?” Molly said ecstatically. “See?” She pointed at her father.
“Daddy. Dah—dee.”

“Deedy,” said Mewhu.

“No, silly. Daddy.”

“Dewdy.”

“_Dah_-dy!”

Jack, quite entranced, pointed at himself and said, “Jack.”

“Jeek.”

“Good enough. Molly, the man can’t say ‘ah.’ He can say ‘oo’ or ‘ee’ but
not ‘ah.’ That’s good enough.”

Jack examined the splints. Iris had done a very competent job. When she
realized that instead of the radius-ulna development of a true human,
Mewhu had only one bone in his forearm, she had set the arm and laid on
two splints instead of one. Jack grinned. Intellectually, Iris would not
accept Mewhu’s existence even as a possibility; but as a nurse, she not
only accepted his body structure but skillfully compensated for its
differences.

“I guess he wants to be polite,” said Jack to his repentant daughter,
“and if you want to play patty-cake he’ll go along with you, even if it
hurts. Don’t take advantage of him, chicken.”

“I won’t, Daddy.”

Jack started up the fire and had a stick crane built and hot water
bubbling by the time Iris emerged. “Takes a cataclysm to get you to
start breakfast,” she grumbled through a pleased smile. “When were you a
Boy Scout?”

“Matter of fact,” said Garry, “I was once. Will modom now take over?”

“Modom will. How’s the patient?”

“Thriving. He and Molly had a patty-cake tournament this morning. His
clothes, by the way, are red again.”

“Jack, where does he come from?”

“I haven’t asked him yet. When I learn to caterwaul, or he learns to
talk, perhaps we’ll find out. Molly has already elicited the information
that his name’s Mewhu.” Garry grinned. “And he calls me ‘Jeek.’ ”

“Can’t pronounce an ‘r,’ hm?”

“That’ll do, woman. Get on with the breakfast.”

While Iris busied herself over the fire, Jack went to look at the house.
It wasn’t as bad as he had thought—a credit to poor construction.
Apparently the upper two rooms were a late addition and had just been
perched onto the older, comparatively flat-topped lower section. The
frame of Molly’s bed was bent beyond repair, but the box spring and
mattress were intact. The old roof seemed fairly sound, where the
removal of the jerrybuilt little top story had exposed it. The living
room would be big enough for him and Iris, and Molly’s bed could be set
up in the study. There were tools and lumber in the garage, the weather
was warm and clear, and Jack Garry was very much attracted by the
prospect of hard work for which he would not get paid, as long as it
wasn’t writing. By the time Iris called him for breakfast, he had most
of the debris cleared from the roof and a plan of action mapped out. All
he would have to do would be to cover the hole where the stairway
landing had been and go over the roof for potential leaks. A good rain,
he reflected, would search those out for him quickly enough.

“What about Mewhu?” Iris asked as she handed him an aromatic plate of
eggs and bacon. “If we feed him any of this, do you think he’ll throw
another fit?”

Jack looked at their visitor, who sat on the other side of the fire,
very close to Molly, gazing big-eyed at their breakfasts.

“I don’t know. We could give him a little, I suppose.”

Mewhu inhaled his sample and wailed for more. He ate a second helping,
and when Iris refused to fry more eggs, he gobbled toast and jam. Each
new thing he tasted he would nibble at, then he would blink twice and
bolt it down. The only exception was the coffee. One taste was
sufficient. He put it down on the ground and very carefully, very
delicately overturned it.

“Can you talk to him?” Iris asked suddenly.

“He can talk to me,” declared Molly.

“I’ve heard him,” Jack said.

“Oh, no. I don’t mean _that,”_ Molly denied vehemently. “I can’t make
any sense out of that stuff.”

“What do you mean, then?”

“I … I dunno, Mommy. He just—talks to me, that’s all.”

Jack and Iris looked at each other. “Oh,” said Iris. Jack shook his
head, looking at his daughter carefully, as if he had not really seen
her before. He could think of nothing to say, and rose.

“Think the house can be patched up?”

“Oh, sure.” He laughed. “You never did like the color of the upstairs
rooms, anyway.”

“I don’t know what’s got into me,” Iris said thoughtfully “I’d have
kicked like a mule at any part of this. I’d have packed up and gone home
if, say, just a wall was gone upstairs, or if there were just a hole in
the roof, or if this … this android phenomenon arrived suddenly. But
when it all happens at once—I can take it all.”

“Question of perspective. Show me a nagging woman and I’ll show you one
who hasn’t enough to worry about.”

“You’ll get out of my sight or you’ll have this frying pan bounced off
your skull,” said Iris steadily. Jack got.

Molly and Mewhu trailed after him as he returned to the house—and stood
side by side goggling at him as he mounted the ladder.

“Whatsha doing, Daddy?”

“Marking off the edges of this hole where the stairway hits the place
where the roof isn’t, so I can clean up the edges with a saw.”

“Oh.”

Jack roughed out the area with a piece of charcoal, lopped off the more
manageable rough edges with a hatchet, cast about for his saw. It was
still in the garage. He climbed down, got it, climbed up again, and
began to saw. Twenty minutes of this, and sweat was streaming down his
face. He knocked off, climbed down, doused his head at the pump, lit a
cigarette, climbed back up on the roof.

“Why don’t you jump off and back?”

The roofing job was looking larger and the day seemed warmer than it
had. Jack’s enthusiasm was in inverse proportion to these factors.
“Don’t be funny, Molly.”

“Yes, but Mewhu wants to know.”

“Oh, he does. Ask him to try it.”

He went back to work. A few minutes later, when he paused for a breath,
Mewhu and Molly were nowhere to be seen. Probably over by the tent, in
Iris’ hair, he thought, and went on sawing.

“Daddy!”

Daddy’s unaccustomed arm and shoulder were, by this time, yelling for
help. The dry softwood alternately cheesed the saw out of line and bound
it. He answered impatiently, “Well, what?”

“Mewhu says to come. He wants to show you something.”

“Show me what? I haven’t time to play now, Molly. I’ll attend to Mewhu
when we get a roof over our heads again.”

“But it’s for you.”

“What is it?”

“The thing in the tree.”

“Oh, all right.” Prompted more by laziness than by curiosity, Jack
climbed back down the ladder. Molly was waiting. Mewhu was not in sight.

“Where is he?”

“By the tree,” she said with exaggerated patience, taking his hand.
“Come on. It’s not far.”

She led him around the house and across the bumpy track that was
euphemistically known as a road. There was a tree down on the other
side. He looked from it to the house, saw that in line with the felled
tree and his damaged roof were more broken trees, where something had
come down out of the sky, skimmed the tops of the trees, angling closer
to the ground until it wiped the top off his house, and had then risen
up and up—to where?

They went deeper into the woods for ten minutes, skirting an occasional
branch or fallen treetop, until they came to Mewhu, who was leaning
against a young maple. He smiled, pointed up into a tree, pointed to his
arm, to the ground. Jack looked at him in puzzlement.

“He fell out of the tree and broke his arm,” said Molly.

“How do you know?”

“Well, he just did, Daddy.”

“Nice to know. Now can I get back to work?”

“He wants you to get the thing in the tree.”

Jack looked upward. Hung on a fork two thirds of the way up the tree was
a gleaming object, a stick about five feet long with a streamlined shape
on each end, rather like the wingtip tanks of a P-80.

“What on earth is that?”

“I dunno. I can’t—He tol’ me, but I dunno. Anyway, it’s for you, so you
don’t … so you don’t …” She looked at Mewhu for a moment. The alien’s
silver mustache seemed to swell a little. “—so you don’t have to climb
the ladder so much.”

“Molly, how did you know that?”

“He _told_ me, that’s all. Gosh, Daddy, don’t be mad. I don’t know how,
honest; he just did, that’s all.”

“I don’t get it,” muttered Jack. “Anyhow, what’s this about that thing
in the tree? I’m supposed to break my arm too?”

“It isn’t dark.”

“What do you mean by that?”

Molly shrugged. “Ask him.”

“Oh, I think I catch that. He fell out of the tree because it was dark.
He thinks I can get up there and get the whatzit without hurting myself
because I can see what I am doing. He also flatters me. Or is it
flattery? How close to the apes does he think we are?”

“What are you talking about, Daddy?”

“Never mind. Why am I supposed to get that thing, anyway?”

“Uh—so’s you can jump off the roof.”

“That is just silly. However, I do want a look at that thing. Since his
ship is gone, that object up there seems to be the only artifact he
brought with him except his clothes.”

“What’s an artifact?”

“Second cousin to an artichoke. Here goes nothin’,” and he swung up into
the tree. He had not climbed a tree for years, and as he carefully chose
his way, it occurred to him that there were probably more efficient ways
of gaining altitude.

The tree began to shiver and sway with his weight. He looked down once
and decided instantly not to do it again. He looked up and was gratified
to see how close he was to the object he was after. He pulled himself up
another three feet and was horrified at how far away it was, for the
branches were very small up here. He squirmed upward, reached, and his
fingers just brushed against the shank of the thing. It had two rings
fastened to it, he noticed, each about a foot from the center, large
enough to get an arm through. It was one of these which was hung up on a
branch. He chinned himself, then, with his unpracticed muscles cracking,
took one hand off and reached.

The one-hand chinning didn’t come off so well. His arm began to sag. The
ring broke off its branch as his weight came on it. He was immediately
surrounded by the enthusiastic crackling of breaking shrubbery. He
folded his tongue over and got his teeth on it. Since he had a grip on
Mewhu’s artifact, he held on—even when it came free. He began to fall,
tensing himself for the bone-breaking jolt he would get at the bottom.

He didn’t get it.

He fell quite fast at first, and then the stick he was holding began to
bear him up. He thought it must have caught on a branch, by some
miracle—but it hadn’t! He was drifting down like a thistle seed, hanging
from the rod, which in some impossible fashion was supporting itself in
midair. There was a shrill, faint whooshing sound from the two
streamlined fixtures at the ends of the rod. He looked down, blinked
sweat out of his eyes, and looked again. Mewhu was grinning a broad and
happy grin; Molly was slack-jawed with astonishment.

The closer he came to the ground the slower he went. When, after what
seemed an eternity, he felt the blessed pressure of earth under his
feet, he had to stand and _pull_ the rod down. It yielded slowly, like
an eddy-current brake. Dry leaves danced and whirled under the end
pieces.

“Gee, Daddy, that was wonderful!” He swallowed twice to wet down his dry
esophagus, and pulled his eyes back in.

“Yeah. Fun,” he said weakly.

Mewhu came and took the rod out of his hand, and dropped it. It stayed
perfectly horizontal, and sank slowly down to the ground, where it lay.
Mewhu pointed at it, at the tree, and grinned.

“Just like a parachute. Oh, _gee_, Daddy!”

“You keep away from it,” said Jack, familiar with youthful intonation.
“Heaven knows what it is. It might go off, or something.”

He looked fearfully at the object. It lay quietly, the hissing of the
end pieces stilled. Mewhu bent suddenly and picked it up, held it over
his head with one hand. Then he calmly lifted his feet and hung from it.
It lowered him gently, butt first, until he sat on the ground, in a
welter of dead leaves; as soon as he picked it up, the streamlined end
pieces had begun to blast again.

“That’s the silliest thing I ever saw. Here—let me see it.” It was
floating about waist-high. He leaned over one of the ends. It had a fine
round grille over it. He put out a hand. Mewhu reached out and caught
his wrist, shaking his head. Apparently it was dangerous to go too near
those ends. Garry suddenly saw why. They were tiny, powerful jet motors
of some kind. If the jet was powerful enough to support a man’s weight,
the intake must be drawing like mad—probably enough to snap a hole
through a man’s hand like a giant ticket-puncher.

But what controlled it? How was the jet strength adjusted to the weight
borne by the device, and to the altitude? He remembered without pleasure
that when he had fallen with it from the treetop, he had dropped quite
fast, and that he went slower and slower as he approached the ground.
And yet when Mewhu had held it over his head, it had borne his weight
instantly and lowered him very slowly. And besides, how was it so
stable? Why didn’t it turn upside down and blast itself and passenger
down to earth?

He looked at Mewhu with some increase of awe. Obviously he came from a
place where the science was really advanced. He wondered if he would
ever be able to get any technical information from his visitor—and if he
would be able to understand it. Of course, Molly seemed to be able to—

“He wants you to take it back and try it on the roof,” said Molly.

“How can that refugee from a Kuttner opus help me?”

Immediately Mewhu took the rod, lifted it, ducked under it, and slipped
his arms through the two rings, so that it crossed his back like a
water-bucket yoke. Peering around, he turned to face a clearing in the
trees, and before their startled eyes he leaped thirty feet in the air,
drifted away in a great arc, and came gently to rest twenty yards away.

Molly jumped up and down and clapped her hands, speechless with delight.
The only words Garry could find were a reiterated, “Ah, no!”

Mewhu stood where he was, smiling his engaging smile, waiting for them.
They walked toward him, and when they were close he leaped again and
soared out toward the road.

“What do you do with a thing like this?” breathed Jack. “Who do you go
to, and what do you say to him?”

“Le’s just keep him for a pet, Daddy.”

Jack took her hand, and they followed the bounding, soaring silver man.
A pet! A member of some alien race, from some unthinkable
civilization—and obviously highly trained, too, for no ordinary
individual would be the first to make such a trip. What was his story?
Was he an advance guard? Or was he the sole survivor of his people? How
far had he come? From Mars? Venus?

They caught up with him at the house. He was standing by the ladder. His
strange rod was lying quiet on the ground. He was fascinatedly operating
Molly’s yo-yo. When he saw them, he threw down the yo-yo, picked up his
device, and, slipping it across his shoulders, sprang high in the air
and drifted down to the roof. “Eee-yu!” he said, with emphasis, and
jumped off backward. So stable was the rod that as he sank through the
air his long body swung to and fro.

“Very nice,” said Jack. “Also spectacular. And I have to go back to
work.” He went to the ladder.

Mewhu bounded over to him and caught his arm, whimpering and whistling
in his peculiar speech. He took the rod and extended it toward Jack.

“He wants you to use it,” said Molly.

“No, thanks,” said Jack, a trace of his tree-climbing vertigo returning
to him. “I’d just as soon use the ladder.” And he put his hand out to
it.

Mewhu, hopping with frustration, reached past him and toppled the
ladder. It levered over a box as it fell and struck Jack painfully on
the shin.

“I guess you better use the flyin’ belt, Daddy.” Jack looked at Mewhu.
The silver man was looking as pleasant as he could with that kind of a
face; on the other hand, it might just possibly be wise to humor him a
little. Being safely on the ground to begin with, Jack felt that it
might not matter if the fantastic thing wouldn’t work for him. And if it
failed him over the roof—well, the house wasn’t _very_ tall.

He shrugged his arms through the two rings. Mewhu pointed to the roof,
to Jack, made a jumping motion. Jack took a deep breath, aimed
carefully, and hoping the gadget wouldn’t work, jumped.

He shot up close to the house—too close. The eave caught him a
resounding thwack on precisely the spot where the ladder had just hit
him. The impact barely checked him. He went sailing up over the roof,
hovered for a breathless second, and then began to come down. For a
moment he thought his flailing legs would find purchase on the far edge
of the roof. He just missed it. All he managed to do was to crack the
same shin, in the same place, mightily on the other eave. Trailing
clouds of profanity, he landed standing—in Iris’ wash basket. Iris, just
turning from the clothesline, confronted him.

“Jack! What on earth are you … get out of that! You’re standing right on
my wash with your dirty … _oh!_”

“Oh-oh!” said Jack, and stepped backward out of the wash basket. His
foot went into Molly’s express wagon, which Iris used to carry the heavy
basket. To get his balance, he leaped—and immediately rose high in the
air. This time his luck was better. He soared completely over the
kitchen wing of the house and came to earth near Molly and Mewhu.

“Daddy, you were just like a bird! Me next, huh, Daddy?”

“I’m going to be just like a corpse if your mother’s expression means
what I think it does. Don’t you touch that!” He shucked off the
“flyin’-belt” and dived into the house just as Iris rounded the corner.
He heard Molly’s delighted “He went _that_ way” as he plowed through the
shambles of the living room and out the front door. As the kitchen door
slammed he was rounding the house. He charged up to Mewhu, snatched the
gadget from him, slipped it on, and jumped. This time his judgment was
faultless. He cleared the house easily although he came very near
landing astride the clothesline. When Iris, panting and furious, stormed
out of the house, he was busily hanging sheets.

“Just what,” said Iris, her voice crackling at the seams, “do you think
you’re doing?”

“Just giving you a hand with the laundry, m’love,” said Jack

“What is that … that object on your back?”

“Another evidence of the ubiquity of the devices of science fiction,”
said Jack blandly. “This is a multilateral, three-dimensional mass
adjuster, or pogo-chute. With it I can fly like a gull, evading the
cares of the world and the advances of beautiful redheads, at such times
as their passions are distasteful to me.”

“Sometime in the very near future, you gangling hatrack, I am going to
pull the tongue out of your juke box of a head and tie a bowknot in it.”
Then she laughed.

He heaved a sigh of relief, went and kissed her. “Darling, I am sorry. I
was scared silly, dangling from this thing. I didn’t see your clothes
basket, and if I had I don’t know how I’d have steered clear.”

“What is it, Jack? How does it work?”

“I dunno. Jets on the ends. They blast hard when there’s a lot of weight
pushing them toward the earth. They blast harder near the earth than up
high. When the weight on them slacks off a bit, they throttle down. What
makes them do it, what they use for power—I just wouldn’t know. As far
as I can see, they suck in air at the top and blow it out through the
jets. And, oh yes—they point directly downward no matter which way the
rod is turned.”

“Where did you get it?”

“Off a tree. It’s Mewhu’s. Apparently he used it for a parachute. On the
way down, a tree branch speared through one of these rings and he
slipped out of it and fell and broke his arm.”

“What are we going to do with him, Jack?”

“I’ve been worrying about that myself. We can’t sell him to a sideshow.”
He paused thoughtfully. “There’s no doubt that he has a lot that would
be of value to humanity. Why, this thing alone would change the face of
the earth! Listen—I weigh a hundred and seventy. I _fell_ on this thing
suddenly, when I lost my grip on a tree, and it bore my weight
immediately. Mewhu weighs more than I do, judging from his build. It
took his weight when he lifted his feet off the ground while he was
holding it over his head. If it can do that, it or a larger version
should be able, not only to drive, but to support an aircraft. If for
some reason that isn’t possible, the power of those little jets
certainly could turn a turbine.”

“Will it wash clothes?” Iris was glum.

“That’s exactly what I mean. Light, portable, and more power than it has
any right to have—of course it’ll wash clothes. And drive generators,
and cars, and … Iris, what do you do when you have something as big as
this?”

“Call a newspaper, I guess.”

“And have a hundred thousand people peeking and prying all over the
place, and Congressional investigations, and what all? Uh-uh!”

“Why not ask Harry Zinsser?”

“Harry? I thought you didn’t like him.”

“I never said that. It’s just that you and he go off in the corner and
chatter about mulpitude amputation and debilities of reactance and
things like that, and I have to sit, knit—and spit when I want someone’s
attention. Harry’s all right.”

“Gosh, honey, you’ve got it. Harry’ll know what to do. I’ll go right
away!”

“You’ll do nothing of the kind. With that hole in the roof? I thought
you said you could have it patched up for the night at least. By the
time you get back here it’ll be dark.”

The prospect of sawing out the ragged hole in the roof was suddenly the
least appealing thing in the world. But there was logic and an “or else”
tone to what she said. He sighed and went off, mumbling something about
the greatest single advance in history awaiting the whim of a woman. He
forgot that he was wearing Mewhu’s armpit altitudinizer. Only his first
two paces were on the ground, and Iris hooted with laughter at his
clumsy walking on air. When he reached the ground he set his jaw and
leaped lightly up to the roof. “Catch me now, you and your piano legs,”
he taunted cheerfully, ducked the lancelike clothes prop she hurled at
him, and went back to work.

As he sawed, he was conscious of a hubbub down below.

“Dah-dee!” “Mr-r-roo ellue—”

He sighed and put down the saw. “What is it?”

“Mewhu wants his flyin’ belt!”

Jack looked at the roof, at the lower shed, and decided that his old
bones could stand it if he had to get down without a ladder. He took the
jet-tipped rod and dropped it. It stayed perfectly horizontal, falling
no slower and no faster than it had when he had ridden it down. Mewhu
caught it, deftly slipped his splinted arm through it—it was astonishing
how careful he was of the arm, and yet how little it inconvenienced
him—then the other arm, and sprang up to join Jack on the roof.

“What do you say, fella?”

“Woopen yew weep.”

“I know how you feel.” He knew the silver man wanted to tell him
something, but he couldn’t help him out. He grinned and picked up the
saw. Mewhu took it out of his hand and tossed it off the roof, being
careful to miss Molly, who was dancing back to get a point of vantage.

“What’s the big idea?”

“Dellihew hidden,” said Mewhu. “Pento deh numinew heh,” and he pointed
at the flying belt and at the hole in the roof.

“You mean I’d rather fly off in that thing than work? Brother, you got
it. But I’m afraid I have to—”

Mewhu circled his arm, pointing all around the hole in the roof, and
pointed again to the pogo-chute, indicating one of the jet motors.

“I don’t get it,” said Jack.

Mewhu apparently understood, and an expression of amazement crossed his
mobile face. Kneeling, he placed his good hand around one of the little
jet motors, pressed two tiny studs, and the casing popped open. Inside
was a compact, sealed, and simple-looking device, the core of the motor
itself, apparently. There seemed to be no other fastening. Mewhu lifted
it out and handed it to Jack. It was about the size and shape of an
electric razor. There was a button on the side. Mewhu pointed at it,
pressed the back, and then moved Jack’s hand so that the device was
pointed away from them both. Jack, expecting anything, from nothing at
all to the “blinding bolt of searing, raw energy” so dear to the
science-fiction world, pressed the button.

The gadget hissed, and snuggled back into his palm in an easy recoil.

“That’s fine,” said Jack, “but what do I do with it?” Mewhu pointed at
Jack’s cut, then at the device.

“Oh,” said Jack. He bent close, aimed the thing at the end of the saw
cut, and pressed the button. Again the hiss and the slight, steady
recoil, and a fine line appeared in the wood. It was a cut, about half
as thick as the saw cut, clean and even and, as long as he kept his hand
steady, very straight. A fine cloud of pulverized wood rose out of the
hole in the roof, carried on a swirl of air.

Jack experimented, holding the jet close to the wood and away from it.
He found that it cut finer the closer he got to it. As he drew it away
from the wood, the slot got wider and the device cut slower until at
about eighteen inches it would not cut at all. Delighted, Jack quickly
cut and trimmed the hole. Mewhu watched, grinning. Jack grinned back,
knowing how he would feel if he introduced a saw to some primitive who
was trying to work wood with a machete.

When he was finished, he handed the jet back to the silver man and
slapped his shoulder. “Thanks a million, Mewhu.”

“Jeek,” said Mewhu, and reached for Jack’s neck. One of his thumbs lay
on Jack’s collarbone, the other on his back, over the scapula. Mewhu
squeezed twice, firmly.

“That the way you shake hands back home?” smiled Jack. He thought it
likely. Any civilized race was likely to have a manual greeting. The
handshake had evolved from a raised palm, indicating that the saluter
was unarmed. It was quite possible that this was an extension, in a
slightly different direction, of the same sign. It would indeed be an
indication of friendliness to have two individuals present their throats
to each other.

With three deft motions, Mewhu slipped the tiny jet back into its casing
and, holding the rod with one hand, stepped off the roof, letting
himself be lowered in that amazing thistledown fashion to the ground.
Once there, he tossed the rod back. Jack was startled to see it hurtle
upward like any earthly object. He grabbed it and missed. It reached the
top of its arc, and as soon as it started down again the jets cut in,
and it sank easily to him. He put it on and floated down to join Mewhu.

The silver man followed Jack to the garage, where he kept a few pieces
of milled lumber. He selected some one-inch pine boards and dragged them
out into the middle of the floor, to measure them and mark them off to
the size he wanted to knock together a simple trap door covering for the
useless stair well, a process which Mewhu watched with great interest.

Jack took up the flying belt and tried to open the streamlined shell to
remove the cutter. It absolutely defied him. He pressed, twisted,
wrenched, and pulled. All it did was to hiss gently when he moved it
toward the floor.

“Eek, Jeek,” said Mewhu. He took the jet from Jack and pressed it. Jack
watched closely, then he grinned and took the cutter.

He swiftly cut the lumber up with it, sneering gayly at the ripsaw which
hung on the wall. Then he put the whole trap together with a Z-brace,
trimmed off the few rough corners, and stood back to admire it. He
realized instantly that it was too heavy to carry by himself, let alone
lift it to the roof. If Mewhu had two good hands, now—He scratched his
head.

“Carry it on the flyin’ belt, Daddy.”

“Molly! What made you think of that?”

“Mewhu tol’ … I mean, I sort of—”

“Let’s get this straight once and for all. How does Mewhu talk to you?”

“I dunno, Daddy. It’s sort of like I remembered something he said, but
not the … the words he said. I jus’ … jus’ …” she faltered, and then
said vehemently, “I don’t _know_, Daddy. Truly I don’t.”

“What’d he say this time?”

She looked at Mewhu. Again Jack noticed the peculiar swelling of Mewhu’s
silver mustache. She said, “Put the door you jus’ made on the flyin’
belt and lift it. The flyin’ belt’ll make it fall slow, and you can push
it along while … it’s … fallin’.”

Jack looked at the door, at the jet device, and got the idea. When he
had slipped the jet rod under the door, Mewhu gave him a lift. Up it
came; and then Mewhu, steadying it, towed it well outside the garage
before it finally sank to the ground. Another lift, another easy tow,
and they covered thirty more feet. In this manner they covered the
distance to the house, with Molly skipping and laughing behind, pleading
for a ride and praising the grinning Mewhu.

At the house, Jack said, “Well, Einstein Junior, how do we get it up on
the roof?”

Mewhu picked up Molly’s yo-yo and began to operate it deftly. Doing so,
he walked around the corner of the house.

“Hey!”

“He don’t know, Daddy. You’ll have to figger it out.”

“You mean he could dream up that slick trick for carrying it out here
and now his brains give out?”

“I guess so, Daddy.”

Jack Garry looked after the retreating form of the silver man and shook
his head. He was already prepared to expect better than human reasoning
from Mewhu, even if it was a little different. He couldn’t quite phase
this with Mewhu’s shrugging off a problem in basic logic. Certainly a
man with his capabilities would not have reasoned out such an ingenious
method of bringing the door out here without realizing that that was
only half the problem. He wondered if the solution was so obvious to
Mewhu that he couldn’t be bothered explaining it.

Shrugging, Jack went back to the garage and got a small block and
tackle. He had to put up a big screw hook on the eave, and another on
the new trap door; and once he had laboriously hauled the door up until
the tackle was two-locked it was a little more than arduous to work it
over the edge and drag it into position. Mewhu had apparently quite lost
interest. It was two hours later, just as he put the last screw in the
tower bolt on the trap door and was calling the job finished, that he
heard Mewhu begin to shriek again. He dropped his tools, shrugged into
the jet stick, and sailed off the roof.

“Iris! Iris! What’s the matter?”

“I don’t know, Jack. He’s …”

Jack pounded around to the front of the house. Mewhu was lying on the
ground in the midst of some violent, tearing convulsion. He lay on his
back, arching it high, digging his heels into the turf, and his head was
bent back at an impossible angle, so that his weight was on his heels
and his forehead. His good arm pounded the ground though the splinted
one lay limp. His lips writhed and he uttered an edgy, gasping series of
ululations quite horrible to listen to. He seemed to be able to scream
as loudly when inhaling as when exhaling.

Molly stood beside him, watching him hypnotically. She was smiling. Jack
knelt beside the writhing form and tried to steady it. “Molly, stop
grinning at the poor fellow.”

“But—he’s happy, Daddy.”

“He’s what?”

“Can’t you see, silly? He feels good, that’s all. He’s laughing!”

“Iris, what’s the matter with him? Do you know?”

“He took some aspirin again, that’s all I can tell you.”

“He ate four,” said Molly. “He loves ’em.”

“What can we do, Jack?”

“I don’t know, honey,” said Jack worriedly. “Better just let him work it
out. Any emetic or sedative we give him might be harmful.”

The attack slackened and ceased suddenly, and Mewhu went quite limp.
Again, with his hand over the man’s chest, Jack felt the strange double
pulsing.

“Out cold,” he said.

Molly said in a strange, quiet voice, “No, Daddy. He’s lookin’ at
dreams.”

“Dreams?”

“A place with a or’nge sky,” said Molly. He looked up sharply. Her eyes
were closed. “Lots of Mewhus. Hunderds an’ hunderds—big ones. As big as
Mr. Thorndyke.” (Thorndyke was an editor whom they knew in the city. He
was six feet seven.) “Round houses, an’ big airplanes with … sticks fer
wings.”

“Molly, you’re talking nonsense,” her mother said worriedly. Jack
shushed her. “Go on, baby.”

“A place, a room. It’s a … Mewhu is there and a bunch more. They’re
in … in lines. Rows. There’s a big one with a yella hat. He keeps them
in rows. Here’s Mewhu. He’s outa the line. He’s jumpin’ out th’ window
with a flyin’ belt.” There was a long silence. Mewhu moaned.

“Well?”

“Nothin’, Daddy … wait! It’s … all … fuzzy. Now there’s a thing, a kinda
summarine. Only on the ground, not in the water. The door’s open. Mewhu
is … is inside. Knobs, and clocks. Pull on the knobs. Push a—Oh. _Oh!_
It hurts!” She put her fists to her temples.

“Molly!”

Molly opened her eyes and said quite calmly, “Oh, I’m all right, Mommy.
It was a thing in the dream that hurt, but it didn’t hurt me. It was all
a bunch of fire an’ … an’ a sleepy feeling, only bigger. An’ it hurt.”

“Jack, he’ll harm the child!”

“I doubt it,” said Jack.

“So do I,” said Iris wonderingly, and then, almost inaudibly, “Now, why
did I say that?”

“Mewhu’s asleep,” said Molly suddenly.

“No more dreams?”

“No more dreams. Gee. That was—funny.”

“Come and have some lunch,” said Iris. Her voice shook a little. They
went into the house. Jack looked down at Mewhu, who was smiling
peacefully in his sleep. He thought of putting the strange creature to
bed, but the day was warm and the grass was thick and soft where he lay.
He shook his head and went into the house.

“Sit down and feed,” Iris said.

He looked around. “You’ve done wonders in here,” he said. The litter of
lath and plaster was gone, and Iris’ triumphant antimacassars blossomed
from the upholstery. She curtsied. “Thank you, m’lord.”

They sat around the card table and began to do damage to tongue
sandwiches. “Jack.”

“Mm-m?”

“What was that—telepathy?”

“Think so. Something like that. Oh, wait’ll I tell Zinsser! He’ll never
believe it.”

“Are you going down to the airfield this afternoon?”

“You bet. Maybe I’ll take Mewhu with me.”

“That would be a little rough on the populace, wouldn’t it? Mewhu isn’t
the kind of fellow you can pass off as your cousin Julius.”

“Heck, he’d be all right. He could sit in the back seat with Molly while
I talked Zinsser into coming out to have a look at him.”

“Why not get Zinsser out here?”

“You know that’s silly. When we see him in town he’s got time off. Out
here he’s tied to that airport almost every minute.”

“Jack, do you think Molly’s quite safe with that creature?”

“Of course. Are you worried?”

“I … I am, Jack. But not about Mewhu. About me. I’m worried because I
think I should worry more, if you see what I mean.”

Jack leaned over and kissed her. “The good old maternal instinct at
work,” he chuckled. “Mewhu’s new and strange and might be dangerous. At
the same time Mewhu’s hurt, and he’s inoffensive, so something in you
wants to mother him, too.”

“There you really have something,” Iris said thoughtfully. “He’s as big
and ugly as you are, and unquestionably more intelligent. Yet I don’t
mother you.”

Jack grinned. “You’re not kiddin’.” He gulped his coffee and stood up.
“Eat it up, Molly, and go wash your hands and face. I’m going to have a
look at Mewhu.”

“You’re going into the airport, then?” asked Iris.

“If Mewhu’s up to it. There’s too much I want to know, too much I
haven’t the brains to figure out. I don’t think I’ll get all the answers
from Zinsser, by any means; but between us we’ll figure out what to do
about this thing. Iris, it’s _big!”_

Full of wild speculation, he stepped out on the lawn. Mewhu was sitting
up, happily contemplating a caterpillar.

“Mewhu.”

“Dew?”

“How’d you like to take a ride?”

“Hubilly grees. Jeek?”

“I guess you don’t get the idea. C’mon,” said Jack, motioning toward the
garage. Mewhu very, very carefully set the caterpillar down on a blade
of grass and rose to follow; and just then the most unearthly crash
issued from the garage. For a frozen moment no one moved, and then
Molly’s voice set up a hair-raising reiterated screech. Jack was
pounding toward the garage before he knew he had moved.

“Molly! What is it?”

At the sound of his voice the child shut up as if she were switch
operated.

“Molly!”

“Here I am, Daddy,” she said in an extremely small voice. She was
standing by the car, her entire being concentrated in her protruding,
faintly quivering lower lip. The car was nose-foremost through the back
wall of the garage.

“Daddy, I didn’t mean to do it; I just wanted to help you get the car
out. Are you going to spank me? Please, Daddy, I didn’t—”

_“Quiet!”_

She was quiet immediately. “Molly, what on earth possessed you to do a
thing like that? You know you’re not supposed to touch the starter!”

“I was pretending, Daddy, like it was a summarine that could fly, the
way Mewhu did.”

Jack threaded his way through this extraordinary shambles of syntax.
“Come here,” he said sternly. She came, her paces half-size, her feet
dragging, her hands behind her where her imagination told her they would
do the most good. “I ought to whack you, you know.”

“Yeah,” she answered tremulously, “I guess you oughta. Not more’n a
couple of times, huh, Daddy?”

Jack bit the insides of his cheeks for control, but couldn’t make it. He
grinned. _You little minx_, he thought. “Tell you what,” he said
gruffly, looking at the car. The garage was fortunately flimsy, and the
few new dents on hood and fenders would blend well with the old ones.
“You’ve got three good whacks coming to you. I’m going to add those on
to your next spanking.”

“Yes, Daddy,” said Molly, her eyes big and chastened. She climbed into
the back seat and sat, very straight and small, away back out of sight.
Jack cleared away what wreckage he could, and then climbed in, started
the old puddle-vaulter, and carefully backed out of the damaged shed.

Mewhu was standing well clear, watching the groaning automobile with
startled silver eyes. “Come on in,” said Jack, beckoning. Mewhu backed
off.

“Mewhu!” cried Molly, putting her head out the rear door. Mewhu said,
“Yowk,” and came instantly. Molly opened the door and he climbed in, and
she shouted with laughter when he crouched down on the floor, and pulled
at him until he got up on the seat. Jack drove around the house,
stopped, picked up Mewhu’s jet rod, blew a kiss through the window to
Iris and they were off.

Forty minutes later they wheeled up to the airport after an ecstatic
ride during which Molly had kept up a running fire of descriptive
commentary on the wonders of a terrestrial countryside. Mewhu had
goggled and ogled in a most satisfactory fashion, listening spellbound
to the child—sometimes Jack would have sworn that the silver man
understood everything she said—and uttering shrieks, exclamatory
mewings, and interrogative peeps.

“Now,” said Jack, when he had parked at the field boundary, “you two
stay in the car for a while. I’m going to speak to Mr. Zinsser and see
if he’ll come out and meet Mewhu. Molly, do you think you can make Mewhu
understand that he’s to stay in the car, and out of sight? You see, if
other people see him, they’ll want to ask a lot of silly questions, and
we don’t want to embarrass him, do we?”

“No, Daddy. I’ll tell him. Mewhu,” she said, turning to the silver man.
She held his eyes with hers. His mustache swelled, rippled. “You’ll be
good, won’t you, and stay out of sight?”

“Jeek,” said Mewhu. “Jeek mereedy.”

“He says you’re the boss.”

Jack laughed, climbing out. “He does, eh?” Did the child really know, or
was it mostly a game? “Be good, then. See you soon, Mewhu.” Carrying the
jet rod, he walked into the building.

Zinsser, as usual, was busy. The field was not large, but it did a great
deal of private-plane business, and as traffic manager Zinsser had his
hands full. He wrapped one of his pudgy, flexible hands around the phone
he was using. “Hi, Garry! What’s new out of this world?” he grated
cheerfully. “Siddown. With you in a minute.” He bumbled cheerfully into
the telephone, grinning at Jack as he talked. Jack made himself as
comfortable as patience permitted and waited until Zinsser hung up.

“Well, now,” said Zinsser, and the phone rang again.

Jack closed his open mouth in annoyance. Zinsser hung up and another
bell rang. He picked up a field telephone from its hook on the side of
his desk. “Zinsser. Yes—”

“Now that’s enough,” said Jack to himself. He rose, went to the door,
and closed it softly, so that he was alone with the manager. He took the
jet rod and, to Zinsser’s vast astonishment, stood on his desk, raised
the rod high over his head, and stepped off. A hurricane screamed out of
the jets. Jack, hanging by his hands from the rod as it lowered him
gently through the air, looked over his shoulder. Zinsser’s face looked
like a red moon in a snow flurry, surrounded as it was by every
interoffice memo for the past two weeks.

Anyway, the first thing he did when he could draw a breath was to hang
up the phone.

“Thought that would do it,” said Jack, grinning.

“You … you … what is that thing?”

“It’s a dialectical polarizer,” said Jack, alighting. “That is, it makes
conversations possible with airport managers who won’t get off the
phone.”

Zinsser was out of his chair and around the desk, remarkably light on
his feet for a man his size. “Let me see that.”

Jack handed it over and began to talk.

“Look, Mewhu! Here comes a plane!” Together they watched the Cub slide
in for a landing, and squeaked at the little puffs of dust that were
thrown up by the tires and flicked away by the slipstream.

“And there goes another one. It’s gonna take off!” The little blue
low-wing coupe taxied across the field, braked one wheel, swung in its
own length, and roared down toward them, lifting to howl away into the
sky far over their heads.

“Eeeeeyow,” droned Molly, imitating the sound of the motor as it passed
overhead.

“S-s-s-s-sweeeeee!” hissed Mewhu, exactly duplicating the whine of
control surfaces in the prop blast.

Molly clapped her hands and shrieked with delight. Another plane began
to circle the field. They watched it avidly.

“Come on out and have a look at him,” said Jack.

Zinsser looked at his watch.” I can’t. All kidding aside, I got to stick
by the phone for another half hour at the very least. Will he be all
right out there? There’s hardly anyone around.”

“I think so. Molly’s with him, and as I told you, they get along
beautifully together. That’s one of the things I want to have
investigated—that telepathy angle.” He laughed suddenly. “That
Molly … know what she did this afternoon?” He told Zinsser about Molly’s
driving the car through the wrong end of the garage.

“The little hellion,” chuckled Zinsser. “They’ll all do it, bless ’em.
My brother’s kid went to work on the front lawn with his mother’s vacuum
cleaner the other day.” He laughed. “To get back to
what’s-his-name—Mewhu—and this gadget of his. Jack, we’ve got to hang on
to it. Do you realize that he and his clothes and this thing are the
only clues we have as to what he is and where he came from?”

“I sure do. But listen, he’s very intelligent. I’m sure he’ll be able to
tell us plenty.”

“You can bet he’s intelligent,” said Zinsser. “He’s probably above
average on his planet. They wouldn’t send just anyone on a trip like
that. Jack, what a pity we don’t have his ship!”

“Maybe it’ll be back. What’s your guess as to where he comes from?”

“Mars, maybe.”

“Now, you know better than that. We know Mars has an atmosphere, but
it’s mighty tenuous. An organism the size of Mewhu would have to have
enormous lungs to keep him going. No; Mewhu’s used to an atmosphere
pretty much like ours.”

“That would rule Venus out.”

“He wears clothes quite comfortably here. His planet must have not only
pretty much the same atmosphere, but the same climate. He seems to be
able to take most of our foods, though he’s revolted by some of them—and
aspirin sends him high as a kite. He gets what looks like a laughing
drunk when he takes it.”

“You don’t say. Let’s see, it wouldn’t be Jupiter, because he isn’t
built to take a gravity like that. And the outer planets are too cold,
and Mercury is too hot.” Zinsser leaned back in his chair and absently
mopped his bald head. “Jack, this guy doesn’t even come from this solar
system!”

“Gosh. I guess you’re right. Harry, what do you make of this jet
gadget?”

“From the way you say it cuts wood … can I see that, by the way?”
Zinsser asked.

“Sure.” Garry went to work on the jet. He found the right studs to press
simultaneously. The casing opened smoothly. He lifted out the active
core of the device, and, handling it gingerly, sliced a small corner off
Zinsser’s desk top.

“That is the strangest thing I have ever seen,” said Zinsser. “May I see
it?”

He took it and turned it over in his hands. “There doesn’t seem to be
any fuel for it,” he said musingly.

“I think it uses air,” said Jack.

“But what pushes the air?”

“Air,” said Jack. “No, I’m not kidding. I think that in some way it
disintegrates part of the air, and uses the energy released to activate
a small jet. If you had a shell around this jet, with an intake at one
end and a blast tube at the other, it would operate like a high-vacuum
pump, dragging more air through.”

“Or like an athodyd,” said Zinsser. Garry’s blood went cold as the
manager sighted down into the jet orifice. “For heaven’s sake don’t push
that button.”

“I won’t. Say—you’re right. The tube’s concentric. Now, how on earth
could a disruption unit be as small and light as that?”

Jack Garry said, “I’ve been chewing on that all day. I have one answer.
Can you take something that sounds really fantastic, so long as it’s
logical?”

“You know me,” grinned Zinsser, waving at a long shelf of back number
science-fiction magazines. “Go ahead.”

“Well,” said Jack carefully. “You know what binding energy is. The stuff
that holds the nucleus of an atom together. If I understand my
smattering of nuclear theory properly, it seems possible to me that a
sphere of binding energy could be produced that would be stable.”

“A sphere? With what inside it?”

“Binding energy—or maybe just nothing … space. Anyhow, if you surround
that sphere with another, this one a force-field which is capable of
penetrating the inner one, or of allowing matter to penetrate it, it
seems to me that anything entering that balance of forces would be
disrupted. An explosive pressure would be bottled up inside the inner
sphere. Now if you bring your penetrating field in contact with the
binding-energy sphere, the pressures inside will come blasting out.
Incase the whole rig in a device which controls the amount of matter
going in one side of the sphere and the amount of orifice allowed for
the escape of energy, and incase that further in an outside shell which
will give you a stream of air induced violently through it—like the
vacuum pump you mentioned—and you have this,” and he rapped on the
little jet motor.

“Most ingenious,” said Zinsser, wagging his head. “Even if you’re wrong,
it’s an ingenious theory. What you’re saying, you know, is that all we
have to do to duplicate this device is to discover the nature of binding
energy and then find a way to make it stay stably in spherical form.
After which we figure out the nature of a field which can penetrate
binding energy and allow any matter to do likewise—one way.” He spread
his hands. “That’s all. Just learn to actually use the stuff that the
long-hair boys haven’t thought of theorizing about yet, and we’re all
set.”

“Shucks,” said Garry. “Mewhu will give us all the dope.”

“I hope so, Jack. This can revolutionize the entire industrial world.”

“You’re understating,” grinned Jack.

The phone rang. Zinsser looked at his watch again. “There’s my call.” He
sat down, answered the phone, and while he went on at great length to
some high-powered character at the other end of the line, about bills of
lading and charter service and interstate commerce restrictions, Jack
lounged against the cut-off corner of the desk and dreamed. Mewhu—a
superior member of a superior race, come to Earth to lead barbaric
humanity out of its struggling, wasteful ways. He wondered what Mewhu
was like at home among his strange people. Young, but very mature, he
decided, and gifted in many ways; the pick of the crop, fit to be
ambassador to a new and dynamic civilization like Earth’s. And what
about the ship? Having dropped Mewhu, had it and its pilot returned to
the mysterious corner of the universe from which they had come? Or was
it circling about somewhere in space, anxiously awaiting word from the
adventurous ambassador?

Zinsser cradled his instrument and stood up with a sigh. “A credit to my
will power,” he said. “The greatest thing that’s ever happened to me,
and I stuck by the day’s work in spite of it. I feel like a kid on
Christmas Eve. Let’s go have a look at him.”

_“Wheeeeyouwow!”_ screamed Mewhu as another rising plane passed over
their heads. Molly bounced joyfully up and down on the cushions, for
Mewhu was an excellent mimic.

The silver man slipped over the back of the driver’s seat in a lithe
movement, to see a little better around the corner of a nearby hangar.
One of the Cubs had been wheeled into it, and was standing not far away,
its prop ticking over.

Molly leaned her elbows on the edge of the seat and stretched her little
neck so she could see, too. Mewhu brushed against her head and her hat
fell off. He bent to pick it up and bumped his own head on the
dashboard, and the glove compartment flew open. His strange pupils
narrowed, and the nictitating membranes flickered over his eyes as he
reached inside. The next thing Molly knew, he was out of the car and
running over the parking area, leaping high in the air, mouthing strange
noises, and stopping every few jumps to roll and beat with his good hand
on the ground.

Horrified, Molly Garry left the car and ran after him. “Mewhu!” she
cried. “Mewhu, come _back!”_

He cavorted toward her, his arms outspread. “W-r-r-row-w!” he shouted,
rushing past her. Lowering one arm a little and raising the other like
an airplane banking, he ran in a wide arc, leaped the little tarmac
retaining wall, and bounded out onto the hangar area.

Molly, panting and sobbing, stopped and stamped her foot. “Mewhu!” she
croaked helplessly. “Daddy said—”

Two mechanics standing near the idling Cub looked around at a sound like
a civet-cat imitating an Onondaga war whoop. What they saw was a
long-legged, silver-gray apparition, with a silver-white mustache and
slotted eyes, dressed in a scarlet robe that turned to indigo. Without a
sound, moving as one man, they cut and ran. And Mewhu, with one last
terrible shriek of joy, leaped to the plane and disappeared inside.

Molly put her hands to her mouth and her eyes bugged. “Oh, Mewhu,” she
breathed. “Now, you’ve done it.” She heard pounding feet, turned. Her
father was racing toward her, with Mr. Zinsser waddling behind. “Molly!
Where’s Mewhu?”

Wordlessly she pointed at the Cub, and as if it were a signal the little
ship throttled up and began to crawl away from the hangar.

“Hey! Wait! Wait!” screamed Jack Garry uselessly, sprinting after the
plane. He leaped the wall but misjudged it because of his speed. Hie toe
hooked it and he sprawled slitheringly, jarringly on the tarmac. Zinsser
and Molly ran to him and helped him up. Jack’s nose was bleeding. He
whipped out a handkerchief and looked out at the dwindling plane.
“Mewhu!”

The little plane waddled across the field, bellowed suddenly with power.
The tail came up, and it scooted away from them—cross-wind, across the
runway. Jack turned to speak to Zinsser and saw the fat man’s face
absolutely stricken. He followed Zinsser’s eyes and there was the other
plane, the big six-place cabin job, coming in.

He had never felt so helpless in all his life. Those planes were going
to collide. There was nothing anyone could do about it. He watched them,
unblinking, almost detachedly. They were hurtling but they seemed to
creep; the moment lasted forever. Then, with a twenty-foot altitude,
Mewhu cut his gun and dropped a wing. The Cub slowed, leaned into the
wind, and _side-slipped_ so close under the cabin ship that another coat
of paint on either craft would have meant disaster.

Jack didn’t know how long he had been holding that breath, but it was
agony when he let it out.

“Anyway, he can fly,” breathed Zinsser.

“Of course he can fly,” snapped Jack. “A prehistoric thing like an
airplane would be child’s play for him.”

“Oh, Daddy, I’m scared.”

“I’m not,” said Jack hollowly.

“Me, too,” said Zinsser with an unconvincing laugh. “The plane’s
insured.”

The Cub arrowed upward. At a hundred feet it went into a skidding turn,
harrowing to watch, suddenly winged over, and came shouting down at
them. Mewhu buzzed them so close that Zinsser went flat on his face.
Jack and Molly simply stood there, wall-eyed. An enormous cloud of dust
obscured everything for ninety interminable seconds. When they next saw
the plane it was wobbling crazily at a hundred and fifty.

Suddenly Molly screamed piercingly and put her hands over her face.

“Molly! Kiddo, what is it?”

She flung her arms around his neck and sobbed so violently that he knew
it was hurting her throat. “Stop it!” he yelled; and then, very gently,
he asked, “What’s the matter, darling?”

“He’s scared. Mewhu’s terrible, terrible scared,” she said brokenly.

Jack looked up at the plane. It yawed, fell away on one wing.

Zinsser shouted, his voice cracking. “Gun her! Gun her! Throttle up, you
idiot!”

Mewhu cut the gun.

Dead stick, the plane winged over and plunged to the ground. The impact
was crushing.

Molly said quite calmly, “All Mewhu’s pictures have gone out now,” and
slumped unconscious to the ground.

They got him to the hospital. It was messy, all of it, picking him up,
carrying him to the ambulance—

Jack wished fervently that Molly had not seen; but she had sat up and
cried as they carried him past. He thought worriedly as he and Zinsser
crossed and recrossed in their pacing of the waiting room that he would
have his hands full with the child when this thing was all over.

The resident physician came in, wiping his hands. He was a small man
with a nose like a walnut meat. “Who brought that plane-crash case in
here—you?”

“Both of us,” said Zinsser.

“What—who is he?”

“A friend of mine. Is he … will he live?”

“How should I know?” snapped the doctor impatiently. “I have never in my
experience—” He exhaled through his nostrils. “The man has two
circulatory systems. Two _closed_ circulatory systems, and a heart for
each. All his arterial blood looks veinous—it’s purple. How’d he happen
to get hurt?”

“He ate half a box of aspirin out of my car,” said Jack. “Aspirin makes
him drunk. He swiped a plane and piled it up.”

“Aspirin makes him—” The doctor looked at each of them in turn. “I won’t
ask if you’re kidding me. Just to see that … that thing in there is
enough to kid any doctor. How long has that splint been on his arm?”

Zinsser looked at Jack and Jack said, “About eighteen hours.”

“Eighteen _hours?”_ The doctor shook his head. “It’s so well knitted
that I’d say eighteen days.” Before Jack could say anything he added,
“He needs a transfusion.”

“But you can’t! I mean, his blood—”

“I know. Took a sample to type it. I have two technicians trying to
blend chemicals into plasma so we can approximate it. Both of ’em called
me a liar. But he’s got to have the transfusion. I’ll let you know.” He
strode out of the room.

“There goes one bewildered medico.”

“He’s O.K.” said Zinsser. “I know him well. Can you blame him?”

“For feeling that way? Gosh no. Harry, I don’t know what I’ll do if
Mewhu checks out.”

“That fond of him?”

“Oh, it isn’t only that. But to come so close to meeting a new culture,
and then have it slip from our fingers like this, it’s too much.”

“That jet—Jack, without Mewhu to explain it, I don’t think any scientist
will be able to build another. It would be like … like giving a Damascus
sword-smith some tungsten and asking him to draw it into filaments.
There the jet would be, hissing when you shove it toward the ground,
sneering at you.”

“And that telepathy—what J. B. Rhine wouldn’t give to be able to study
it!”

“Yeah, and what about his origin?” Zinsser asked excitedly. “He isn’t
from this system. It means that he used an interstellar drive of some
kind, or even that space-time warp the boys write about.”

“He’s got to live,” said Jack. “He’s got to, or there ain’t no justice.
There are too many things we’ve got to know, Harry! Look—he’s here. That
must mean that some more of his people will come some day.”

“Yeah. Why haven’t they come before now?”

“Maybe they have. Charles Fort—”

“Aw, look,” said Zinsser, “don’t let’s get this thing out of hand.”

The doctor came back. “I think he’ll make it.”

“Really?”

“Not really. Nothing real about that character. But from all
indications, he’ll be O.K. Responded very strongly. What does he eat?”

“Pretty much the same as we do, I think.”

“You think. You don’t seem to know much about him.”

“I don’t. He only just got here. No—don’t ask me where from,” said Jack.
“You’ll have to ask him.”

The doctor scratched his head. “He’s out of this world. I can tell you
that. Obviously adult, but every fracture but one is a green stick
break; kind of thing you see on a three-year old. Transparent membranes
over his—What are you laughing at?” he asked suddenly.

Jack had started easily, with a chuckle, but it got out of control. He
roared.

Zinsser said, “Jack! Cut it out. This is a hosp—”

Jack shoved his hand away. “I got to,” he said helplessly and went off
on another peal.

“You’ve got to what?”

“Laugh,” said Jack, gasping. He sobered, he more than sobered. “It has
to be funny, Harry. I won’t let it be anything else.”

“What the devil do you—”

“Look, Harry. We assumed a lot about Mewhu, his culture, his technology,
his origin. We’ll never know anything about it!”

“Why? You mean he won’t tell us?”

“He won’t tell us. I’m wrong. He’ll tell us plenty. But it won’t do any
good. Here’s what I mean. Because he’s our size, because he obviously
arrived in a space ship, because he brought a gadget or two that’s
obviously the product of a highly advanced civilization, we believe that
_he_ produced the civilization, that he’s a superior individual in his
own place.”

“Well, he must be.”

“He must be? Harry, did Molly invent the automobile?”

“No, but—”

“But she drove one through the back of the garage.”

Light began to dawn on Zinsser’s moon face.” You mean—”

“It all fits! Remember when Mewhu figured out how to carry that heavy
trap door of mine on the jet stick, and then left the problem
half-finished? Remember his fascination with Molly’s yo-yo? What about
that peculiar rapport he has with Molly? Doesn’t that begin to look
reasonable? Look at Iris’ reaction to him—almost maternal, though she
didn’t know why.”

“The poor little fellow,” breathed Zinsser. “I wonder if he thought he
was home when he landed?”

“Poor little fellow—sure,” said Jack, and began to laugh again. “Can
Molly tell you how an internal combustion engine works? Can she explain
laminar flow on an airfoil?” He shook his head. “You wait and see. Mewhu
will be able to tell us the equivalent of Molly’s ‘I rode in the car
with Daddy and we went sixty miles an hour.’ ”

“But how did he get here?”

“How did Molly get through the back of my garage?”

The doctor shrugged his shoulders helplessly. “His biological reactions
do look like those of a child—and if he is a child, then his rate of
tissue restoration will be high, and I’ll guarantee he’ll live.”

Zinsser groaned. “Much good will it do us—and him, poor kid. With a
kid’s faith in any intelligent adult, he’s probably been sure we’d get
him home somehow. Well, we haven’t got what it takes, and won’t have for
a long, long time. We don’t even know enough to start duplicating that
jet of his—and that was just a little kid’s toy on his world.”



STORY NOTES
BY PAUL WILLIAMS


The first period in Theodore Sturgeon’s writing career began in December
1937 and ended in June 1941 when he and his wife and child moved from
New York City to the British West Indies. The first five stories in this
volume date from late in that first period. He then did no writing of
any sort until April-May 1944, when he wrote the novella “Killdozer!”
The rest of the stories included here were written between 1944 and
early 1946.

In an interview at the 1972 World Science Fiction Convention in Los
Angeles, David Hartwell asked TS why he stopped writing for that long
stretch in the West Indies. Sturgeon replied:

_Well, the tropics is funny. The sun’s going to shine tomorrow the way
it’s shining today, and you can put it off; and also I was running a
hotel and I was extremely busy. I’d been very recently married and had a
baby by that time and, uh, I don’t know, it just got lost. But anyway, I
couldn’t write successfully in the tropics. I had one more session of
that, in the late 50’s, when I went down to the West Indies again, and
again the same thing happened. And I will_ never _go down to the West
Indies again, or any tropical clime like that, without an assured income
of some sort, because really it terrifies—something clicks off as soon
as I go down there, and I don’t know what it is or whether that indeed
is it. But I wouldn’t risk it again_.

“BLABBERMOUTH”: first published in _Amazing Stories_, February 1947.
Very likely written before June 1941. Sturgeon’s papers contain an
untitled 2½ page manuscript, written between August 1940 and June 1941,
which is identical to the first thirteen paragraphs of “Blabbermouth”
with the exception of a few word changes. Separately his surviving
papers contain a half-page unfinished story idea, from the same period
or possibly earlier, which starts: _Introduce Blabbermouth by an
incident—past tense. Guy is irresistibly led to mischief-making.
Consciously (at first reluctantly) imparts false information to total
strangers—accosts an aging woman and tells her that her boss is about to
replace her with a younger woman, and that her son will also lose his
job_. Apart from the “blabbermouth” being male, this fragment
demonstrates that the core idea of the story has not yet occurred to
Sturgeon, because the information is described as “false.” So it was
later in the story-creating process that he came up with the notion of a
person compelled, under certain circumstances, to blab the truth.

It is possible that story-opening and story idea were not combined and
developed until after the War, but much more likely that the story was
written by 1941, rejected, and resubmitted when Sturgeon returned to
active writing in 1946.

Sturgeon’s “in one sentence” summary of “Blabbermouth”’s message, in a
1954 exercise, was: _Any “haunted” individual expression can be
circumvented_. Presumably this refers to the
curse-turned-into-a-blessing resolution of the story, which is similar
in this respect to his earlier fantasy “Derm Fool.” It also strikes me
that this one-liner could result from confusing “Blabbermouth” with
“Ghost of a Chance” (both written around the same time, both included in
Sturgeon’s 1955 collection _Caviar_). Whether or not this is the case, I
am struck by the way the phrase “ ‘haunted’ individual expression”
points to the ghost story as an allegorical representation of a
psychological condition. In fact, in “Ghost of a Chance” one of the
characters is a psychologist who is unable to help the “haunted” girl
because of his scientific skepticism.

To me the central idea in “Blabbermouth”—not well-developed but still a
powerful, original, stimulating insight—is that something synergistic
occurs when one person’s mood—suspicion—meets another’s
mood—specifically, guilt. Sturgeon, as a very young (and attractive,
charming) husband, presumably drew this insight from personal
experience. And what he observes (and it is his treatment of this sort
of insight that makes Sturgeon close to unique among fiction writers, sf
or otherwise) is that something tangible is created, an energy being
which is not matter but nonetheless measurably, experientially real. In
this case it’s referred to as a poltergeist, and its reality is measured
by its impact on one of the characters in the story (who happens also to
be the love object, as in “Ghost of a Chance”). In other Sturgeon
stories the (psychologically created) energy being evolves to the level
of a kind of life form (“The Perfect Host”), or manifests as an
emotional field (doubt in “The Pod and the Barrier,” guilt in “Rule of
Three,” fear in “Mr. Costello, Hero”) with the measurable physical power
to paralyze or otherwise dominate an entire planet or civilization. This
is genuine psychological science fiction, containing insights arguably
as original and worthwhile as those of Erickson or Jung or Freud. And
because of the uneasy status of psychology (shamanism, science, art
form?) in the twentieth century, Sturgeon’s fiction of this sort mixes
science fiction, fantasy, and so-called mainstream or literary fiction
in a very unusual way.

Because psychology is not a “hard” science, and also because Sturgeon
chooses not to develop his idea in a pseudoscientific psychological
framework (something he does do, effectively and appropriately, in his
1956 story “The Other Man”), it’s easy to understand editor John
Campbell rejecting “Blabbermouth” for _Astounding Science-Fiction;_ and
it is also not too hard to imagine him concluding, perhaps regretfully,
that the fantastic element is not strong enough for the story to fit in
his other magazine, _Unknown_. On the other hand, such a story was then
and probably is still today too idea-driven to be published as literary
or mainstream popular fiction. (In this case it is also not a very
strong story outside of its idea. But many first-rate Sturgeon tales
fall between the cracks in precisely the same way, notably “And Now the
News,” in my opinion one of the finest short stories ever written by an
American writer.)

For readers from other countries or eras, be it noted that the last
lines of “Blabbermouth” were presumably universally recognized by
readers at the time as a reference to Walter Winchell.

The blurb above the story in its original pulp magazine publication
read: SHE WAS POSSESSED—OR SO SHE SAID—AND A LITTLE IMP WHISPERED TO
HER … THINGS SHE HAD TO REPEAT!

“MEDUSA”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, February
1942, and certainly written before June 1941. The concept of a spaceship
of fools (on a dangerous and vital mission), each of whom has been told
there’s only one sane man aboard the ship, is a memorable one. Eminent
science fiction critic Damon Knight later wrote a groundbreaking essay
on Robert A. Heinlein entitled “One Sane Man.”

As with so many stories from this period (and very few from later in
Sturgeon’s career), a related false start can be found in the Sturgeon
papers. This untitled, unfinished eight-page manuscript is about a man
brought before a panel of distinguished “psychoscientists,” one of eight
men who has been intentionally rendered insane and who will now crew a
space cruiser on a special mission against a mysterious galactic enemy.
In other details it’s quite a different story: it’s told in the third
person, the enemy are seemingly friendly galactic traders similar to the
Artnans in “Artnan Process,” etc.

Sturgeon’s 1957 story “The Pod and the Barrier” can be considered an
extremely sophisticated rewrite of “Medusa.”

TS’s introduction to “Medusa” in his 1984 collection _Alien Cargo: This
is fun too, but of a whole different order of magnitude. Some fun is, by
its nature, trivial. This kind, however, is at base deeply thoughtful,
though it masquerades as a comedy. It is, in short—metaphor_.

Magazine blurb (title page): “YOU,” SAID THE HEADQUARTERS MEN, “WILL BE
THE ONLY SANE MAN IN THE CREW. THE REST ARE MADMEN BUT DON’T KNOW IT, OF
COURSE—”

“GHOST OF A CHANCE”: first published in _Unknown Worlds_, June 1943,
under the title “The Green-Eyed Monster.” The title was changed,
probably by Sturgeon, when the story was reprinted in a magazine
entitled _Suspense_ in 1951, and the title change was retained in 1955
when the story appeared in Sturgeon’s collection _Caviar_.

See related comments under “Blabbermouth.” Sturgeon wrote a number of
stories in which the hero falls in love with a beautiful woman at first
sight, after a chance encounter, and then must do battle with a
mysterious circumstance that makes her unavailable.

Magazine blurb (contents page): SHOOING OFF A JEALOUS LOVER IS
ORDINARILY SOMETHING OF A PROBLEM, BUT WHEN THE JEALOUS ONE IS A GHOST,
AND A GHOST WITH A NASTY HABIT OF HAUNTING MOST UNPLEASANTLY HIS MORE
SOLID RIVALS—

“THE BONES”: by Theodore Sturgeon and James H. Beard; first published in
_Unknown Worlds_, August 1943. Beard, according to Sam Moskowitz in his
book _Seekers of Tomorrow_, was “a crippled old man who had submitted
several stories to [John] Campbell which were strongly plotted but
inadequately written. Campbell asked Sturgeon if he would take Beard’s
plots and turn them into stories.” How closely Sturgeon followed Beard’s
original plot-line is not known. “The Bones” was jointly credited to
Sturgeon and Beard when it appeared in _Unknown Worlds_, but Beard’s
credit was omitted when the story was reprinted in Sturgeon’s 1960
collection _Beyond_.

_I was a great one for crystal_ [radio] _sets, made them all sorts of
ways_, Sturgeon said in a childhood reminiscence written for his
therapist in 1965 (and later published as _Argyll_).

Magazine blurb (contents page): THE INTENTION WAS TO MAKE A SUPER-RADIO.
IT NEVER GLEANED A MESSAGE FROM THE AIR-WAVES, BUT IT “HEARD”—BONES
TALK!

“THE HAG SÉLEEN”: by Theodore Sturgeon and James H. Beard; first
published in _Unknown Worlds_, December 1942. When the story was
included in D.R. Bensen’s 1964 anthology _The Unknown Five_, Sturgeon
was given sole credit. The editor noted that the story had been credited
in the magazine to Sturgeon and Beard, but added: “All the same, it’s a
Sturgeon story—Beard, who collaborated sometimes with Sturgeon on other
pieces, supplied the background information for this one, and Sturgeon
did the writing.” In the 1978 Sturgeon collection _Visions and
Venturers_, the story title is followed by the line “(written with James
H. Beard)”.

In a letter dated March 22, 1941, Beard wrote to Sturgeon:

“In case you elect to do the River Spider story, I think you had better
have a copy of the rune used by devotees of the spider when launching
their tiny canoes on the river.

“These canoes by the way are often delicately and beautifully made,
sometimes carved of cedar or cypress, sometimes made of bark, brightly
colored with dyes which are prepared from various plants growing in the
swamp.

“The rune follows:

River Spider, black and strong

Folks round here have done me wrong.

Three fat flies I’m sending you

Human blood, they’ve all been through.

First fly, he named Willie Brown,

River Spider, drag him down!

Second fly, she is Alice Jones,

River Spider, crack her bones.

Third fly, he named Willie Flood,

River Spider, drink his blood.”

Beard in the letter invites Sturgeon to visit him, and in a letter to
his mother dated April 6, 1941, Sturgeon mentions that in the next week
he and Dorothe have plans to: _drive forty miles to Suffern, N.Y., where
lives Captain Beard, my collaborator on a new series for_ Unknown.

In the Sturgeon Papers at the Spencer Library at the University of
Kansas there is an incomplete manuscript of a longer version of this
story, typed by Sturgeon, and an attached letter from TS asking his wife
to edit it down from 13,500 words to 6,000 (presumably at Campbell’s
request), retyping and rewriting as necessary. He asks her to drop the
first 9½ pages and suggests a couple of other possible cuts, but leaves
the decision-making to her discretion. He also provides instructions on
how to mail it to the magazine when she’s finished.

The missing manuscript pages (14–19, 29–33, and 40 to end) are probably
absent because they weren’t rewritten and could be included as is in the
final manuscript. If Dorothe did in fact cut and edit the story from the
surviving manuscript (we don’t know for certain that Sturgeon didn’t do
the job himself in the end), she did an extraordinary job. Whole
paragraphs of exposition have been added, plus connecting sentences here
and there, that sound very much like Sturgeon, and indeed the finished
work is one of his better-written stories of the period.

As for the circumstances of his asking her to do the edit (without even
his final review), he may have been traveling for a few days, though
from what I know of his biography it’s not easy to imagine where or why.
More likely is that he had been awake for days, finishing up writing
assignments to get the money to pay for their trip to Jamaica (this
writing was done sometime between April 1941 and the end of June, when
they left New York), and he was giving her this assignment to carry out
while he collapsed into ten hours’ sleep. There’s no reason Campbell
would have been in a rush to have the story; but Sturgeon was always in
a rush to collect his payment, and all the more so if this was done just
before their departure.

The story was significantly improved by being shortened. The published
version is between 7,500 and 8,000 words (evidently 6,000 was not
possible).

The narrator says of Séleen, “She looked like a Cartier illustration.”
Edd Cartier was one of the finest fantasy artists of the era, and did
many of the interior illustrations for _Unknown_ (which changed its name
to _Unknown Worlds_ in late ’41); ultimately he did illustrate this
story.

Patty in the story has the same name as Dorothe and Ted’s first child,
who was no more than six months old when “The Hag Séleen” was written.

Magazine blurb (contents page): THE DARK, DANK MAGIC OF THE BAYOUS WAS
BEYOND THE UNDERSTANDING OF MODERN ADULTS. IT TOOK A CHILD WITH A GIFT
FOR RHYMING TO HANDLE THE HAG SÉLEEN.

“KILLDOZER!”: First published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, November
1944. Written early May, 1944. Later adapted for an ABC-TV “Suspense
Movie,” directed by Jerry London and starring Clint Walker, first aired
on February 2, 1974.

The purpose of these story notes is to make readily available to readers
useful information about each story’s writing and publication, including
biographical and other influences that may be reflected in its content,
comments the author has made about a story, at the time of writing or
since, and the context of the story’s writing within the events of the
author’s life and career. With this in mind, there is much that must be
said about “Killdozer!” It draws heavily, of course, from Sturgeon’s
experience as a bulldozer operator in the tropics in 1942 and 1943. In
terms of money and acclaim, it was arguably the most successful story of
the first decade of his career. And in Sturgeon’s own telling of his
life story, it punctuates his longest bout of “writer’s block,” usually
described by him (in interviews, and in the foreword to his 1971
collection _Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_) as lasting for six years,
1940 to 1946, with “Killdozer!” a solitary interruption in the middle,
1943.

Close examination of documentary evidence, primarily copies of letters
to and from Sturgeon during and after this period, allows a more
accurate dating. He did continue to write as long as he was still in New
York, which he left (in order to manage his uncle’s hotel at Treasure
Beach on the island of Jamaica) on June 28, 1941. Although he and his
wife expected that the hotel job and change of scene would make it
easier for him to go on writing fiction, he did not do any writing until
April of 1944, on St. Croix in the Virgin Islands, when he wrote a
(probably mainstream, i.e. not aimed at the science fiction or fantasy
market) short story _propagandizing in favor of the much misunderstood
Nisei, or American-born Japs_. (Italicized phrases are quotes from
Sturgeon, in this case from a letter writen to his mother on May 8,
1944.) This story immediately went to a new agent, Nannine Joseph, who
was unable to sell it; the manuscript does not survive among Sturgeon’s
papers.

The first week of May, 1944, while still completing “the Nisei story,”
TS began “Killdozer!”, which he wrote in nine days and immediately sent
to the science fiction editor who had published him regularly between
1939 and 1943. From a letter to his mother, Christine Hamilton Sturgeon,
July 8, 1944: _When we were right at the end of the rope, in comes a
check and a letter from Jack Campbell. The check was a godsend, but the
letter is something that I’ll treasure for the rest of my life. I must
have sold him thirty-five or forty stories and never have I had such a
missive from him. “I don’t know how I can place it or when I’ll be able
to use it, but there, my friend, you have a hunk of story. I’m giving
you our highest rate, which brings the check to $542.50. I’m glad you’re
back in the field, and if you have any more with anything like this
level of tenseness, send ’em along. I want ’em.”_

In May or June Sturgeon wrote and sent his agent another story,
“Operator—Please!”, _a slick-style woman’s angle number about a USO
singer in the South Pacific who was walking on a cleared track by
herself deep in the jungle and came on the bulldozer that was doing the
work; argued_ [with] _the operator because he wouldn’t let her ride;
jumped on the machine when his back was turned; dropped the blade on him
by accident, pinning his legs_. This story also didn’t sell and has been
lost. Sturgeon’s frustration with his agent was the primary reason for
his trip back to New York in October 1944; he subsequently found himself
unable to sell or to write satisfactorily. He didn’t return to his
family on St. Croix, or send them money, and in June 1945 Dorothe
divorced him.

Although TS did write a few more stories in 1944 and early ’45, the
breakthrough as he remembered it came with the next story he sold, “The
Chromium Helmet,” completed at the end of 1945. So what he thought of as
his “writer’s block” lasted from July ’41 to December ’45, punctuated by
only one story that sold close to the time when it was written:
“Killdozer!” in 1944.

How Ted became a ’dozer driver (abbreviated from a conversation between
TS and Paul Williams, December 6, 1975): _So while we were in Jamaica,
along came December the 7th, and Pearl Harbor, and here we were at the
hotel, ninety miles away from Kingston, with gasoline supplies cut off
and no chance of getting any guests out there at all. The Americans
started building a very large base at Fort Simonds, and we went down
there and applied for jobs. I ended up on the Jamaican payroll, handling
mess halls and barracks, and a food warehouse. And finally a man came
along, clearing up ground around the housing area, and driving a
bulldozer. And I fell in love with that machine. So he let me get up on
it, and I learned an awful lot. Then I was transferred from quarters and
barracks to a gasoline station. We serviced all kinds of equipment, and
I got to know some of the American operators, and finally I got hired as
a bulldozer operator. I was making more money than I’d ever seen in my
life. Then when the base began to fold up, a guy came around recruiting
for another job, in Puerto Rico at a place called Ensenada Honda, where
they were building an enormous shipfitting plant, and a dry dock, and a
landing field. And ultimately we moved over to St. Croix and I settled
down to write_. Sturgeon worked in Puerto Rico as a bulldozer operator
from August ’42 to December ’43, after which he worked for the Navy for
a few months as a supply clerk and cost analyst. In April he and Dorothe
and their two daughters moved to St. Croix.

The manuscript title of “Killdozer!” was “Daisy Etta.” In August 1945,
recalling the experience of writing this story as _Worked like hell for
nine days, wrote something after two and a half years of being dried
up_, Sturgeon described it to his mother as _Complete justification for
everything_. In a letter to his father, Edward Waldo, Feb. 27, 1946, he
further reported: _The thing wrote itself! It was called KILLDOZER and
after it I could write nothing else. It sold on sight for $542.50, and
the editor thought so well of it that he cancelled his production
schedule and had it in print within weeks, as the lead novel in his
magazine, with a cover illustration. (The original oil painting for that
cover now hangs in my living room.) The magazine hit the stands just as
I arrived back in the States, and apparently caused quite a stir in the
science-fiction crowd. Through this I met many people who have become
valuable friends—including_ [his roommate] _Stanton. Crown Publishing
Co. released a new anthology of science-fiction last week. [The Best of
Science Fiction.] A month ago, an advance copy was read by a science
editor out in California who, on seeing KILLDOZER leading its section in
the book, wrote me and asked me if I would take on this series of
juveniles_. [A “novel series” called _Bob Haley of the Atomic Police_,
that employed Sturgeon as a “for hire” writer in spring 1946.] _And
Crown has just sent me a check for $155 for the reprint rights! In other
words, what seemed like a mere temporary alleviation of my circumstances
down in St. Croix and nothing more, has proved to be the focal point of
a whole series of fine breaks_. And in two more letters to his mother:
March 25, 1946: _The original oil painting from the cover … is my
proudest possession. Through that yarn I got in really solid with John
Campbell, editor of_ Astounding _and now an increasingly important man_.
April 25, 1946: _By the way, got a call from a screen agent who has high
hopes for KILLDOZER in Hollywood. Good ol’ KILLDOZER!_

So the story also brought Sturgeon the first of what was to be a
lifelong series of tantalizing (and, usually, disappointing) flirtations
with the money and glory of Hollywood, in regard to his stories and
novels and original scripts. In July 1970 (after Sturgeon had already
seen two of his scripts become well-known Star Trek episodes) he wrote
to Tom Snell at Columbia Studios, apparently a producer who’d expressed
interest to a director who told Sturgeon he wanted to film this story:
_I have been called a “visual” writer; KILLDOZER is far and away the
most cinematographic piece of prose I have ever done. It has been
optioned before, over the years. The last time was CBS’ Cinema 100. Just
before first-draft screenplay it became a victim of Sen. Pastore’s
famous speech on violence in TV. The people out here were all for going
ahead, but back east CBS got cold feet and killed every one of their
works-in-progress that might possibly be called violent. I honestly do
not think that the kind of violence which occurs in KILLDOZER is the
sort of thing the good Senator had in mind. KILLDOZER is a fable about
man vs the machine, and it ends in a fine climax of victory for man. But
you can’t argue with cold feet—not in television-land, anyway_.

Later in this letter Sturgeon said, _We’ve even got a class-A heavy
equipment operator who knows construction machinery as well as he does a
script—especially this script. Namely, me_. And then he provided a
compact treatment: _KILLDOZER is the story of eight men alone on an
island with a million dollars’ worth of heavy earth-moving equipment and
the assignment of carving an airstrip in ten days’ time. One of the
machines—an 18–ton Caterpillar D-7_—_gets a life of its own, vast
intelligence, and the obsessive desire to kill men. It gets five of
them; the survivors “kill” it_.

The 1974 TV movie that did get made was commemorated in the April 1974
issue of a Marvel Comics comic book called _Worlds Unknown presents the
Thing Called KILLDOZER_. (“based on the spine-tingling shocker by
Theodore Sturgeon, author of ‘It!’ ”) The story and film have since
given their name to at least one rock and roll group.

In 1972 actor Anthony Quinn called TS to ask if screen rights to
“Killdozer!” were available—but he had just sold it to Universal
Television. On 4/4/78 Sturgeon wrote to Quinn, saying, _They finally
rejected my first draft_ [screenplay] _and produced one of the worst
“Movies of the Week” I have ever seen_.

Editor’s blurb from the original magazine publication: STURGEON’S BEEN
MISSING FOR A LONG TIME NOW; HE’S BEEN DOING HEAVY CONSTRUCTION WORK.
THIS YARN HE GOT OUT OF THAT EXPERIENCE; IT WILL, CERTAINLY, BE LONG
REMEMBERED.

In 1959 “Killdozer!” was first included in a book of Sturgeon stories, a
paperback, _Aliens 4_. At first the publisher was going to call the book
_Killdozer_ but they changed their mind, and Sturgeon expressed his
chagrin to his agent at the time, Sterling Lord, in a letter dated
2/25/59: _Not too bad a title, but it irritates me on two counts. They
say the title must categorize the book; now, that’s just stupid. There
are more impulse-buyers who can’t stand s-f than those who look for it.
They say KILLDOZER sounds like a detective novel. Well, dandy. What’s
wrong with that? In addition, the only similarity between my stuff and
what is usually called s-f is that my stuff has appeared mostly in s-f
magazines—not a subtle distinction at all when you think about it. If
it’s the real s-f cognoscenti they’re after, the much-lauded KILLDOZER
will pull ’em in better than any new title_. (Sturgeon had tried
unsuccessfully in 1947 to get Simon & Schuster to publish “Killdozer!”
as “a separate novel.”)

Sept. 23, 1958, Sturgeon wrote his agent: _I would like to correct
galleys on the collection called KILLDOZER. One reason … has to do with
the title story, which has been talked about for films ever since it was
written. It is a World War II story and needn’t be; a very little
invisible mending will take care of that. It also needs a touch here and
there in characterization and dialogue—for example, Street & Smith’s
editing “damn” into “care” every time they saw it, so that your
bulldozer operators keep saying “I don’t give a care …” and one or two
other small repairs_.

So Sturgeon did rewrite the last eight paragraphs. In cases like this,
this series chooses to assume that the last revision the author chose to
make for publication is the proper text for his Collected Stories. So
our text has been set from the book that reflects Sturgeon’s 1959
corrections and revisions. For the readers’ interest, we do include in
these notes the text of the original ending, as published in
_Astounding_ in 1944 and _The Best of Science Fiction_ in 1946.

Text of the original ending of “Killdozer!”:

_This is the story of_ Daisy Etta, _the bulldozer that went mad and had
a life of its own, and not the story of the flat-top_ Marokuru _of the
Imperial Japanese Navy, which has been told elsewhere. But there is a
connection. You will remember how the_ Marokuru _was cut off from its
base by the concentrated attack on Truk, how it slipped far to the south
and east and was sunk nearer to our shores than any other Jap warship in
the whole course of the war. And you will remember how a squadron of
five planes, having been separated by three vertical miles of water from
their flight deck, turned east with their bomb-loads and droned away for
a suicide mission. You read that they bombed a minor airfield in the
outside of Panama’s far-flung defenses, and all hands crashed in the
best sacrificial fashion_.

_Well, that was no airfield, no matter what it might have looked like
from the air. It was simply a roughly graded runway, white marl against
brown scrub-grass_.

_The planes came two days after the death of_ Daisy Etta, _as Tom and
Kelly sat in the shadow of the pile of fuel drums, down in the coolth of
the swag that_ Daisy _had dug there to fuel herself. They were poring
over paper and pencil, trying to complete the impossible task of making
a written statement of what had happened on the island, and why they and
their company had failed to complete their contract. They had found Chub
and Harris, and had buried them next to the other three. Al Knowles was
tied up in the camp, because they had heard him raving in his sleep, and
it seemed he could not believe that_ Daisy _was dead and he still wanted
to go around killing operators for her. They knew that there must be an
investigation, and they knew just how far their story would go; and
having escaped a monster like_ Daisy Etta, _life was far too sweet for
them to want to be shot for sabotage. And murder_.

_The first stick of bombs struck three hundred yards behind them at the
edge of the camp, and at the same instant a plane whistled low over
their heads, and that was the first they knew about it. They ran to Al
Knowles and untied his feet and the three of them headed for the bush.
They found refuge, strangely enough, inside the mound where_ Daisy Etta
_had first met her possessor_.

_“Bless their black little hearts,” said Kelly as he and Tom stood on
the bluff and looked at the flaming wreckage of a camp and five medium
bombers below them. And he took the statement they had been sweating out
and tore it across_.

_“But what about him?” said Tom, pointing at Al Knowles, who was sitting
on the ground, playing with his fingers. “He’ll still spill the whole
thing, no matter if we do try to blame it all on the bombing.”_

_“What’s the matter with that?” said Kelly_.

_Tom thought a minute, then grinned. “Why, nothing! That’s just the sort
of thing they’ll expect from him!”_

“ABREACTION”: first published in _Weird Tales_, July 1948. Written
between July and October 1944. In a letter to TS dated Dec. 19, 1944,
his friend Art Kohn said, “What cooks on the literary front? By now
maybe comes words of acceptance from _Colliers_ of one or two
stories—but howzabout the ones you had already prepared—to wit ‘Poor
Yorick,’ ‘Crossfire,’ ‘Abreaction’ et all. Surely must be a market for
’em somewheres. Also and to wit the Campbell inspired yarn anent
polarized fields of rotators or some such.” In context, this seems to
refer to stories Sturgeon told Kohn he had written (or showed him)
before he left St. Croix.

Sturgeon was a gymnast in high school and may well have fallen off the
parallel bars.

Magazine blurb: HE WANTED TO GO BACK TO A PLACE HE’D SURELY NEVER
VISITED!

“POOR YORICK”: unpublished. A handwritten note on the manuscript says
“submitted—NJ [agent’s initials] 8–2–44.” Manuscript is untitled,
probably a rough draft, but surely is the “Poor Yorick” referred to in
Kohn’s 12/44 letter. Some pages of “synopses,” ideas for stories he
might try to write, survive from this era (dated by a reference to “NJ”
in one of the notes). One of the 32 entries reads as follows:

_Wicked little short short—and I dare you sell it. Girl gets present
from boy-friend in the South Pacific of Japanese skull. Is a little
queasy but proud. Some character—friend of the family, Lionel Barrymore
type, gives deep pronouncements on the basic fellowship of man and so
forth, and rather deplores the gift. Family dentist drops around, takes
one look at it, and then what you will. It’s the manhandled skull of her
own brother, picked up already sunbleached and to an expert not
recognizable as caucasian_.

“CROSSFIRE”: unpublished. Another single-spaced rough draft, probably
written in summer ’44. No title on ms., but quite possibly the
“Crossfire” Kohn refers to.

“NOON GUN”: first published in _Playboy_, September 1963. The existence
of a manuscript with Sturgeon’s St. Croix address on the top sheet
alongside the name of the agent he got in late ’44 to replace Nannine
Joseph, dates it as having been written in the second half of 1944 or
the early months of 1945. Never included in a Sturgeon book until now,
this was scheduled for a collection called _Slow Sculpture_ that was
cancelled by the publisher sometime after TS wrote an introduction and
rubrics for it in 1980. The “Noon Gun” rubric:

_I’ve been very fortunate; what I write, I sell. There have been just
two stories I couldn’t even give away for years: “Bianca’s Hands,” which
ultimately won a prestigious literary award in England and the first
check I had ever seen for over a thousand dollars, and this one, written
in 1946 and sold in 1962 to_ Playboy _for $100 per typed page. It’s a
highly autobiographical tale_.

On Feb. 9, 1947 Sturgeon wrote to his mother about his new association
with still another agent, Scott Meredith: _In my files was one 5000
worder called NOON GUN, written during that desperate period in early
’45 when I was starving in New York and my family likewise in St. Croix.
Scott was mightily pleased with it. I had given it to my current agent,
a sweet old has-been called Ed Bodin, and he had mismarketed it
dreadfully. Since its one or two submissions it had lain in the files.
(Two others he had had, I sold instantly when I picked up my stuff from
him last spring.) So I rewrote NOON GUN, making only slight changes in
the dialogue which referred to the war (the magazines don’t know there
was a war any more!) and gave it to him. It’s been out for quite a few
weeks, and Scott says that’s good_.

_Wouldn’t it be ironic if that story, of all stories, should be my first
slick sale! If it had sold when written, I wouldn’t have been stuck in
New York. I’d have been home (St. Croix) for Christmas with my pockets
bulging and my faith in myself (which later took such a dreadful fall)
intact and blooming!_

Magazine blurb: AS THEY WALKED, HE TRIED TO ENVISION THE BIG GUY
GROVELING—BUT ALL HE COULD SEE WAS THAT KID WAITING FOR THE CANNON TO
FIRE.

“BULLDOZER IS A NOUN”: unpublished. Again, the St. Croix address on the
manuscript shows it was written before June 1945, perhaps in spring ’45
when Sturgeon briefly held the first office job of his life. On August
3, 1945, TS wrote his mother: _Finally in March met some people in the
Biltmore Bar and found myself Copy Director of Advertising Division of a
big electronics firm. $85_. [ellipses his] … _something happened. I
didn’t send any money south. I didn’t know why. Fifty bucks just then
would have saved the whole situation. I went psychotic over food. I
couldn’t get enough to eat. I ate five, six meals a day; cost me $30,
$40 a week to eat. I put money into insurance, things like that_.

No title on surviving manuscript; this title assigned by PW.

“AUGUST SIXTH 1945”: unpublished. Probably written soon after. The
authorial address in the upper right corner of the first page suggests
TS did consider this something to be submitted for possible publication;
whether and where it was submitted is not known.

“THE CHROMIUM HELMET”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
June 1946. Written at the end of 1945. Sam Moskowitz in _Seekers of
Tomorrow_ reports what TS told him in a 1961 interview: “Sturgeon
returned to New York … He was in a daze for months. John Campbell
befriended him, inviting him as a house guest for periods as prolonged
as two weeks at a stretch. Gradually, Campbell coaxed him out of his
depression, until one day, in the basement of the editor’s home,
Sturgeon sat down at a typewriter and wrote ‘The Chromium Helmet.’
Campbell read the first draft straight from the typewriter and accepted
the story.” In 1972 TS told David Hartwell, _I was really in a zombieish
condition. Gradually I began to write again, and finally I wrote a story
called “The Chromium Helmet” in John’s cellar out in Westfield, New
Jersey. And that was really the first of these so-called “therapeutic”
or optimum humanity stories. And they just went on from there_. However,
an undated (probably mid-’46) fragment of a letter from TS to a friend
found in Sturgeon’s papers complicates things by saying, _ … began to
write again, and sold “The Chromium Helmet,” four thousand words of
which had been done for a year or more. That broke the ice, and I began
to pull out of it_. Could this possibly be “the Campbell inspired yarn
anent polarized fields of rotators” Art Kohn mentioned in his 12/44
letter (see “Crossfire” note)? Regardless of when Sturgeon began it,
finishing and _selling_ the story in Campbell’s cellar was certainly an
event, a breakthrough, TS long remembered and recounted.

Your editor, who’s done much of the research for these notes in
Sturgeon’s daughter’s cellar, wishes to report that he now considers
“The Chromium Helmet” a major and surprising and visionary story, even
though other readers including the estimable Mr. Silverberg, and myself
two decades ago when I first read it, have failed to appreciate it.
Sturgeon almost alone among modern writers seems to have some insight
into the psychological and cultural significance of the technological
advances being made in the realm of “wish fulfillment” in the Media Age.
I missed this story’s allegorical power until now, even though TS told
me in 1975: _“The Chromium Helmet,” according to that man I told you
about_ [a renegade therapist who treated Sturgeon with LSD in 1965 at
the therapist’s country home over a period of weeks, just like a
character in a Pynchon novel] _is the first of my “therapy” stories—it’s
not too exceptionable as a story, but it does have that component, as
does everything else that I’ve ever written since then. And from then
on, I started turning out a tremendous amount of stuff, and finally
busted it wide open_.

_He was able to point out to me that the nature of my work changed so
drastically between 1940 and 1946, that they were not wasted years, that
clearly something was going on all the time. There was an evolution
towards something infinitely more important and infinitely more serious
than anything I’d ever done before. And that there was no break, there
were no “wasted years.” This was a tremendous comfort to me, it is to
this day as a matter of fact. And now, when I go through long periods,
which I do, when I’m not writing anything, I don’t panic_.

Hartwell (’72): “You’ve said that love is the principal theme of
practically everything you’ve ever written. Have you ever written
anything that it wasn’t?” Sturgeon: _No, except that my preoccupation in
a larger sense is the optimum man. The question of establishing an
internal ecology, where the optimum liver works with the optimum spleen
and the optimum eyeball and so forth. Now, when you get to the mind—not
the brain, but the optimum mind—then you have the whole inner space
idea; my conviction is that there’s more room there than there is in
outer space, in each individual human being. Love of course has a great
deal to do with that, as a necessary coloration and adjunct to
everything that we do—to love oneself, to love the parts of oneself, to
love the interaction of the parts of oneself, and then the interaction
of that whole organism with those of another person. Which is as good a
definition of love as you can get, I think_.

And to PW in 1975: _It wasn’t until comparatively recently, before I
discovered that there_ is _a common denominator in all my stories, and
that is, the search for the optimum human being. This was pointed out to
me by a therapist many years ago, when I was bemoaning the fact of a
time when I would let six years go by without writing anything. He said
that the stories I’d written before that hiatus were good enough in
their way, and brilliant in some ways, but they were entertainments. And
the ones I wrote_ after _that six year period were all—well, we all take
our own specialty, you know, and graft it onto what we’re talking
about—but he said they’re all_ therapy _stories. In the sense that they
are almost always about somebody who is no good who gets good, somebody
who is good who gets better, somebody who is sick and gets well,
somebody who gets well and turns into a super-person, and so on. “The
Other Man,” “Maturity” and all these different stories are very much
obsessed with the search for the optimum human being. Not the
superman …_ PW: “We’re talking here about human potential.” TS: _That’s
right. And everything that I’ve ever done since then has been—well, the
one that I won all those awards for, “Slow Sculpture,” is purely and
simply a description of that search. Not only for the optimum human
being but for_ human acceptance _of the optimum human being_.

Magazine blurb: THIS ISN’T THE BEST OF ALL POSSIBLE WORLDS—BUT IT WAS NO
HELP TO FIVE REASONABLY COMFORTABLE PEOPLE TO ENCOUNTER THE STRANGE
EFFECTS OF THE ‘CORMIUM HEMLET.’

“MEMORIAL”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, April 1946.
Written January ’46?

Sturgeon’s story introduction from _Without Sorcery_ (1948):

_It could happen. it really could_.

_It might happen. It really might_.

_It can be stopped. It’s up to you_.

On the Science Fiction Radio Show in 1983, Sturgeon made a comment on
“Thunder and Roses” (written or finished 1947) that seems more
applicable to “Memorial”: _It’s probably the first “atomic doom” story
that was written after the bomb was dropped. It was written in late 1945
and was looked at with considerable passion. There wasn’t anybody in the
world who understood what had happened, except the people in the science
fiction fraternity and one or two rather forward-thinking scientists at
Oak Ridge and in the state of Washington. The rest of the world thought
it was just another big bang. In science fiction, John Campbell had been
publishing atomic power and atomic war stories for fifteen years before
that. We all understood what had happened; every single person who had
been writing or reading science fiction understood precisely what had
happened and what it meant to the world. Now, of course, it is very much
in the forefront. But we all saw it coming, a very bad and ugly
situation_.

“Memorial” was translated into the proposed “world language” Esperanto
by Forrest J. Ackerman, and published in _Heraldo de Esperanto_, a
newspaper published in the Netherlands, May 25, 1946. Magazine blurb
(from _Astounding_): HIS PLAN WAS TO CREATE A CRATER THAT WOULD WARN ALL
MEN TO AVOID ATOMIC WAR FOR FIVE THOUSAND YEARS TO COME, A MEMORIAL THAT
WOULD SPIT LAVA AND DEADLY RAYS FOR FIVE MILLENIA. PART OF HIS PLAN WAS
FULFILLED—THE WRONG PART.

“MEWHU’S JET”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, November
1946 (cover story). Written early 1946.

Although I don’t know of Sturgeon ever commenting on the subject, it’s
hard not to think that “Mewhu’s Jet” was a significant forerunner of and
inspiration for Steven Spielberg’s 1982 film _E.T_.

TS to his mother, July 4, 1947: _Now, about kids in general. You, and
quite a few other people, keep spotting my kids in my stories. Not so. I
can’t explain it at all. One of the big reasons for kids appearing at
all is that when a story dies in my arms, I can invariably inject a kid
and make it go again. I not only don’t know why this is, I don’t know
how I do it; for_ never _in my life have I been associated with the
seven-to-ten-year-old girl children who pop up in my copy. I have been
told repeatedly that they are real in action and in dialogue, but so
help me, I don’t know where they come from. I should mention one other
phenomenon: when I use a kid in a story this way, for this reason, the
little devil invariably takes the bit in her teeth and walks off with
the plot, turning out to be the kind of character who would under no
circumstances act the way I have laid the narrative course. So, after
writing six or eight thousand words, which I’ll be damned if I’ll do
again, I have to figure out some way to rationalize the plot with the
characterization. It comes to me eventually, and accounts for the
readability of much of my stuff—the reader can’t possibly know how it’s
going to turn out because the author didn’t …_

Magazine blurb: MEWHU CAME FROM—SOMEWHERE. HE WRECKED HIS SPACESHIP ON
LANDING, BUT THE ‘PARACHUTE’ HE HAD WAS SOMETHING DECIDEDLY SUPER—AN
ATOMIC JET JOB! THE PROBLEM WAS TO GET INTO COMMUNICATION—THEY THOUGHT.

I found six pages stapled together among Sturgeon’s papers left in
Woodstock, numbered 46 to 51 that give every appearance of being the
last pages of a 51–page manuscript. It seems reasonable to assume that
they are the original manuscript ending of “Mewhu’s Jet” that was cut by
the author because he ran out of inspiration (the bottom two-thirds of
the last page is blank, and does not say “end”), or by the editor to
strengthen the story.

Text of the unpublished original ending of “Mewhu’s Jet”:

_The following three weeks were the fullest, the most exciting, and the
most infuriating of Jack Garry’s life. Jack was a family man, and in his
own argumentative, bull-headed way he loved his wife. Mewhu’s arrival
had completely turned over and shaken up his way of life—even his
thinking. He had enough to do to adjust himself to this fantastic series
of events, and to worry about Molly and her new strangeness, and to
worry even more about Iris. Iris was outraged at the change in Molly,
and at the same time was deeply troubled about Mewhu. Iris wanted, with
everything in her vitriolic nature, to blame someone, but her native
intelligence made it impossible for her to hang the culpability on
anyone, except for brief periods_.

_Yes indeed, it was enough to drive any man frantic; but Jack Garry was
not permitted to stay home and let things there get him frantic. He was
suddenly a public figure. “Do you realize,” strange voices would say to
him over the telephone in his city apartment, “that Zincus’ No-Phlegm
Trokeys are the only product which contains every palliative and
preventive against the common cold?”_

_And Jack would roll his eyes up and say, “No, I hadn’t realized. So
what?”_

_And the voice would say, “Since you have gone on the record as wanting
to protect the Man from Mars in every possible way, you cannot afford to
overlook this remarkable—”_

_And Jack would say, “Exactly what do you want?”_

_And the voice would say, “Would you consider five thousand dollars to
sign a small testimonial?” and Jack would bang down the receiver; and
the phone would ring again …_

_There were people outside. There were always people outside, hanging
around in the lobby of the apartment house when they could get in,
lounging outside. Autographs. Sometimes pickets carrying signs
denouncing him for bringing new terror to the world. Once somebody shot
at him. Most of the loungers just gawked_.

_And the mail! Checks and dollar bills. Threats. Appeals for money, made
apparently for no other reason than that Jack had had his name in the
papers. “Dear Mr. Garry, at last I know that there is a man alive with
enough foresight, enough breadth of vision, to understand me and my
work, for only such a man would have been chosen to receive a
distinguished visitor from another world. I have a theory for the
development of a space-warp generator, and if you can get backing to the
extent of fifty thousand dollars, we can collaborate on the beginnings
of this amazing—” “Dear Sir you are a crimnell and a thief you shud of
kild that monster insted of takin him into your midst. aint we got trubl
enough.” “Dear Mr. Garry, Let us face it. Small considerations,
magnified by the conventions, are not important to people like you and
me. It is our duty to found a super-race together. My background of deep
study into esoteric matters has convinced me that the only thing that
can save the race is to people the world with the superior strain
evident in both of us. I enclose a nude photograph of myself and will
appreciate it if you will do likewise. I am thirty three years old and
have kept myself sacrosanct awaiting this great moment.” “Dear sir: My
most sincere congratulations to you and your co-workers on your
execution of the most magnificent hoax since the Cardiff Giant. It is
evident from the extent of the publicity you are receiving that you have
the backing of the Jews and the international bankers. I hereby serve
notice on you that you are being carefully watched by the
Blood-Brotherhood of the Sons of Caesar. You will not get away with
it.”_

_And yet Jack Garry stayed by the telephone, leafed through all the
mail, went out constantly to get any possible reports of Mewhu. For
Mewhu was alive_.

_It was incredible. A human being could not possibly have survived that
crash. If Mewhu had not cut the ignition, he would not have lived
either. The list of his injuries was frightening, and, due to his alien
structure, it was impossible to determine their true extent. As for
treatment, that had to be a guess-and-prayer operation. He lost a good
deal of his purplish blood before they dared to give him a transfusion.
Two Red Cross surgeons and an Army man had a violent altercation over
the first-aid substitutions in plasma which they had concocted to
approximate the first rough analysis of Mewhu’s blood. They chanced it,
finally, because they had to. Jack Garry, in one of the few moments he
had to reflect about anything, was amused by the attitude of the medical
mind. Like Iris, when she had used her nurse’s training to set Mewhu’s
broken arm while refusing to admit Mewhu’s existence, these doctors had
done everything in their power to save Mewhu’s life without daring to
cogitate on what he really was_.

_But after he was whisked away to a Naval hospital, under careful guard,
the controversies started. Mewhu was accused of being a Russian, a
Japanese, a Turk, an Atlantean, and the Devil. He was credited with
being_ homo superior, _a secret weapon, and the Messiah. The one thing
that infuriated Garry the most was that the newspapers called him “the
Man from Mars,” the public insisted that he was from Mars, newspapers
whose editorial policy included headlines in red published diagrams of
the orbit of Mars and monosyllable rewrites of weighty words on the
subject of Mars originally composed years ago by theoreticians
specializing in Mars. The careful series of tests of Mewhu’s blood,
bones, nerves and organs which was conducted for the purpose of saving
his life, was violently attacked in the press by the anti-vivisection
bloc, who took the position that the Man from Mars should be permitted
to die in the established Martian fashion. Garry reached a point where
he would have given anything in the world to feel free to run down the
street shouting “He’s_ not _from Mars!” But he had family
considerations …_

_When they had first returned to the city, Iris had stood over Molly
like a tigress, refusing to let the child be questioned by anyone,
including Jack_.

_“But honey,” he pleaded, “Molly may know things that can change the
face of the Earth! She’s been subject to a degree of telepathy unheard
of before. She’s had the chance to see, through Mewhu’s eyes, a totally
new civilization, infinitely farther advanced than ours. She has the
only key to it, and you won’t let us get to it.”_

_“As long as she cries when she’s questioned—no! Let Mewhu do his own
press-agentry.”_

_“He can’t even talk yet—not even in his own language. You wouldn’t
either, with a busted jaw. He might even die before we can get anything
out of him.”_

_“Molly’s going to have trouble enough getting over this,” said Iris
firmly. “Better drop the subject, Jack.”_

_Mild words, but the set of her red head and the tied-in look of her
mouth told him that she was right—it would be better to drop it_.

_When he could, he dropped in to see the child. She had a three-quarter
size bed, and she looked very tiny in it. Iris would stand just inside
the room, leaning easily against the door, her arms folded, deftly
keeping the conversation where she thought it should be kept_.

_“How do you feel, chicken?”_

_Her face was almost as white as the sheet, and her eyes were as dark as
her hair against it. Her freckles were startling_.

_“Okay, daddy.”_

_“What you been doing?”_

_“Helpin’ Mewhu get better.”_

_“Tell daddy about the book I got you today, Molly,” said Iris too
quickly, too loud_.

_And Molly would smile and say that the book was fine_.

_The doctors couldn’t find anything wrong with her. She simply didn’t
have all of her vitality. She didn’t lack a dangerous amount of it, and
it didn’t vary. She didn’t move much when they first came back to the
city; she didn’t try. She was apparently very contented. Only she seemed
to know something. It was there in her face all the time, but
particularly when she smiled_.

_And as the weeks passed she got better—slowly, evenly, without
relapses. It was not a cyclic thing at all. She ate well, and she slept
well; and, devastatingly, she always did exactly as she was told_.

_It was midwinter when Mewhu walked again. Jack had not been permitted
to see him in all that time, not only because the silver man had been
such a nine-days wonder that armed guards had had to surround the
hospital, but because Congress had appointed a committee to study
Mewhu—a committee which, by the way, included no psychologists, no
physicians, no sociologists, anthropologists, physicists or astronomers.
The Army and the Navy were represented, however. After a due period of
polysyllabic ponderment, the committee tabled the matter until such time
as the alien was in a position to speak for himself. He was to be taught
the language if possible and otherwise kept incommunicado_.



AFTERWORD
BY ROBERT A. HEINLEIN


_(Excerpted from “Agape and Eros: The Art of Theodore Sturgeon,” first
published as an introduction to Sturgeon’s last novel_, Godbody)

Again and again for half a century Theodore Sturgeon has given us one
message—a message that was ancient before he was born but which he made
his own, then spoke it and sang it and shouted it and sometimes scolded
us with it:

“Love one another.”

Simple. Ancient. Difficult.

Seldom attained.

Early this century, before World War I, I was taught in Sunday school
that Jesus loves us, you and me and everyone, saint and sinner alike.
Then the Kaiser raped poor innocent Belgium, and never again did the
world seem sweet and warm and safe. Today I cannot promise you that
Jesus loves you, but I can assure you that Ted Sturgeon loves you … did
love you and does today—“does,” present tense, because what I still hold
of my childhood faith includes a conviction that Ted did not cease to be
when his worn-out body stopped breathing. It may be that villains die
utterly. But not saints.

In fifty years of storytelling Sturgeon spoke to us of love, again and
again and yet again, without ever repeating himself. One of the marks of
his art was his unique talent for looking at an old situation from a new
angle, one that no one else had ever noticed. He did not imitate (and
could not be imitated) … and each of his stories was a love story.

Examples:

“Bianca’s Hands.” (That one? A story so horrible that editors not only
bounced it but blacklisted the author? Yes, that one.)

“The World Well Lost.” (A love story, obviously—one about homosexuals.
But please note that the copyright on it is 1953, many years before “gay
pride” was even whispered, much less shouted. And Ted was not speaking
in defense of himself but out of empathy for others. Ted was not even
mildly homosexual. You can check this for yourself if you wish. I have
no need to; I knew him intimately for more than forty years.)

“Some of Your Blood.” (Go back and read it again. Yes, George Smith
makes Count Dracula look like a tenderfoot Scout. But Sturgeon invites
you to look at it from George Smith’s angle.)

And so on, story after story for half a century. Some of Sturgeon’s
yarns had adventure trappings, or science-fiction gadgets, or
fantasy/weird/horror props, or whodunnit gimmicks or other McGuffins,
but in each, tucked away or displayed openly, you will find some
searching comment on love, a new statement, not something borrowed from
another writer.

In addition to this prime interest Ted was alive to every facet of the
world around him: He had a lifelong passion for machinery; his interest
in music was intense and professional; he delighted in travel; he
relished teaching others what he had learned—but above all and at all
times, waking and sleeping, he loved his fellow humans and expressed it
in all aspects of his life.

I first met Theodore Sturgeon in 1944. He had just returned from the
Caribbean, where he had been a heavy-machinery operator building
airstrips for the U.S. Army Air Force. That job played out in ’44; no
more airfields were being built in the Antilles; the emphasis was
shifting to the Pacific Theater. Ted was 4-F, a waste of skin; his draft
board laughed at him. He was not even eligible for limited service.
Rheumatic fever in his high-school days had left him with a heart so
disabled that simply staying alive through each day was a separate
miracle.

That damaged heart not only kept Ted out of military service; ten years
earlier it had robbed him of his dearest ambition: to be a circus
acrobat. In high school, by grueling daily practice, he had transformed
himself from that fabled ninety-pound weakling into a heavily muscled
and highly skilled tumbler, one who could reasonably hope to join
someday the “Greatest Show on Earth.” Then one morning he woke up ill.

He recovered … but with a badly damaged heart. A circus career was out
of the question, and many other pursuits were foreclosed. Eventually his
disability forced him into the one career open to anyone whose body is
warm and mind still functioning: free-lance writing.

I once collected notes for an essay—the relation between physical
disability and the literary pursuit; or Shakespeare was 4-F and so was
Lord Byron and Julius Caesar and Somerset Maugham—and what’s your
excuse, brother? Was it a queasy itch to see your name in print and a
distaste for hard work? Or was it diabetes (polio, consumption, heart
trouble) and a pressing need to pay the rent?

If we limit the discussion to science fiction, I can recall offhand
several writers who got into the business not from choice but from
physical disability coupled with financial necessity: Theodore Sturgeon,
Robert A. Heinlein, Cleve Cartmill, H. G. Wells, Fletcher Pratt, Daniel
F. Galouye, J. T. McIntosh. Each on this list wound up as a free-lance
writer through physical limitations that crowded him into it … and I am
sure that the list could be much longer, if we but knew.

So what was Sturgeon doing running bulldozers and backhoes and power
shovels? Driving a Daisy Eight is not as easy as driving a car; rassling
a dozer is no job for a man with a bad heart.

The answer is simple: Ted never paid any more attention to his physical
limitations than he was forced to, and in wartime the physical
examination for a civilian employee of the army or navy consisted of
walking past the surgeon, who would then mark the prospect “fit for
heavy manual labor.” I am not joking. In World War II, I hired many
civilians for the Navy Field Service; the Army Field Service was not
more demanding than we were—or we would have snatched their prospects
away from them. This was a time when any warm body would do. A typist
was a girl who could tell a typewriter from a washing machine. (Later we
took out the washing machine.)

So Ted built airstrips in broiling sun and 120-degree heat and failed to
drop dead. He outlasted the job and then came to New York.

I think Ted worked for a while for the University of California, in the
Empire State Building, with John W. Campbell, Jr., the editor of
_Astounding Science Fiction_, as his supervisor. No, I have not jumped
my trolley; at that time the University of California occupied one
entire floor in the Empire State Building. Campbell was supervisor in a
classified section that wrote radar operation and maintenance
manuals—and even the word “radar” was classified; one did not say that
word. (And didn’t even _think_ the word “uranium,” not even in one’s
sleep.)

I am not certain what work Ted did, because in 1944 one did not poke
into another man’s classified work. I knew a trifle about this radar
project because I had a radar project of my own, with a touch of
overlap. But Campbell is dead now, and so is George O. Smith and so is
Ted; I can’t check. (Ted’s wife Jayne can’t be certain; I am speaking of
the year she was born.)

As may be, Ted was writing at night for Campbell and sharing lodging
with Jay Stanton, who was both Campbell’s assistant supervisor on the
radar writing project and Campbell’s assistant editor at Street and
Smith … and all three men were part of another project I ran for
OpNav-23, a brainstorming job on antikamikaze measures. (I was wearing
three hats, not unusual then. One tended to live on aspirin and soothing
syrup.)

I had been ordered to round up science-fiction writers for this crash
project—the wildest brains I could find, so Ted was a welcome recruit.
Some of the others were George O. Smith, John W. Campbell, Jr., Murray
Leinster, L. Ron Hubbard, Sprague de Camp, and Fletcher Pratt. On
Saturday nights and Sundays this group usually gathered at my apartment
in downtown Philadelphia.

At my request Campbell brought Sturgeon there. My first impression of
Sturgeon was that no male had any business being that pretty. He was a
golden boy, one that caused comparisons with Michelangelo’s David. Or
Baldur. He was twenty-six but looked about twenty. He was tall,
straight, broad-shouldered, and carried himself with the grace of a
tightwire artist. He had a crown of golden curls, classic features and a
sweet, permanent smile.

All this would have been inexcusable had it not been that he was
honestly humble and warmly charming. When others spoke, Sturgeon
listened with full attention. His interest in others caused one to
forget his physical beauty.

My flat was about three hundred yards from the Broad Street Station;
people came to these meetings from Washington, Scarsdale, Princeton, the
Main Line, Manhattan, Arlington, etc.; my place was the most convenient
rendezvous for most of the group. No one could drive a car (war
restrictions), but the trains every thirty minutes on the Pennsylvania
Railroad could get any member of the group there in two hours or less.
It was a good neutral ground, too, for meetings that might include
several officers (lieutenant to admiral), a corporal from OSS, a State
Department officer, one sergeant, civil servants ranging from P-1 to
P-6, contractors’ employees with clearances up to “top secret” but
limited by “need to know,” and civilians with no official status and no
clearance. I never worried about security because there was always one
member of naval intelligence invariably present.

On Saturday nights there would be two or three in my bed, a couple on
the couch and the rest on the living-room floor. If there was still
overflow, I sent them a block down the street to a friend with more
floor space if not beds. Hotel rooms? Let’s not be silly; this was 1944.

The first weekend Sturgeon was there he slept on the hall rug, a choice
spot, while both L. Ron Hubbard and George O. Smith were in the overflow
who had to walk down the street. In retrospect that seems like a wrong
decision; Hubbard should not have been asked to walk, as both of his
feet had been broken (drumhead-type injury) when his last ship was
bombed. Ron had had a busy war—sunk four times and wounded again and
again—and at that time was on limited duty at Princeton, attending
military governors’ school.

On Sunday afternoon the working meeting was over, and we were sitting
around in my living room. Ron and Ted had been swapping stories and
horrible puns and harmonizing on songs—both were fine vocalists, one
baritone, one tenor. I think it was the first time they had met, and
they obviously enjoyed each other’s company.

Ron had run through a burlesque skit, playing all the parts; then Ted
got up and made a speech “explaining” Marxism and featuring puns such as
“Engels with dirty faces” (groan), and ending with “then comes the
Revolution!” At that last word he jumped straight up into the air and
into a full revolution—a back flip. His heels missed the ceiling by a
scant inch, and he landed as perfectly as Mary Lou Retton on the exact
spot on which he had been standing.

This with no warning—which is how I learned that Ted was a tumbler. This
in a crowded room. This with no windup. I don’t think he could have done
it in a phone booth but he did not have much more room.

Ron Hubbard leaned toward me, said quietly into my ear, “Uh huh, I can
see him now, a skinny kid in a clown suit too big for him, piling out of
that little car with the other clowns and bouncing straight into his
routine.”

Ron was almost right.

I think it was a later weekend that we learned of Ted’s incredible
ability to produce just from his vocal cords, no props, any sound he had
ever heard—traffic noises, train noises, shipboard noises, animals,
birds, machinery, any accent whatever.

Here is the first one I asked for: A frosty morning, a buzzsaw powered
by a two-cycle engine cranked by a line. Start the engine despite the
freezing weather, then use the saw to cut firewood. The saw hits a nail
in the wood.

I’m sorry I can’t offer you a tape. Ted scored a cold four-oh.

Thirty-three years later, in front of a large audience at San Diego
ComiCon, I asked Sturgeon to repeat that buzzsaw routine, defining it
again for him, as he had forgotten ever doing it. He thought for a few
seconds, then did it. Another four-oh.

The second one I demanded was this: A hen lays an egg, then announces
it. The farm wife shoos her off the nest long enough to grab the egg and
replace it with a china egg.

Another perfect score—I do not know when or where Sturgeon coped with
cranky two-cycle engines or with temperamental hens’… but this farm boy
now speaking can testify that Ted had been there in each case and could
reproduce the sounds as exactly as any equipment from Sony or
Mitsubishi.

I hope that someone somewhere has taped and preserved some of Sturgeon’s
jokes in dialect. I would like to hear again the one about the pub in
London where one could get a bit of bread, a bit of cheese, a pint of
bitter, a gammon of Yorkshire ham, a bit of pudding and a go with the
barmaid, all for two and six. Try to imagine all _that_. Was anyone
running a recorder?

Ted’s ear was phenomenal and not limited to parlor tricks. Mark Twain
said that the difference between the right word and almost the right
word was the difference between lightning and a lightning bug.

Sturgeon did not deal in lightning bugs.

Robert A. Heinlein
September 1985

[]
