[Description: C:\Users\RF\Desktop\Theodore Sturgeon - To Marry
Medusa_files\Theodore Sturgeon - To Marry Medusa-1.png]

 

TO MARRY MEDUSA

This is a work of fiction. All the characters and events portrayed in
this book are fictional, and any resemblance to real people or incidents
is purely coincidental.

Copyright © 1987 by The Estate of Theodore Sturgeon

The two parts of this book were originally published as follows: _To
Marry Medusa,_ © 1958 by Theodore Sturgeon; “Killdozer,” _Astounding
Science Fiction,_ © 1944 by Street & Smith Publications.

All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or
portions thereof in any form.

A Baen Book

Baen Publishing Enterprises

260 Fifth Avenue

New York, N.Y. 10001

First printing, December 1987

ISBN: 0-671-65370-9

Cover art by Armand Cabrera

Printed in the United States of America

Distributed by SIMON & SCHUSTER 1230 Avenue of the Americas New York,
N.Y. 10020

 



TO MARRY MEDUSA


 


CHAPTER 1

“I’ll bus’ your face, Al,” said Gurlick. “I gon’ break your back. I gon’
blow up your place, an’ you with it, an’ all your rotgut likker, who
wants it? You hear me, Al?”

Al didn’t hear him. Al was back of the bar in his saloon, three blocks
away, probably still indignantly red, still twitching his long bald head
at the empty doorway through which Gurlick had fled, still repeating
what all his customers had just witnessed: Gurlick cringing in from the
slick raw night, fawning at Al, stretching his stubble in a ragged brown
grin, tilting his head, half-closing his sick-green, muddy-whited eyes.
“Walkin’ in here,” Al would be reporting for the fourth time in nine
minutes, “all full of good-ol’-Al this an’ hiya-buddy that, an’
you-know-me-Al, and how’s about a little, you-know’; an all I says is I
know you all right, Gurlick, shuck on out o’ here, I wouldn’t give you
sand if I met you on the beach; an’ him spittin’ like that, right on the
bar, an’ runnin’ out, an’ stickin’ his head back in an’ callin’ me a—”
Sanctimoniously, Al would not sully his lips with the word. And the
rye-and-ginger by the door would be nodding wisely and saying, “Man
shouldn’t mention a feller’s mother, whatever,” while the long-term
would be clasping his glass, warm as pablum and headless as Ann Boleyn,
and intoning, “You was right, Al, dead right.”

Gurlick, four blocks away now, glanced back over his shoulder and saw no
pursuit. He slowed his scamper to a trot and then a soggy shuffle,
hunching his shoulders against the blowing mist. He kept on cursing Al,
and the beer, and the rye-and-ginger, announcing that he could take ‘em
one at a time or all together one-handed.

He could do nothing of the kind, of course. It wasn’t in him. It would
have been success of a sort, and it was too late in life for Gurlick,
unassisted, to start anything as new and different as success. His very
first breath had been ill-timed and poorly done, and from then on he had
done nothing right. He begged badly and stole when it was absolutely
safe, which was seldom, and he rolled drunks providing they were totally
blacked out, alone, and concealed. He slept in warehouses, box-cars,
parked trucks. He worked only in the most extreme circumstances, and had
yet to last through the second week. “I’ll cut ‘em,” he muttered. “Smash
their face for them, I’ll ...”

He sidled into an alley and felt along the wall to a garbage can he knew
about. It was a restaurant garbage can and sometimes ... He lifted the
lid, and as he did so saw something pale slide away and fell to the
ground. It looked like a bun, and he snatched at it and missed. He
stooped for it, and part of the misted wall beside him seemed to detach
itself and become solid and hairy; it scrabbled past his legs. He gasped
in terror and kicked out, a vicious, ratlike motion, a hysterical spasm.

His foot connected solidly and the creature rose in the air and fell
heavily at the base of the fence, in the dim wet light from the street.
It was a small white dog, three-quarters starved. It yipped twice,
faintly, tried to rise and could not.

When Gurlick saw it was helpless he laughed aloud and ran to it and
kicked it and stamped on it until it was dead, and with each blow his
vengeance became more mighty. There went Al, and there the two barflies
and one for the cops, and one for all judges and jailers, and a good one
for everyone in the world who owned anything, and to top it, one for the
rain. He was a pretty big man by the time he was finished.

Out of breath, he wheezed back to the garbage can and felt around until
he found the bun. It was sodden and slippery, but it was half a
hamburger which some profligate had tossed into the alley, and that was
all that mattered. He wiped it on his sleeve, which made no appreciable
difference to sleeve or bun, and crammed the doughy, greasy mass into
his mouth.

He stepped out into the light and looked up through the mist at the
square shoulders of the buildings that stood around to watch him. He was
a man who had fought for, killed for what was rightfully his. “Don’t
mess with me,” he growled at the city.

A kind of intoxication flooded him. He felt the way he did at the
beginning of that dream he was always having, where he would walk down a
dirt path beside a lake, feeling good, feeling strong and expectant,
knowing he was about to come to the pile of clothes on the bank. He
wasn’t having the dream just then, he knew; he was too cold and too wet,
but he squared his shoulders anyway. He began to walk, looking up. He
told the world to look out. He said he was going to shake it up and dump
it and stamp on its fat face. “You going to know Dan Gurlick passed this
way,” he said.

 

He was perfectly right this time, because it was in him now. It had been
in the hamburger and before that in the horse from which most of the
hamburger had been made, and before that in two birds, one after the
other, which had mistaken it for a berry. Before that ... it’s hard to
say. It had fallen into a field, that’s all. It was patient, and quite
content to wait. When the first bird ate it, it sensed it was in the
wrong place, and did nothing, and the same thing with the second. When
the horse’s blunt club of a tongue scooped it up with a clutch of
meadow-grass, it had hopes for a while. It straightened itself out after
the horse’s teeth flattened it, and left the digestive tract early, to
shoulder its way between cells and fibers until it rested in a ganglion.
There it sensed another disappointment, and high time too— once it
penetrated into the neurone-chains, its nature would be irreversibly
changed, and it would have been with the horse for the rest of its life.
As, in feet, it was. But after the butcher s blade missed it, and the
meat-grinder wrung it, pinched it, stretched it (but in no way separated
any part of it from any other), it could still go on about its job when
the time came. Eight months in the deepfreeze affected it not at all,
nor did hot fat. It was sold from a pushcart with a bag full of other
hamburgers, and wound up in the bottom of the bag. The boy who bit into
this particular hamburger was the only human being who ever saw it. It
looked like a boiled raisin, or worse. The boy had had enough by then,
anyway. He threw it into the alley.

The rain began in earnest. Gurlick’s exaltation faded, his shoulders
hunched, his head went down. He slogged through the wet, and soon sank
to his usual level of feral misery. And there he stayed for a while.

 


CHAPTER 2

This girl’s name was Charlotte Dunsay and she worked in Accounting. She
was open and sunny and she was a dish. She had rich brown hair with ruby
lights in it, and the kind of topaz eyes that usually belong to a
special kind of blonde. She had a figure that Paul Sanders, who was in
Pharmaceuticals, considered a waste on an office job, and an outright
deprivation when viewed in the light of the information that her husband
was a Merchant Marine officer on the Australia run. It was a matter of
hours after she caught the attention of the entire plant (which was a
matter of minutes after she got there) that news went around of her
cheerful but unshakable “Thanks, but no thanks.”

Paul considered this an outright challenge, but he kept his distance and
bided his time. When the water-cooler reported that her husband’s ship
had come off second best in a bout with the Great Barrier Reef, and had
limped to Hobart, Tasmania, for repairs, Paul decided that the day was
upon him. He stated as much in the locker room and got good odds—11 to
2—and somebody to hold the money. It was, as a matter of fact, one of
the suckers who gave him the cue for the single strategic detail which
so far escaped him. He had the time (Saturday night), the place
(obviously her apartment, since she wouldn’t go out) and the girl. All
he had to figure out was how to put himself on the scene, and when one
of the suckers said, “Nobody gets into that place but a for-real husband
or a sick kitten,” he had the answer. This girl had cried when one of
the boss’s tropical fish was found belly-up one morning. She had rescued
a praying mantis from an accountant who was flailing it against the
window with the morning _Times,_ and after she let the little green
monster out, she had then rescued the accountant’s opinion of himself
with a comforting word and a smile that put dazzle-spots all over his
work for the rest of the afternoon. Let her be sorry for you, and ...

So on Saturday night, late enough so he would meet few people in the
halls, but early enough so she wouldn’t be in bed yet, Paul Sanders
stopped for a moment by a mirror in the hallway of her apartment house,
regarded his rather startling appearance approvingly, winked at it, and
then went to her door ana began rapping softly and excitedly. He heard
soft hurrying footsteps behind the door and began to breathe noisily,
like someone trying not to sob. “Who is it? What’s the matter?”

“Please,” he moaned against the panel, “please, please, Mrs. Dunsay,
help me!”

She immediately opened the door a peering inch. “Oh, thank God,” he
breathed and pushed hard. She sprang back with her hands on her mouth
and he slid in and closed the door with his back. She was indeed ready
for bed, as he had hardly dared to hope. The robe was a little on the
sensible side, but what he could see of the gown was fine, just fine. He
said hoarsely, “Don’t let them get me. Don’t let them get me!”

“Mr. _Sanders!_” Then she came closer, comforting, cheering. “No one’s
going to get you. You come on in and sit down until it’s safe for you.
Oh,” she cried as he let his coat fall open, to reveal the shaggy rip
and the bloodstain, “you’re hurt!”

He gazed dully at the scarlet stain. Then he flung up his head and set
his features in an approximation of those of the Spartan boy who denied
all knowledge of a stolen fox while the fox, hidden under his toga, ate
his entrails until he dropped dead. He pulled his coat straight and
buttoned it and smiled and said, “Just a scratch.” Then he sagged,
caught the doorknob behind him, straightened up, and again smiled. It
was devastating.

“Oh, oh, come and sit down,” she cried. He leaned heavily on her but
kept his hands decent, and she got him to the sofa. She helped him off
with his coat and the shirt. It was indeed only a scratch, laboriously
applied with the tips of his nail scissors, but it was real, and she
didn’t seem to find the amount of blood too remarkable. A couple of cc’s
swiped from the plasma lab goes a long way on a white sport shirt.

He lay back limp and breathing shallowly while she flew to get scissors
and bandages and warm water in a bowl, and averted his face from the
light until she considerately turned it out in favor of a dim end-table
lamp, and then he started the routine of not telling her his story
because it was too bad ... he was not fit to be here ... she shouldn’t
know about such things, he’d been such a fool ... and so on until she
insisted that he could tell her anything, anything at all if it made him
feel better. So he asked her to drink with him before he told her
because she surely wouldn’t afterward, and she didn’t have anything but
some sherry, and he said that was fine. He emptied a vial from his
pocket into his drink and managed to switch glasses with her, and when
she tasted it she frowned slightly and looked down into the glass, but
by then he was talking a blue streak, a subdued, dark blue, convoluted
streak that she must strain to hear and puzzle to follow. In twenty
minutes he let it dwindle away to silence. She said nothing, but sat
with slightly glazed eyes on her glass, which she held with both hands
like a child afraid of spilling. He took it away from her and set it on
the end table and took her pulse. He looked at the glass. It wasn’t
empty, but she’d had enough. He moved over close to her.

“How do you feel?”

She took seconds to answer, and then said slowly, “I feel ...” Her lips
opened and closed twice, and she shook her head slightly and was silent,
staring out at him from topaz eyes gone all black.

“Charlotte ... Lottie ... lonely little Lottie. You’re lonesome. You’ve
been so alone. You need me, li’l Lottie,” he crooned, watching her
carefully. When she did not move or speak, he took the sleeve of her
robe in one hand and, moving steadily and slowly, tugged at it until her
hand slipped inside. He untied the sash with his free hand and took her
arm and drew it out of the robe. “You don’t need this now,” he murmured.
“You are warm, so warm ...” He dropped the robe behind her and freed her
other hand. She seemed not to understand what he was doing. The gown was
nylon tricot, as sheer as they come.

He drew her slowly into his arms. She raised her hands to his chest as
if to push him away but there seemed to be no strength in them. Her hand
came forward until her cheek rested softly against his. She spoke into
his ear quietly, without any particular force or expression. “I mustn’t
do this with you, Paul. Don’t let me. Harry is the ... there’s never
been anyone but him, there never must be. I’m ... something’s happened
to me. Help me, Paul. Help me. If I do it with you I can’t live any
move; I’m going to have to die if you don’t help me now.” She didn’t
accuse him in any way. Not once.

Paul Sanders sat quite still and silent. It wasn’t easy. But sometimes
when you rush things they snap out of it, groggy, even sick, but
nonetheless out of it, and then that’s all, brother.... After a silent
time he felt what he had been waiting for, the slow, subsiding shiver,
and the sigh. He waited for it again and it came.

The blood pounded in his ears. Well, boy, if it isn’t now it never will
be.

 


CHAPTER 3

The carcass of the old trunk stood forgotten in the never-visited back
edge of a junk-yard. Gurlick didn’t visit it; he lived in it, more often
than not. Sometimes the weather was too bitterly cold for it to serve
him, and in the hottest part of the summer he stayed away from it for
weeks at a time. But most of the time it served him well. It broke the
wind and it kept out most of the rain; it was dirty and dark and
cost-free, which three items made it pure Gurlick.

It was in this truck, two days after his encounter with the dog and the
hamburger, that he was awakened from a deep sleep by ... call it the
Medusa.

He had not been having his dream of the pile of clothes by the bank of
the pool, and of how he would sit by them and wait, and then of how
_she_ would appear out there in the water, splashing and humming and not
knowing he was there. Yet. This morning there seemed not to be room in
his head for the dream nor for anything else, including its usual
contents. He made some grunts and a moan, and ground his stubby yellow
teeth together, and rolled up to a sitting position and tried to squeeze
his pressured head back into shape from the outside. It didn’t seem to
help. He bent double and used his knees against his temples to squeeze
even harder, and that didn’t help either.

The head didn’t hurt exactly. And it wasn’t what Gurlick occasionally
called a “crazy” head. On the contrary, it seemed to contain a spacious,
frigid, and meticulous balance, a thing lying like a metrical lesion on
the inner surface of his mind. He felt himself capable of looking at the
thing, but, for all that it was in his head, it existed in a frightening
_direction,_ and at first he couldn’t bring himself to look that way.
But then the thing began to spread and grow, and in a few rocking,
groaning moments there wasn’t anything in his head _but_ the new
illumination, this opening casement which looked out upon two galaxies
and part of a third, through the eyes and minds of countless billions of
individuals, cultures, hives, gaggles, prides, bevies, braces, herds,
races, flocks and other kinds and quantities of sets and groupings,
complexes, systems and pairings for which the language has as yet no
terms; living in states liquid, solid, gaseous and a good many others
with combinations and permutations among and between: swimming, flying,
crawling, burrowing, pelagic, rooted, awash; and variously belegged,
ciliated and bewinged; with consciousness which could be called the
skulk-mind, the crash-mind, the paddle-, exaltation-, spring-, or
murmuration-mind, and other minds too numerous, too difficult or too
outrageous to mention. And over all, the central consciousness of the
creature itself (though “central” is misleading; the hive-mind is
permeative)—the Medusa, the galactic man o’ war, the superconscious of
the illimitable beast, of which the people of a planet were here a nerve
and there an organ, where entire cultures were specialized ganglia; the
creature of which Gurlick was now a member and a part, for all he was a
minor atom in a simple molecule of a primitive cell—this mighty
consciousness became aware of Gurlick and he of it. He let himself
regard it just long enough to know it was there, and then blanked ten
elevenths of his mind away from the very idea. If you set before Gurlick
a page of the writings of Immanuel Kant, he would see it; he might even
be able to read a number of the words. But he wouldn’t spend any time or
effort over it. He would see it and discard it from his attention, and
if you left it in front of him, or held it there, he would see without
looking and wait for it to go away.

Now, in its seedings, the Medusa had dropped its wrinkled milt into many
a fantastic fossa. And if one of those scattered spores survived at all,
it survived in, and linked with, the person and the species in which it
found itself. If the host-integer were a fish, then a fish it would
remain, acting as a fish, thinking as a fish; and when it became a
“person” (which is what biologists call the individual polyps which make
up the incredible colonies we call hydromedusae), it would _not_ put
away fishly things. On the contrary, it was to the interest of the
Medusa that it keep its manifold parts specialized in the media in which
they had evolved; the fish not only remained a fish, but in many cases
might become much more so. Therefore in inducting Gurlick into itself,
he remained—just Gurlick. What Gurlick saw of the Medusa’s environments)
he would not look at. What the Medusa sensed was only what Gurlick could
sense, and (regrettably for our pride of species) Gurlick himself. It
could not, as might be supposed, snatch out every particle of Gurlick’s
information and experience, nor could it observe Gurlick’s world in any
other way than through the man’s own eye and mind. Answers there might
be, in that rotted repository, to the questions the Medusa asked, but
they were unavailable until Gurlick himself formulated them. This had
always been a slow process with him. He thought verbally, and his
constructions were put together at approximately oral speed. The end
effect was extraordinary; the irresistible demands came arrowing into
him from immensity, crossing light-years with considerably less
difficulty than it found in traversing Gurlick’s thin tough layer of
subjective soft-focus, of not-caring,
not-understanding-not-wanting-to-under-stand. But reach him they did,
the mighty union of voice with which the super-creature conveyed ideas
... and were answered in Gurlick’s own time, in his own way, and aloud
in his own words.

And so it was that this scrubby, greasy, rottentoothed near-illiterate
in the filthy clothes raised his face to the dim light, and responded to
the demand-for-audience of the most mamestic, complex, resourceful and
potent intellect in all the known universe: “Okay, _okay._ So whaddaya
want?”

He was not afraid. Incredible as this might seem, it must be realized
that he was now a member, a person of the creature; part of it. It no
more occurred to him to fear it than a finger might fear a rib. But at
the same time his essential Gurlickness was intact—or, as has been
pointed out, possibly more so. So he knew that something he could not
comprehend wanted to do something through him of which he was incapable,
and would unquestionably berate him because it had not been done....

But this was Gurlick! This kind of thing could hold no fears and no
surprises for Gurlick. Bosses, cops, young drunks and barkeeps had done
just this to Gurlick all his life! And “Okay, _okay!_ So whaddaya want?”
was his invariable response not only to a simple call but also, and
infuriatingly, to detailed orders. They had then to repeat their orders,
or perhaps they would throw up their hands and walk away, or kick him
and walk away. More often than not the demand was disposed of, whatever
it was, at this point, and that was worth a kick any time.

The Medusa would not give up. Gurlick would not listen, and would not
listen, and ... had to listen, and took the easiest way out, and
subsided to resentful seething—as always, as ever for him. It is
doubtful that anyone else on earth could have found himself so quickly
at home with the invader. In this very moment of initial contact, he was
aware of the old familiar response of anyone to a first encounter with
him—a disgusted astonishment, a surge of unbelief, annoyance, and
dawning frustration.

“So whaddaya want?”

The Medusa told him what it wanted, incredulously, as one explaining the
utter and absolute obvious, and drew a blank from Gurlick. There was a
moment of disbelief, and then a forceful repetition of the demand.

And Gurlick still did not understand.

 


CHAPTER 4

I am Guido, seventeen. I ... think; nearly seventeen. There is always
doubt about us who crawled out of the bones of Anzio and Cassini as
infants, as ... maggots out of the bones when the meat is gone. I never
look back, never look back. Today the belly is full, tomorrow it must be
filled. Yesterday’s empty belly is nothing to fear, yesterday’s full
belly is meaningless today; so never look back, never look back ...

And I am looking back because of Massoni, what he has done. Massoni who
will never catch me, has locked me into his house, never knowing I am
here. While he goes to all the places I live, all the places I hide, I
come straight here to his own house because he is not so clever as I am
and will never dream I am here. Perhaps I shall steal from him and
perhaps I shall kill him. Massoni’s house was part of a fortification in
the war, so they say, concrete walls and an iron door and little slits
for windows on two sides of the single room. But at the back, where the
house is buried in the hill, is plywood, and a panel is loose. Behind is
space to climb. Above the room is a flat ceiling; above that a slanted
roof, so there is a small space that I, Guido, would think of and he,
the clever (but not clever enough) Massoni could live with for years and
never suspect. I come here. I find the iron door unlocked. I slip in. I
find the loose panel, the climbing space, the dark high hole to hide in,
the crack to look through at the room of Massoni. There is time. It is
I, Guido, he is looking for and will look in many places before he comes
back tired.

And he comes, and he is tired indeed, falling onto his bed with his
overcoat on. It is nearly dark and I can see him staring up and I know
he is thinking, _Where is that Guido?_ And I know he is also thinking
(because he talks this way), _If I could understand that Guido I could
be there before he breaks the legs of another beggar, smashes the
stained glass of another church, sets another fire in another print
shop._ ... If Massoni says this aloud I shall laugh aloud, because
Massoni does not understand Guido and never will; because what Guido
does once, Guido will never do again, so that nobody knows where Guido
strikes next.

He sighs, he tightens his lips in the dimness, shakes his head hard. He
is thinking. And though he must make a mistake some day, that is not
good enough. If one knew, if one could understand why, one could
predict, one could be there at the time— before the time, waiting for
him.

He will never understand, never predict, and never, never be there when
Guido strikes. Because Massoni cannot understand anything as simple as
this: that I am Guido, and I hate because I am Guido, and I break and
maim and destroy because I am Guido— because that is reason enough.
Massoni is afraid because Massoni is a policeman. His life is studying
things as they are, and making them into what they should be. But ... he
is not like other policemen. He is a detective policeman, without the
bright buttons and the stick. The other policemen catch breakers of laws
so they may be punished? Some catch them and punish them too. Massoni
likes to say he stops the criminal before there is a crime. Massoni is
indeed not like the other police. They understand, as I understand, that
a crime without witnesses and without clues is not the affair of the
police, and that is why they shrug and try to forget the things Guido
does. Massoni does not forget. Worse, Massoni knows which are Guido’s
acts and which are not. When the acid was put in the compressor tank at
the bus garage and caused the ruin of sixty-one tires, everyone thought
it was Guido’s work. Massoni knew it was not; four different people told
me what he said. He said it was not the kind of ruin Guido would make.
This is why I hide. I never hid before. Eleven times I am arrested and
set free, for no clues, no witnesses. I walk in the daytime and I laugh.
But now Massoni knows which things I do and which I do not. I do not
know how he knows that, so I hide. They are all enemies, every one, but
this Massoni, he is my first and greatest enemy. They all want to catch
me, _after;_ Massoni wants to stop me, _before._ All the rest are making
me a plague, a legend, capable of anything; Massoni credits me only with
what I do, and says—and says—that I did not do this, I could not do
that. Massoni makes me small. Massoni follows everywhere, is behind me;
he is beginning to be at my side too often; he will be ahead of me
waiting soon, if I do not take care ... by himself he will surround me.
I am Guido and I do not underestimate real danger. I am Guido, who looks
and talks and behaves like any other seventeen (I think) year old, who
fills the belly yesterday and today, and possibly tomorrow, any way he
can, like all the others ... but who knows there is more in life than
the belly; there is the hating to be done and too short a life to do it
all if I live to be a hundred and ten; there is ruin to do, breaking
hurting silencing most of all silencing ... silencing their honks and
scrapes and everlasting singing.

Massoni, lying on his bed in his overcoat, sighs and rolls over and sits
up. From there he can reach the litde kerosene stove to light it. When
the flame is blue, he sighs, yawns, lifts the kettle to shake it and put
it back on the fire. He gets up slowly, walks as if his shoes are too
heavy, opens the cabinet, lifts out a—

_No!_ Oh ... _no!_

—lifts out a portable phonograph, sets it on the table, strokes it like
a cat, opens it, takes out crank, fits it in, winds it up. Goes to
cabinet again, takes a record, looks, another, another, finds one and
brings it to the machine—

Not now, not now, Massoni, or you will die in a slow way Guido will plan
for you.

—puts it on, puts the needle down, and again it begins, oh why, why, why
is everyone in this accursed country forever making music, hearing
music, walking from one music to another and humming music while they
walk? Why can Massoni not make a pot of coffee without this? It is the
one thing I, Guido, cannot bear ... and I must bear it now ... and I
cannot ... Ah, look at the fool, swinging his hand, nodding his head, he
who was too tired to move not ninety seconds ago; it is as if he drew
some substitute for sleep from it, and I do believe all these fools can
do it, with their dancing half the night and singing the rest ... Why,
why must they have music? Why must Massoni make it now, when I am
trapped up here hiding and cannot stop it and _cannot stand it.. ._

Oh look, look at him now, what is he taking from under the bed ...
surely not a ... Oh it is, it is, it’s a violin, it’s that horror of
shingles and catgut and the hair of horses’ tails, and he, and he ...

I will not listen, I will wrap my arms around my head, I ... He goes
now, sawing at the thing, and the caterwauling starts and I can’t keep
him out of my head! ...

He plays a lot of notes, this policeman. A lot of notes. He plays with
the record, note for note with the swift fall of notes from the machine.

I look at last. His feet are apart, his chin couched on the ebony rest,
his eyes half asleep, face quiet, left fingers running like an insect.
His whole body ... not sways ... turns a little, turns back, turned by
the music. His right hand with the bow is very ... wide, and free. His
whole body is ... free in a way, like ... flying ... But this _I_
_cannot stand!_ I will—

He has stopped.

The record is finished. He turns it over, sets down the violin on the
table, winds the crank, puts on the needle again. I hold my breath, I
will roar, I will scream if... But he is looking at the kettle, he is at
the cabinet, he is fetching a cookpot, a big can with a cover. Opens.
Empty. He is sighing. He goes to phonograph _(stop it, stop it),_ he
stops it—only to start it over again at the beginning. He takes the big
can, he—

He goes out.

Locking the door.

I am alone with this shriek of music, the violin staring up at me from
its two long twisted slits.

I can run away now. Can I ...?

He has locked the door. Iron door in concrete wall.

And he has left his overcoat. He has left the record playing. He has
left the fire in the little stove, the water about to boil on it.

He will be right back then. No time for me to pick that lock and go. I
must stay here hidden and near that gabble of music and look down at
that violin, and wait, oh my God, and wait.

This country has music through its blood and bones like a disease, and a
man cannot draw in a breath of air that isn’t a-thrum with it. You can
break the legs of a singing beggar and stop his music, you can bum the
printing presses and the stacks of finished paper bearing the fly-specks
and chicken-tracks by which men read the music, and still it does not
stop; you can throw a brick through the shining window of a shrine and
the choir practicing inside will stop, but even as you slip away in the
dark you hear a woman singing to a brat, and around the corner some
brainless fumbler is tinkling a mandolin....

Ah, God curse that screeching record! What madness could possess what
gibbering lunatic to set down such a series of squeaks and stutters? I
do not know. (I will not know.) Once he did it, it should have killed
him, that mish-mash of noises, but they are all mad, the Frenchmen, all
lunatics to begin with, and can be excused for calling it a good Italian
name. Massoni, Massoni, come back and quiet this bellowing box of yours
or I shall surely come down in spite of all safety and good sense and
smash it along with that grinning fiddle! To be caught, to be caught at
last ... it might be worth it, for a moment’s peace and a breath of air
undrenched by the _Rondo Capriccioso._

I bite my tongue until I grunt from the pain.

I do not know what they call it, that music; cannot, will not know!

Someone laughs.

I open my throat, to be silent, breathing like this, breathing like
running up a kilometer of steps ... the door moves. It is Massoni. I
will kill him very soon now. It may be that for one man to dry up the
music in this country is like drying up the River Po with a spoon, but
oh, this one drop of music, this Massoni, surely I will scoop him up and
scatter him on the bank; for if I hate (and I do), and if I hate the
gurgling men call music (and I do), and if I hate policemen (and before
God I do that) then in all the world I hate this maestro-detective most
of all, aside and apart and above all other things. Now I know I have
been a child, with my breaking here, wrecking there. Guido will be
_Guido_ after this killing, so now— But the door swings open and I see
Massoni is not alone, and I sink down again quiet, and watch.

He is bringing a child, an eight-year-old boy with a dirty pale face and
eyes shiny-black as that damned record. They both stop as the door
swings shut and listen to it, both their silly mouths agape as if they
each tried to make another ear of it to hear better. And now Massoni
puts down the covered can and snatches up the violin; now again he makes
the chatter and yammer of notes fly up at me, along with the violin on
the record, and the boy watches, slowly moving his hands together until
they hold each other, slowly making his eyes round. Massoni’s face
sleeps while the one hand swoops, the other crawls, then for a moment he
looks down at the boy and winks at him and smiles a little and lets the
face doze off again, playing notes the way a hose throws water-drops.

Then like slipping into warmth out of the snow, like the sudden taste of
new bread to the starving, a silence fells over the room and I slump,
weak and wet with sweat.

The boy whispers, “Ah-h-h, Signor Massoni, ah-h-h ...”

Massoni puts down the violin and touches it with his fingertips, as if
it were the hair of a beloved instead of a twisted box with a long
handle on it, says, “But Vicente, it’s easy you know.”

“Easy for you, Signor ...”

Massoni laughs. He gets covered can, opens. Puts ground coffee into
cookpot, pours in boiling water, sets kettle aside, puts cookpot on
stove, lowers flame, stirs with long spoon, talks.

I lie limp, wet in the dark, smelling the coffee, watching them.

Massoni says, smiling, “Yes if you like, easy for me, impossible for
you. But it will be easy for you, Vicente. You have two lessons
now—tonight, three, and already what you do is easy for you. When you
have been playing for as many years as I have, you will not play as well
as I; you will play better; you will not be good, you will be great.”

“No, Signor, I could never—”

Massoni laughs and sweeps away the black bubbles on his coffee with his
spoon. He lifts it off the burner and turns out the flame, and sets the
pot on the table to settle. Says, “I tell you, small one, I know what is
good and what is great and what is hopeless. I know better than anybody.
I am a policeman, glad of what I do, and not a good violinist gating out
my heart wanting greatness, because I know what greatness is. Take up
the violin, Vicente. Go on, take it.”

The boy takes the violin from the table and sets the ebony under his
cheek and chin. He is afraid of it and he is past speech, and on him the
violin looks the size of a ‘cello.

“There,” Massoni says, “there before you play a note, it is to be seen.
Your feet placed so, to balance you when your music tilts the world.
Your chest frill like the beginning of a great voice which will be heard
all over the earth. Throat, chin, belonging to the violin and it grown
to you.... Put up the bow, Vicente, but don’t play yet. Ah ... there is
what the violinist calls the Auer arm, and you in your eighth year, your
third lesson! Now put the violin down again, boy, and sit, and we will
talk while I have my coffee. I nave embarrassed you.”

I, Guido, watch from above with the bitter black wonder of the coffee
smell pressing deep in the bridge of my nose, watch the child put down
the violin exquisitely, like some delicate thing sleeping lightly. He
sits before Massoni, who has poured a little coffee and much milk for
him in a large cup, and is ladling in sugar like an American.

Massoni drinks his black and looks through the steam at the boy, says,
“Vincente, such a gift as yours is a natural thing and you must never
feel you are different because of it ... there are those who will try to
make it so; pity them if you like, but do not listen to them. A man with
talent eats, sweats, and cares for his children like any other. And if
talent is a natural thing, remember that water is also, and fire, and
wind; therefore flood and holocaust and hurricane are as natural as
talent, and can consume and destroy you.... You do not understand me,
Vicente? Then ... I shall tell you a story....

“There was a boy who had talent such as yours, or greater ... oh, almost
certainly greater. But he had no kind mother and father like yours,
Vicente, no home, no sisters and brother. He was one of the wild ones
who used to roam the hills after the war like dogs. Where he was born I
cannot tell you, nor how he lived at all; perhaps some of the girls
cared for him when he was a small baby. He was a year and a half old
when he turned up at one of the UNRRA centers, starved, ragged, filthy.

“But you know what that baby could do, at a year and a half? He could
whistle. Yes, he could. He would lie in his bundle of blankets and
whistle, and people would stop and come and cluster around him.

“Perhaps if this happened today he would be cared for just for this one
thing. But then, all was confusion; he was put with one family where the
man died, and then into an orphanage which burned: these were unhappy
accidents, but purely accidents. They could not quench the tiling that
was in him. Before he was three he knew a thousand melodies; he could
sing words he did not understand, before he could speak; he could
whistle the themes of any music he had once heard. He was full of music,
that boy, full to bursting.”

(Above, listening, I, Guido, thought, now Massoni, who is filling you
with such fairy-tales as this?)

Massoni puts his hands around the big cup as if to warm them, searches
down into the black liquid as if to find more of his story, says, “Now a
natural thing like talent, like pure cool mountain water, if you put it
in a closed place, cover it tight, set a fire under it, nothing happens,
and nothing happens, and nothing ... until _blam!_ it breaks the prison
and comes out. But what comes out is no longer pure cool kind water, but
a blistering devil ready to scald, soak, smash whatever is near enough.
You have changed it, you see, by what you have done to it.

“So. There is this small boy, three or four years old, with more music
than blood in his body. And then something happens. He is taken into the
family of a Corfu shepherd and not seen for six years. When we next hear
of him he is a devil, just such a blistering devil as that gout of
tortured mountain water. But he is not a jet of water, he is a human
being; his explosion is not over in a second, but is to go on for years.

“Something has happened to him in the shepherd’s house in those six
years, something which put the cover down tight over what was in him,
and heated it up.”

Vicente, the boy, asks, “What was it?”

Massoni says nothing for a long time, and then says he doesn’t know.
Says, “I mean to find out some day ... if I can. The shepherd is dead
now, the wife disappeared, the other children gone, perhaps dead too.
They lived alone in a rocky place, without neighbors, fishing and
herding sheep and perhaps other things ... anyway, they are gone. All
but this unhappy demon of a boy.”

(I, Guido, feel a flash of rage. Who’s unhappy?) Massoni says, “So you
see what can happen if a talent big enough is held back hard enough.”

Vicente, the boy, says, “You mean to live apart from all music did such
a thing to this child?”

Massoni shakes his head, says, “No, that would not be enough by itself.
It must have been something more—something that was done to him, and
done so thoroughly that this has happened.”

“What things does he do?”

“Cruel, vicious things. They say meaningless things; but they are not
meaningless. He beat an old beggar one night and broke his legs. He set
fire to a print shop. He cut the hydraulic brake tube on a parked bus.
He threw a big building-stone through the stained glass of St.
Anthony’s. He destroyed the big loudspeaker over the door of a
phonograph shop with the handle of a broom. And there are dozens of
small things, meaningless until one realizes the single thread that runs
through them all. Knowing that, one can understand why he does these
things (though not why he wants to). One can also know, in the long list
of small crimes, cruelties and ruinations a city like this must write
each day, each week, which are done by this unfortunate boy and which
are not.”

“Has no one seen him?” asks Vicente.

“Hardly. He took a toy from a child and smashed it under his foot, and
we got a description; but it was a five-year-old child, it was after
dark, it happened very quickly; it was not evidence enough to hold him.
There was a witness when he wrecked the loud-speaker, and when he pushed
a porter’s luggage-truck on to the tracks at the railroad station, but
again it was dark, fast, confused; the witnesses argued with one another
and he went free. He moves like the night wind, appears everywhere,
strikes when he is safe and the act is unexpected.”

(Ah now, Massoni, you are beginning to tell the truth.)

The boy Vincente wants to know how one may be sure all these things are
really the work of this one boy.

Massoni says, “It is the thread that runs through all his acts. In the
shrine, St. Anthony’s, a choir was practicing. The toy he smashed was a
harmonica. On the luggage truck were instrument cases, a trombone and a
flugelhorn. The damaged bus carried members of an orchestra and their
instruments (and a driver who had his wits about him, tried his brakes
even as he began to move, or all might have been killed). The
destruction of the loud-speaker speaks for itself. Always something
about music, something against music.”

“The beggar?”

“A mad old man who sang all the time. You see?”

“Ah,” says the boy Vicente sadly.

“Yes, it is a sad thing. If music angers him so, his days and his nights
must be a furnace of fury, living as he does in the most musical land on
earth, with every voice, whistle, bell, each humming, singing, plunking,
tinkling man, woman and child reaching him with music ... music reaches
him, you see, as nothing can reach you and me, Vicente; it reaches him
more than rain; it splashes on his heart and bones.... Ah, forgive me,
forgive me, boy; I am using your lesson time on a matter of police
business. Yet—it is not time wasted, if you gain from it something about
the nature of talent, and how so natural a thing can break a block of
stone to thrust one tender shoot into the sun, as you have seen a
grass-blade do. And remember, too, that a great talent is not a
substitute for work. A man of small skill, or even good skill like mine,
must practice until his fingers bleed to bring his talent to flower; but
if your talent is great, why then you must work even harder. The
stronger the growth, the more tangled it can become; we want you to make
a tall tree and not a great wide bramble-patch. Now enough of talk. Take
up the violin.”

... So again I Guido descended into hell, while Massoni coaxes and goads
the boy who goads and coaxes the instrument to scratch, squawk, squeak
and weep. In between noises is advice and learning: “A little higher
with the bow arm, Vicente—so; now if there is a board resting on wrist,
elbow, shoulder, I may set a brimming glass there and never spill. And
to this level you must always return.” ...”Na, na, get the left elbow
away from the body, Vicente. Nobody scrunches up arm and fingers that
way to play ... except Joseph Szigeti of course, and you are not going
to be the second Szigeti but the first Vicente Panaori.”

From my hole in the ceiling I Guido watch, and then strangely cease to
watch ... as if watching was a thing to do, to try to do and a thing I
could do or not do ... and as if I ceased trying to do this thing and
became instead something not-alive, like a great gaping street-sewer,
letting everything pour into me. A few minutes ago I am ready to shout,
to come out, to kill—anything to stop this agony. Now I am past that. I
am beaten into a kind of unconsciousness ... no; a sleep of the will;
the consciousness is open and awake as never before. Along with it a
land of blindness with the eyes seeing. I see, but I am past seeing,
past understanding what I see. I do not see them finish. I do not see
mem go. I am, after a long time, aware of what seems to be the sound of
the violin, when the big low G string is touched by one single soft
bounce of the bow, scraping a little under the boy’s fledgling fingers.
Hearing this, over and over, I begin to see normally again and see only
the dark room with a single band of light across it from a street-lamp
outside the wide slit of window. Massoni is gone. Vicente is gone. The
violin is gone. Yet I hear it, the soft scraping _staccato,_ over and
over.

It hurts my throat.

_Hcoo_ ... _hcoo_ ...

It hurts each time, the quiet sound, as if I am the violin being struck
softly, and being so tender, hurting so easily, I softly cry out....

And then I understand that it is not a violin I hear; I am sobbing up
there in the dark. Enraged, I swallow a mouthful of sour, and stop the
noise.

 


CHAPTER 5

“So—whaddaya want?”

The Medusa told him what it wanted, incredulously, as one explaining the
utter and absolute obvious, and drew a blank from Gurlick. There was a
moment of disbelief, and then a forceful repetition of the demand.

And Gurlick still did not understand. Few humans would, for not many
have made the effort to comprehend the nature of the hive-mind—what it
must be like to have such a mind, and further, to be totally ignorant of
the fact that any other kind of mind could exist.

For in all its eons of being, across and back and through and through
the immensities of space it occupied, the Medusa had never encountered
intelligence except as a phenomenon of the group. It was aware of the
almost infinite variations in kind and quality of the _gestalt_ psyche,
but so fused in its experience and comprehension were the concepts
“intelligence” and “group” that it was genuinely incapable of regarding
them as separable things. That a single entity of any species was
capable of so much as lucid thought without the operation of group
mechanisms, was outside its experience and beyond its otherwise
near-omniscience. To contact any individual of a species was—or had been
until now—to contact the entire species. Now, it pressed against
Gurlick, changed its angle and pressed again, paused to ponder, came
back again and, puzzling, yet again to do the exploratory, bewildered
things a man might do faced with the opening of, and penetration
through, some artifact he did not understand. There were tappings and
listenings, and (analogously) pressures this way and that as if to find
a left-hand thread. There were scrapings as for samples to analyze,
prod-dings and pricks as for hardness tests, polarized rayings as if to
determine lattice structures. And in the end there was a—call it a
pressure test, the procedure one applies to clogged tubing or to
oxide-shorts on shielded wire: blow it out. Take what’s supposed to be
going through and cram an excess down it.

Gurlick sat on the floor of the abandoned truck, disinterestedly aware
of the distant cerebration, computation, discussion and conjecture. A
lot of gabble by someone who knew more than he did about things he
didn’t understand. Like always.

Uh!

It had been a thing without sight or sound or touch, but it struck like
all three, suffused him for a moment with some unbearable tension, and
then receded and left him limp and shaken. Some mighty generator
somewhere had shunted in and poured its product to him, and it did a
great many things inside him somehow; and all of them hurt, and none was
what was wanted.

He was simply not the right conduit for such a force. He was a solid bar
fitted into a plumbing system, a jet of air tied into an electrical
circuit; he was the wrong material in the wrong place and the output end
wasn’t hooked up to anything at all.

Spectacular, the degree of mystification which now suffused the Medusa.
For ages untold there had always been some segment somewhere which could
come up with an answer to anything; now there was not. That particular
jolt of that particular force ought to have exploded into the psyche of
every rational being on earth, forming a network of intangible,
unbreakable threads leading to Gurlick and through him to Medusa itself.
It had _always_ happened that way—not almost always, but always. This
was how the creature expanded. Not by campaign, attack, siege,
consolidation, conquest, but by contact and influx. Its “spores,” if
they encountered any life-form which the Medusa could not control,
simply did not function. If they functioned, the Medusa flowed in.
_Always._

From methane swamp to airless rock, from sun to sun through two galaxies
and part of a third flickered the messages, sorting, combining,
test-hypothesizing, calculating, extrapolating. And these flickerings
began to take on the hue of fear. The Medusa had never known fear
before.

To be thus checked meant that the irresistible force was resisted, the
indefensible was guarded. Earth had a shield, and a shield is the very
next thing to a weapon. It _was_ a weapon, in the Medusa’s lexicon; for
expansion was a factor as basic to its existence as Deity to the
religious, as breath or heart beat to a single animal; such a factor may
not, must not be checked.

Earth suddenly became a good deal more than just another berry for the
mammoth to sweep in. Humanity now had to be absorbed, by every measure
of principle, of gross ethic, of life.

And it must be done through Gurlick, for the action of the “spore”
within him was irreversible, and no other human could be affected by it.
The chances of another being in the same sector at the same time were
too remote to justify waiting, and Earth was physically too far from the
nearest Medusa-dominated planet to allow for an attack in force or even
an exploratory expedition, whereby expert mind might put expert hands
(or palps or claws or tentacles or cilia or mandibles) to work in the
field. No, it had to be done through Gurlick, who might be— must
be—manipulated by thought emanations, which are nonphysical and thereby
exempt from physical laws, capable of skipping across a galaxy and back
before a light-ray can travel a hundred yards.

Even while, after that blast of force, Gurlick slumped and scrabbled
dazedly after his staggering consciousness, and as he slowly rolled over
and got to his knees, grunting and pressing his head, the Medusa was
making a thousand simultaneous computations and setting up ten thousand
more. From the considerations of a space-traveling culture deep in the
nebula came a thought in the form of an analogy: as a defense against
thick concentrations of cosmic dust, these creatures had designed
spaceships which, on approaching a cloud, broke up into hundreds of
small streamlined parts which would come together and reunite when the
danger was past. Could that be what humanity had done? Had they a
built-in mechanism, like the chipmunk’s tail, the seacucumber’s
ejectible intestines, which would fragment the hive-mind on contact from
outside, break it up into two and a half billion specimens like this
Gurlick?

It seemed reasonable. In its isolation as the only logical hypothesis
conceivable by the Medusa, it seemed so reasonable as to be a certainty.

How could it be undone, then, and humanity’s total mind restored?
Therein lay the Medusa’s answer. Unify humanity (it thought, reunify
humanity) and the only problem left would be that of influx, if that
influx could not be done through Gurlick directly, other ways might be
found: it had never met a hive-mind yet that it couldn’t enter.

Gasping, Gurlick grated, “Try that again, you gon’ kill me, you hear?”

Coldly examining what it could of the mists of his mind, the Medusa
weighed that statement. It doubted it. On the other hand, Gurlick was,
at the moment, infinitely valuable. It now knew that he could be hurt,
and organisms which can be hurt can be driven. It realized also that
Gurlick might be more useful, however, if he could be enlisted.

To enlist an organism, you find out what it wants, and give it a little
in a way that indicates promise of more. It asked Gurlick then what he
wanted.

“Lea’ me lone,” Gurlick said.

The response to that was a flat negative, with a faint stirring of that
wrenching, explosive force it had already used. Gurlick whimpered, and
the Medusa asked him again what he wanted.

“What do I want?” whispered Gurlick. He ceased, for the moment to use
words, but the concepts were there. They were hate and smashed faces,
and the taste of good liquor, and a pile of clothes by the bank of a
pond: she saw him sitting there and was startled for a moment; then she
smiled and said, “Hello, Handsome.” What did he want? ... Thoughts of
Gurlick striding down the street, with the people scurrying away before
him in terror and the bartenders standing in their open doors, holding
shot-glasses out to him, calling, pleading. And all along South Main
Street, where the fancy restaurants and clubs are, with the soft-handed
hard-eyed big shots who never in their lives had an empty belly, them
and their clean sweet-smelling women, Gurlick wanted them lined up and
he would go down the line and slit their bellies and take out their
dinners by the handful and throw it in their faces.

The Medusa at this point had some considerable trouble interrupting.
Gurlick, on the subject of what Gurlick wanted, could go on with
surprising force for a very long time. The Medusa found it possible to
understand this resentment, surely the tropistic flailing of something
amputated, something denied full function, robbed, deprived. And of
course, insane.

Deftly, the Medusa began making promises. The rewards described were
described vividly indeed, and in detail that enchanted Gurlick. They
were subtly implanted feedback circuits from his own imaginings, and
they dazzled him. And from time to time there was a faint prod from that
which had hurt him, just to remind him that it was still there.

At last, “Oh, sure, sure,” Gurlick said. “I’ll find out about that,
about how people can get put together again. An’ then, boy, I gon’ step
on their face.”

So it was, chuckling, that Daniel Gurlick went forth from his wrecked
truck to conquer the world.

 


CHAPTER 6

Dimity Carmichael sat back and smiled at the weeping girl. “Sex,” she
told Caroline, “is, after all, so _unnecessary.”_

Caroline knelt on the rug with her face hidden in the couch cushion, her
nape bright red from her weeping, the end strands of her hair wet with
tears.

She had come unexpectedly, in mid-afternoon, and Dimity Carmichael had
opened the door and almost screamed. She had caught the girl before she
could fall, led her to the couch. When Caroline could speak, she
muttered about a dentist, about how it had hurt, how she had been so
sure she could make it home but was just too sick, and, finding herself
here, had hoped Dimity would let her lie down for a few minutes....
Dimity had made her comfortable and then, with a few sharp unanswerable
questions (“What dentist: What is his name? Why couldn’t you lie down in
his office? He wanted you out of there as soon as he’d finished, didn’t
he? In fact, he wasn’t a dentist and he didn’t do the kind of operations
dentists do, isn’t that so?”), she had reduced the pale girl to this
sodden sobbing thing huddled against the couch. “I’ve known for a long
time how you were carrying on. And you finally got caught.”

It was at that point, after thinking it out in grim, self-satisfied
silence, that Dimity Carmichael said sex was after all so unnecessary.
“It certainly has done you no good. Why do you give in, Caroline? You
don’t _have_ to.”

“I did, I did ...” came the girl’s muffled voice. “Nonsense. Say you
wanted to, and we’d be closer to the truth. No one _has_ to.”

Caroline said something_—I love_ (or _loved) him so,_ or some such.
Dimity sniffed. “Love, Caroline, isn’t ... _that._ Love is everything
else that can be between a man and a woman, without _that.”_

Caroline sobbed.

“That’s your test, you see,” explained Dimity Carmichael. “We are human
beings because there are communions between us which are not experienced
by—by rabbits, we’ll say. If a man is willing to make some great
sacrifice for a woman, it might be a proof of love. Considerateness,
chivalry, kindness, patience, the sharing of great books and fine music—
these are the things that prove a _man._ It is hardly a demonstration of
manhood for a man to prove that he wants what a rabbit wants as badly as
a rabbit wants it.”

Caroline shuddered. Dimity Carmichael smiled tightly. Caroline spoke.

“What? What’s that?”

Caroline turned her cheek to rest it in her clenching hand. Her eyes
were squeezed closed. “I said ... I just can’t see it the way you do. I
can’t.”

“You’d be a lot happier if you did.”

“I know, I know ...” Caroline sobbed.

Dimity Carmichael leaned forward. “You can, if you like. Even after the
kind of life you’ve lived—oh, I know how you were playing with the boys
from the time you were twelve years old—but that can all be wiped away,
and this will never bother you again. If you’ll let me help you.”

Caroline shook her head exhaustedly. It was not a refusal, but instead,
doubt, despair.

“Of course I can,” said Dimity, as if Caroline had spoken her doubts
aloud. “You just do as I say.” She waited until the girl’s shoulders
were still, and until she lifted her head away from the couch, turned to
sit on her calves, look sideways up at Dimity from the corners of her
long eyes.

“Do what?” Caroline asked forlornly.

“Tell me what happened—everything.”

“You know what happened.”

“You don’t understand. I don’t mean this afternoon—that was a
consequence, and we needn’t dwell on it. I want the cause. I want to
know exactly what happened to get you into this.”

“I won’t tell you his name,” she said sullenly.

“His name,” said Dimity Carmichael, “is legion, from what I’ve heard. I
don’t care about that. What I want you to do is to describe to me
exactly what happened, in every last detail, to bring you to _this,”_
and she waved a hand at the girl, and her “dentist,” and all the parts
of her predicament.

“Oh,” said Caroline faintly. Suddenly she blushed. “I—I can’t be sure
just wh-which time it was,” she whispered.

“That doesn’t matter either,” said Dimity flatly. “Pick your own. For
example the first time with this latest one. All right? Now tell me what
happened—every last little detail, from second to second.” Caroline
turned her face into the upholstery again. “Oh, why?”

“You’ll see.” She waited for a time, and then said, “Well?” and again,
“Look, Caroline; we’ll peel away the sentiment, the bad judgment, the
illusions and delusions and leave you free. As I am free. You will see
for yourself what it is to be that free.”

Caroline closed her eyes, making two red welts where the lids met. “I
don’t know where to begin ...”

“At the beginning. You had been somewhere—a dance, a club ...?”

“A ... a drive-in.”

“And then he took you ...”

“Home. His house.”

“Go on.”

“We got there and had another drink, and—and it happened, that’s all.”

_“What_ happened?”

“Oh, I can’t, I can’t talk about it! Not to you! Don’t you see?”

“I don’t see. This is an emergency, Caroline. You do as I tell you.
Forget I’m me. just talk.” She paused and then said quietly, “You got to
his house.” The girl looked up at her with one searching, pleading look,
and staring down at her hands, began speaking rapidly. Dimity Carmichael
bent close to listen, and let her go on for a minute, then stopped her.
“You have to say exactly how it was. Now—this was in the parlor.”

“L-Living room.”

“Living room. You have to see it all again—drapes, pictures, everything.
The sofa was in front of the fireplace, is that right?”

Caroline haltingly described the room, with Dimity repeating, expanding,
insisting. Sofa here, fireplace there, table with drinks, window, door,
easy-chair. How warm, how large, what do you mean red, _what_ red were
the drapes? “Begin again so I can see it.”

More swift and soft speech, more interruption. “You wore what?”

“The black faille, with the velvet trim and that neckline, you know ...”

“Which has the zipper—”

“In the back.”

“Go on.”

She went on. After a time Dimity stopped her with a hand on her back.
“Get up off the floor. I can’t hear you. Get up, girl.” Caroline rose
and sat on the couch. “No, no; Lie down. Lie down,” Dimity whispered.

Caroline lay down and put her forearms across her eyes. It took a while
to get started again, but at last she did. Dimity drew up an ottoman and
sat on it, close, watching the girl’s mouth.

“Don’t say _it,”_ she said at one point. “There are names for these
things. Use them.”

“Oh, I ... just _couldn’t.”_

“Use them.”

Caroline used them. Dimity listened.

“But what were you feeling all this time?”

“F-Feeling?”

“Exactly.”

Caroline tried.

“And did you say anything while this was going on?”

“No, nothing. Except—”

“Well?”

“Just at first,” whispered the girl. She moved and was still again, and
her concealing arms clamped visibly tighter against her eyes. “I think I
went ...” and her teeth met, her lips curled back, her breath hissed in
sharply.

Dimity Carmichael’s lips curled back and she clenched her teeth and
sharply drew in her breath. “Like that?”

“Yes.”

“Go on. Did he say anything?”

“No. Yes. Yes, he said, ‘Caroline. Caroline. Caroline,’ “ she crooned
softly.

“Go on.”

She went on. Dimity listened, watching. She saw the girl smiling and the
tears that pressed out through the juncture of forearm and cheek. She
watched the feint flickering of white-edged nostrils. She watched the
breast in its rapid motion, not quite like that which would result from
running up stairs, because of the shallow shiver each long inhalation
carried, the second’s catch and hold, the gasping release. “Ah-h-h-h!”
Caroline screamed suddenly, softly. “Ahh ... I thought he loved me, I
did think he loved me!” She wept, and then said, “That’s all.”

“No, it isn’t. You had to leave. Get ready. Hm? What did he say? What
did you say?”

Finally, when Caroline said, “... and that’s all,” there were no
questions to ask. Dimity Carmichael rose and picked up the ottoman and
placed it carefully where it belonged by the easy-chair, and sat down.
The girl had not moved.

“Now how do you feel?”

Slowly the girl took down her arms and lay looking at the ceiling. She
wet her lips and let her head fall to the side so she could look at
Dimity Carmichael, composed in the easy-chair—a chair not too easy, but
comfortable for one who liked a flat seat and a straight back. The girl
searched Dimity Carmichael’s face, looking apparently for shock,
confusion, anger, disgust. She found none of these, nothing but thin
lips, dry skin, cool eyes. Answering at last, she said, “I feel...
awful.” She waited, but Dimity Carmichael had nothing to say. She sat up
painfully and covered her face with her hands. She said, “Telling it was
making it happen all over again, almost real. But—” Again a silence.

“—but it was like ... doing it in front of somebody else. In front of—”

“In front of me?”

“Yes, but not exactly.”

“I can explain that,” said Dimity. “You did it in front of
someone—_yourself. You were watched._ After this, every time, every
single time, Caroline, you will always be watched. You will never be in
such a situation again,” she intoned, her voice returning and returning
to the same note like some soft insistent buzzer, “without hearing
yourself tell it, every detail, every sight and sound of it, to someone
else. Except that the happening and the telling won’t be weeks apart,
like this time. They’ll be simultaneous.”

“But the telling makes it all so ... cheap, almost ... funny!”

“It isn’t the telling that makes it that way. The act is itself
ridiculous, ungraceful, and altogether too trivial for the terrible
price one pays for it. Now you can see it as I see it; now you will be
unable to see it any other way. Go wash your face.”

She did, and came back looking much better, with her hair combed and the
furrows gone from her brows and the corners of her long eyes. With the
last of her makeup gone, she looked even younger than usual; to think
she was actually two years older than Dimity Carmichael was incredible,
incredible.... She slipped on her jacket and took up her top coat and
handbag. “I’m going. I ... feel a lot better. I mean about ... things.”

“It’s just that you’re beginning to feel as I do about ... things.”

“Oh!” Caroline cried from the door, from the depths of her troubles, her
physical and mental agonies, the hopeless complexity of simply trying to
live through what life presented. “Oh,” she cried, “I wish I were like
you. I wish I’d always been like you!” And she went out.

Dimity Carmichael sat for a long time in the not-quite-easy chair with
her eyes closed. Then she rose and went into the bedroom and began to
take off her clothes. She needed a bath; she felt proud. She had a
sudden recollection of her father’s face showing a pride like this. He
had gone down into the cesspool to remove a blockage when nobody else
would do it.

It had made him quite sick, but when he came up, unspeakably filthy and
every nerve screaming for a scalding bath, it had been with that kind of
pride. Mama had not understood that nor liked it. She would have borne
the unmentionable discomforts of the blocked sewer indefinitely rather
than have it known even within the family that Daddy had been so soiled.
Well, that’s the way Daddy was. That’s the way Mama was. The episode
somehow crystallized the great difference between them, and why Mama had
been so glad when he died, and how it was that Dimity’s given name—given
by him—was one which reflected all the luminance of wickedness and sin,
and why Salomé Carmichael came to be known as Dimity from the day he
died. No cesspools for her. Clean, cute, crisp was little Dimity,
decent, pleated, skirted and cosy all her life.

To get from her bedroom into the adjoining bath— seven steps—she bundled
up in the long robe. Once the shower was adjusted to her liking, she
hung up the robe and stepped under the cleansing flood. She kept her
gaze, like her thoughts, directed upward as she soaped. The detailed
revelation she had extracted from Caroline flashed through her mind, all
of it, in a second, but with no detail missing. She smiled at the whole
disgusting affair with a cool detachment. In the glass door of the
shower-stall she saw the ghost-reflection of her face, the
coarse-fleshed, broad nose, the heavy chin with its random scattering of
thick curled hairs, the strong square clean yellow teeth. _I wish I were
like you, I wish I’d always been like you!_ Caroline had said that,
slim-waisted, full-breasted Caroline, Caroline with the mouth which, in
relaxation, pouted to _kiss me,_ Caroline with the skin of a peach,
whose eyes were long jewels of a rare cut, whose hair was fine and
glossy and inwardly ember-radiant. _I wish I were like you ..._ Could
Caroline have known that Dimity Carmichael had yearned all her life for
those words spoken that way by Caroline’s kind of woman? For were they
not the words Dimity herself repressed as she turned the pages of
magazines, watched the phantoms on the stereophonic, technicolored, wide
deep unbearable screen?

It was time now for the best part of the shower, the part Dimity looked
forward to most. She put her hand on the control and let it rest there,
ecstatically delaying the transcendent moment.

... _Be like you ..._ perhaps Caroline would, one day, with luck. How
good not to _need_ all that, how fine and clear everything was without
it! How laughingly revolting, to have a man prove the power of a
rabbit’s preoccupations with his animal strugglings and his breathy
croonings of one’s name, “Salomé, Salomé, Salomé ...” (I mean, she
corrected herself suddenly and with a shade of panic,
“Caroline-Caroline-Caroline.”)

In part because it was time, and partly because of a swift suspicion
that her thoughts were gaining a momentum beyond her control and a
direction past her choice, she threw the control hard over to _Cold,_
and braced her whole mind and body for that clean (surely sexless)
moment of total sensation by which she punctuated her entire inner
existence.

As the liquid fire of cold enveloped her, the lips of Dimity Carmichael
turned back, the teeth met, the breath was drawn in with a sharp,
explosive sibilance.

 


CHAPTER 7

Gurlick sank his chin into his collarbones, hunched his shoulders, and
shuffled. “I’ll find out,” he promised, muttering. “You jus’ let me know
what you want, I’ll find out f’ya. Then, boy, look out.”

At the corner, sprawled out on the steps of an abandoned candy store, he
encountered what at first glance seemed to be an odorous bundle of rags.
He was about to pass it when he stopped. Or was stopped.

“It’s on’y Freddy,” he said disgustedly. “He don’t know nothin’ hardly.”

“Gah dime, bo?” asked the bundle, stirring feebly, and extending a
filthy hand which flowered on the stem of an impossibly thin wrist.

“Well, sure I said somebody oughta know,” growled Gurlick, “but not him,
f’godsakes.”

“Gah dime, bo? Oh ... it’s Danny. Got a dime on ya, Danny?”

“All right, all right, I’ll ast ‘im!” said Gurlick angrily, and at last
turned to Freddy. “Shut up, Freddy. You know I ain’t got no dime.
Listen, I wanna ast you somethin’. How could we get all put together
again?”

Freddy made an effort which he had apparently not considered worth while
until now. He focused his eyes. “Who—you and me? What you mean, put
together?”

“I _tole_ you!” said Gurlick, not speaking to Freddy; then at the
mingled pressure of threat and promise, he whimpered in exasperation and
said, “Just tell me can we do it or not, Freddy.”

“What’s the matter with you, Danny?”

“You gon’ tell me or aincha?”

Freddy blinked palely and seemed on the verge of making a mental effort.
Finally he said, “I’m cold. I been cold for three years. You got a drink
on you, Danny?”

There wasn’t anybody around, so Gurlick kicked him. “Stoopid,” he said,
tucked his chin down, and shuffled away. Freddy watched him for a while,
until his gritty lids got too heavy to hold up.

Two blocks farther, Gurlick saw somebody else, and immediately tried to
cross the street. He was not permitted to. “No!” he begged. “No, no, no!
You can’t ast every single one you see.” Whatever he was told, it was
said in no uncertain terms, because he whined, “You gon’ get me in big
trouble, jus’ you wait.”

Ask he must: ask he did. The plumber’s wife, who stood a head taller
than he and weighed twice as much, stopped sweeping her stone steps as
he shuffled toward her, head still down but eyes up, and obviously not
going to scuttle past as he and his kind usually did.

He stopped before her, looking up. She would tower over him if he stood
on a box; as it was, he was on the sidewalk and she on the second step.
He regarded her like a country cousin examining a monument. She looked
down at him with the nauseated avidity of a witness to an automobile
accident.

He wet his lips, and for a moment the moment held them. Then he put a
hand on the side of his head and screwed up his eyes. The hand fell
away; he gazed at her and croaked, “How can we get together again?”

She kept looking at him, expressionless, unmoving. Then, with a movement
and a blare of sound abrupt as a film-splice, she threw back her head
and laughed. It seemed a long noisy while before the immense capacity of
her lungs was exhausted by that first great ring of laughter, but when
it was over it brought her face down again, which served only to grant
her another glimpse of Gurlick’s anxious filthy race, and caused another
paroxysm.

Gurlick left her laughing and headed for the park. Numbly he cursed the
woman and all women, and all their husbands, and all their forebears.

Into the park, the young spring had brought slim grass, tree buds, dogs,
children, old people and a hopeful ice-cream vendor. The peace of these
beings was leavened by a scattering of adolescents who had found the
park on such a day more attractive than school, and it was three of
these who swarmed into Gurlick’s irresolution as he stood just inside
the park, trying to find an easy way to still the demand inside his
head.

“Dig the creep,” said the one with _Heroes_ on the back of his jacket,
and another: “Or_-bit_!_”_ and the three began to circle Gurlick,
capering like stage Indians, holding fingers out from their heads and
shrilling, “Bee-beep! bee-beep” satellite signals.

Gurlick turned back and forth for a moment like a weathervane in a
williwaw, trying to sort them out. “Giddada year,” he growled.

“Bee-beep!” cried one of the satellites. “Stand by fer _re-yentry!’”_
The capering became a gallop as the orbits closed, swirled around him in
a shouting blur, and at the signal, “Burnout!” they stopped abruptly and
the one behind Gurlick dropped to his hands and knees while the other
two pushed. Gurlick hit the ground with a _whoosh,_ flat on his back
with his arms and legs in the air. Around the scene, one woman cried out
indignantly, one old man’s mouth popped open with shock, and everyone
else, everyone else, laughed and laughed.

“Giddada year,” gasped Gurlick, trying to roll over and get his knees
under him.

One of the boys solicitously helped him to his feet, saying to another,
“Now, Rocky, ya shoonta. Ya shoonta.” When the trembling Gurlick was
upright and the second of the trio—the “Hero”—down on his hands and
knees behind him again, the solicitous one gave another push and down
went Gurlick again. Gurlick, now dropping his muffled pretenses of
threat and counterattack, lay whimpering without trying to rise.
Everybody laughed and laughed, all but two, and they didn’t do anything.
Except move closer, which attracted more laughters.

“Space Patrol! Space Patrol,” yelled Rocky, pointing at the approaching
blue uniform. “Four o’clock high!”

“Esss-cape velocity!” one of them barked; and with their antenna-fingers
clamped to their heads and a chorus of shrill _beep-beeps_ they snaked
through the crowd and were gone.

“Bastits. Lousy bastits. I’ll killum, the lousy bastits,” Gurlick wept.

“Ah right. _Ah_ right! Break it up. Move it along. Ah right,” said the
policeman. The crowd broke it up immediately ahead of him and moved
along sufficiently to close the gap behind, craning in gapmouthed
anticipation of another laugh ... laughter makes folks feel good.

The policeman found Gurlick on all fours and jerked him to his feet, a
good deal more roughly than Rocky had done. “Ah right, you, what’s the
matter with you?”

The indignant lady pushed through and said something about hoodlums.
“Oh,” said the policeman, “hoodlum, are ye?”

“Lousy bastits,” Gurlick sobbed.

The policeman quelled the indignant lady in midprotest with a bland, “Ah
right, don’t get excited, lady; I’ll handle this. What you got to say
about it?” he demanded of Gurlick.

Gurlick, half suspended from the policeman’s hard hand, whimpered and
put his hands to his head. Suddenly nothing around him, no sound, no
face, pressed upon him more than that insistence inside. “I don’t care
there _is_ lotsa people, don’t make me ast now!”

“What’d you say!” demanded the policeman truculently.

“A’right! A’right!” Gurlick cried to the Medusa, and to the policeman.
“All I want is, tell me how we c’n get together again.”

“What?”

“All of us,” said Gurlick. “Everybody in the world.”

“He’s talking about world peace,” said the indignant woman. There was
laughter. Someone explained to someone else that the bum was afraid of
the Communists. Someone else heard that and explained to the man behind
him that Gurlick was a Communist. The policeman heard part of that and
shook Gurlick. “Don’t you go shootin’ your mouth off around here no
more, or it’s the cooler for you. Get me?”

Gurlick sniveled and mumbled, “Yessir. Yessir,” and sidled, scuttled,
cringed away.

“Ah right. Move it along. Show’s over. Ah right, there ...”

When he could, Gurlick ran. He was out of breath before he began to run,
so his wind lasted him only to the edge of the park, where he reeled
against the railing and clung there to whimper his breath back again. He
stood with his hands over his face, his fingers trying to press back at
that thing inside him, his mouth open and noisy with self-pity and
anoxia. A hand fell on his shoulder and he jumped wildly.

“It’s all right,” said the indignant woman. “I just wanted to let you
know, everybody in the whole world isn’t cruel and mean and—and—mean and
cruel.”

Gurlick looked at her, working his mouth. She was in her fifties,
round-shouldered, bespectacled, and most earnest. She said, “You go
right on thinking about world peace. Talking about it too.”

He was not yet capable of speaking. He gulped air, it was like sobbing.

“You poor man.” She fumbled in an edge-flaked patent leather pocketbook
and found a quarter. She held it and sighed as if it were an heirloom,
and handed it to him. He took it unnoticing and put it away. He did not
thank her. He asked, “Do you know?” He pressed his temples in that newly
developed compulsive gesture. “I got to find out, see? I got to.”

“Find out what?”

“How people can get put back together again?”

“Oh,” she said. “Oh, dear.” She mulled it over. “I’m afraid I don’t know
just what you mean.”

“Y’see?” he informed his inner tormentor, agonized. “Ain’t nobody
knows—nobody!”

“Please explain it a little,” the woman begged. “Maybe there’s _some_
one who can help you, if I can’t.” Gurlick said hopelessly, “It’s about
people’s brains, see what I mean, how to make all the brains go together
again.”

“Oh, you poor man ...” She looked at him pityingly clearly certain that
his brains indeed needed putting together again, and _Well, at least he
realizes it, which is a sight more than most of us do._ “I know!” she
cried. “Dr. Langley’s the man for you. I clean for him once a week, and
believe me, if you want to know somebody who knows about the brain, he’s
the one. He has a machine that draws wiggly lines and he can read them
and tell what you’re thinking.”

Gurlick’s vague visualization of such a device flashed out to the stars,
where it had an electrifying effect. “Where’s it at?”

“The machine? Right there in his office. He’ll tell you all about it;
he’s such a dear kind man. He told _me_ all about it, though I’m afraid
I didn’t quite—”

“Where’s it at?” Gurlick barked.

“Why, in his office. Oh, you mean, where. Well, it’s 13 Deak Street, on
the second floor; look, you can almost see it from here. Right there
where the house with the—”

Without another word Gurlick put down his chin and hunched his shoulders
and scuttled off.

“Oh, dear,” murmured the woman, worriedly. “I do hope he doesn’t bother
Dr. Langley too much. But then, he wouldn’t; he _does_ believe in
peace.” She turned away from her good deed and started home.

Gurlick did not bother Dr. Langley for long, and he did indeed bring him
peace.

 


CHAPTER 8

Mbala slipped through the night, terrified. The night was for sleep, for
drowsing in the kraal with one of one’s wives snoring on the floor and
the goats shifting and munching by the door. Let the jungle mutter and
squeak then, shriek and clatter and be still, rustle and rush and roar;
it was proper that it should do all these things. It was full of devils,
as everyone knew, and that was proper too. They never came into the
kraal, and Mbala never went into the dark. Not until now.

_I am walking upside down,_ he thought. The devils had done that. The
top of him had forgotten how to see, and his eyes stretched round and
protuberant against the blackness. But his feet knew the trail, every
root and rock of it. He sidled, because somehow his feet saw better that
way, and his assegai, poised against—what?—was more on the ready.

His assegai, blooded, honorable, bladed now for half its length ... he
remembered the day he had become a man and had stood stonily to receive
it, bleeding from the ceremony, sick from the potions which had been
poured into him and which, though they bloated his stomach, did nothing
to kill the fire-ants of hunger that crawled biting inside him. He had
not slept for two nights and a day, he had not eaten for nearly a week,
and yet he could remember none of these feelings save as detached facts,
like parts of a story told of someone else. The single thing that came
to him fine and clear was his pride when they pressed his assegai into
his hand and called him man. His slender little assegai, with its tiny
pointed tip, its long unmarked shaft. He thought of it now with the same
faint leap of glory it always brought him, but there was a sadness mixed
with it now, and an undertone of primal horror; for although the weapon
which slanted by his neck now was heavy steel, beautiful with carvings,
it was useless ... useless ... and he was less of a man than that young
warrior with his smooth tipped stick, he was less of a man than a boy
was. In the man’s world the assegai was never useless. It might be used
well or ill, that was all. But this was the devil’s world, and the
assegai had no place or purpose here save to comfort his practiced hand
and the tight-strung cords of his ready shoulder and back. It became
small comfort, and by the moment smaller, as he realized its
uselessness. His very manhood became a foolishness like that of old
Nugubwa, whose forearm was severed in a raid, who for once did not die
but mended, and who carried the lost limb about with him until there was
nothing left of it but a twisted bundle like white sticks.

A demon uttered a chattering shriek by his very ear and scampered up
into the darkness; the fright was like a blaze of white light in his
face, so that for long seconds the night was full of floating flashes
inside his eyeballs. In the daytime such a sound and scamper meant only
the flight of a monkey; but here in the dark it meant that a demon had
taken the guise of a monkey. And it broke him.

Mbala was frozen in the spot, in the pose of his fright, down on one
knee, body arched back and to the side, head up, assegai drawn back and
ready to throw at the source of his terror. And then—

He slumped, wagged his head foolishly, and climbed to his feet like an
old old man, both hands on the staff of the spear and its butt in the
ground. He began to trudge forward, balanced no longer on the springs of
his toes, no longer sidewise and alert, but walking flat-footed and
dragging his assegai behind him like a child with a stick. His eyes had
ceased to serve him so he closed them. His feet knew the way. Beside him
something screamed and died, and he shuffled past as if he had heard
nothing. He dimly realized that he was in some way past fear. It was not
any kind of courage. It was instead a stupidity marching with him like a
ring of men, a guard and a barrier against everything. In reality it was
a guard against nothing, and a gnat or a centipede would penetrate it
quite as readily as a lion. But through such a cordon of stupidity,
Mbala could not know that, and so he found a dim content. He walked on
to his yam patch.

With Mbala’s people, the yam patch was a good deal more than a kitchen
garden. It was his treasure, his honor. His women worked it; and when it
yielded well and the bellies of his kin were full, a man could pile his
surplus by his door and sit and contemplate it, and accept the company
of the less fortunate who would come to chat, and speak of anything but
yams while the yearning spittle ran down their chins; until at last he
deigned to give them one or two and send them away praising him; or
perhaps he would give them nothing, and at length they would leave, and
he could sense the bitter curses hiding in the somber folds of their
impassive faces, knowing they could sense the laughter in his own.

Tribal law protecting a man’s yam patch was specific and horrifying in
its penalties, and the tabus were mighty. It was believed that if a man
cleared a patch and cultivated it and passed it on to his son, the
father’s spirit remained to watch and guard the patch. But if a man
broke some tabu, even unknowingly, a devil would drive away the guardian
spirit and take its place. That was the time when the patch wouldn’t
yield, when the worms and maggots attacked, when the elephant broke down
the thorn trees ... and when the grown yams began to disappear during
the night. Obviously no one but a demon could steal yams at night.

And so it was that misfortune, grown tall, would mount the shoulders of
misfortune. A man who lost yams at night was to be avoided until he had
cleansed himself and propitiated the offended being. So when Mbala began
to lose yams at night, he consulted the witch doctor, who at
considerable cost—three links of a brass chain and two goats—killed a
bird and a kid and did many mumbling things with stinking smokes and
bitter potions and spittings to the several winds, and packed up his
armamentarium and hunkered down to meditate and at last inform Mbala
that no demon was offended, except possibly the shade of his father, who
must be furious in his impotence to guard the yams from, not a devil,
but a man. And this man must be exorcised not by devil’s weapons but by
man’s. At news of this, Mbala took a great ribbing from Nuyu, his
uncle’s second son. Nuyu had traveled far to the east and had sat in the
compound of an Arab trader, and had seen many wonders and had come back
with a lot less respect than a man should have for the old ways. And
Nuyu said among howls of laughter that a man was a fool to pay a doctor
for the doctor’s opinion that the doctor could not help him; he said
that he, Nuyu, could have told him the same thing for a third the price,
and any unspoiled child would have said it for nothing. Others did
not—dared not—laugh aloud like Nuyu, but Mbala knew well what went on
behind their feces.

Well, if a man stole his yams at night, he must hunt the man at night.
He foiled completely to round up a party, for though they all believed
the doctor’s diagnosis, still night marches and dealings with demon’s
work—even men doing demon’s work—were not trifles. It was decided after
much talk that this exorcism would bring great honors to anyone so brave
as to undertake it, so everyone in the prospective hunting party
graciously withdrew and generously left the acquisition of such honors
to the injured party, Mbala. Mbala was thereby pressured not only into
going, but also into thanking gravely each and every one of his warrior
friends and kinsmen for the opportunity. This he did with some
difficulty, girded himself for battle, and was escorted to the jungle
margin at evening by all the warriors in the kraal, while his wives
stood apart and wept. The first three nights he spent huddled in terror
in the tallest solid crotch he could find in the nearest tree out of
sight of the kraal, returning each day to sit and glower so fiercely
that no one dared ask him anything. He let them think he had gone each
night to the patch. Or hoped they thought that. On the fourth morning he
climbed down and turned away from the tree to be greeted by the smiling
face of his cousin Nuyu, who waved his assegai and walked off laughing.
And so at last Mbala had to undertake his quest in earnest. And this was
the night during which the demons scared him at last into the numbness
of impenetrable stupidity.

He reached his patch in the blackest part of the night, and slipped
through the thorns with the practiced irregular steps of a modern
dancer. Well into the thickest part of the bush which surrounded his
yams—a bush his people called _makuyu_ and others astralagus vetch—he
hunkered down, rested his hands on his upright spear and his chin on his
forearms. So he was here—splendid. Bad luck, thievery, shame and
stupidity had brought him to this pinnacle, and now what? Man or devil,
if the thief came now he would not see him.

He dozed, hoping for some lightening of the leaden sky, for a suspicious
sound, for anything that would give him a suggestion of what to do next.
He hoped the demons could not see him crouched there in the vetch,
though he knew perfectly well they could. He was stripped of his faith
and his courage; he was helpless and he did not care. His helplessness
commanded this new trick of stupidity. He hid in it, vulnerable to
anything but happily unable to see out. He slept.

His fingers slipped on the shaft of the assegia. He jolted awake, peered
numbly around, yawned and let the weapon down to he across his feet. He
hooked his wide chin over his bony updrawn knees and slept again.

 


CHAPTER 9

“You Doctor Langley?”

The doctor said, “Good God.”

Dear kind man he might be to his cleaning lady, but to Gurlick he was
just another clean man full of knowledges and affairs which Gurlick
wouldn’t understand, plus the usual foreseeable anger, disgust and
intolerance Gurlick stimulated wherever he went. In short, just another
one of the bastits to hate. Gurlick said, “You know about brains?”

The doctor said, “Who sent you here?”

“You know what to do to put people’s brains together again?”

“What? Who are you? What do you want anyway?”

“Look,” said Gurlick, “I got to find this out, see. You know how to do
it, or not?”

“I’m afraid,” said the doctor icily, “that I can’t answer a question I
don’t understand.”

“So ya _don’t_ know anything about brains.”

The doctor sat tall behind a wide desk. His face was smooth and narrow,
and in repose fell naturally into an expression of arrogance. No better
example in all the world could have been found of the epitome of
everything Gurlick hated in his fellow-man.

The doctor was archetype, coda, essence; and in his presence Gurlick was
so unreasonably angry as almost to forget how to cringe.

“I didn’t say that,” said Langley. He looked at Gurlick steadily for a
moment, openly selecting a course of action: Throw him out? Humor him?
Or study him? He observed the glaring eyes, the trembling mouth, the
posture of fear-driven aggressiveness. He said, “Let’s get something
straight. I’m not a psychiatrist.” Aware that this creature didn’t know
a psychiatrist from a CPA, he explained, “I mean, I don’t treat people
who have problems. I’m a physiologist, specializing on the brain. I’m
just interested in how brains do what they do. If the brain was a motor,
you might say I am the man who writes the manual that the mechanic
studies before he goes to work. That’s all I am, so before you waste
your own time and mine, get that straight. If you want me to recommend
somebody who can help you with whatev—”

“You tell me,” Gurlick barked, “you just tell me that one thing and
that’s all you got to do.”

“What one thing?”

Exasperated, adding his impatience with all his previous failures to his
intense dislike of this new enemy, Gurlick growled, “I tole ya.” When
this got no response, and when he understood from the doctor’s
expression that it would get no response, he blew angrily from his
nostrils and explained, “Once everybody in the world had just the one
brain, see what I mean. Now they’s all took apart. All you got to tell
me is how to stick ‘em together again.”

“You seem to be pretty sure that everybody—how’s that again?—had the
same brain once.”

Gurlick listened to something inside him. Then, “Had to be like that,”
he said.

“Why did it have to be?”

Gurlick waved a vague hand. “All this. Buildin’s. Cars, cloe’s, tools,
‘lectric, all like that. This don’t git done without the people all
think with like one head.”

“It did get done that way, though. People can work together
without—thinking together. That is what you mean, isn’t it—all thinking
at once, like a hive of bees?”

“Bees, yeah.”

“It didn’t happen that way with people, believe me. What made you think
it did?”

“Well, it did, thass all,” said Gurlick positively.

A startled computation was made among the stars, and, given the axiom
which had proved unalterably and invariably true heretofore, namely,
that a species did not reach this high a level of technology without the
hive-mind to organize it, there was only one way to account for the
doctor’s incredible statement—providing he did not lie—and Gurlick,
informed of this conclusion, did his best to phrase it. “I guess what
happened was, everybody broke all apart, they on their own now, they
just don’t remember no more. I don’t remember it, you don’t remember it,
that one time you and me and everybody was part of one great big brain.”

“I wouldn’t believe that,” said the doctor, “even if it were true.”

“Sure not,” Gurlick agreed, obviously and irritatingly taking the
doctor’s statement as a proof of his own. “Well ... I still got to find
out how to stick ‘em all together again.”

“You won’t find it out from me. I don’t know. So why don’t you just go
and—”

“You got a machine, it knows what you’re thinkin’,” said Gurlick
suddenly.

“I have a machine which does nothing of the kind. Who told you about me,
anyway?”

“You show me that machine.”

“Certainly not. Look, this has been very interesting, but I’m busy and I
can’t talk to you any more. Now be a good—”

“You got to show it to me,” said Gurlick in a terrifying whisper; for
through his fogbound mind had shot his visions (she’s in the water up to
her neck, saying, _Hello, Handsome,_ and he just grins, and she says,
_I’m coming out,_ and he says, _Come on then,_ and slowly she starts up
toward him, the water down to her collarbone, to her chest, to—) and a
smoky curl of his new agony; he had to get this information, he _must._

The doctor pressed himself away from his desk a few inches in alarm.
“That’s the machine over there. It won’t make the slightest sense to
you. I’m not trying to hide anything from you—it’s just that you
wouldn’t understand it.”

Gurlick sidled over to the equipment the doctor had pointed to. He stood
looking at it for a moment, flashing a cautious ratlike glance toward
the doctor from time to time, and pulling at his mouth. “What you call
this thing?”

“An electroencephalograph. Are you satisfied?”

“How’s it know what you’re thinkin’?”

“It doesn’t. It picks up electrical impulses from a brain and turns them
into wavy lines on a strip of paper.”

Watching Gurlick, the doctor saw clearly that in some strange way his
visitor was not thinking of the next question; he was waiting for it. He
could see it arrive.

“Open it up,” said Gurlick.

“What?”

“Open it. I got to look at the stuff inside it.”

Again that frightening hiss: “I got to see it.”

The doctor sighed in exasperation and pulled open the file drawer of his
desk. He located a manual, slapped it down on the desk, leafed through
it and opened it. “There’s a picture of it. It’s a wiring diagram. If it
makes any sense to you it’ll tell you more than a look inside would tell
you. I hope it tells you that the thing’s far too complicated for a man
without train— “

Gurlick snatched up the manual and stared at it. His eyes glazed and
cleared. He put the manual down and pointed. “These here lines is
wires?”

“Yes.”

‘‘This here?”

“A rectifier. It’s a tube. You know what a tube is.”

“Like radio tubes. Electric is in these here wires?”

“This can’t mean anyth—”

“What’s this here?”

“Those little lines? Ground. Here, and here, and over here the current
goes to ground.”

Gurlick placed a filthy fingertip on the transformer symbol. “This
changes the electric. Right?” Dumbfounded, Langley nodded. Gurlick said,
“Regular electric comes in here. Some other land comes in here. What?”

“That’s the detector. The input. The electrodes mean whatever brain the
machine is hooked up to feeds current in there.”

“It ain’t very much.”

“It ain’t,” mimicked the doctor weakly, “very much.”

“You got one of those strips with the wavy lines?” Wordlessly the doctor
opened the drawer, found a trace, and tossed it on top of the diagram.
Gurlick pored over it for a long moment, referring twice to the wiring
diagram. Suddenly he threw it down. “Okay. Now I found out.”

“You found out what?”

“What I wanted.”

“Will you be kind enough to tell me just what you found?”

“God,” said Gurlick disgustedly, “how sh’d I know?” Langley shook his
head, suddenly ready to laugh at this mystifying and irritating
visitation. “Well, if you’ve found it, you don’t have to stick around.
Right?”

“Shut up,” said Gurlick, cocking his head, closing his eyes. Langley
waited.

It was like hearing one side of a phone conversation, but there was no
phone. “How the hell I’m supposed to do _that?”_ Gurlick demanded at one
point, and later, “I gon’ need money for anything like that. No, I
can’t. I can’t, I tell ya; you just gon’ git me in th’ clink.... What
you think he’s gon’ be doin’ while I take it?”

“Who are you talking to?” Langley demanded.

“I dunno,’ said Gurlick. “Shut up, now.” He fixed his gaze on the
doctor’s face, and for seconds it was unseeing. Then suddenly it was
not, and Gurlick spoke to him: “I got to have money.”

“I’m not giving any handouts this season. Now get out of here. ‘

Gurlick, showing all the signs of an unwelcome internal goading, came
around the desk and repeated his demand. As he did so, he saw for the
very first time that Doctor Langley sat in a wheelchair.

That made all the difference in the world to Gurlick.

 


CHAPTER 10

Henry was tall. He stood tall and sat tall and had a surprisingly adult
face, which made him all the more ridiculous as he sat through school
day after day, weeping. He did not cry piteously or with bellows of rage
and outrage, but almost silently, with a series of widely spaced, soft,
difficult sniffs. He did what he was told (_Get in line_ ... _move your
chairs, it’s story time ... fetch the puzzles ... put away the paints_)
but he did not speak and would not play or dance or sing or laugh. He
would only sit, still as a spike, and sniff Henry was five and
kindergarten was tough for him. Life was tough for him. “Life is tough,”
his father was fond of saying, “and the little coward might as well
learn.”

Henry’s mother disagreed, but deviously. She lied to everyone
concerned—to her husband, to Henry’s teacher, to the school psychologist
and the principal and to Henry himself. She told her husband she was
shopping in the mornings but instead she was sitting in the corner of
the kindergarten room watching Henry crying. After two weeks of this the
psychologist and the principal corralled her and explained to her that
the reality of home involved having her at home, the reality of school
involved _not_ having her at school, and Henry was not going to face the
reality of school until he could experience it without her. She agreed
immediately, because she always agreed with anyone who had a clear
opinion about anything, went back to the room, told the stricken Henry
that she would be waiting just outside, and marched out. She completely
overlooked the feet that Henry could see her from the window, see her
walk down the path and get into her car and drive away. If he had any
composure left after that it was destroyed after a few minutes when,
having circled the block and concealed her car, she crept back past the
_Keep Off the Grass_ sign, and spent the rest of the morning peeping in
the window. Henry saw her right away, but the teacher and the principal
didn’t catch on to it for weeks. Henry continued to sit stiffly and hiss
out his occasional sobs, wondering numbly what there was about school so
terrifying as to make his mother go to such lengths to protect him, and,
whatever it was, feeling a speechless horror of it.

Henry’s father did what he could about Henry’s cowardice. It pained him
because, though he was certain it didn’t come from his side, other
people might not know that. He told Henry ghost stories about sheeted
phantasms which ate little boys and then sent him up to bed in the dark,
in a room where there was a hot-air register opening directly into the
ceiling of the room below. The father had troubled to spread a sheet
over the register and when he heard the boy’s door open and close, he
shoved a stick up through the register and moaned. The white form rising
up out of the floor elicited no sound or movement from Henry, so the
father went upstairs, laughing to see the effect he had not heard. Henry
stood as stiff as ever, straight and tall, motionless in the dark, so
his father turned on the light and looked him over, and then gave him a
good whaling. “Five years old,” he told the mother when he got back
downstairs, “and he wets his pants yet.”

He jumped out shouting at Henry from around corners and hid in closets
and made animal noises and he gave him ruthless orders to go out and
punch eight- and ten-year-olds in the nose and warmed his seat for him
when he refused, but he just couldn’t seem to make the dirty little
sissy into anything else. “Blood will tell,” he used to say knowingly to
the mother who had never stood up to anyone in her life and had
manifestly tainted the boy. But he clung to the hope that he could do
something about it, and he kept trying.

Henry was afraid when his parents quarreled, because the father shouted
and the mother wept; but he was afraid when they did not quarrel too.
This was a special fear, raised to its peak on the occasion when the
father spoke to him pleasantly, smiling. Undoubtedly the father himself
did not realize it, but his pattern for punishing the boy was invariably
a soft-voiced, smiling approach and a sudden burst of brutality, and
Henry had become incapable of discriminating between a genuine
pleasantry and one of these cheerful precursors to punishment. Meanwhile
his mother coddled and cuddled him secretly and unsystematically,
secretly violated his father’s deprivations by contrabanding to him too
much cookies and candy, yet all the while turned a cold and unresponsive
back to any real or tacit plea for help in the father’s presence.
Henry’s natural curiosity, along with his normal rebelliousness, had
been thoroughly excised when they first showed themselves in his second
and third years, and at five he was so thoroughly trained that he would
take nothing not actually handed to him by a recognized authority, go
nowhere and do nothing unless and until clearly instructed to do so.
Children should be seen and not heard. Do not speak unless spoken to.
“Why didn’t you poke that kid right in the nose? Why? _Why?_”

_ _“Daddy, I—”

“Shaddup, you little yellow-belly. I don’t want to hear it.”

So tall little, sad little Henry sat sniffing in kindergarten, and was
numbly silent everywhere else.

 


CHAPTER 11

After clubbing Dr. Langley with the floor lamp, Gurlick rummaged around
as ordered, and, bearing a bundle, went shopping. The Medusa permitted
him to shop for himself first, quite willing to concede that he knew the
subtleties of his own matrix better than it did. He got a second-hand
suit from a hockshop in the tenderloin district, and a shave and a trim
at the barber college. Esthetically the improvement was negligible;
socially it was enormous. He was able to get what he wanted, though none
of it was easy, since he personally knew the names of none of the things
he was compelled to buy. Probably the metal samples were hardest of all
to acquire; he had to go into an endless succession of glassy-eyed
silences before a bewildered lab supply clerk undertook to show him a
periodic table of the elements. Once he had that, things moved more
rapidly. By pointing and mumbling and asking and trancing, he acquired
lab demonstration samples of nickel, aluminum, iron, copper, selenium,
carbon and certain others. He asked for but could not afford deuterium,
four-nines pure tantalum, and six-nines silver. The electrical-supply
houses frustrated him deeply on the matter of small-gauge wire with a
square cross-section, but someone at last directed him to a
jewelry-findings store and at last he had what he wanted.

By now he was burdened with a wooden crate rigged by an accommodating
clerk into something approximating a foot-locker in size and shape, with
a rope handle to carry it by. His destination was decided after a
painful prodding session by the Medusa, which dug out of Gurlick’s
unwilling brain a memory that Gurlick himself had long ago let vanish—a
brief and unprofitable stab at prospecting, or rather at carrying the
pack for a friend who was stabbing at it, years ago. The important facet
of the memory was an abandoned shack miles from anywhere, together with
a rough idea of how to get there.

So Gurlick took a bus, and another bus, and stole a jeep and abandoned
it, and at last, cursing his tormentors, slavering for his dream, and
wailing his discomfort, he walked.

Heavy woods, an upland of scrub pine and dwarf maple, then a jagged rock
ridge—that was it; and the roofless remnant of the shack like a patch of
decay between and against the stained tooth-roots of the snaggly ridge.

More than water, more than food or to be left alone, Gurlick wanted
rest, but he was not allowed it. Panting and sniffling, he fell to his
knees and began to fumble with the ropes on his burden. He took out the
mercury cells and the metal slugs and the wire and tube-sockets, and
began to jumble them together. He didn’t know what he was doing and he
didn’t have to. The work was being done by an aggregate of computing
wills scattered across the heavens, partly by direct orders, partly by a
semi-direct control, brain to neurone, bypassing that foggy swamp which
comprised Gurlick’s consciousness. Gurlick disliked the whole thing
mightily, but except for a lachrymose grumble, no protest was possible.
So he blubbered and slaved, and did not, could not, let up until it was
finished.

When it was finished, Gurlick was released. He stumbled away from it, as
if a rope under tension had tied him and was suddenly cut. He fell
heavily, reared up on his elbows to blink at the thing, and then
exhaustion overcame him and he slept.

When he fell asleep it was a tangle of wires and components, a stack of
dissimilar metals strangely assembled, and with ... capabilities. While
he slept, the thoughts from the stars operated it, directly at last, not
needing his blunt fumbling fingers. Within one of the circlets of square
wire, a small mound of sand began to smoke. It rose suddenly and drifted
down, rose again and drifted down, and lay finally smooth and flat. A
depression of an unusual shape appeared in it. A block of Invar tumbled
end over end from the small pile of metals and dropped into the sand. It
slumped, melted, ran and was cast. Another piece was formed, then
another, and with a swirl like the unpredictable formation of a
dust-devil, the pieces whirled and fell together, an assembly. A coil of
enameled copper wire rolled to the sand bed and stopped rolling ... but
continued to rotate, as its free end crawled outward to the assembly,
snaked here, there, around a prong. A faint smell of burning, and the
wire was spot-welded in seven places, and burned through where it was
not needed.

Now Gurlick’s original conglomeration began to shed its parts, some
being invisibly shoved aside, others being drawn in to join the growing
aggregate. Sometimes there was a long pause as if some inhuman digestive
process were going on within the growing machine; then it would shudder
as if shaken more tightly together, or it could thrust out a new
sub-assembly to one side, which in turn would erect a foot-high T-shaped
mast which would begin to swing from side to side as if seeking. Or
there would be a flurry of activity as it tried and rejected materials
in rapid succession; after one such scurry, its T-headed mast aimed at
the rock near-by. There was a tense moment, a flicker of violet corona
discharge; a great bite appeared in the rock, and a cold cloud of
rock-dust which drifted over to the new machine and was absorbed into
it—traces of silver, traces of copper, and certain borosilicates.

And when it was finished, it was ... it was what Gurlick had built.
However, it bore the same relation to the original as a superheterodyne
receiver does to a twenty-cent home-rigged crystal set. Like its
predecessor, it began, on the instant of its completion, to build
another, more advanced version of itself.

 


CHAPTER 12

Tony Brevix and his wife and their four kids and the cat were moving.
Tony drove the truck, a patched, rusted, flap-fendered quarter-ton panel
truck with an immense transmission, a transmogrified rear end, and a
little bitty motor that had rated 42 horsepower American when it was
new, which was certainly not recently. In the truck were almost all of
their household goods, carefully not packed in boxes, but stacked,
folded, wadded and rodded down until the entire truck body was solid as
a rubber brick. With Tony rode one and occasionally two of the children,
who for children’s mysterious reasons counted it a privilege to be
subjected to the cold, the oil-smoke from the breather which came up
through the holes under the floorboard, and the vehicle’s strange
slantwise gait as it carried its eightfold overload on only three
ancient shock-absorbers. The cat did not ride in the truck, as there was
no glass in the side windows.

Atty Brevix (her name, infuriatingly, was Beatitude, which made Batty
and Titty and even, in the midst of an argument, Attitude) drove the
station wagon, a long, hushed, low, overpowered this-year’s dream-boat
with lines as clean as those of a baseball bat and an appetite like a
storm sewer. She drove with great skill and even greater trepidation,
since she had misplaced her driver’s license some weeks earlier and was
convinced that this information was marked on the sides of their caravan
as in neon lights. It had grown dark at the end of their second day on
the road; they had taken a wrong turning and were miles away from their
chosen track, although still going in the desired direction, and they
began bitterly to regret their decision to make the remaining eighty
miles in one jump rather than stop at a motel again. Nerves were raw,
bladders acreak; two of the children were whining, one screaming, and
four-year-old Sharon, who was always either taking or sleeping,
blissfully slept. The cat set up a grating reiteration of one note, two
of them every three seconds, while at a dead run it made the rounds of
all glass areas of the station wagon, of which there were many. Every
time it ran across Atty’s shoulders she bit down on her back teeth until
her jaw ached. The baby had wriggled clear of his lashing and was trying
to stand up in the car-bed, so Atty drove with one hand on the wheel and
one on his chest. Every time he sat up she pushed him down, and every
time she pushed him down he screeched. In the truck Tony drove grimly,
squinting through a windshield so spider-webbed with scratches that
oncoming lights made the whole thing totally opaque. Carol, five and one
of the weepers, and Billy, eight and a whiner, were the pair privileged
to ride the truck, and while Billy described in incessant detail the
food he wasn’t getting, Carol cried steadily. It was a monotone bleat,
rather like that of the cat, from whom she had probably learned it, and
denoted no special sorrow but only an empty stomach. She would cease it
completely at the first loom of light from an oncoming car, and announce
the obvious: “Here comes another one. Summon a _bish._ Summon a _bish.”_

And Billy would cease his listings (“Why _cant_ I have a chocklit
maltit? I bet I could drink three chocklit maltits. I bet I could drink
four chocklit maltits. I bet I could drink five ...”) to say, “Carol
shoon’t say summon’ a bish, pop. Hey, _Pop!_ Carol’s sayin’ summon a
bish.”

And Tony would say, “Don’t say that, Carol,” whereupon the lights of the
oncoming vehicle would be upon him, and in dedicated attention he would
slit his eyes, set his jaw, and say precisely what Carol was trying to
repeat.

Tony led, the car followed, it being somehow the male responsibility to
find the right road. (They were not on the right road.) For some time he
had been aware of the station wagon’s headlights flashing on and off in
his rear-view mirror. Each time he noticed it he cheerily flashed his
own lights in acknowledgment, and kept going. After about an hour, the
station wagon whisked by him like a half-heard insult and pulled in
front, glaring at him with angry brakelights. He did his best to stop in
time, but Atty, though an excellent driver, had overlooked the detail of
the load he was carrying, and the feet that stopping the wheels of the
truck and stopping the truck itself, were consecutive and not concurrent
circumstances. In short, he ran into the back of the station wagon.

There was a moment of total cacophony. Tony closed his eyes, covered his
ears, and let it pass him. He was then aware of an urgent tugging at his
sleeve, and “Pop! Pop!”

“Yes, Billy. Carol, shut up a minute.” Carol was wailing.

“You run into the station wagon, Pop.”

“I noticed that,” said Tony with heroic control.

“Pop ...”

“Yes, Billy.”

“Why did you run into the station wagon?”

“Just felt like it, I guess.” He got out. “You stay here and see if you
can make Carol happy.”

“Okay, Pop.” To Carol, “Shut up, mudface.” Carol’s wail became an angry
screech. Tony sighed and walked to the front of the truck. There was no
breakage, just “Bendage,” he murmured, and walked up to the driver’s
side of the station wagon. Atty was unpinning the baby. He thumped on
the window and she rolled it down. She said something, but he couldn’t
hear it. The noise in there was classic. “What?” he shouted.

“I said, why didn’t you stop?”

He glanced back vaguely at the crumpled front end of the truck. “I
_did.”_

“Here, hold him.” He held the baby under the armpits while she relieved
him of several soggy fabrics. “You might have killed all of us. Would
you believe it, Sharon’s still asleep. What do you think I was blinking
my lights for?”

“I thought you just wanted to say hello.”

“I told you at the gas station to find some place along the road to stop
so we could eat. Now everything’s cold. Linda, you’re six years old so
_stop_ that yelling!”

“What do you mean cold?”

“Our _dinner._ There’s a sweet big boy, now you feel _much_ better.” The
baby screamed _much_ louder.

“I didn’t know we had any dinner. You must’ve bought it while I had
Carol in the men’s room. What’d you want me to take her in the men’s
room for anyway? It was awful. There was a guy pounding on the—”

“Hey, Mom!” This from Billy, who had ranged up behind Tony. “You know
what? Pop ran spang into the station wagon!”

“Get back in the truck.”

“Stay here, Billy. It’s Sharon’s turn to ride in the truck anyway. We’re
going to eat right here, right now.”

“Aw, gee, I didn’t get to ride but a little tiny bit. Did you buy some
choclit maltits, Mom? I bet I could drink seven—”

“Gosh, honey,” said Tony, “let’s go on at least until we find a place
with some hot coffee and—”

“Is there a bathroom here?” demanded Linda at the top of her voice. “I
got to—”

“Yeh, and a bathroom,” finished Tony.

“I will not drive another inch with this hungry baby and these screaming
children and my _back_ hurts.”

“Well, I say let’s go on,” said Tony firmly, and then wheedled, “Come
on, honey. You know you’ll be glad you did.”

At that moment the cat, having reversed his orbit, caromed off the
windshield and shot out the window as if he had been launched with
boosters.

“You win,” said Tony. “It’ll take an hour to round him up. Where’s that
dinner?”

“Right here,” said Atty composedly. She reached back of the seat and
_“Oh!”_

She gingerly lifted out a square white cardboard box and opened it. Tony
said, “What did you get?”

“Cheeseburgers,” said Atty in stricken tones, “two with catchup and
relish. Milk. Tomato juice. Dill pickles. Black coffee and rice pudding.
And”—she peered down—”blueberry pie. Here, dear. I’m not hungry.”

Tony thrust his head in a little farther and, in the glow from the dome
light, gazed into the box. It took a moment for his eyes to orient, as
sometimes happens with an unexpected close-up on a TV screen: what _is_
that? and then he found himself looking down on what looked like the
relief map of some justifiably forgotten, unwanted archipelago. In a sea
of cold curdled milk and tomato juice was a string of hamburger islands
on whose sodden beaches could be seen the occasional upthrust prow of a
wrecked and sunken dill pickle. Just under the surface blueberries
bobbed, staring up at him like tiny cataracted eyeballs. Over to the
northeast, a blunt island of rice pudding gave up its losing battle and,
before his eyes, disappeared under the waves.

“I’m not hungry either,” Tony said. Atty looked at him and tears started
from her lids.

“I put it on edge,” she said, tapping the limp box. “It seemed to take
up so much room lying flat.” And suddenly she began to laugh.

“Whatcha got? Whatcha got?” demanded Billy, and when, wordless, his
father had brought out the box, he happily plunged in with both grimy
hands. “Boy, oh boy, pickles ...”

They left it with him and began the complex process of getting the
company’s bladders wrung out in the roadside bushes.

The four-year-old Sharon, woke contentedly in the back of the station
wagon. She unwound her blanket and stretched. She was content; it had
been a happy dream. She couldn’t remember it, but it must have been a
happy one because of the way she felt now. She lay drowsily listening to
sounds near and far.

A wild scream, and “Mommy! Mom_-meeee!_ Billy frowed sand on my bottom!”

“Billy!”

Protestingly, “No, I didn’t she’s a liar and I didn’t throw nothing I
kicked it a little.”

Daddy: “Honey, where’s that little pack of Kleenex?” Mommy: “Carol’s got
it, dear. In the bushes.” Daddy: “Are you out of your MIND? The truck
registration’s in there!”

“Puss-puss-puss! Here, puss ...” Bang bang with a spoon on the cat’s
aluminum feeding dish.

Sharon became aware of the clean cool smell of fresh air, and the open
tailgate near by. She slid silently out so that mean old Billy wouldn’t
see her and, clutching Mary Lou (an eyeless, naked, brokenfooted,
mattress-haired doll which was, above all things on earth, Sharon’s most
beloved), she slid into the dark bushes. “Don’t be ‘fraid,” she told
Mary Lou. “It’s the _friendly_ dark.” She pressed on, stopped once to
look back and be comforted at the beaconlike glow from the lights of car
and the truck, and then slipped over a ridge into velvety shadow, so
dark that it seemed to be darkness itself that swallowed almost all
sound from the road.

“Now that ol’ Billy never find us,” said Sharon to Mary Lou.

At the road, Atty said to Tony, “I don’t feel tired, dear, just numb.
Let’s go all the way and get it over with.”

“Yeah. Maybe we can slide into a dog-wagon and get a hot cup of coffee
while the kids sleep.”

“I wouldn’t risk it,” said Atty positively. “They’ll sleep now and it
will be quiet, and for the sake of a little quiet I can stand an empty
stomach. I’ve had a belly fall.”

“Yes, dear,” said Tony. “So we’ll drive all the way. Next stop, the new
house.”

Later, in the truck, Linda said sleepily, “Isn’t it Sharon’s turn with
me in the truck, Daddy?”

And Tony squinted into the windshield and said, “Hmm? Sharon? Oh, she
slept through the whole thing.”

And in the station wagon, Billy called, “Hey, Mom, where’s Sharon?”

Atty said, “Shh. The baby’s asleep. It’s Sharon’s turn to ride with
Daddy. Go to sleep.”

At which time Sharon stood on the ridge, turning round and round and
looking for the guiding loom of lights. There was none, not anywhere but
in the changing canyons of the cloudy sky where the stars peeped
through. Turning and turning, Sharon lost the road, and herself was
lost.

“Reely, it’s the friendly dark,” she shakily assured her doll. In the
friendly (oh please be friendly) dark, she began to walk carefully, and
after a while she heard running water.

 


CHAPTER 13

When Gurlick fell asleep, the thing he had built was a tangle of
components, possessing (to any trained terrestrial eye) a certain
compelling symmetry and an elaborate uselessness (but how useless would
a variable frequency oscillator seem to a wise bushman or a savage from
Madison Avenue?); but when he awoke, the picture was different. Very
different.

What Gurlick had built was not, in actuality, a matter receiver,
although it acted as if such a thing were a possibility. It was, rather,
a receiver and amplifier for a certain “band” in the “thought spectrum”
—each of these terms being analogous and general. The first receiver,
and its be-Gurlicked attachments, turned information into manipulation,
and constructed from the elemental samples Gurlick had supplied it a
second and much more efficient machine of far greater capacity. This in
turn received and manipulated yet a third receiver and manipulator; and
this one was a heavy-duty device. The process was, in essence, precisely
that of the sailor who takes a heaving-line to draw in a rope which
brings him a hawser. In a brief span of hours, machines were making
machines to use available matter to make machines which would scout out
and procure locally unavailable matter, which was returned to the site
and used by other machines to make yet others, all specialized, and
certain of these in immense numbers.

Gurlick came unbidden out of that dream, where he sat on the bank on the
pile of clothes, shiny black and red and an edge of lacy white, and was
greeted (_Hello, Handsome_) by her who so boldly (after he refused to go
away) began to come up out of the water, slowly and gleaming in the
sunlight, the water now down to her waist, and as she began to smile—he
awoke in the midst of an incredible clanking city. Around him were row
upon row of huge blind machines, spewing forth more machines by the
moment: tanklike things with long snake necks and heads surrounded by a
circlet of trumpets; silver balls ten feet in diameter which now and
then would flick silently into the air, too fast to be believed, too
silent; low, wide, massive devices which slid snail-like along roads of
their own making, snouted with projectors which put out strange beams
which would have been like light if they were not cut off at the far end
as if by an invisible wall; and with these beams sniffing along the
rocks, some of which trembled and slumped; and then there would be a
movement up the beam to the machine, and from behind the machine silvery
ingots were laid like eggs while fine cold dust gouted off to the side.

Gurlick awoke surrounded by this, blinking and staring stupidly. It was
some minutes later that he realized where he was—atop a column of earth,
ten feet in diameter and perhaps thirty feet high. All around for
hundreds of yards the ground had been excavated and ... used. At the
edge of his little plateau was a small domed box which, when his eye
fell on it, popped open and slid a flat bowl of hot, mushlike substance
toward him. He picked it up and smelled it. He tasted it, shrugged,
grunted, raised the bowl to his lips and dozed its contents into his
mouth with the heel of his hand. Its warmth in his belly was soothing,
then puzzling, then frightening, the way it grew. He put his hands to
his belt-line, and abruptly sat down, staring at his numb and
disobedient legs. Dazed, he looked out across the busy scene and saw
approaching him a stilted device with endless treads for feet and a
turtlelike housing, perhaps a dozen feet in diameter. It straddled his
imprisoning column of earth, achieving a sort of mechanical tiptoe, and
the carapace began to descend over him and all his perch like a great
slow candle-snuffer. He now could not speak, nor could he sit up any
longer; he fell back and lay helpless, staring up and silently screaming
...

But as the device, its underside alive with more wriggling tool-tipped
limbs than has a horseshoe crab, slowly covered him he was flooded with
reassurance and promise, a special strength (its specialty: to make him
feel strong but in no wise be strong) and the nearest thing to peace
that he had ever known. He was informed that he was to undergo a simple
operation, and that it was good, oh, good.

 


CHAPTER 14

Who has sent me to Massoni, and Massoni to me, Guido? Is all my life,
everything in it lost, glad, hungry, weary, furious, hopeful, hurt—is it
planned to lead me to Massoni and Massoni to me? Who has curved the path
he treads, all the places he has been and things ne has done, to meet
mine and travel it?

Why could he not be a policeman like other police, who begin with a
crime and follow the criminal forward to his arrest, instead of backward
and backward until the day he was born? He has asked and asked, smelling
my cold, old footprints from here to Ancona and from Ancona to
Villafresca and from there back and back to the house of the Corfu
shepherd, Pansoni. He will find nothing there because the house is gone,
Pansoni dead, the sheep slaughtered, the trail cold. But, finding
nothing there, he has leaped backward in time to find me arriving there
as an infant, and back and back through the orphanage and everywhere
else, until he sees me carried whistling out of the bomb ruins near
Anzio.

Perhaps he needs to find nothing more about me. He has found what no one
else has known ... I may not have known it myself... the thread that
runs through all I have done. Who could have known that cutting the hard
black hose by the bus wheel, stamping the old man’s legs against the
curbstone, throwing the kerosene rags into the print shop—all were ...
acts of... music?

I moan and hump myself backward to the dark climbing space behind the
wall, and fell scrabbling down and backward to floor level. I press
aside the loose plywood and stand shaking, aching in the room. I am
caked with dried sweat and dirt; cold, hungry, frightened. I hobble to
the door, beginning to sob again, that soft bouncing _staccato._ It
frightens me more. The iron door is locked. I am still more frightened.
I shake the door and then run away from it and sink down on my knees by
the bed, looking up, right, left, to see what is after me.

What could be after me?

I look under the bed. It is there, the black leather cheek of the violin
case. The violin is after me.

Kill it, then.

I put my hand under the bed, a thumb-tip at the bottom, fingertips at
the top, just enough to hold, as if the thing were going to be hot. I
draw it out. It is not hot. The sound it makes, scraping along the rough
concrete floor, is like the last water shouting and belching down a
drain, and when it stops I hear the strings faintly ringing.

I open a steel clasp at the side. Once I am running from someone and
hide in a dark cellar; I go around a heap of fallen timbers and back
into a dark corner; behind me a rat squeaks once and leaps at me and, as
I duck, scratches my shoulder and neck and I hear its yellow fangs come
together as it squeaks again: _squeak-click!_ all at once. Now in the
dark silence the clasp of the violin case squeak-clicks just the same,
and I feel the same blinding flash of terror. I kneel limp by the bed,
wait until the heart-thunder goes out of my ears.

I do not want to see this violin; with all my soul I do not, and like
someone watching a runaway truck bear down on a dog in the street,
helpless and horrified, I kneel there and watch my hands lift the case
and set it on the bed, open the other two clasps, turn back the lid.

Sheep gut, horse hair, twigs and shingles.

I put out a finger, slip it under the neck, lift the violin up far
enough to rest half out of the case, take away my finger and look at it.
It weighs nothing. It makes a sound as I lift it, like the distant
opening of a door. I look at the pegs, and they take my eye dong to the
scroll, down, up, around, around again, around to spin dizzily somewhere
down in the shining wood. I put my hands over my face and kneel there
shaking.

Guido moves like the night wind—Massoni said it himself. Guido is a
natural thing like holocaust, like hurricane, and no one knows where he
will strike next. Guido fears nothing.

Then why crouch here like a fascinated bird staring into the jaws of a
serpent? The violin will not bite. The violin is nothing to fear. It is
mute now; it is only when it makes music that—

Is music something to fear?

Yes, oh yes.

Music is a pressure inside, welling up and ready to burst out and fill
the room, fill the world; but let a note of it escape and _blam!_ the
hard hand of Pansoni, the Corfu shepherd, bruises the music back into
the mouth, or clubs down hard on the nape, so that you pitch forward and
lie with your mouth full of sand and speckles of pain dancing inside the
eyeballs. Pansoni can hear music before it is born, lying like too much
food just under the solar plexus; and there he will kick you before ever
a note can escape. Be six years old, seven, and tend the sheep in the
rocky hills, you alone with the stones and the wind and the soft filthy
silly sheep; sit on a crag and sing all the notes he has crushed in his
hut, and he will come without a sound and slip up behind you and knock
you spinning and sliding down the mountain.

Ana in time you learn. You learn that to hum is to ask for that ready
hard hand, to whistle a note is to be thrown out into the cold night and
to cower there until daylight without a crust to eat. You feel the music
rising within you and before it can sound its first syllable you look up
and his bright black eyes are on you, waiting. So ... you learn that
music is fear, music is pain ... and deep, deep underneath, waiting
until you are tall as a man and almost strong as a man, music is
revenge; music is anger. You understand Pansoni, why he does these
things. Pansoni knows that the music in you is remarkable—that is to
say, noticeable, and there is that about Pansoni which strikes down
whatever is noticeable as soon as it shows itself. Pansoni will not risk
rumors in the countryside of the shepherd’s boy who can sing any aria
from any opera, whistle an entire violin concerto after hearing it once.
Pansoni is a smuggler. Pansoni and his sheep and his boy Guido cannot be
seen against the brown rocks and shadows of the seaside hills, and he
will naturally extinguish, in this music-dyed map on which we crawl, the
mighty beacon of melody which waits in the breast and brain of his
ragged, beaten Guido.

_Never look back, never look back,_ and damn you, Massoni, damn you,
violin, you have made me look back!

I take my hands from my face and look at the violin. It has not moved
nor spoken, nor has the scroll unfurled, nor the strings loosed
themselves to reach for me like tentacles. My one finger lifted it and
put it so, half out of its bed. It is only obedient, and ... and
beautiful....

I get to my feet. How long have I knelt there? My knee hurts, my foot is
asleep. I take up the violin. It weighs nothing. My hand on its neck is
at home; the smooth wood snugs down into my palm like part of the flesh.
I squeeze it; it is strong and unyielding, not at all as fragile as it
ought to be.

Squeezing it has brought the sound-box end close to me; I let it come
and it touches my shoulder, throat, chin. Someone has intimately known
the curve of my chin and left jaw; I turn my head a fraction, raise the
fingerboard a fraction, and my chin and the ebony rest are one. I stand
holding the violin like this for a long time, overcome with amazement,
so much that there is no room for fear. I become aware of my chest,
expanded as if to utter a note to be heard round the earth, my feet
placed apart and ready to balance me when with my music I tilt the
world. It is a sort of flight; my weight diminishes, my strength
increases.

I take up the bow, thumb here, here the index and second fingers, the
little finger straight and rigid and angling down as a prop to bear all
the weight of the bow. Up elbow, down shoulder a bit ... there: so if
there is a plank across shoulder, elbow, wrist and a full glass on it,
not a drop is spilled.

I balance there a long time, until the muscles of shoulder and back
begin to pain me. It comes to me that this is the hurting of weariness
but not of strain, and to me, strangely, this knowledge is a glory.

I take down the bow, I take down the violin. I stand with one in each
hand looking at them. I have not made a sound with them, but I will. A
door has opened and let in music. A door has opened and let out fear. I
need not make a note with this instrument to discover whether or not the
dead hand of Pansoni will strike. If it took a note of music to be sure,
then I would not be sure; I would fear him still. I have become _that_
free; it need not be tested.

Massoni has given me the lesson, Massoni has given me my freedom. I am
grateful to Massoni now, and will do him this service: since the
prevention of my crimes and the release of my terror of anything musical
are things which come first with him (for is he not first a thinking
policeman and only second a violinist?) I shall permit him to give me
also his violin. Thank you, Massoni: thank you; it is a wondrous change
you have brought about in Guido.

I find a stiff sharp knife among Massoni’s things, and a piece of iron
wire, and in time—more time than this usually takes me, but then I am
not as I was—I get the door unlocked.

I put the violin in its case and put the case under my flapping old
trench coat, and I take my leave of Massoni and all things which have
brought him into my life. For this violin, this spout for the music
which boils within me, I have exchanged all other things I have been and
done.

I shall kill anyone who tries to take it away from me.

 


CHAPTER 15

The spore, the “raisin” which Gurlick had eaten, had been life or its
surrogate. It had traversed space physically, bodily, and it had
finished its function and its capabilities with its invasion of Gurlick.
But the transfer of the life-essence of all the Medusa into all of
humanity was something that earth-built machines—even if built on earth
by others—could not accomplish. Only life can transmit life. A very
slight alteration indeed—an adjustment of isotopes in certain ionized
elements in Gurlick’s ductless glands— would make the membership of
humanity in the corpus of the Medusa a certainty. The machines now
abuilding would effectively restore (the Medusa still unswervingly
operated from a conviction that this was a restoration) the unity of the
human species, its hive-mind, so that each “person” could reach, and be
reached by, all persons; but the fusion with the Medusa would be
Gurlick’s special chore, and would take place on the instant that his
seed married with the ovum of a human female. As the machine slowly
closed over him, its deft limbs already performing the first of a
hundred delicate manipulations, it caught up his dream and congratulated
him on it, and gave it detail and depth which his creative poverty had
never made possible to him before, so that he lived it realer than real,
from the instant of approach (and a degree of anticipation which might
have destroyed him had he felt it earlier) to the moments of
consummation, so violent they shook the earth and sent the sky itself
acrinkle with ripples of delighted color. And more: for in these tactile
inventions there was no human limitation, and it was given to him to
proceed again, and yet again, without exhaustion or dulling familiarity,
either through the entire episode or through any smallest part of it,
whether it be the thrill of seeing the clothes (shiny black and scarlet,
and the tumbled frosting of lace-edged white) or the pounding, fainting
climax. Always, too, was the laughing offhand promise that _any_
conquest of Gurlick’s would be such a peak, or a higher one; let him
wallow in his dream because he loved it, but let him understand also
that it was only one of many, the symbol of any, the quality of all.

So while it built its machines to fuse (“again”) the scattered psyche of
humanity, it got Gurlick— good—and—ready.

 


CHAPTER 16

The warrior Mbala caught his thief perhaps an hour after he fell asleep
squatting in the inky shadows of the astralagus vetch which encircled
his yam patch. His assegai had fallen across his legs, and he was deep
in that vulnerable torpor taught him by fear and weariness, so perhaps
it really was the shade of his father, watching over the yam garden, who
made the capture. Or that other powerful ghost man call Justice.
Whatever the instrument, the thief walked out of the yam patch in the
impenetrable dark and stepped so close to the sleeping warrior that his
foot landed under the horizontal butt of Mbala’s assegai. His other foot
swung past the end of the shaft, and the first foot left the ground and
caught the spear with its instep. The thief went flat on his face and
the assegai snapped up and with great enthusiasm rapped Mbala painfully
on the bridge of the nose.

In unison the two men squalled in terror, and then training dictated the
outcome. The thief, who for most of his years had lifted nothing but
other people’s property, and that at irregular intervals, scrambled and
slipped and fell flat again. Mbala, whose reflexes always placed action
before conjecture, was up out of a sound sleep and a remaining cloud of
stupidity-withdrawal, uttering a curdling battle screech, and plunging
his assegai into his prostrate enemy’s back before he was at all
consciously aware. The prone man shrieked in agony, but it was the wrong
shriek, as well as the wrong impact felt by Mbala’s schooled hands.
Apparently there had been enough stupidity left in that blazing moment
to cause Mbala to handle his weapon as it lay, so that it was not the
wide, long blade which presented itself to the thief’s shoulders, but
the bruising end of the shaft.

“Mbala! Mbala! Don’t kill me! I am your brother, Mbala!”

Mbala, about to whirl his weapon end for end and settle the matter,
checked himself and drove the haft down again. His prisoner, attempting
to rise, fell flat again.

“Nuyu!”

“Yes, Nuyu, your own brother, your own dear brother. Let me up, Mbala! I
haven’t done anything to you!”

“I’m standing on a bag of yams,” growled Mbala. “For that you die,
Nuyu.”

“No! No, you can’t! I am the son of the brother of your father! Your
father wants me spared!” Nuyu screamed. “Did he not turn your spear
wrong-end-to when you first struck at me? Well, didn’t he?” Nuyu
insisted when Mbala seemed to hesitate.

Fury and disillusion made Mbala say, “My father is gone from here.” He
shifted suddenly, literally vaulting from his stance beside the prone
man to one astride him, facing the feet, with his own heelbones pressing
the fleshy part of the armpits flat to the ground. In pitch darkness it
was done with amazing accuracy. In the moment when the warrior’s weight
was on the spear and pivoting, Nuyu uttered a short shrill scream,
thinking his moment had come. As the rock-hard heels captured his
armpits he grunted and arched his back and began flailing his legs.

“Uncle! Uncle! _Uncle!_”

Mbala reversed his spear at last. “Hold still,” he said irritably. “You
know I can’t see.”

“U-Un—cle!”

“_Now_ you call on him. _Now_ you fear the demon. _Now_ you believe, eh,
thief?” Mbala taunted. By touch alone, he drew the needle point across
the man’s kidneys, barely enough to part the skin. Nuyu squalled
abominably and began to weep. “Uncle, uncle ...” he sobbed and then
abruptly was silent and motionless.

Mbala knew that trick well and was prepared for it, but when he began to
see his shadow stretching away, lumping across the vetch and lost in the
thorns, he forgot about trickery.

“Uncle ... Nuyu moaned.... There was a new note to his weeping: hope,
was it? And something else?

Nuyu lay with his head toward the yam patch, Mbala stood with his back
to it. The patch was roughly circular, with the tubers scattered
randomly in it. A thick rim of the vetch bushes bordered it back to the
thorns. Almost exactly at the four midpoints of the compass stood four
ship’s prow monoliths. The mound on which the patch lay must at one time
have been an almost conical rock mount, before some forgotten cataclysm
split it exactly in two, northeast to southwest, and again in two,
northwest to southeast. Settling and erosion had widened the crossed
canyons until they took the form which Mbala’s dead father had found. In
the native language the place was called Giant’s Mouth, and it was said
that a man’s shout from the center of the yam patch could be heard for a
day’s journey in every direction.

“Uncle, oh uncle,” Nuyu wept, with such a passion in his voice that
Mbala bent curiously to look at him. He was bending his head back and up
at an almost impossible angle, and his eyes strained at the roofs of
their sockets. His dark face was ... silver.

Mbala sprang away from him, whirling about in the air. He came down
crouching, staring up at the silver ball which floated down the sky. It
halted perhaps ten feet above the center of the yam patch and stayed
motionless.

Nuyu made a sound. Mbala glanced quickly down at him and, without
understanding why, without trying to, he bent and helped the other man
to his feet. They stood close together, watching.

“Like a moon,” Mbala murmured. He glanced at the silvered landscape and
back again to the object. It had a brilliant, steady radiance, which
fantastically left no after-image on the retina.

“He came,” said the thief. “I called him and he came.”

“It might be a demon.”

“You doubt your own father?”

Mbala said, “Father ...” And the sphere sank to the center of the yam
patch. Then it opened.

There were doors completely around the object, all hinged at their upper
edges, so that when they opened they formed a sort of awning all around
the sphere. A beam of light fanned out to the north, but it was like no
light Mbala had ever seen. It was mauve with flickers of green, and
though the air was clear and the walls of the crossed canyons
brilliantly lighted by the sphere, it was impossible to see through the
beam. Not only that, but the beam did not fade or spread from the source
outward, and terminated as sharply as if it played on a wall, which it
did not. This odd square end of the light beam pressed outward from the
ship until it reached the margin of vetch, and nosed into it. There was
a sound like water over rapids, hissing, churning, crackling. There
almost seemed to be something moving back up the light beam into the
ship, but one could not be sure.

The light pressed slowly outward through the vetch to the edge of the
surrounding thorn trees and stopped. No, not stopped. It was scything
away from them, moving slowly, and the square end was adjusting itself
to the encroachments and retreats of the thorn.

Where it had passed the vetch was gone, and where it had been the bare
ground was powdered with a white substance unlike anything they had ever
seen. After a few minutes it changed and the ground seemed moist.

“Can you doubt now?” murmured Nuyu. “Who but your father would clear
your land?”

They stood in awe, watching the sphere clear the land. When it seemed
reasonable to get out of its way they backed to the thorn and slipped
through. If the sphere and its beam noticed them or their going, it made
no sign. It just went on collecting and processing astralagus vetch, a
weed with a high affinity for selenium. When it had all it could get
from this pocket, it clicked shut, took a picture of the site, and
leaped into the sky, where at ten thousand feet it switched on its
sensors, located another patch of vetch to the north, and flashed away
after the only thing it knew how to care about—selenium, from
astralagus.

Mbala and Nuyu crept cautiously out on the new ground and looked around
in the paling dawnlight. Nuyu touched the ground with his hand. It was
wet, and cold. He saw some of the white material in a hole and picked it
up. It disappeared in his hand, leaving only a few drops of water. He
grunted and wiped his hand on his kilt. What was another miracle at a
time like this.

Mbala was still staring at the sky. Nuyu said, “Will you kill me?”

Mbala brought his gaze down from the disappearing stars and gave it to
Nuyu’s face. He looked at it for a long while, and from all Nuyu could
see there was no change in Mbala’s expression at all; he looked at him
as one will at distant lights. “I lost my father,” he said at last,
“because he let my yams be stolen. So I did not believe. But you
believed, and he saved you, and he came back again. I will not kill you,
Nuyu.”

“I died,” Nuyu breathed. “Nuyu the unbeliever died when he saw your
father.” He bent and picked up the sack of yams and extended them to
Mbala.

“Nuyu the thief died,” said Mbala. “The yams are yours and mine, forever
in tomorrow and forever in yesterday. There has been no thief, then,
Nuyu.”

They went back to the kraal to tell the women they would have a lot of
new work tomorrow. As Nuyu passed the witch doctor, the old man reached
out unseen and touched Nuyu’s kilt. Then the witch doctor held the
touching hand in his other, and hugged them against his chest. What he
got from Nuyu he could have gotten from his mere presence. He knew that,
but nevertheless he touched the kilt. The touch was a symbol the old man
needed, and so he took and treasured it. He said to Mbala, “Your demon
is dead, then.”

At that Mbala and Nuyu smiled at one another, the devout and the
convert, richly content with faith and full of wonder.

 


CHAPTER 17

Gurlick lay hooded and unaware, passive under the submicroscopic
manipulations of the machine which brought his special membership in the
Medusa to his seed. So he did not observe the change in the mighty
operations around him, when the egg-laying snail-gaited miners drew in
and darkened the snouts of light, and fell neatly apart to have their
substance incorporated in other, more needed machines; and these in turn
completed their special tasks and segmented and dispersed to others
which still needed them, until at last there remained only the
longnecked, tank-treaded, trumpet-headed ones, and enough silver spheres
to carry them, in their multithousands, to their precisely mapped
destinations. There was no provision for failure, for there would be no
failure. The nature of the electroencephalograph, and of its traces,
clearly showed to the transcendent science of the Medusa exactly what
was lacking in the average mind which kept it from being a common mind.
The net would be comparatively simple to cast and draw shut, for it
found the potent base of the hive mentality alive and awaiting it,
showing itself wherever humans blindly moved in the paths of other
humans, purely because other humans so moved; wherever friends apart
impulsively sat down to write one another simultaneous letters, wherever
men in groups (cartels, committees, mobs, and nations) divided their
intelligence by their numbers and let that incredible quotient chart
their course. The possible or probable nature of a human hive, once
(re)established, was a question hardly explored, because it was hardly
important. Once united, humanity would join the Medusa, because the
Medusa always (not almost, not “in virtually every case,” but _always)_
infused the hives it touched.

So the factory-area rumbled to silence, and the noiseless spheres swept
over the storage yard and scooped up their clusters of long-necked
projectors, fell away up with them, flashed away to all the corners of
earth, ready to place the projectors wherever their emanations (part
sound, part something else) would reach masses of humans. They could not
reach all humans, but they would reach most, and the established hive
would then draw in the rest. No human would escape, none could; none
would want to. Then, somewhere in this flawless, undivided,
multi-skilled entity, Gurlick would plant a tiny fleck of himself, and
at the instant of fusion between it and a living ovum, the Medusa would
spread through it like crystallization through a supersaturated
solution.

 


CHAPTER 18

Sharon Brevix squatted on the dry part of a stony stream bed, dying. It
was the second night, and she hadn’t come to the ocean or a city or any
people at all. Billy had told her that lost people just have to find a
river and go downstream and they’ll be all right, because all the rivers
flow into the sea and there’s always a town or people there. She had
started downstream as soon as it was fight on the first morning. It
never occurred to her to stay where she was until she heard a car,
because she must certainly still be near the road, and a car had to come
by eventually. She did not reason that when she traveled the stream bed
for the first hour and it did not bring her to the road, it must
therefore be leading her away from it.

She was, after all, only four years old.

By ten in the morning she was aching hungry, and by noon it was just
awful. She whimpered and stopped for a while to cry hard, but after a
time she got up again and kept on. The ocean couldn’t be terribly far
away after a person walks so far. (It was another twelve hundred miles,
but she could not know that.) In the afternoon she had slept for a
while, and when she awoke she found some wild raspberries on a bush. She
ate all she could find until she was stung by a yellowjacket and ran
away screaming. She found her little stream again and kept on going
until it was dark.

Now it was very late and she was dying. She felt better than she had,
because she felt nothing at all very much, except hungry. The hunger had
not diminished with her other sensations, but it had the virtue of
blanketing them. Fear and cold and even loneliness were as unnoticeable,
in the presence of that dazzle of hunger, as stars at noon. In the
excitement of packing, and on the two days of traveling, she had eaten
little, and she had rather less to fell back on than most
four-year-olds, which is little enough.

It was after midnight, and her troubled sleep had long since turned into
a darker and more dangerous condition. Cramped limbs no longer tingled,
and the chilly air brought no more shivers. She slept squatting, with
her back and side against a nook of rock. Later she might topple over,
very possibly too weak to move at all but for some feeble squirmings.
Yet—

She heard a sound, she raised her head. She saw what at first she
thought was a Christmas tree ornament, a silver ball with a dangle of
gewgaws under it, in midair a few inches from her face. She blinked and
resolved it into something much larger, much farther away, coming down
out of the night sky. She heard a snarling howl. She looked a little
higher, and was able to identify the running lights of a small airplane
streaking down out of the high overcast.

Sharon rose to her feet, holding the rock wall to steady herself while
her congealed blood began to move. She saw the globe about to land on
clear ground at the top of a knoll three miles away. She saw the
airplane strike it dead center while it was still thirty feet off the
ground, and then plane, globe, and cargo were a tangled, flaming ruin on
the hill. She watched it until it died, and then lay down to finish her
own dying.

 


CHAPTER 19

Just another rash of saucer-sightings, thought the few observers, and
recipients of their observations, in the brief minutes left to them to
think as they had always thought. Some of the military had, in these
minutes, a harrowing perplexity. Anything tracked at such speeds as the
radars reported, must, with small variations, appear somewhere along an
extrapolated path; the higher the speed, the finer the extrapolation.
The few recordings made of the flick and flash of these objects yielded
flight-paths on which the objects simply did not appear. It was
manifestly impossible for them to check and drop straight to their
destinations at such velocities; they did, however, and before the
theoreticians could finish their redefinition of “impossible,” they and
all their co-workers, colleagues, acquaintances, cohabitants, heirs and
assigns were relieved of the necessity to calculate. It happened so
quickly, one minute a heterogenous mass of seething noncommunicants; the
next, the end of Babel.

 

Henry, five years old, slept as usual flat on his back and face straight
up, arms rigid, fists clenched under, and pinned down by his buttocks,
and his ankles together. He was having a nightmare, soundlessly, of
being surrounded by gentle smiling fathers, some of whom wore the masks
of the other kids in his class, and storekeepers, and passing puppy
dogs, but who were really just smiling fathers, dressed up and being
gentle at the very verge of exploding in his face; and between him and
all the fathers was a loving goddess with soft hands full of forbidden
lollipops and raisin-bread peanut-butter sandwiches to be passed to
little boys in the dark when they had been sent to bed without their
suppers because they were little cowards; this goddess was there to care
for him and protect him, but when the explosion came, with this breath
or the next or the one after, the puppies and children and grocers and
fathers would whisk through to him as if the goddess weren’t there at
all; and while they did what they would do to him, she would still be
there smiling and ready with guilty lollipops, not knowing what the
fathers were doing to him.... And under this nightmare was the color of
hopelessness, the absolute certainty that to awake from it would be to
emerge into it; the dream and the world were one now, fused and
identical.

 


CHAPTER 20

These were people, these are anecdotes, dwelt upon for their several
elements of the extraordinary. But each man alive has such a story,
unique unto himself, of what is in him and of its molding by the forces
around him, and of his interpretations of those forces. Here a man sees
a machine as a god, and there a man sees God as an argument; and another
uses men’s argument quite as if it were a tool, a machine of his own.
For all his ability to work in concert with his fellows, and to induce
some sympathy in their vibrations, man remains isolated; no one knows
_exactly_ how another feels. At the very climax of sensation, man
approaches unconsciousness ... unconsciousness of what? Why, of all
around him; never of himself.

These were people, there are anecdotes of the night the world ended;
this the night when people the world over thought their thoughts and
lived their lives and at long, long last were wrong in thinking that
tomorrow was the front part of today, yesterday the back, and that the
way to go on was to go on as before.

This was the night, and the very moment, when Paul Sanders rose from the
couch, lifted Charlotte Dunsay in his arms, and said, “Well, if it isn’t
now, it never will be ...”

When young Guido strode a pre-dawn Rome, his very bones aching with
music and a carven miracle under his arm, waiting the ardent reach of
his unshackled talent. No lover, no miser, no acolyte on earth loved
money or woman or Master more than Guido loved this violin; no whelping
fox or wounded water-buffalo so watchful for an enemy....

When the cousins Mbala and Nuyu, the redeemed backslider and the
convert, turned into a new and glorious day of faith and many yams....

When Henry, who was five, lay stiffly in his bed and sniffled through a
dream of smiling cruelties in a place quite like all other places to
him, where he was despised....

When Dimity Carmichael’s dutiful alarm preceded the sunrise and she rose
in her sensible cotton gown and made ready, eyes averted, to take her
morning shower ...

When Sharon Brevix entered the dusk and the dark of her second lost day
without shelter or food ...

Only motes among the millions, remarked upon for that about them which
is remarkable, yet different only insofar as each is different _from,_
or is different _within,_ the pattern of qualities possessed two and
three quarter billion living times under this sun.

 


CHAPTER 21

He stood motionless with the girl in his arms, ready to put her down on
the sofa; and then, without a start, without a word of wonderment, Paul
Sanders set her on her feet and stood supporting her with a firm arm
around her shoulders until her head cleared and she could stand alone.

There was nothing said, because there was in that moment nothing to be
said. In a split second there was orientation of a transcendent
nature—nothing as crude as mutual mind-reading, but an instant and
permeating acknowledgment of relationships: I to you, we to the rest of
the world; the nature of a final and overriding decision, and the clear
necessity of instant and specific action. Together Paul Sanders and
Charlotte Dunsay left her apartment. The hallway was full of people in
all stages of dress—all moving wordlessly, purposefully. No one paid
Charlotte, in her transparent gown, the slightest attention.

They walked to the elevator bank. She paused before it with a half dozen
other people, and he opened the door of the fire stairs and sprang up
them two at a time. Emerging on the roof, he went to the kiosk which
sheltered the elevator motor and cables, twisted off the light padlock
with one easy motion, opened the door, and entered. He had never been
here before in his life; yet without hesitation he reached to the left
and scooped up a five-foot slice-bar which lay across the grating, and
ran with it back down the fire stairs.

Without glancing at floor numbers, he left the fire stairs on the fourth
floor, turned left and ran down the hall. The last door on the right
opened as he reached it; he did not glance at the old lady who held it
for him, nor did she speak. He sped through a foyer, a living room, and
a bedroom, opened the window at the far right and climbed out.

There was a narrow ledge on which he could barely keep his balance and
carry the heavy bar as well, _yet_ he managed it. The chief enemy of a
balancing man is the poison of fear which permeates him: I’ll fell!
_I’ll fall!_ but Paul felt no fear at all. He made a rapid succession of
two-inch sidewise shuffles until he reached the big eyebolt from which
there thrust, out and down, the huge chain supporting one end of a
massive theater marquee. Here he turned sidewise and squatted, brought
his bar up over his shoulder, and, reaching down, thrust the tip through
the fourth link of the chain. Then he waited.

The street below—what he could see of it—seemed at first glance to be
normally tenanted, with about as many people about as one might expect
at this hour of a Saturday night. But then it could be seen that nobody
_strolled—everyone_ walked briskly and with purpose; one or two people
ran, the way they ran indicating running to, not from anything. He saw
Charlotte Dunsay across the street, swinging along on her bare feet, and
enter a showroom where computing machines were on display. Though the
place had been closed since noon, it was now open and lighted, and full
of people silently and rapidly working.

There came a sound, and more than a sound, a deep pervasive ululation
which seemed at first to be born in all the air and under the earth,
sourceless. But as it grew louder, Paul heard it more from his left, and
finally altogether from the corner of the building. Whatever was making
that sound was crawling slowly up the street to take its place at the
intersection, a major one where three avenues crossed. Patiently, Paul
Sanders waited.

 


CHAPTER 22

From his soundless nightmare, Henry soundlessly awoke. He slid out of
bed and trotted out of his room, past his parents’ open door—they were
awake, but he said nothing, and if they saw him, they said nothing
either. Henry padded down the stairs and out into the warm night. He
turned downtown at a dog-trot, and ran for three blocks south, one west,
and two south. He may or may not have noticed that while the traffic
lights still operated, they were no longer obeyed by anyone, including
himself. Uncannily, cars and pedestrians set their courses and their
speeds and held them, regardless of blind corners, passing and repassing
each other without incident and with no perceptible added effort.

Henry had been aware for some time of the all but subsonic hooting and
of its rapid increase in volume as he ran. When he reached the big
intersection, he saw the source of the sound on the same street he ran
on, but past the corner where the theater stood. It was a heavy tanklike
machine, surmounted by a long flexible neck on top of which four horns,
like square megaphones or speakers, emitted the sound. The neck weaved
back and forth, tilting the horns and changing their direction in an
elaborate repetitive motion, which had the effect of adding a slow and
disturbing vibrato to the sound.

Henry dashed across the street and under the side-street marquee. He
came abreast of the thing just as it was about to enter the
intersection. Without breaking stride, Henry turned and dove straight
into the small space between the drive-spindle of the machine’s tread
and its carrier rollers. His blood spouted, and on it the spindle spun
for a moment; the other track, still driving, caused the machine to
swerve suddenly and bump up on the sidewalk under the marquee.

Paul Sanders, at the very instant the child had leapt, and before the
small head and hands entered the machine’s drive, leaned out and down
and jammed the’ chisel point of his slice-bar hard through the fourth
link of the chain. Plunging outward, his momentum carried the bar around
the chain and, as his weight came upon it, gave the chain a prodigious
twist. The eyebolt pulled out of the building wall with a screech, and
the corner of the marquee sagged and then, as the weight of the chain
came upon it, and Paul Sanders’s muscular body with it, the marquee let
go altogether and came hammering down on the machine. In a welter of
loose bricks, sheet-tin, movie-sign lettering and girders, the machine
heaved mightily, its slipping treads grating and shrieking on the
pavement. But it could not free itself. Its long neck and four-homed
head twitched and slammed against the street for a moment, and then the
deep howl faded and was gone, and the head slumped down and lay still.

Four men ran to the wreckage, two of them pushing a dolly on which rode
an oxyacetylene outfit. One man went instantly to work taking
measurements with scale, micrometer and calipers. Two others had the
torch going in seconds and fell to work testing for a portion of the
machine which might be cut away. The fourth man, with abrasive rasps and
a cold chisel, began investigating the dismantling of the thing.

And meanwhile, in unearthly silence and with steady determination,
people passed and repassed, on foot, in cars, and went about their
business. No crowd collected. Why should it? Everybody _knew._

 

The entire village population, with Mbala and Nuyu at their head and the
witch doctor following, were within two hundred yards of Mbala’s yam
patch when the thing come down from the sky. It was broad daylight here,
so the ghostly-luminous moonlit effect was missing; but the shape of the
projector as it dangled by invisible bonds from the sphere was
unprecedented enough to bring a gasp of astonishment and fear from the
villagers. Mbala stopped and bowed down and called his father’s name,
and all the people followed suit.

The sphere dropped rapidly to the yam patch, which, judging from the
photograph taken by the selenium miner, seemed an ideal position for a
projector to land, to send forth its commanding, mesmerizing waves.

The sphere set down its burden and started up again without pause, swift
as a bouncing ball. The projector began its wavering bass hooting which
swept out through the echoing clefts of the great split rock, rolled
down upon the villagers, and silenced their chant as if it had blotted
it up.

There was a moment—mere seconds—of frozen inaction, and then half the
warriors turned as one man and plunged away through the jungle. The
rest, and all the women and children, drew together, over four hundred
of them, and poured swiftly up the slope toward the yam patch. No one
said a word or made a sound; yet when they choked the space between two
of the stone steeples, half the people ran into the clearing, skirting
its edge, while half squatted where they were, blocking their avenue
from side to side. The runners reached the north opening, filled it, and
also squatted, wordless and waiting.

Directly across from the first group, in the westward opening, there was
movement as one, two, a dozen, a hundred heads appeared, steadily and
quietly approaching. It was the Ngubwe, neighboring villagers with whom
there was a tradition, now quiescent, of wife-stealing and warfare going
back to the most ancient days. Mbala’s people and the Ngubwe, though
aware of each other at all times, were content to respect each other’s
privacy and each cultivate his own garden, and for the past thirty years
or so there had been room enough for everybody.

Now three openings to the rock-rimmed plateau were filled with
squatting, patient natives. Even the babies were silent. For nearly an
hour there was no sound but the penetrating, disturbing howl of the
projector, no motion but its complex, hypnotic pattern of weavings and
turnings. And then there was a new sound.

Blast after shrill blast, the angry sound approached, and the waiting
people rose to their feet. The women tore their clothes to get bright
rags, the men filled their lungs and emptied them, and filled them
again, getting ready.

Through the open southern gateway four warriors erupted, howling and
capering. Hard on their heels came a herd of furious elephants, three,
four—seven— nine in all, one old bull, two young ones, four cows and two
calves, distraught, angry, goaded beyond bearing. The fleeing warriors
separated, two to the right, two to the left, sprinted to and
disappeared in the crowds waiting there. The big bull trumpeted shrilly,
wheeled, and charged to the right, only to face nearly two hundred
shrieking, capering people.

He swerved away, his momentum carrying him along the rock wall and to
the second opening, where he met the same startling cacophony. The other
elephants, all but one young bull and one of the calves, thundered along
behind him, and when he drew up as if to wheel and attack the second
group, he was pounded and pressed from behind by his fellows. By now
quite out of his mind, he put up his trunk, turned his mighty shoulders
against those who pressed him, and found himself glaring at this noisy,
shining thing in the center of the clearing.

He shrieked and made for it. It moved on its endless treads, but not
swiftly enough, nor far enough, nor in enough places at once to avoid
the tons of hysteria which struck it. The elephants tore off its howling
head and its neck in three successive broken bits, and shouldered it
over on its side and then on its back. The howling stopped with
deafening suddenness when the head came off, but the tracks kept
treading the air for minutes after it was on its back.

 

Elephants were used in Berlin, too, on the machine which landed in the
park near the famous zoo, though this was a more disciplined performance
by trained animals who did exactly as they were told. In China a
projector squatted in a cleft in the mountains under a railroad trestle,
and began hooting into the wind. An old nomad with arthritis hobbled out
of the rocks and pulled two spikes, shifted one rail. A half mile down
the track, the engineer and fireman of a locomotive putting a
combination passenger-freight train with over four hundred people
aboard, wordlessly left their posts, climbed back over the tender, and
uncoupled the locomotive from the first car. There was, on the instant,
a man at every handwheel on the train. It coasted to a stop, while far
ahead the locomotive thundered over the edge of the trestle and was
crushing the projector before the alien machine could move a foot.

In Baffin Land a group of Eskimo hunters stood transfixed, watching a
projector squatting comfortably on mounded and impassable pack ice and,
in the crisp air, bellowing its message across the wastes to the ears of
four and possibly five widely scattered settlements. The hunters had not
long to wait; high above the atmosphere a mighty Atlas missile
approached, and, while still well below their horizon, released a
comparatively tiny sliver, the redoubtable Hawk. The little Hawk came
shrieking out of the upper air, made a wide half-circle to kill some of
its excess velocity, and then zeroed in on the projector with the kind
of accuracy the old-time Navy bombardiers would brag about: “I dropped
it right down his stack.”

From then on missiles got most of the projectors, though in crowded
areas, other means were found. In Bombay a projector took its greatest
toll—one hundred and thirty-six, when a mob simply overran one of the
machines and tore it to pieces with their bare hands. And in Rome one
man despatched four of them and came out of it unscathed.

(A man?)

(Unscathed?)

 


CHAPTER 23

I am Guido, walking the back ways and the dark paths leading out of the
city, to a place where this glossy glory of a violin can make itself
known to me. No human soul will hear me coax a squeak out of it, or I
will kill him for knowing of it. I will kill anyone who harms it, or who
tries to take it from me. This city will no longer know Guido or see
Guido, and it must get along for a while without Guido’s small protests
against music. Against music ... Listen now, someone is singing under
the sliver of moon, far away, a little drunk.... No, God, that’s the
shift whistle at the auto place. Now wait, wait, stop and listen ...

I stop and look down the hill, across to the other hill, and I listen as
I have never listened before, and I make a great finding, one of those
large things you come to know while realizing that others have always
known it. How many, many times have I heard a man say wind _sings_ in
the wires, a _musical_ waterfall, the _melody_ in certain laughter. But
in fighting music all these years, I have not known, I have not let
myself hear all these words, nor the music which is their meaning.

I hear it now, because through owning this violin, something has
happened to me. I hear the city singing while it sleeps, and I hear a
singing which would sweetly cry among these hills if the city had never
existed, and will cry here when it is gone.

It is as if I have new ears, yes, and a new mind and heart to go with
them. I think, in the morning, when this world wakes, oh, I shall hear,
I shall hear ... and I lose the thought for its very size, thinking
about what I am to hear from now on.

I go on to my hiding place. Guido’s studio, I think, laughing. When they
built the new highway into the city, they cut away the end of a crooked,
narrow little street which used to climb the hill. Right at the top were
two small houses, built Italian land style, four square stone walls
which they filled with earth, then lay a four-sided dome of plaster on
the earth, then dug away the earth when the plaster was hardened. These
little houses will stand for a thousand years. The two I know of were
buried by the embankment of the new road, where it comes near the
hilltop on its stilts and curves across to the other hill. I found the
houses when I escaped once from the police. I leaped from the police car
and off the road, and down the embankment I put my leg in a hole, and
the hole was a window. The second house is behind the first, buried
completely, but there is a door between them. Two rooms in a hillside,
and nobody knows but Guido.

I walk the new road, where it sweeps up to the hilltop, looking out over
the city and hearing the city sing, and hearing that other music which
will play, city or not, and it is all for me, for Guido. There is one
thing which is not changed now: the world has always been against Guido,
or Guido against the world; everything moved around Guido as its center.
It still does, but while it does, it makes music. I laugh at this,
waiting at the top of the slope for a gap in the traffic; always
careful, I will not be seen dropping over the rail to the embankment
below. I—

—hear a note and all sound, all singing stops for a moment; sight too, I
think, and touch; a wave, a wrench, a great peace, and then I am back on
the high road, holding the rail, clamping my violin case under my coat,
looking at the sky. I am different. The ... meaning of “I” is
different....

All across the city, like distant thunder heard in a high wind, there is
a whisper of breaking metal, a twinkling of explosion and fire, and no
music. To none of this do I pay attention; I am watching that which is
slipping down out of the sky. A silver ball, and under it, four machines
like tanks, their four long necks twined together, their four heads
stacked neatly one on the other. But for the deep hooting which comes
from these heads, they fall silently.

I take off my trench coat and let it fall. I open the violin case, take
out the violin, strike the railing once with it, pull out the four pegs,
clear away the strings with two quick swipes, until I hold only the
smooth neck and fingerboard, which ends in the widening curled scroll.

I run downhill as fast as I can, faster than I have ever run before. I
know I shall be met, by whom, how, and exactly when. It is an old
Hispano-Suiza with wide flaring fenders and big yellow headlights,
driven by a woman. I see the car coming, run straight down the middle of
the road. She slows but does not stop. I leap to the front of the car,
turn, hook a knee over the headlight brace, grasp the radiator ornament.
She is already howling up the hill; faster she goes, and faster, all
that mighty automobile can put out.

Acceleration pressure lessens and frees me; I move myself, get one foot
on the hood and the other on the radiator, still holding with one hand
to the headlight brace. It has all happened quickly; I have been riding
perhaps twenty, twenty-five seconds. We are back to the top of the slope
and traveling eighty, ninety kilometers ... who has made these
observations and calculations as to our speed, the slope, the rate of
descent of the globe and its machines, how close they must pass the
rail? No matter who ... it has been done, and every slightest pull of
her wrists, each lean and striving of my body against the wind, is part
of those calculations; I know it, know it is right, without wonder and
without astonishment ... for I have calculated it all; I know how; it
must be right, I know so very well how. (And “I” means something new
now.)

She turns to the left and the front wheels shudder over the curb. I let
go the brace and put my feet side by side on the radiator, and as the
front of the car reaches the railing I spring up and out, flying as men
have in their hearts always wished to fly ... up and up into the dark.
With my ears I know my speed, air rushing past, diminishing as I reach
the top of my arc and begin to descend; it is in this poised moment that
I meet the machines from the sky, with my left arm and both legs taking
those intertwined metal necks. Below me the Hispano is turning end over
end down the embankment.

I reach up with my violin neck, holding it by the flat protruding lower
end of the ebony fingerboard, and find that with the other end, the hard
curved polished scroll, I can reach the open trumpet mouth of the
topmost head. It accepts the slight curve of the carving exactly; I ram
it home, extract it, repeat the motion on the second, third, fourth,
crushing some delicate something in the joined throats of each.

Then that pervasive hooting is gone, and we drift silently for a
second—but only a second; we are on the ground near and between two of
the stilts which support the road. A sort of curtain hangs there; as we
touch earth, this curtain topples outward and falls across the globe.
There are people—three women, four men. One of the men is old, and wears
nothing but a wooden leg strapped to his thigh. One of the women wears
an ermine jacket; the tall heels are broken off her shoes. They seize a
rope and run, and drop a steel hook into the girders of the stilt. On
the other side, a girl and a man, an impossibly fat man, place a hook on
the other side. The hard fabric of the curtain smashes at me as I
struggle free—it is one of those enormous woven mats of steel-cored
hempen cable they use to cover rocks when dynamiting in the city. They
have captured the globe with it, casting it like a net over birds! And
the globe fights; it fights, plunging upward, making no sound. The net
holds, the ropes hold; I hear the steel hooks crackle in the girders as
they slip and grab. The plunging stops; the globe presses upward, trying
and trying to break free. The anchor ropes hum, the net rustles with
strain. I feel a warmth, a heat, from the globe; it drops abruptly,
plunges upward once more, but weakly, and suddenly falls to the ground
with the rope mat shrouding it and smoking. The four tanklike machines
have not moved since they landed; with their voices gone they have no
function.

The woman in ermine and the fat man run to a two-wheeled dolly standing
under the roadway. I run to help them. Nobody speaks. It is an acetylene
set. We drag it to the dead sphere and light it. We begin to cut the
sphere open so that I—this new, wide, deep, all-over-the-world “I”—can
see what it is, how it works.

I—and “I,” now, think as I work of what is happening—a different kind of
thinking than any I have ever known ... if thinking was seeing, then all
my life I have thought in a hole in the ground, and now I think on a
mountaintop. To think of any question is to think of the answer, if the
answer exists in the experience of any other part of “I.” If I wonder
why I was chosen to make that leap from the car, using all my strength
and all its speed to carry me exactly to that point in space where the
descending machines would be, then the wonder doesn’t last long enough
to be called that: I _know_ why I was chosen, on the instant of
wondering. Someone had measured the throat of one of the tank machines;
someone knew what tool would fit it exactly and be right to destroy it
most easily. The neck and scroll of my violin happened to be that tool,
and I happened to be on the high road with it. I might have died. The
woman driving the Hispano did die. These are things that do not matter;
one will unhesitatingly break a fingernail in reaching to snatch a child
from the fire.

Yet, as all knowledge of the greater “I” is available to me, so is all
feeling. The loss of my violin before I had made the first single note
with it is a hurt beyond bearing; its loss in so important an action
does not diminish the hurt at all. But to think of the hurt is to know
all hurts, everywhere, of all of us who are now so strangely joined. Now
there was a little boy in America, who when it was time threw himself
into the drive of one of the tank machines because “I” required that the
drive slip just so much, just at that second. It is known to me now that
the child Henry wanted hungrily to live, more than ever in his little
life before, because he had, within the hour, experienced a half second
of real peace. It hurt him, dying; knowing him as I (as “I”) do, it
hurts to have him dead. Near him died a man, Paul, unhesitatingly,
feeling the most pointed loss of a woman he desired to the moment he
died, and whom he had almost possessed a moment before. There are many
such deaths at this moment, all over the world, and not one which “I”
cannot feel; all are known to me—the helpless, so many of whom he this
minute crushed in their cars and houses, who crawl numbly away from the
fires, not fast enough to get away. These are dying too, and hurting,
and even these know Guido and Guido’s loss; _Unfair, unfair,_ they cry
as they bleed and die; _you should not have lost your violin so soon!_
All, all add themselves to me; all, all understand. I belong, belong; I
Guido, belong!

We have struck back with whatever would do the job, wherever it could be
found, regardless of the cost, because no cost is too great to combat
what has come upon us.

We will take care of our own; “I” will defend “myself.” And meanwhile
the pressure of Guido’s music floods “me” and enriches the species, and
Guido is enriched in numberless ways to an infinite degree. This is
thinking as never before; this is living as never before; this is a life
to be defended to a degree and in ways never before realized on this
earth. ... I wonder if anyone will ever speak again?

 


CHAPTER 24

Sharon Brevix thought, I can see all over the world. And she thought,
They’ve found me.

You’re four and you’re lost: what bothers you? Hunger, cold, but mostly
disorientation—detachment: not knowing where to go or where “they” all
are. Sharon awoke where she had dozed off ... rather, where she had
slipped so very far over the slippery edge of the forever-dark. It was
slippery no longer. She was hungry, she was cold, certainly; but _she
wasn’t lost._

Suppose her mother were here—what would she do? _Are you all right_?
Well, she was all right. Nothing broken, no cuts; no encounters with the
bestial in any form. Her mother knew that and Sharon knew she knew that.
The closeness she felt to her mother and to Billy and the other kids
wasn’t quite as nice as having them here, and being warm and having
something to eat. But there were new ways, other ways, that were
nicer—nicer than anything she had ever known. Billy now—see how glad he
was, how afraid he’d been. How much he cared. It made her feel very good
to know that Billy cared so much. It had always been his best-kept
secret.

She knew she must sleep for an hour, so she closed her eyes and slept.
It was quite a different thing from that other sleep.

When she awoke for the second time, it was instantly and with instant
motion. She bounced to her feet no matter how stiff she felt and marked
time, double-time, on a flat rock, banging her feet until they stung,
and breathing deeply. Three minutes of that and she struck off
purposefully into the still-dark underbrush, skipped on two
stepping-stones across the brook, and unhesitatingly went to a fallen
log where, the night before, she had seen a bright orange shelf fungus.
She broke off large greedy pieces and crammed her mouth full of them. It
was delicious, and safe, too, because although most people did not know
it, someone, somewhere did know that this particular pileus was edible.

She trotted back to the half-cave where she had spent the night and got
Mary Lou, her broken-footed doll, and fed her some of the fungus and a
few drops of water from the brook. Then, cautioning the doll not to say
a word, she set off through the woods.

In less than an hour, and while the light was still gray, she found
herself at the edge of a meadow. She raised a warning finger at Mary
Lou, and then stood still as a tree-trunk—an unnatural act for any child
before now—and peered through the dawn-light until she saw a rabbit. It
was aware of her and fear-frozen into exactly her immobility. Sharon
outwaited it, let it move, let it move again, let it nibble on young
clover and stare at her again and at last move curiously closer. When it
was close enough, she pounced, not at the rabbit but at the place where
the rabbit would be when she moved. The rabbit was there.

She transferred her grasp on the dew-damp, kicking creature to a
one-handed grip just over the joints of the hind legs and stood up,
lifting the rabbit clear of the ground. As it hung upside down, it
immediately swung its head up and forward (as someone, somewhere, knew
it would). Sharon brought the edge of her left hand down with a single
smart chop, and broke its neck. She squatted down, and unhesitatingly
nibbled a hole in the animal’s throat with her sharp front teeth. She
drank as much blood as she needed, offered some to Mary Lou (who didn’t
want any) wiped her mouth daintily with a handful of moist grass, picked
up her doll and went her purposeful way. She knew which way to go. She
knew where the road was and where a railroad was and where three
farmhouses and a hunting lodge were. She also knew which one to go to,
and that Daddy would come to pick her up, and that she would be at the
meeting place before Daddy would, and which cellar window she was
allowed to break to get in, and where the can opener was and how to
prime the pump to get water. It was pretty wonderful. All she had to do
was to need to know something, and if anyone knew it, she knew it.

She walked along happily, for a while sharing a stomach-shrinking thrill
with some child, somewhere, who was riding a roller-coaster, and for a
while doing a new kind of talking with her father. It was a tease; he’d
have said to her, before: “I thought you were in the station wagon and
Mummy thought you were in the truck. Good thing we were wrong.
There’d’ve been two of you, and then who’d wear the pink dress?” But now
it came out as a kind of picture, or maybe a memory of two Sharons
screeching at each other and pulling at the party dress, while two
brokenfooted Mary Lous looked on. It was funny and she laughed. It was
more than a memory. It was all the relieved anxiety and deep fondness
and self-accusation her Daddy felt over almost losing his
Princess-Wicked-wif -the-fickles-on-her-nose.

She reached the lodge and got in all right. After about an hour she
looked out the window and saw a bush rattlesnake in the bare patch by
the shed. She ran to the gun-cabinet and then to the bookcase for the
box of .32 cartridges, and loaded the revolver and put it down and got
the window open a crack and picked up the gun and braced it against the
sill and got it lined up until she, or somebody, knew it was just right.
Then she squeezed off a single shot that eliminated the snake’s head.
She unloaded the gun and ran a swab through it and put it away, and put
the shells away, and then built a play-house out of overturned furniture
and sofa cushions, in which she and Mary Lou fell fast asleep until Tony
Brevix got there. All in all, she had a wonderful time. She never once
had to wonder whether she was allowed to do this or that—she _knew._
Most important, she was by herself and in a new place, but she wasn’t
lost. She would never be lost again. If only nothing spoiled this, no
one in the world would ever be lost again, no, nor wonder if somebody
really loved them, or think they’d gone away and left them, because they
didn’t want them.

It had always been thus between Sharon and Mary Lou, because Mary Lou
knew Sharon loved her even when she accidentally left her out in the
rain or threw her down the stairs. Now the children understood that kind
of thing as well as the dolls, and never again would a child wonder if
anyone cared, or grow up thinking that to be loved is a privilege. It’s
a privilege only to adults. To any child it’s a basic right, which if
denied dooms the child to a lifetime of seeking it and an inability to
accept anything but child-style love. The way things were now, never
again would a child be afraid of growing up, or hover anxiously near
half-empty coffers so very easy to fill.

_I know your need,_ the whole world was saying to “I,” while “I”
everywhere could understand the justice of “my” needs, and the silliness
of so many wants.

When Tony Brevix came into the lodge he found her asleep. He knew she
was aware of him and he knew that her awareness would not interrupt her
slumber, not for a second. She slept smiling while he carried her out to
the station wagon.

 


CHAPTER 25

There she stands the water beading her bright body her head to one side
the water sparking off her hair, she smiles, says All Right Handsome
What Are You Going To Do About It?

Crash!

A soft rumble and a glare of light: sky. Crash! A brighter, unbearable
flash of light on light, a sharp smell of burning chemicals, a choking
cloud of dust and smoke and the patter-patter of falling debris.
Confusion, bewilderment, disorientation and growing anger at the
deprivation of a dream.

The sharp command to every sentience, mechanical or not, on the entire
hilltop: _Get Gurlick out of here!_

A flash of silver overhead, then a strange overall sticky, pore-choking
sensation, like being coated with warm oil, and underneath, the torn
hill dwindles away. There are still hundreds of projectors left, row on
row of them, but from the size of the terraces where they are parked,
there must have been hundreds of thousands more. _Crash!_ A half dozen
of the projectors bulge skyward and fall back in shatters and shards.
Look there, a flight of jets. See, two silver spheres, dodging, dancing:
then the long curve of a seeking missile points one out, and the trail
and the burst make a bright ball on a smoky string, painted across the
sky. _Crash! Crash!_ Even as the scarred hill disappears in swift
distance, the parked projectors can be seen bursting skyward, a dozen
and a dozen and a score of them, pressing upward through the rain of
pieces from those blasted a breath or a blink ago; and c_ra_—

No, not _crash_ this time, but a point, a porthole, a bay-window looking
in to the core of hell, all the colors and all too bright, growing, too,
too big to be growing so fast, taking the hilltop, the hillside, the
whole hill lost in the ball of brilliance.

And for minutes afterward, hanging stickily by something invisible,
frighteningly in midair under the silver sphere, but not feeling wind or
acceleration or any of the impossible turns as the sphere whizzes along
low, hedge-hopping, ground-hugging, back-tracking and hovering to hide;
for minutes and minutes afterward, through the drifting speckles of
overdazzled eyeballs, the pastel column can be seen rising and rising
flat-headed over the land, thousands and thousands of feet, building a
roof with eaves, the eaves curling and curling out and down, or are they
the grasping fingers of rows and rows of what devils who have climbed up
the inside of the spout, about to put up _what_ hellish faces?

“Bastits,” Gurlick whimpered, “tryin to atom-bomb _me._ You tell ‘em who
I am?”

No response. The Medusa was calculating, for once, to capacity—even to
its immense, infinitely varied capacity. It had expected to succeed in
unifying the mind of humanity—it had correctly predicted its certainty
of success and the impossibility of failure. But success like _this?_

Like this: In the first forty minutes humanity destroyed seventy-one
percent of the projectors and forty-three percent of the spheres. To do
this it used everything and anything that came to hand, regardless of
the cost in lives or materiel; it put out its fire by smothering it with
its mink coat. It killed its cobra by hitting it with the baby. It
moved, reactive and accurate and almost in reflex, like a man holding a
burning stick, and as the heat increases near one finger, it will
release and withdraw and find another purchase while he thinks of other
things. It threw a child into the drive of a projector because he fit,
he contained the right amount of the right grade of lubricant for just
that purpose at just that time. It could understand in microseconds that
the nearest thing to the exact necessary tool for tearing the throat out
of a projector would be the neck and scroll of a violin.

And like this: Beginning in the forty-first minute, humanity launched
the first precision weapon against the projectors, having devised and
produced a seeking mechanism which would infallibly find and destroy
projectors (though they did not radiate in the electromagnetic spectrum,
not even infra-red) and then made it compact enough to cram into the
warhead of a Hawk, and, further, applied the Hawk to the Atlas. And this
was only the first. In the fifty-second minute—that is, less than an
hour after the Medusa pushed the button to unify the mind of
man—humanity was using hasty makeshifts of appalling efficiency, devices
which reversed the steering commands of the projectors (like the one
which under its own power walked off the Hell Gate Bridge into eighty
feet of water) and others which rebroadcast the projectors’ signals 180
degrees out of phase, nullifying them. At the ninety-minute mark
humanity was knocking out two of every three flying spheres it saw, not
by accurate aiming (because as yet humanity couldn’t tool up to
countermeasure inertia-less turns at six miles per second) but by an
ingenious application of the theory of random numbers, by which they
placed proximity missiles where the sphere wasn’t but almost certainly
would be—and all too often was.

The Medusa had anticipated success. But, to sum up: success like _this?_
For hadn’t the humans stamped out every operable instrument of the
Medusa’s invasion (save Gurlick, about whom they couldn’t know) in just
two hours and eight minutes?

This incredible species, uniquely possessed of a defense against the
Medusa (the Medusa still stubbornly insisted) in its instant, total
fragmentation at the invader’s first touch, seemed uniquely to possess
other qualities as well. It would be wise—more: it was imperative—that
Earth be brought into the fold where it would have to take orders.
Hence—Gurlick.

It swept Gurlick back into its confidence, told him that in spite of the
abruptness of his awakening, he was now ready to go out on his own. It
described to him his assignment, which made Gurlick snicker like an
eight-year-old behind the barn, and assured him that it would set up for
him the most perfect opportunity its mighty computers could devise.
Speed, however, was of the essence—which was all right with Gurlick, who
spit on his hands and made cluck-cluck noises from his back teeth and
wrinkled up half his face with an obscene wink, and snickered again to
show his willingness.

The sphere hovered now at treetop level over heavily wooded ground,
keeping out of sight while awaiting the alien computation of the best
conceivable circumstances for Gurlick’s project. This might well have
proved lengthy, based as it was on Gurlick’s partial, mistaken,
romantic, deluded and down right pornographic information, and might
even have supplied some highly amusing conclusions, since they would
have been based on logic, and Gurlick’s most certainly were not. These
diverting computations were lost, however, and lost forever when the
sphere dropped dizzyingly, released Gurlick so abruptly that he tumbled,
and informed him that he was on his own—the sphere was detected.
Growling and grumbling, Gurlick sprawled under the trees and watched the
sphere bullet upward and away, and a moment later the appearance of a
Hawk, or rather its trail, scoring the sky in a swift reach like the
spread of a strain-crack in window glass.

He did not see the inevitable, but heard it in due course—the feint
distant thump against the roof of the world which marked the end of the
sphere’s existence—and very probably the end of all the Medusa’s
artifacts on earth. He said an unprintable syllable, rolled over and
eyed the woodlands with disfavor. This wasn’t going to be like flying
over it like a bug over a carpet, with some big brain doing all your
thinking for you. On the other hand ... this was the payoff. This was
where Gurlick got his— where at long last he could strike back at a
whole world full of bastits.

He got to his feet and began walking.

 


CHAPTER 26

Full of wonder, the human hive contemplated itself and its works, its
gains, its losses and its new nature.

First, there was the intercommunication—a thing so huge, so different,
that few minds could previously have imagined it. No analogy could
suffice; no concepts of infinite telephone exchanges, or multi-side-band
receivers, could hint at the quality of that gigantic cognizance. To
describe it in terms of its complexity would be as impossible—and as
purblind— as an attempt to describe fine lace by a description of each
of its threads. It had, rather, _texture._ Your memory, and his and his,
and hers over the horizons shoulder—all your memories are mine. More:
your personal orientation in the framework of your own experiences, your
I-in-the-past, is also mine. More: your skills remain your own (is great
music made less for being shared?) but your sensitivity to your special
subject is mine now, and your pride in your excellence is mine now.
More: though bound to the organism, Mankind, as never before, I am I as
never before. When Man has demands on me, I am totally dedicated to
Man’s purpose. Otherwise, within the wide, wide limits of mankind’s best
interests, I am as never before a free agent; I am I to a greater
degree, and with less obstruction from within and without, than ever
before possible. For gone, gone altogether are individual man’s hosts of
pests and devils, which in strange combinations have plagued us all in
the past: the They-don’t-want-me devil, the Suppose-they-find-out devil,
the twin imps of They-are-lying-to-me and They-are-trying-to-cheat-me;
gone, gone is I’m-afraid-to-try, and They-won’t-let-me, and
I-couldn’t-be-loved-if-they-knew.

Along with the imps and devils, other things disappeared—things regarded
throughout human history as basic, thematic, keys to the structures of
lives and cultures. Now if a real thing should disappear, a rock or a
tree or a handful of water, there will be thunder and a wind and other
violence, depending upon what form the vanished mass owned. Or if a
great man disappears, there is almighty confusion in the rush to fill
the vacuum of his functions. But the things which disappeared now proved
their unreality by the unruffled silence in which they disappeared.
Money. The sense of property. Jingoistic patriotism, tariffs, taxes,
boundaries and frontiers, profit and loss, hatred and suspicion of
humans by humans, and language itself (except as part of an art) with
all the difficulties of communication between languages and within them.

In short, it was abruptly possible for mankind to five with itself in
health. Removed now was mankind’s cess-gland, the secretions of which
(called everything from cussedness to Original Sin) had poisoned its
body since it was born, distorting decencies like survival and love into
greed and lust, turning Achievement (“I have built”) into Position (“I
have power”).

So much for humanity’s new state of being. As to its abilities, they
were simply based, straightforward. There are always many ways to
accomplish anything, but only one of them is really best. Which of them
is best—that is the source of all argument on the production of
anything, the creator of factions among the designers, and the first
enemy of speed and efficiency. But when humanity became a hive, and
needed something—as for example the adaptation of the swift hunting
missile Hawk to the giant carrier Atlas—the device was produced without
considerations of pride or profit, without waste motion, and without
interpersonal friction of any land. The decision was made, the job was
done. In those heady first moments, anything and everything available
was used—but with precision. Later (by minutes) fewer ingenious stopgaps
were used, more perfect tools were shaped from the materials at hand.
And still later (by hours) there was full production of new designs.
Mankind now used exactly the right tool for the jobs it had to do....

And within it, each individual flowered, finding freedoms to be, to act,
to take enrichment and pleasure as never before. What were the things
that Dimity (Salomé?) Carmichael had always needed, wanted to do? She
could do them now. An Italian boy, Guido, packed taut with talent,
awaited the arrival of the greatest living violinist from behind a now
collapsed Iron Curtain; they would hereafter spend their lives and do
their work together. The parents of a small stiff boy named Henry
contemplated, as all the world contemplated, what had happened to him
and why, and how totally impossible it would be for such a thing ever to
happen again. Sacrifice there must be from time to time, even now; but
never again a useless one. Everyone now knew, as if in personal memory,
how fiercely Henry had wanted to live in that flash of agony which had
eclipsed him. All Earth shared the two kinds of religious experience
discovered by the Africans Mbala and Nuyu, wherein one had become
confirmed in his faith and the other had found it. What, specifically,
had brought them to it was of no significance; the feet of their
devotion was the important thing to be shared, for it is in the finest
nature of humanity to worship, fight it as he sometimes may. The
universe being what it is, there is always _plus ultra, plus
ultra_—powers and patterns beyond understanding, and more beyond these
when these are understood. Out there is the call to which faith is the
natural response and worship the natural approach.

Such was humanity when it became a hive—a beautiful entity, balanced and
fine and wondrously alive. A pity, in a way, that such a work of art,
such self-sufficiency, was to exist in this form for so brief a time....

 


CHAPTER 27

Gurlick, alone of humans insulated from the human hive, member of
another, sensed none of this. Driven, hungry through a whole spectrum of
appetites, lull of resentment, he shuffled through the woods. He had
been vaguely aware of the outskirts of a town not far from where the
silver sphere had set him down; he would, he supposed, find what he
wanted there, though wanting it was the only thing quite clear to him.
How he was to get it was uncertain; but get it he must. He was aware of
the presence within him of the Medusa, observing, computing, but—not
directing, cognizant as it was of the fact that the fine details of such
an operation must be left to the species itself. Had it had its spheres
and other machines available, there might have been a great deal it
could do to assist Gurlick. But now—he was on his own.

He was in virgin forest now, the interlocked foliage overhead dimming
the mid-morning sunshine to an underwater green, and the footing was
good, there being little underbrush and a gentle downslope. Gurlick
gravitated downhill, knowing he would encounter a path or a road sooner
or later, and monotonously cursed his empty stomach, his aching feet,
and his enemies.

He heard voices.

He stopped, shrank back against a tree trunk, and peered. For a moment
he could detect nothing, and then, off to the right, he heard a sudden
musical laugh. He looked toward the sound, and saw a brief motion of
something blue. He came out of hiding, and, scuttling clumsily from tree
to tree, went to investigate.

There were three of them, girls in their mid-teens, dressed in halters
and shorts, giggling over the chore of building a fire in a small
clearing. They had a string of fish, pike and lake trout, and a frying
pan, and seemed completely and hilariously preoccupied.

Gurlick, from a vantage point above them, chewed on his lower lip and
wondered what to do. He had no delusions about approaching openly and
sweet-talking his way into their circle. It would be far wiser, he knew,
to slip away and go looking elsewhere, for something surer, safer. On
the other hand ... he heard the crackle of bacon fat as one of the girls
dropped the tender slivers into the frying pan. He looked at the three
lithe young bodies, and at the waiting string of fish, half of which
were scaled and beheaded, and quietly moaned. There was too much of what
was wanted, down there, for him to turn his back.

Then a curl of fragrance from the bacon reached him and toppled his
reason. He rose from his crouch and in three bounds was down the slope
and in their midst, moaning and slavering. One of the children bounded
away to the right, one to the left. The third fell under his hands,
shrieking.

“Now you jus’ be still,” he panted, trying to hold his victim, trying to
protect himself against her hysterical lappings, writhings, clawings. “I
ain’t goin’ to hurt you if you jus’—”

_Uh!_ He was bowled right off his feet by one of the escapees who had
returned at a dead run and crashed him with a hard shoulder. He rolled
over and found himself staring up at the second girl who had run away as
she stood over him with a stone the size of a grapefruit raised in both
hands. She brought it down; it hit Gurlick on the left cheekbone and the
bridge of his nose and filled the world with stars and brilliant tatters
of pain. He fell back, wagging his head, pawing at his face, trying to
get some vision back and kick away the sick dizziness; and when at last
he could see again, he was alone with the campfire, the frying pan, the
string of fish.

“Li’l bastits,” he growled, holding his face. He looked at his hand, on
which were flecks of his own blood, swore luridly, turned in a circle as
if to find and pursue them, and then squatted before the fire, reached
for two cleaned fish, and dropped them hissing into the pan.

Well, he’d get that much out of it, anyway.

He had eaten four of the fish and had two more cooking when he heard
voices again, a man’s deep “Which way now? Over here?” and a girl’s
answer, “Yes, where the smoke’s coming from.”

Jailbait ... of course, of _course_ they’d have gone for help! Gurlick
cursed them all and lumbered downslope, away from the sound of voices.
Boy, he’d messed up, but good. The whole hillside would be crawling with
people hunting him. He had to get out of here.

He moved as cautiously as he could, quite sure he was being watched by
hundreds of eyes, yet seeing no one until he glimpsed two men off to his
left and below him. One had binoculars on a strap around his neck, the
other a shotgun. Gurlick, half-fainting with terror, slumped down
between a tree trunk and a rock, and cowered there until he could hear
their voices, and while he heard them, and after he heard them, with
their curt certain syllables and their cold lack of mercy. When all was
quite quiet again, he rose, and at that moment became aware of an
aircraft sound. It approached rapidly, and he dropped back into his
hiding place, trembling, and peeped up at the glittering patches of blue
in the leafy roof. The machine flew directly overhead, low, too slowly—a
helicopter. He heard it thrashing the air off to the north, downhill
from him, and for a while he could not judge if it was going or coming
or simply circling down mere. In his pride he was convinced that its
business was Gurlick and only Gurlick, and in his ignorance he was
certain it had seen him through the thick cover. It went away at last,
and the forest returned to its murmuring silence. He heard a faint shout
behind and above him, and scuttled from cover and away from the sound.
Pausing, a moment later, for breath, he caught another glimpse of the
man with the shotgun off to his left, and escaped to the right and down.

And, thus pursued and herded, he came to the water’s edge.

There was a dirt path there, and no one in sight; and it was warm and
sunny and peaceful. Slowly Gurlick’s panic subsided, and, as he walked
along the path, there was a deep throb of anticipation within him. He’d
gotten away clean; he had outdistanced his enemies and now, enemies,
beware!

The path curved closer to the bank of the lake. Alders stood thick here,
and there was the smell of moss. The path turned, and the shade was
briefly darker here at the verge of the floods of gold over the water.
And there by the path it lay, the little pile of fabric, bright red,
shiny black, filmy white with edges iced with lace....

Gurlick stopped walking, stopped breathing until his chest hurt. Then he
moved slowly past this incredible, impossible consolidation of his
dream, and went to the bushes at the water’s edge.

She was out there—_she._

He made a sharp wordless sound and stood forward, away from the bushes.
She turned in the water and stared at him, her eyes round.

Emancipated now, free to be what she had always wished to be, and to do
what she needed to do without fear or hesitation; swimming now naked in
the sun, sure and fearless, shameless; utterly oriented within herself
and herself within the matrix of humanity and all its known data, Salomé
Carmichael stood up in the water, under the sun, and said, “Hello,
Handsome.”

 


CHAPTER 28

So ended humanity within its planetary limits; so ended the
self-contained, self-aware species-hive which had for such a brief time
been able to feel, to the ends of its earth, its multifarious self. The
end came some hours after the helicopter—the same one which had set her
down by the pond—had come for Salomé Carmichael, which it had the
instant Gurlick quit the scene. Gurlick had seen it from where he
crouched guiltily in the bushes. After it had gone away he slowly
climbed to his feet and made his way back to the pond. He hunkered down
with his back to a tree and regarded the scene unwinkingly.

It had been right there, on the moss.

Over there had lain the pretty little heap of clothes, so clean, so
soft, so very red, shiny black, the white so pretty. The strangest thing
that had ever happened to him in his whole life had happened here,
stranger than the coming of the Medusa, stranger than the unpeopled
factory back there in the mountains, stranger, even, than the
overwhelming fact of this place, of her being here, of the unbelievable
coincidence of it all with his dream. And that strangest thing of all
was that once when she was here, she had cried out, and he had then been
gentle. He had been gentle with all his heart and mind and body, for a
brief while flooded, melted, swept away by gentleness. No wrinkled
raisin from out of space, no concept like the existence of a single
living thing so large it permeated two galaxies and part of a third,
could be so shockingly alien to him, everything he was and had ever
been, as this rush of gentleness. Its microscopic seed must have lain
encysted within him all his life, never encountering a single thing,
large or small, which could warm it to germination. Now it had burst
open, burst him open, and he was shocked, shaken, macerated as never
before in his bruised existence.

He crouched against the tree and regarded the moss, and the lake, and
the place where the red and the black and the lace had lain, and
wondered why he had run away. He wondered how he could have let her go.
The gentleness was consuming him, even now ... he had to find somewhere
to put it down, but there wouldn’t be anyone else, anyone or anything,
for him to be gentle to, anywhere in the world.

He began to cry. Gurlick had always wept easily, his facile tears his
only outlet for fear, and anger, and humiliation, and spite. This,
however, was different. This was very difficult to do, painful in the
extreme, and impossible to stop until he was racked, wrung out,
exhausted. It tumbled him over and left him groveling on the moss. Then
he slept, abruptly, his whipped consciousness fleeing away to the dark.

 


CHAPTER 29

What can travel faster than light?

Stand here by me, friend, on this hillside, under the black and freckled
sky. Which stars do you know— Polaris? Good. And the bright one yonder,
that’s Sirius. Look at them now: at Polaris, at Sirius. Quickly now:
Polaris, Sirius. And again: Sirius, Polaris.

How far apart are they? It says in the book, thousands of light-years.
How many? Too many: never mind. But how long does it take you to flick
your gaze from one to the other and back? a second? A half-second next
time, then a tenth? ... You can’t say that nothing, absolutely nothing,
has traveled between the two. Your vision has; your attention has.

You now understand, you have the rudiments of understanding what it is
to flick a part of yourself from star to star, just as (given the skill)
you may shift from soul to soul.

With such a shift, down such a path, came the Medusa at the instant of
its marriage to humanity. In all the history of humanity, the one
instant (save death) of most significance is the instant of syngamy, the
moment of penetration by the sperm of the ovum.

Yet almost never is there a heralding of this instant, nor a sign; it
comes to pass in silence and darkness, and no one ever knows but the
mindless flecks of complex jelly directly involved.

Not so now; and never before, and never again would marriage occur with
such explosion. A microsecond after that melding, Gurlick’s altered seed
to the welcoming ovum of a human, the Medusa of space shot down its
contacting thread, an unerring harpoon carrying a line to itself, and
all of its Self following in the line, ready to reach and fill humanity,
make of it a pseudopod, the newest member of its sprawling corpus.

But if the Medusa’s bolt can be likened to a harpoon, then it can be
said that the uprushing flood it met was like a volcano. The Medusa had
not a micromicro-second in which to realize what had happened to it. It
did not die; it was not killed any more than humanity would have been
killed had the Medusa’s plan been realized. Humanity would have become a
“person” of the illimitable creature. Now ...

Now, instead, humanity became the creature; flooded it, filled it to its
furthermost crannies, drenched its most remote cells with the Self of
humankind. Die? Never that; the Medusa was alive as never before, with a
new and different kind of life, in which its slaves were freed but its
motivations unified; where the individual was courted and honored and
brought special nutrients, body and mind, and where, freely, “want to”
forever replaced “must.”

And all for want of a datum: that intelligence might exist in
individuals, and that dissociated individuals might co-operate yet not
be a hive. For there is no structure on earth which could not have been
built by rats, were the rats centrally directed and properly motivated.
How could the Medusa have known? Thousands upon thousands of species and
cultures throughout the galaxies have technological progress as advanced
as that of Earth, and are yet composed of individuals no more highly
evolved than termites, lemurs, or shrews. What slightest hint was there
for the Medusa that a hive-humanity would be a different thing from a
super-rat?

Humanity had passed the barriers of language and of individual isolation
on its planet. It passed the barriers of species now, and of isolation
in its cosmos. The faith of Mbala was available to Guido, and so were
the crystal symphonies of the black planets past Ophiuchus. Charlotte
Dunsay, reaching across the world to her husband in Hobart, Tasmania,
might share with him a triple sunrise in the hub of Orion’s great
Nebula. As one man could share the _being_ of another here on earth, so
both, and perhaps a small child with them, could fuse their inner selves
with some ancient contemplative mind leeched to the rocks in some
roaring methane cataract, or soar with some insubstantial life-forms
adrift where they were born in the high layers of atmosphere around some
unheard-of planet.

So ended mankind, to be born again as hive-humanity; so ended the hive
of earth to become star-man, the immeasurable, the limitless, the
growing; maker of music beyond music, poetry beyond words, and full of
wonder, full of worship.

 


CHAPTER 30

So too ended Gurlick, the isolated, alone among humankind denied
membership in the fusion of humans, full of a steaming fog, aglow with
his flickerings of hate and the soft shine of corruption, member of
something other than humankind. For while humanity had been able to read
him (and his dream) and herd him through the forest’ to its fulfillment,
it had never been able to reach his consciousness, blocked as it was by
the thoughtlines of the Medusa.

These lines, however, were open still, and when humanity became Medusa,
it flooded down to Gurlick and made him welcome. _Come!_ it called, and
whirled him up and outward, showing and sharing its joy and strength and
pride, showering him with wonders of a thousand elsewheres and a hundred
heres; it showed him how to laugh at the most rarefied technician’s joke
and how to feel the structure of sestinae and sonnets, of bridges and
Bach. It spoke to him saying _We_ and granting him the right to regard
it all and say: _I._ And more: he had been promised a kingship, and now
he had it, for all this sentient immensity acknowledged to him its debt.
Let him but make the phantom of a wish of a thought, and his desires
would be fulfilled. _Come!_ it called. _Come!_

But the weight of the man o’ war was on his mind. _Hide!_ he thought.
Don’t attract attention. If he got out of line, the man o’ war would
squash him like a bug. But humanity, which had become Medusa, insisted,
it beat down upon him, and finally Gurlick could withstand its force no
longer. He turned and faced humankind as it had become,
all-transcending, all-inclusive, all-knowing, pervasive-faced humankind
as he had never faced it before in his life.

Humankind had changed.

His first reaction was My God, it’s full of people!

Which was strange, because he found himself at the edge of a purple
cliff which overlooked a valley with a silver river in it. Not silver
like the poets say, which only means the reflection of sky-white; this
one was metallic silver color, fluid, test. He was aware without
surprise that he sat on the tip of his spine, which was long, black and
tapering, with two enormous hind legs, kneed in the middle like broken
straws and pretty nearly as slender, forming the other two points of his
tripod. He was chewing on a stone, holding it to black marble lips
(which opened sidewise) with four hands (having scorpion-nippers for
fingers) and he found it delicious. He turned his head around (all the
way, without effort) and saw Salomé Carmichael behind him, and she was
beautiful beyond belief, which was odd because she looked like a
twelve-foot, blue-black praying mantis. But then, so did he.

She spoke, but it was not speech really, but a sort of semaphore of the
emotions. He felt himself greeted, and made joyfully welcome _(Hello, oh
hello, Danny, I knew you’d come, you had to come)_ and then there was an
invitation: _to the place to watch that game._ She moved close to him so
that their bodies touched, and somehow he knew just exactly what to do
to stay with her; in a blink they were somewhere else, on the top of a
swaying green tree (the bark was the green part) and he had a round
blunt front end like a bull-frog and four gauzy wings, and two long legs
with webbed feet like a waterbird. Salomé was there too, of the same
species and utterly lovely; and together they watched the game,
understanding it as completely in all its suspensions and convolutions
as any earthside hockey or baseball or chess fan might follow his
favorite. The teams were whole hives, and they could all together,
create soundwaves and focus them; at the focal point danced a blue-green
crystal, held spinning in midair by the beam of sound. There were three
hive-teams, not two, and if two should focus together on the crystal it
would shatter musically, and that was a foul, and the third team won the
point, and could have the playing field to dance in. And when the dance
was over (there were points for the dance too) then another crystal
would be projected high in the rosy air....

To a swimming place, tingling, refreshing, Gurlick knowing somehow that
where they swam under a blue-black rock ceiling, the temperature was
over a thousand degrees centigrade, and the gleaming bony paddles and
sleek speckled flanks with which he swam and on which he felt the
tingling were no flesh he had ever learned of. And to a flying place
where all the people, welcoming as everywhere, and some known to him as
people he had met on Earth, all these people were cobweb-frail, spending
their lives adrift in the thin shifts of air with the highest mist peaks
of a cloud-shrouded planet as their floor....

And Salomé gave him her story of envy and of her need to have others
depend on her.

These two were ideal antagonists, ideal weapons in the conflict between
Medusa and mankind. Medusa had won the battles; mankind had won the war.
And it had all begun with Gurlick....

Somewhere in this communion between them, the whole thing was talked
out. It was probably in the first couple of seconds of their first
meeting, there over the silver river. If it were rendered into words it
was Gurlick’s complete wounding by the discovery (in his loneliness)
that what had happened by the lake was no affair of his at all, but only
a strategic move in a war between a giant and a behemoth; with it, all
he had ever been in his tattered life, how there was nothing within him
with a whole soul to give in exchange for accidental kindness; how he
was unashamed to have far, far passed the point where he could keep
clean and think well and be a man ... in short, the entire Gurlick, with
all the reasons why, in one clear flash.

Gurlick, numb and passive as he tossed like a chip on their ocean of
wonders, had at last a wish, and had it, and had it.

True, none of this could have come about without him. This result could
not have been with anyone else in his place, so—true enough—he was owed
a debt. Pay it, then.

Pay the debt.... You do not reward a catalyst by changing it, the
unchanging, into something else. When a man is what Gurlick is, he is
that because he has made himself so; for what his environment has done
to him, blame the environment not so much as the stolid will that kept
him in it. So—take away hunger and poverty (or body and soul),
deprivation and discomfort and humiliation, and you take away the very
core of his being—his sole claim to superiority.

You take away his hate. You take away from him all reason to hate anyone
or anything—like the wet, like the cold.

So don’t ask him to look out among the stars, and join in the revelries
of giants. Don’t thank him, don’t treat him, and above all, do not so
emasculate him as to take away from him his reasons to hate: they have
become his life.

So they paid him, meticulously to the specifications he himself (though
all unknowing) set up.

And as long as he lived, there was a city-corner, drab streets and
fumes, sullen pedestrians and careless, dangerous aimers of trucks and
cabs; moist unbearable heat and bitter cold; and bars where Gurlick
could go and put in his head, whining for a drink, and bartenders to
send him out into the wet with his hatred, back to a wrecked truck in a
junkyard where he might lie in the dark and dream that dream of his.
“Bastits,” Gurlick would mutter in the dark, hating ... happy: “Lousy
bastits.”

 



KILLDOZER


 

 

 

 

 

Before the race was the deluge, and before the deluge another race,
whose nature it is not for mankind to understand. Not unearthly, not
alien, for this was their earth and their home.

There was a war between this race, which was a great one, and another.
The other was truly alien, a sentient cloudform, an intelligent grouping
of tangible electrons. It was spawned in mighty machines by some
accident of science before our aboriginal conception of its
complexities. And the machines, servants of the people, became the
people’s masters, and great were the battles that followed. The
electron-beings had the power to warp the delicate balances of
atom-structure, and their life-medium was metal, which they permeated
and used to their own ends. Each weapon the people developed was
possessed and turned against them, until a time when the remnants of
that vast civilization found a defense— An insulator. The terminal
product or by-product of all energy research—neutronium.

In its shelter they developed a weapon. What it was we shall never know,
and our race will live—or we shall know, and our race will perish as
theirs perished. For, to destroy the enemy, it got out of hand and its
measureless power destroyed them with it, and their cities, and their
possessed machines. The very earth dissolved in flame, the crust writhed
and shook and the oceans boiled. Nothing escaped it, nothing that we
know as life, and nothing of the pseudolife that had evolved within the
mysterious force-fields of their incomprehensible machines, save one
hardy mutant.

Mutant it was, and ironically this one alone could have been killed by
the first simple measures used against its kind—but it was past time for
simple expediences. It was an organized electron-field possessing
intelligence and mobility and a will to destroy, and little else.
Stunned by the holocaust, it drifted over the grumbling globe, and in a
lull in the violence of the forces gone wild on Earth, sank to the
steaming ground in its half-conscious exhaustion. There it found
shelter—shelter built by and for its dead enemies. An envelope of
neutronium. It drifted in, and its consciousness at last fell to its
lowest ebb. And there it lay while the neutronium, with its strange
constant flux, its interminable striving for perfect balance, extended
itself and closed the opening. And thereafter in the turbulent eons that
followed, the envelope tossed like a gray bubble on the surface of the
roiling sphere, for no substance on Earth would have it or combine with
it.

The ages came and went, and chemical action and reaction did their
mysterious work, and once again there was life and evolution. And a
tribe found the mass of neutronium, which is not a substance but a
static force, and were awed by its aura of indescribable chill, and they
worshiped it and built a temple around it and made sacrifices to it. And
ice and fire and the seas came and went, and the land rose and fell as
the years went by, until the ruined temple was on a knoll, and the knoll
was an island. Islanders came and went, lived and built and died, and
races forgot. So now somewhere in the Pacific to the west of the
archipelago called Islas Revillagigeda, there was an uninhabited island.
And one day—

 

Chub Horton and Tom Jaeger stood watching the _sprite_ and her squat tow
of three cargo lighters dwindle over the glassy sea. The big ocean-going
towboat and her charges seemed to be moving out of focus rather than
traveling away. Chub spat cleanly around the cigar that grew out of the
corner of his mouth.

“That’s that for three weeks. How’s it feel to be a guinea pig?”

“We’ll get it done.” Tom had little crinkles all around the outer ends
of his eyes. He was a head taller than Chub and rangy, and not so tough,
and he was a real operator. Choosing him as a foreman for the experiment
had been wise, for he was competent and he commanded respect. The theory
of airfield construction that they were testing appealed vastly to him,
for here were no officers-in-charge, no government inspectors, no
timekeeping or reports. The government had allowed the company a
temporary land grant, and the idea was to put production-line techniques
into the layout and grading of the project. There were six operators and
two mechanics and more than a million dollars’ worth of the best
equipment that money could buy. Government acceptance was to be on a
partially completed basis, and contingent on government standards. The
theory obviated both gold-bricking and graft, and neatly sidestepped the
man-power shortage. “When that black-topping crew gets here, I reckon
we’ll be ready for ‘em,” said Tom.

He turned and scanned the island with an operator’s vision and saw it as
it was, and in all the stages it would pass through, and as it would
look when they had finished, with four thousand feet of clean-draining
runway, hard-packed shoulders, four acres of plane-park, the access road
and the short taxiway. He saw the lay of each lift that the power shovel
would cut as it brought down the marl bluff, and the ruins on top of it
that would give them stone to haul down the salt-flat to the little
swamp at the other end, there to be walked in by the dozers.

“We got time to walk the shovel up there to the bluff before dark.”

They walked down the beach toward the outcropping where the equipment
stood surrounded by crates and drums of supplies. The three tractors
were ticking over quietly, the two-cycle Diesel chuckling through their
mufflers and the big D-7 whacking away its metronomic compression knock
on every easy revolution. The Dumptors were lined up and silent, for
they would not be ready to work until the shovel was ready to load them.
They looked like a mechanical interpretation of Dr. Dolittle’s
“Pushme-pullyou,” the fantastic animal with two front ends. They had two
large driving wheels and two small steerable wheels. The motor and the
driver’s seat were side by side over the front—or smaller—wheels; but
the driver faced the dump body between the big rear wheels, exactly the
opposite of the way he would sit in a dump truck. Hence, in traveling
from shovel to dumping-ground, the operator drove backwards, looking
over his shoulder, and in dumping he backed the machine up but he
himself traveled forward— quite a trick for fourteen hours a day! The
shovel squatted in the midst of all the others, its great hulk looming
over them, humped there with its boom low and its iron chin on the
ground, like some great tired dinosaur.

Rivera, the Puerto Rican mechanic, looked up grinning as Tom and Chub
approached, and stuck a bleeder wrench into the top pocket of his
coveralls.

“She says ‘Sigalo,’ “ he said, his white teeth flashlighting out of the
smear of grease across his mouth. “She says she wan’ to get dirt on dis
paint.” He kicked the blade of the Seven with his heel.

Tom sent the grin back—always a surprising thing in his grave face.

“That Seven’ll do that, and shell take a good deal off her bitin’ edge
along with the paint before we’re through. Get in the saddle, Goony.
Build a ramp off the rocks down to the flat there, and blade us off some
humps from here to the bluff yonder. We’re walking the dipper up there.”

The Puerto Rican was in the seat before Tom had finished, and with a
roar the Seven spun in its length and moved back along the outcropping
to the inland edge. Rivera dropped his blade and the sandy marl curled
and piled up in front of the dozer, loading the blade and running off in
two even rolls at the ends. He shoved the load toward the rocky edge,
the Seven revving down as it took the load, _blat blat blatting_ and
pulling like a supercharged ox as it fired slowly enough for them to
count the revolutions.

“She’s a hunk of machine,” said Tom.

“A hunk of operator, too,” gruffed Chub, and added, “for a mechanic.”

“The boy’s all right,” said Kelly. He was standing there with them,
watching the Puerto Rican operate the dozer, as if he had been there all
along, which was the way Kelly always arrived places. He was tall, slim,
with green eyes too long and an easy stretch to the way he moved, like
an attenuated cat. He said, “Never thought I’d see the day when
equipment was shipped set up ready to run like this. Guess no one ever
thought of it before.”

“There’s times when heavy equipment has to be unloaded in a hurry these
days,” Tom said. “If they can do it with tanks, they can do it with
construction equipment. We’re doin’ it to build something instead, is
all. Kelly, crank up the shovel. It’s oiled. We’re walking it over to
the bluff”

Kelly swung up into the cab of the big dipper-stick and, diddling the
governor control, pulled up the starting handle. The Murphy Diesel
snorted and settled down into a thudding idle. Kelly got into the
saddle, set up the throttle a little, and began to boom up.

“I still can’t get over it,” said Chub. “Not more’n a year ago we’d a
had two hundred men on a job like this.”

Tom smiled. “Yeah, and the first thing we’d have done would be to build
an office building, and then quarters. Me, I’ll take this way. No
timekeepers, no equipment-use reports, no progress and yardage
summaries, no nothin’ but eight men, a million bucks worth of equipment,
an’ three weeks. A shovel an’ a mess of tool crates’ll keep the rain off
us, an’ army field rations’ll keep our bellies full. We’ll get it done,
we’ll get out and we’ll get paid.”

Rivera finished the ramp, turned the Seven around and climbed it,
walking the new fill down. At the top he dropped his blade, floated it,
and backed down the ramp, smoothing out the rolls. At a wave from Tom he
started out across the shore, angling up toward the bluff, beating out
the humps and carrying fill into the hollows. As he worked, he sang,
feeling the beat of the mighty motor, the micrometric obedience of that
vast implacable machine.

“Why doesn’t that monkey stick to his grease guns?” Tom turned and took
the chewed end of a match stick out of his mouth. He said nothing,
because he had for some time been trying to make a habit of saying
nothing to Joe Dennis. Dennis was an ex-accountant, drafted out of an
office at the last gasp of a defunct project in the West Indies. He had
become an operator because they needed operators badly. He had been
released with alacrity from the office because of his propensity for
small office politics. It was a game he still played, and completely
aside from his boiled-looking red face and his slightly womanish walk,
he was out of place in the field; for boot-licking and back-stabbing
accomplish even less out on the field than they do in an office. Tom,
trying so hard to keep his mind on his work, had to admit to himself
that of all Dennis’ annoying traits the worst was that he was as good a
pan operator as could be found anywhere, and no one could deny it.
Dennis certainly didn’t.

“I’ve seen the day when anyone catching one of those goonies so much as
sitting on a machine during lunch, would kick his fanny,” Dennis
groused. “Now they give ‘em a man’s work and a man’s pay.”

“_Doin’_ a man’s work, ain’t he?” Tom said.

“He’s a Puerto Rican!”

Tom turned and looked at him levelly. “Where was it you said _you_ come
from,” he mused. “Oh yeah. Georgia.”

“What do you mean by that?”

Tom was already striding away. “Tell you as soon as I have to,” he flung
back over his shoulder. Dennis went back to watching the Seven.

Tom glanced at the ramp and then waved Kelly on. Kelly set his
housebrake so the shovel could not swing, put her into travel gear, and
shoved the swing lever forward. With a crackling of drive chains and a
massive scrunching of compacting coral sand, the shovel’s great flat
pads carried her over and down the ramp. As she tipped over the peak of
the ramp the heavy manganese steel bucket-door gaped open and closed,
like a hungry mouth, slamming up against the bucket until suddenly it
latched shut and was quiet. The big Murphy Diesel crooned hollowly under
compression as the machine ran downgrade and then the sensitive governor
took hold and it took up its belly-beating thud.

Peebles was standing by one of the door-pan combines, sucking on his
pipe and looking out to sea. He was grizzled and heavy, and from under
the bushiest gray brows looked the calmest gray eyes Tom had ever seen.
Peebles had never gotten angry at a machine—a rare trait in a born
mechanic—and in fifty-odd years he had learned it was even less use
getting angry at a man. Because no matter what, you could always fix
what was wrong with a machine. He said around his pipestem:

“Hope you’ll give me back my boy, there.”

Tom s lips quirked in a little grin. There had been an understanding
between old Peebles and himself ever since they had met. It was one of
those things which exists unspoken—they knew little about each other
because they had never found it necessary to make small talk to keep
their friendship extant. It was enough to know that each could expect
the best from the other, without persuasion.

“Rivera?” Tom asked. “I’ll chase him back as soon as he finishes that
service road for the dipper-stick. Why—got anything on?”

“Not much. Want to get that arc welder drained and flushed and set up a
grounded table in case you guys tear anything up.” He paused. “Besides,
the kid’s filling his head up with too many things at once. Mechanicing
is one thing; operating is something else.”

“Hasn’t got in his way much so far, has it?”

“Nope. Don’t aim t’ let it, either. ‘Less you need him.”

Tom swung up on the pan tractor. “I don’t need him that bad, Peeby. If
you want some help in the meantime, get Dennis.”

Peebles said nothing. He spat. He didn’t say anything at all.

“What’s the matter with Dennis?” Tom wanted to know.

“Look yonder,” said Peebles, waving his pipestem. Out on the beach
Dennis was talking to Chub, in Dennis’ indefatigable style, standing
beside Chub, one hand on Chub’s shoulder. As they watched they saw
Dennis call his side-kick, Al Knowles.

“Dennis talks too much,” said Peebles. “That most generally don’t amount
to much, but that Dennis, he sometimes _says_ too much. Ain’t got what
it takes to run a show, and knows it. Makes up for it by messin’ in
between folks.”

“He’s harmless,” said Tom.

Still looking up the beach, Peebles said slowly:

“Is, so far.’

Tom started to say something, then shrugged. “I’ll send you Rivera,” he
said, and opened the throttle. Like a huge electric dynamo, the two
cycle motor whined to a crescendo. Tom lifted the dozer with a small
lever by his right thigh and raised the pan with the long control
sprouting out from behind his shoulder. He moved off, setting the rear
gate of the scraper so that anything the blade bit would run off to the
side instead of loading into the pan. He slapped the tractor into sixth
gear and whined up to and around the crawling shovel, cutting neatly in
under the boom and running on ahead with his scraper blade just touching
the ground, dragging to a fine grade the service road Rivera had cut.

 

Dennis was saying, “It’s that little Hitler stuff. Why should I take
that kind of talk? ‘You come from Georgia,’ he says. What is he—a Yankee
or something?”

“A crackah f’m Macon,” chortled Al Knowles, who came from Georgia, too.
He was tall and stringy and round-shouldered. All of his skill was in
his hands and feet, brains being a commodity he had lived without all
his life until he had met Dennis and used him as a reasonable facsimile
thereof.

“Tom didn’t mean nothing by it,” said Chub.

“No, he didn’t mean nothin’. Only that we do what he says the way he
says it, specially if he finds a way we don’t like. _You_ wouldn’t do
like that, Chub. Al, think Chub would carry on thataway?”

“Sure wouldn’t,” said Al, feeling it expected of him.

“Nuts,” said Chub, pleased and uncomfortable, and thinking, what have I
got against Tom?—not knowing, not liking Tom as well as he had. “Tom’s
the man here, Dennis. We got a job to do—let’s slat and git. Man can
take anything for a lousy six weeks.”

“Oh, sho’,” said Al.

“Man can take just so much,” Dennis said. “What they put a man like that
on top for, chub? What’s the matter with you? Don’t you know grading and
drainage as good as Tom? Can Tom stake out a side hill like you can?”

“Sure, sure, but what’s the difference, long as we get a field built?
An’ anyhow, hell with bein’ the boss-man. Who gets the blame if things
don’t run right, anyway?”

Dennis stepped back, taking his hand off Chub’s shoulder, and stuck an
elbow in Al’s ribs.

“You see that, Al? Now there’s a smart man. That’s the thing Uncle Tom
didn’t bargain for. Chub, you can count on Al and me to do just that
little thing.”

“Do just what little thing?” asked Chub, genuinely puzzled.

“Like you said. If the job goes wrong, the boss gets blamed. So if the
boss don’t behave, the job goes wrong.”

“Uh-huh,” agreed Al with the conviction of mental simplicity.

Chub double-took this extraordinary logical process and grasped wildly
at anger as the conversation slid out from under him. “I didn’t say any
such thing! This job is going’ to get done, no matter what! Hitler ain’t
hangin’ no iron cross on me or anybody else around here if I can help
it.”

“Tha’s the ol’ fight,” feinted Dennis. “We’ll show that guy what we
think of his kind of sabotage.”

“You talk too much,” said Chub and escaped with the remnants of
coherence. Every time he talked with Dennis he walked away feeling as if
he had an unwanted membership card stuck in his pocket that he couldn’t
throw away with a clear conscience.

 

Rivera ran his road up under the bluff, swung the Seven around, punched
out the master clutch and throttled down, idling. Tom was making his
pass with the pan, and as he approached, Rivera slipped out of the seat
and behind the tractor, laying a sensitive hand on the final drive
casing and sprocket bushings, checking for overheating. Tom pulled
alongside and beckoned him up on the pan tractor.

_“Que pase,_ Goony? Anything wrong?”

Rivera shook his head and grinned. “Nothing wrong. She is perfect, that
_‘De Siete.’_ She—”

“That what? ‘Daisy Etta’?”

_“De siete._ In Spanish, D-7. It means something in English?”

“Got you wrong,” smiled Tom. “But Daisy Etta is a girl’s name in
English, all the same.”

He shifted the pan tractor into neutral and engaged the clutch, and
jumped off the machine. Rivera followed. They climbed aboard the Seven,
Tom at the controls.

Rivera said “Daisy Etta,” and grinned so widely that a soft little
chuckling noise came from behind his back teeth. He reached out his
hand, crooked his little finger around one of the tall steering clutch
levers, and pulled it all the way back. Tom laughed outright.

“You got something there,” he said. “The easiest runnin’ cat ever built.
Hydraulic steerin’ clutches and brakes that’ll bring you to a dead stop
if you spit on ‘em. Forward an’ reverse lever so’s you got all your
speeds front and backwards. A little different from the old jobs. They
had no booster springs, eight-ten years ago; took a sixty-pound pull to
get a steerin’ clutch back. Cuttin’ a side-hill with an angle-dozer
really was a job in them days. You try it sometime, dozin’ with one
hand, holdin’ her nose out o’ the bank with the other, ten hours a day.
And what’d it get you? Eighty cents an hour an’ “—Tom took his cigarette
and butted the fiery end out against the horny palm of his hand—
“these.”

“Santa Maria!”

“Want to talk to you, Goony. Want to look over the bluff, too, at that
stone up there. It’ll take Kelly pret’ near an hour to get this far and
sumped in, anyhow.”

They started up the slope, Tom feeling the ground under the four-foot
brush, taking her up in a zigzag course like a hairpin road on a
mountainside. Though the Seven carried a muffler on the exhaust stack
that stuck up out of the hood before them, the blat of four big
cylinders hauling fourteen tons of steel upgrade could outshout any
man’s conversation, so they sat without talking, Tom driving, Rivera
watching his hands flick over the controls.

The bluff started in a low ridge running almost the length of the little
island, like a lopsided backbone. Toward the center it rose abruptly,
sent a wing out toward the rocky outcropping at the beach where their
equipment had been unloaded, and then rose again to a small, almost
square plateau area, half a mile square. It was humpy and rough until
they could see all of it, when they realized how incredibly level it
was, under the brash and ruins that covered it. In the center—and
exactly in the center they realized suddenly—was a low, overgrown mound.
Tom threw out the clutch and revved her down.

“Survey report said there was stone up here,”

Tom said, vaulting out of the seat. “Let’s walk around some.”

They walked toward the knoll, Tom’s eyes casting about as he went. He
stooped down into the heavy, short grass and scooped up a piece of
stone, blue-gray, hard and brittle.

“Rivera—look at this. This is what the report was talking about.
See—more of it. All in small pieces, though. We need big stuff for the
bog if we can get it.”

“Good stone?” asked Rivera.

“Yes, boy—but it don’t belong here. Th’ whole island’s sand and marl and
sandstone on the outcrop down yonder. This here’s a bluestone, like
diamond clay. Harder’n blazes. I never saw this stuff on a marl hill
before. Or near one. Anyhow, root around and see if there is any big
stuff.”

They walked on. Rivera suddenly dipped down and pulled grass aside.

“Tom—here’s a beeg one.”

Tom came over and looked down at the corner of stone sticking up out of
the topsoil. “Yeh. Goony, get your girl-friend over here and we’ll root
it out. ‘ Rivera sprinted back to the idling dozer and climbed aboard.
He brought the machine over to where Tom waited, stopped, stood up and
peered over the front of the machine to locate the stone, then sat down
and shifted gears. Before he could move the machine Tom was on the
fender beside him, checking him with a hand on his arm.

“No, boy—no. Not third. First. And half throttle. That’s it. Don’t try
to bash a rock out of the ground. Go on up to it easy; set your blade
against it, lift it out, don t boot it out. Take it with the middle of
your blade, not the corner—get the load on both hydraulic cylinders. Who
told you to do like that?”

“No one tol’ me, Tom. I see a man do it, I do it.”

“Yeah? Who was it?”

“Dennis, but—”

“Listen, Goony, if you want to learn anything from Dennis, watch him
while he’s on a pan. He dozes like he talks. That reminds me—what I
wanted to talk to you about. You ever have any trouble with him?”

Rivera spread his hands. “How I have trouble when he never talk to me?”

“Well, that’s all right then. You keep it that way. Dennis is O.K., I
guess, but you better keep away from him.”

He went on to tell the boy then about what Peebles had said concerning
being an operator and a mechanic at the same time. Rivera’s lean dark
face fell, and his hand strayed to the blade control, touching it
lightly, feeling the composition grip and the machined locknuts that
held it. When Tom had quite finished he said:

“O.K., Tom—if you want, you break ‘em, I feex ‘em. But if you wan’ help
some time, I run _Daisy Etta_ for you, no?”

“Sure, kid, sure. But don’t forget, no man can do everything.”

“You can do everything,” said the boy.

Tom leaped off the machine and Rivera shifted into first and crept up to
the stone, setting the blade gently against it. Taking the load, the
mighty engine audibly bunched its muscles; Rivera opened the throttle a
little and the machine set solidly against the stone, the tracks
slipping, digging into the ground, piling loose earth up behind. Tom
raised a fist, thumb up, and the boy began lifting his blade. The Seven
lowered her snout like an ox pulling through mud; the front of the
tracks buried themselves deeper and the blade slipped upward an inch on
the rock, as if it were on a ratchet. The stone shifted, and suddenly
heaved itself up out of the earth that covered it, bulging the sod aside
like a ship’s slow bow-wave.

And the blade lost its grip and slipped over the stone. Rivera slapped
out the master clutch within an ace of letting the mass of it poke
through his radiator core. Reversing, he set the blade against it again
and rolled it at last into daylight.

Tom stood staring at it, scratching the back of his neck. Rivera got off
the machine and stood beside him. For« long time they said nothing.

The stone was roughly rectangular, shaped like a brick with one end cut
at about a thirty-degree angle. And on the angled face was a square-cut
ridge, like the tongue on a piece of milled lumber. The stone was about
3x2x2 feet, and must have weighed six or seven hundred pounds.

“Now that,” said Tom, bug-eyed, “didn’t grow _here,_ and if it did it
never grew that way.”

_“Una piedra de una casa,”_ said Rivera softly. “Tom, there was a
building here, no?”

Tom turned suddenly to look at the knoll.

“There is a building here—or what’s left of it. Lord on’y knows how
old—”

They stood there in the slowly dwindling light, staring at the knoll;
and there came upon them a feeling of oppression, as if there were no
wind and no sound anywhere. And yet there was wind, and behind them
_Daisy Etta_ whacked away with her muttering idle, and nothing had
changed and—was that it? That nothing had changed? That nothing would
change, or could, here?

Tom opened his mouth twice to speak, and couldn’t, or didn’t want to—he
didn’t know which. Rivera slumped down suddenly on his hunkers, back
erect, and his eyes wide.

It grew very cold. “It’s cold,” Tom said, and his voice sounded harsh to
him. And the wind blew warm on them, the earth was warm under Rivera’s
knees. The cold was not a lack of heat, but a lack of something
else—warmth, but the specific warmth of life-force, perhaps. The feeling
of oppression grew, as if their recognition of the strangeness of the
place had started it, and their increasing sensitivity to it made it
grow.

Rivera said something, quietly, in Spanish.

“What are you looking at?” asked Tom.

Rivera started violently, threw up an arm, as if to ward off the crash
of Tom’s voice.

“I ... there is nothin’ to see, Tom. I feel this way wance before. I
dunno—” He shook his head, his eyes wide and blank. “An’ after, there
was being wan hell of a thunderstorm—” His voice petered out.

Tom took his shoulder and hauled him roughly to his feet. “Goony! You
slap-happy?”

The boy smiled, almost gently. The down on his upper lip held little
spheres of sweat. “I ain’ nothin’, Tom. I’m jus’ scare like hell.”

“You scare yourself right back up there on that cat and git to work,”
Tom roared. More quietly then, he said, “I know there’s
something—wrong—here, Goony, but that ain’t goin’ to get us a runway
built. Anyhow, I know what to do about a dawg ‘at gits gunshy. Ought to
be able to do as much fer you. Git along to th’ mound now and see if it
ain’t a cache o’ big stone for us. We got a swamp down there to fill.”
Rivera hesitated, started to speak, swallowed and then walked slowly
over to the Seven. Tom stood watching him, closing his mind to the
impalpable pressure of something, somewhere near, making his guts cold.

The bulldozer nosed over to the mound, grunting, reminding Tom suddenly
that the machine’s Spanish slang name was _puerco_—pig, boar. Rivera
angled into the edge of the mound with the cutting corner of the blade.
Dirt and brush curled up, fell away from the mound and loaded from the
bank side, out along the moldboard. The boy finished his pass along the
mound, carried the load past it and wasted it out on the flat, turned
around and started back again.

Ten minutes later Rivera struck stone, the manganese steel screaming
along it, a puff of gray dust spouting from the cutting corner. Tom
knelt and examined it after the machine had passed. It was the same kind
of stone they had found out on the flat— and shaped the same way. But
here it was a wall, the angled feces of the block ends obviously tongued
and grooved together.

Cold, cold as—

Tom took one deep breath and wiped sweat out of his eyes.

“I don’t care,” he whispered, “I got to have that stone. I got to fill
me a swamp.” He stood back and motioned to Rivera to blade into a
chipped crevice in the buried wall.

The Seven swung into the wall and stopped while Rivera shifted into
first, throttled down and lowered his blade. Tom looked up into his
face. The boy’s lips were white. He eased in the master clutch, the
blade dipped and the corner swung neatly into the crevice.

The dozer blatted protestingly and began to crab sideways, pivoting on
the end of the blade. Tom jumped out of the way, ran around behind the
machine, which was almost parallel with the wall now, and stood in the
clear, one hand raised ready to signal, his eyes on the straining blade.
And then everything happened at once.

With a toothy snap the block started and came free, pivoting outward
from its square end, bringing with it its neighbor. The block above them
dropped, and the whole mound seemed to settle. And _something_ whooshed
out of the black hole where the rocks had been. Something like a fog,
but not a fog that could be seen, something huge that could not be
measured. With it came a gust of that cold which was not cold, and the
smell of ozone, and the prickling crackle of a mighty static discharge.

Tom was fifty feet from the wall before he knew he had moved. He stopped
and saw the Seven suddenly buck like a wild stallion, once, and Rivera
turning over twice in the air. Tom shouted some meaningless syllable and
tore over to the boy, where he sprawled in the rough grass, lifted him
in his arms, and ran. Only then did he realize that he was running from
the machine.

It was like a mad thing. Its moldboard rose and fell. It curved away
from the mound, howling governor gone wild, controls flailing. The blade
dug repeatedly into the earth, gouging it up in great dips through which
the tractor plunged, clanking and bellowing furiously. It raced away in
a great irregular arc, turned and came snorting back to the mound, where
it beat at the buried wall, slewed and scraped and roared.

Tom reached the edge of the plateau sobbing for breath, and kneeling,
laid the boy gently down on the grass.

“Goony, boy ... hey—”

The long silken eyelashes fluttered, lifted. Something wrenched in Tom
as he saw the eyes, rolled right back so that only the whites showed.
Rivera drew a long quivering breath which caught suddenly. He coughed
twice, threw his head from side to side so violently that Tom took it
between his hands and steadied it.

_“Ay ... Marie madre_ ... _que me pasado,_ Tom— w’at has happen to me?”

“Fell off the Seven, stupid. You ... how you feel?”

Rivera scrabbled at the ground, got his elbows half under him, then sank
back weakly. “Feel O.K. Headache like hell. W-w’at happen to my feets?”

“Feet? They hurt?”

“No hurt—” The young face went gray, the lips tightened with effort. “No
nothin’, Tom.”

“You can’t move ‘em?”

Rivera shook his head, still trying. Tom stood up. “You take it easy.
I’ll go get Kelly. Be right back.”

He walked away quickly and when Rivera called to him he did not turn
around. Tom had seen a man with a broken back before.

 

At the edge of the little plateau Tom stopped, listening. In the
deepening twilight he could see the bulldozer standing by the mound. The
motor was running; she had not stalled herself. But what stopped Tom was
that she wasn’t idling, but revving up and down as if an impatient hand
were on the throttle— _hroom hroooom,_ running up and up far fester than
even a broken governor should permit, then coasting down to near
silence, broken by the explosive punctuation of sharp and irregular
firing. Then it would run up and up again, almost screaming, sustaining
a r.p.m. that threatened every moving part, shaking the great machine
like some deadly ague.

Tom walked swiftly toward the Seven, a puzzled and grim frown on his
weather-beaten face. Governors break down occasionally, and once in a
while you will have a motor tear itself to pieces, revving up out of
control. But it will either do that or it will rev down and quit. If an
operator is fool enough to leave his machine with the master clutch
engaged, the machine will take off and run the way the Seven had—but it
will not turn unless the blade corner catches in something unresisting,
and then the chances are very strong that it will stall. But in any
case, it was past reason for any machine to act this way, revving up and
down, running, turning, lifting and dropping the blade.

The motor slowed as he approached, and at last settled down into
something like a steady and regular idle. Tom had the sudden crazy
impression that it was watching him. He shrugged off the feeling, walked
up and laid a hand on the fender.

The Seven reacted like a wild stallion. The big Diesel roared, and Tom
distinctly saw the master clutch lever snap back over center. He leaped
clear, expecting the machine to jolt forward, but apparently it was in a
reverse gear, for it shot backwards, one track locked, and the near end
of the blade swung in a swift vicious arc, breezing a bare fraction of
an inch past his hip as he danced back out of the way.

And as if it had bounced off a wall, the tractor had shifted and was
bearing down on him, the twelve-foot blade rising, the two big
headlights looming over him on their bow-legged supports, looking like
the protruding eyes of some mighty toad. Tom had no choice but to leap
straight up and grasp the top of the blade in his two hands, leaning
back hard to brace his feet against the curved moldboard. The blade
dropped and sank into the soft topsoil, digging a deep little swale in
the ground. The earth loading on the moldboard rose and churned around
Tom’s legs; he stepped wildly, keeping them clear of the rolling drag of
it. Up came the blade then, leaving a four-foot pile at the edge of the
pit; down and up the tractor raced as the tracks went into it; up and up
as they climbed the pile of dirt. A quick balance and overbalance as the
machine lurched up and over like a motorcycle taking a jump off a ramp,
and then a spine-shaking crash as fourteen tons of metal smashed
blade-first into the ground.

Part of the leather from Tom’s tough palms stayed with the blade as he
was flung off. He went head over heels backwards, but had his feet
gathered and sprang as they touched the ground; for he knew that no
machine could bury its blade like that and get out easily. He leaped to
the top of the blade, got one hand on the radiator cap, vaulted.
Perversely, the cap broke from its hinge and came away in his hand, in
that split instant when only that hand rested on anything. Off balance,
he landed on his shoulder with his legs flailing the air, his body
sliding off the hood’s smooth shoulder toward the track now churning the
earth beneath. He made a wild grab at the air intake pipe, barely had it
in his fingers when the dozer freed itself and shot backwards up and
over the hump. Again that breathless flight pivoting over the top, and
the clanking crash as the machine landed, this time almost flat on its
tracks.

The jolt tore Tom’s hand away, and as he slid back over the hood the
crook of his elbow caught the exhaust stack, the dull red metal biting
into his flesh. He grunted and clamped the arm around it. His momentum
carried him around it, and his feet crashed into the steering clutch
levers. Hooking one with his instep, he doubled his legs and whipped
himself back, scrabbling at the smooth warm metal, crawling frantically
backward until he finally fell heavily into the seat.

“Now,” he gritted through a red wall of pain, “you’re gonna git
operated.” And he kicked out the master clutch.

The motor wailed, with the load taken off so suddenly. Tom grasped the
throttle, his thumb clamped down on the ratchet release, and he shoved
the lever forward to shut off the fuel.

It wouldn’t shut off; it went down to a slow idle, but it wouldn’t shut
off.

“There’s one thing you can’t do without,” he muttered, “compression.”

He stood up and leaned around the dash, reaching for the
compression-release lever. As he came up out of the seat, the engine
revved up again. He turned to the throttle, which had snapped back into
the “open” position. As his hand touched it the master clutch lever
snapped in and the howling machine lurched forward with a jerk that
snapped his head on his shoulders and threw him heavily back into the
seat. He snatched at the hydraulic blade control and threw it to “float”
position; and then as the falling moldboard touched the ground, into
“power down.” The cutting edge bit into the ground and the engine began
to labor. Holding the blade control, he pushed the throttle forward with
his other hand. One of the steering clutch levers whipped back and
struck him agonizingly on the kneecap. He involuntarily let go of the
blade control and the moldboard began to rise. The engine began to turn
faster and he realized that it was not responding to the throttle.
Cursing, he leaped to his feet; the suddenly flailing steering clutch
levers struck him three times in the groin before he could get between
them.

Blind with pain, Tom clung gasping to the dash. The oil-pressure gauge
fell off the dash to his right, with a tinkling of broken glass, and
from its broken quarter-inch line scalding oil drenched him. The shock
of it snapped back his wavering consciousness. Ignoring the blows of the
left steering clutch and the master clutch which had started the same
mad punching, he bent over the left end of the dash and grasped the
compression lever. The tractor rushed forward and spun sickeningly, and
Tom knew he was thrown. But as he felt himself leave the decking his
hand punched the compression lever down. The great valves at the
cylinder heads opened and locked open; atomized fuel and superheated air
chattered out, and as Tom’s head and shoulders struck the ground the
great wild machine rolled to a stop, stood silently except for the
grumble of water boiling in the cooling system.

Minutes later Tom raised his head and groaned. He rolled over and sat
up, his chin on his knees, washed by wave after wave of pain. As they
gradually subsided, he crawled to the machine and pulled himself to his
feet, hand over hand on the track. And groggily he began to cripple the
tractor, at least for the night.

He opened the cock under the fuel tank, left the warm yellow fluid
gushing out on the ground. He opened the drain on the reservoir by the
injection pump. He found a piece of wire in the crank box and with it
tied down the compression release lever. He crawled up on the machine,
wrenched the hood and ball jar off the air intake precleaner, pulled off
his shirt and stuffed it down the pipe. He pushed the throttle all the
way forward and locked it with the locking pin. And he shut off the fuel
on the main line from the tank to the pump.

Then he climbed heavily to the ground and slogged back to the edge of
the plateau where he had left Rivera.

 

They didn’t know Tom was hurt until an hour and a half later—there had
been too much to do—rigging a stretcher for the Puerto Rican, building
him a shelter, an engine crate with an Army pup tent for a roof. They
brought out the first-aid kit and the medical books and did what they
could—tied and splinted and dosed with an opiate. Tom was a mass of
bruises, and his right arm, where it had hooked the exhaust stack, was a
flayed mass. They fixed him up then, old Peebles handling the sulfa
powder and bandages like a trained nurse. And only then was there talk.

“I’ve seen a man thrown off a pan,” said Dennis, as they sat around the
coffee urn munching C rations. “Sittin’ up on the arm rest on a cat,
looking backwards. Cat hit a rock and bucked. Threw him off on the
track. Stretched him out ten feet long.” He in-whistled some coffee to
dilute the mouthful of food he had been talking around, and masticated
noisily. “Man’s a fool to set up there on one side of his butt even on a
pan. Can’t see why th’ goony was doin’ it on a dozer. ‘

“He wasn’t,” said Tom.

Kelly rubbed his pointed jaw. “He set flat on th’ seat an’ was th’owed?”

“That’s right.”

After an unbelieving silence Dennis said, “What was he doin’—drivin’
over sixty?”

Tom looked around the circle of faces lit up by the over-artificial
brilliance of a pressure lantern, and wondered what the reaction would
be if he told it all just as it was. He had to say something, and it
didn’t look as if it could be the truth.

“He was workin’,” he said finally. “Bucking stone out of the wall of an
old building up on the mesa there. One turned loose an’ as it did the
governor must’ve gone haywire. She bucked like a loco hoss and run off.”

“Run off?”

Tom opened his mouth and closed it again, and just nodded.

Dennis said, “Well, reckon that’s what happens when you put a mechanic
to operatin’.”

“That had nothin’ to do with it,” Tom snapped. Peebles spoke up quickly.
“Tom—what about the Seven? Broke up any?”

“Some,” said Tom. “Better look at the steering clutches. An’ she was
hot.”

“Head’s cracked,” said Harris, a burly young man with shoulders like a
buffalo and a famous thirst.

“How do you know?”

“Saw it when Al and me went up with the stretcher to get the kid while
you all were building the shelter. Hot water runnin’ down the side of
the block.”

“You mean you walked all the way out to the mound to look at that
tractor while the kid was lyin’ there? I told you where he was!”

“Out to the mound!” Al Knowles’ pop eyes teetered out of their sockets.
“We found that cat stalled twenty feet away from where the kid was!”

“What!”

“That’s right, Tom,” said Harris. “What’s eatin’ you? Where’d you leave
it?”

“I told you ... by the mound ... the ol’ building we cut into.”

“Leave the startin’ motor runnin’?”

“Starting motor?” Tom’s mind caught the picture of the small,
two-cylinder gasoline engine bolted to the side of the big Diesel’s
crankcase, coupled through a Bendix gear and a clutch to the flywheel of
the Diesel to crank it. He remembered his last glance at the still
machine, silent but for the sound of water boiling. “Hell no!”

Al and Harris exchanged a glance. “I guess you were sort of slap-happy
all the time, Tom,” Harris said, not unkindly. “When we were halfway up
the hill we heard it, and you know you can’t mistake that racket.
Sounded like it was under a load.”

Tom beat softly at his temples with his clenched fists. “I left that
machine dead,” he said quietly. “I got compression off her and tied down
the lever. I even stuffed my shirt in the intake. I drained the tank.
But—I didn’t touch the starting motor.” Peebles wanted to know why he
had gone to all that trouble. Tom just looked vaguely at him and shook
his head. “I shoulda pulled the wires. I never thought about the
starting motor,” he whispered. Then, “Harris—you say you found the
starting motor running when you got to the top?”

“No—she was stalled. And hot—awmighty hot. I’d say the startin’ motor
was seized up tight. That must be it, Tom. You left the startin’ motor
runnin’ and somehow engaged the clutch an’ Bendix.” His voice lost
conviction as he said it—it takes seventeen separate motions to start a
tractor of this type. “Anyhow, she was in gear an’ crawled along on the
little motor.”

“I done that once,” said Chub. “Broke a con rod on an Eight, on a
highway job. Walked her about three-quarters of a mile on the startin’
motor that way. Only I had to stop every hundred yards and let her cool
down some.”

Not without sarcasm, Dennis said, “Seems to me like the Seven was out to
get th’ goony. Made one pass at him and then went back to finish the
job.”

Al Knowles haw-hawed extravagantly.

Tom stood up, shaking his head, and went off among the crates to the
hospital they had jury-rigged for the lad.

A dim light was burning inside, and Rivera lay very still, with his eyes
closed. Tom leaned in the doorway—the open end of the engine crate—and
watched him for a moment. Behind him he could hear the murmur of the
crew’s voices; the night was otherwise windless and still. Rivera’s face
was the peculiar color that olive skin takes when drained of blood. Tom
looked at his chest and for a panicky moment thought he could discern no
movement there. He entered and put a hand over the boy’s heart. Rivera
shivered, his eyes flew open, and he drew a sudden breath which caught
raggedly at the back of this throat. “Tom ... Tom!” he cried weakly.

“O.K., Goony ... _que pase?”_

“She commeen back ... Tom!”

“Who?”

“El de siete.”

_Daisy Etta_—”She ain’t comin’ back, kiddo. You’re off the mesa now.
Keep your chin up, fella.”

Rivera’s dark, doped eyes stared up at him without expression. Tom moved
back and the eyes continued to stare. They weren’t seeing anything. “Go
to sleep,” he whispered. The eyes closed instantly.

 

Kelly was saying that nobody ever got hurt on a construction job unless
somebody was dumb. “An’ most times you don’t realize how dumb what
you’re doin’ is until somebody does get hurt.”

“The dumb part was gettin’ a kid, an’ not even an operator at that, up
on a machine,” said Dennis in his smuggest voice.

“I heard you try to sing that song before,” said old Peebles quietly. “I
hate to have to point out anything like this to a man because it don’t
do any good to make comparisons. But I’ve worked with that fella Rivera
for a long time now, an’ I’ve seen ‘em as good but doggone few better.
As far as you’re concerned, you’re O.K. on a pan, but the kid could give
you cards and spades and still make you look like a cost accountant on a
dozer.”

Dennis half rose and mouthed something filthy. He looked at Al Knowles
for backing and got it. He looked around the circle and got none.
Peebles lounged back, sucking on his pipe, watching from under those
bristling brows. Dennis subsided, running now on another tack.

“So what does that prove? The better you say he is, the less reason he
had to fall off a cat and get himself hurt.”

“I haven’t got the thing straight yet,” said Chub, in a voice whose tone
indicated ‘I hate to admit it, but—’

About this time Tom returned, like a sleepwalker, standing with the
brilliant pressure lantern between him and Dennis. Dennis rambled right
on, not knowing he was anywhere near: “That’s something you never will
find out. That Puerto Rican is a pretty husky lad. Could be Tom said
somethin’ he didnt like an’ he tried to put a knife in Tom’s back. They
all do, y’now. Tom didn’t get all that bashin’ around just stoppin’ a
wound up with a busted back. Tom sets the dozer to walk him down while
he lies there and comes on down here and tries to tell us—” His voice
fluttered to a stop as Tom loomed over him.

Tom grabbed the pan operator up by the slack of his shirt front with his
uninjured arm and shook him like an empty burlap bag.

“Skunk, “ he growled. “I oughta lower th’ boom on you.” He set Dennis on
his feet and backhanded his face with the edge of his forearm. Dennis
went down— cowered down, rather than fell. “Aw, Tom, I was just talkin’.
Just a joke, Tom, I was just—”

“Yellow, too,” snarled Tom, stepping forward, raising a solid Texan
boot. Peebles barked “Tom!” and the foot came back to the ground.

“Out o’ my sight,” rumbled the foreman. “Git!” Dennis got. Al Knowles
said vaguely, “Naow, Tom, y’all cain’t— “

“You, y’wall-eyed string-bean!” Tom raved, his voice harsh arjd
strained. “Go ‘long with yer Siamese twin!”

“O.K., O.K.,” said Al, white-faced, and disappeared into the dark after
Dennis.

“Nuts to this,” said Chub. “I’m turnin’ in.” He went to a crate and
hauled out a mosquito-hooded sleeping bag and went off without another
word. Harris and Kelly, who were both on their feet, sat down again. Old
Peebles hadn’t moved.

Tom stood staring out into the dark, his arms straight at his sides, his
fists knotted.

“Sit down,” said Peebles gently. Tom turned and stared at him.

“Sit down. I can’t change that dressing ‘less you do.” He pointed at the
bandage around Tom’s elbow. It was red, a widening stain, the tattered
tissues having parted as the big Georgian bunched his infuriated
muscles. He sat down.

“Talkin’ about dumbness,” said Harris calmly, as Peebles went to work,
“I was about to say that I got the record. I done the dumbest thing
anybody ever did on a machine. You can’t top it.”

“I could,” said Kelly. “Runnin’ a crane dragline once. Put her in boom
gear and started to boom her up. Had an eighty-five-foot stick on her.
Machine was standing on wooden mats in th’ middle of a swamp. Heard the
motor miss and got out of the saddle to look at the filter-glass. Messed
around back there longer than I figured, and the boom went straight up
in the air and fell backwards over the cab. Th’ jolt tilted my mats an’
she slid backwards slow and stately as you please, butt-first into the
mud. Buried up to the eyeballs, she was.” He laughed quietly. “Looked
like a ditching machine!”

“I still say I done the dumbest thing ever, bar none,” said Harris. “It
was on a river job, widening a channel. I come back to work from a
three-day binge, still rum-dumb. Got up on a dozer an’ was workin’
around on the edge of a twenty-foot cliff. Down at the foot of the cliff
was a big hickory tree, an’ growin’ right along the edge was a great big
limb. I got the dopey idea I should break it off. I put one track on the
limb and the other on the cliff edge and run out away from the trunk. I
was about halfway out, an’ the branch saggin’ some, before I thought
what would happen if it broke. Just about then it did break. You know
hickory—if it breaks at all it breaks altogether. So down we go into
thirty feet of water—me an’ the cat. I got out from under somehow. When
all them bubbles stopped comin’ up I swum around lookin’ down at it. I
was still paddlin’ around when the superintendent came rushin’ up. He
wants to know what’s up. I yell at him, ‘Look down there, the way that
water is movin’ an’ shiftin’, looks like the cat is workin’ down there.’
He pursed his lips and _tsk tsked._ My, that man said some nasty things
to me.”

“Where’d you get your next job?” Kelly exploded.

“Oh, he didn’t fire me,” said Harris soberly. “Said he couldn’t afford
to fire a man as dumb as that. Said he wanted me around to look at
whenever he felt bad.”

Tom said, “Thanks, you guys. That’s as good a way as any of sayin’ that
everybody makes mistakes.” He stood up, examining the new dressing,
turning his arm in front of the lantern. “You all can think what you
please, but I don’t recollect there was any dumbness went on on that
mesa this evenin’. That’s finished with, anyway. Do I have to say that
Dennis’ idea about it is all wet?”

Harris said one foul word that completely disposed of Dennis and
anything he might say.

Peebles said, “It’ll be all right. Dennis an’ his popeyed friend’ll hang
together, but they don’t amount to anything. Chub’ll do whatever he’s
argued into.”

“So you got ‘em all lined up, hey?” Tom shrugged. “In the meantime, are
we going to get an airfield built?”

“We’ll get it built,” Peebles said. “Only—Tom, I got no right to give
you any advice, but go easy on the rough stuff after this. It does a lot
of harm.”

“I will if I can,” said Tom gruffly. They broke up and turned in.

Peebles was right. It did do harm. It made Dennis use the word “murder”
when they found, in the morning, that Rivera had died during the night.

 

The work progressed in spite of everything that had happened. With
equipment like that, it’s hard to slow things down. Kelly bit two cubic
yards out of the bluff with every swing of the big shovel, and Dumptors
are the fastest short-haul earth movers yet devised. Dennis kept the
service road clean for them with his pan, and Tom and Chub spelled each
other on the bulldozer they had detached from its pan to make up for the
lack of the Seven, spending their alternate periods with transit and
stakes. Peebles was rod-man for the surveys, and in between times worked
on setting up his field shop, keeping the water cooler and battery
chargers running, and fining up his forge and welding tables. The
operators fueled and serviced their own equipment, and there was little
delay. Rocks and marl came out of the growing cavity in the side of the
central mesa—a whole third of it had to come out—were spun down to the
edge of the swamp, which lay across the lower end of the projected
runway, in the hornet-howling dump-tractors, their big driving wheels
churned up vast clouds of dust, and were dumped and spread and walked in
by the whining two-cycle dozer. When much began to pile up in front of
the fill, it was blasted out of the way with carefully placed charges of
sixty percent dynamite and the craters filled with rocks, stone from the
ruins, and surfaced with easily compacting marl, run out of a clean
deposit by the pan.

And when he had his shop set up, Peebles went up the hill to get the
Seven. When he got to it he just stood there for a moment scratching his
head, and then, shaking his head, he ambled back down the hill and went
for Tom.

“Been looking at the Seven,” he said, when he had flagged the moaning
two-cycle and Tom had climbed off.

“What’d you find?”

Peebles held out an arm. “A list as long as that.” He shook his head.
“Tom, what really happened up there?”

“Governor went haywire and she run away,” Tom said promptly, deadpan.

“Yeah, but—” For a long moment he held Tom’s eyes. Then he sighed.
“O.K., Tom. Anyhow, I can’t do a thing up there. We’ll have to bring her
back and I’ll have to have this tractor to tow her down. And first I
have to have some help—the track idler adjustment bolt’s busted and the
right track is off the track rollers.”

“Oh-h-h. So that’s why she couldn’t get to the kid, running on the
starting motor. Track would hardly turn, hey?”

“It’s a miracle she ran as far as she did. That track is really jammed
up. Riding right up on the roller flanges. And that ain’t the half of
it. The head’s gone, like Harris said, and Lord only knows what I’ll
find when I open her up.”

“Why bother?”

“What?”

“We can get along without that dozer,” said Tom suddenly. “Leave her
where she is. There’s lots more for you to do.”

“But what for?”

“Well, there’s no call to go to all that trouble.” Peebles scratched the
side of his nose and said, “I got a new head, track master pins—even a
spare starting motor. I got tools to make what I don’t stock.” He
pointed at the long row of dumps left by the hurtling dump-tractors
while they had been talking. “You got a pan tied up because you’re using
this machine to doze with, and you can’t tell me you can’t use another
one. You’re gonna have to shut down one or two o’ those Dumptors if you
go on like this.”

“I had all that figured out as soon as I opened my mouth,” Tom said
sullenly. “Let’s go.”

They climbed on the tractor and took off, stopping for a moment at the
beach outcropping to pick up a cable and some tools.

_Daisy Etta_ sat at the edge of the mesa, glowering out of her stilted
headlights at the soft sward which still bore the impression of a young
body and the tramplings of the stretcher-bearers. Her general aspect was
woebegone—there were scratches on her olive-drab paint and the bright
metal of the scratches was already dulled red by the earliest
powder-rust. And though the ground was level, she was not, for her right
track was off its lower rollers, and she stood slightly canted, like a
man who has had a broken hip. And whatever passed for consciousness
within her mulled over that paradox of the bulldozer that every operator
must go through while he is learning his own machine.

It is the most difficult thing of all for the beginner to understand,
that paradox. A bulldozer is a crawling powerhouse, a behemoth of noise
and toughness, the nearest thing to the famous irresistible force. The
beginner, awed and with the pictures of unconquerable army tanks printed
on his mind from the newsreels, takes all in his stride and with a sense
of limitless power treats all obstacles alike, not knowing the fragility
of a cast-iron radiator core, the morality of tempered manganese, the
friability of over-heated babbitt, and most of all, the ease with which
a tractor can bury itself in mud. Climbing off to stare at a machine
which he has reduced in twenty seconds to a useless hulk, or which was
running a half-minute before on ground where it now has its tracks out
of sight, he has that sense of guilty disappointment which overcomes any
man on having made an error in judgment.

So, as she stood, _Daisy Etta_ was broken and useless. These soft
persistent bipeds had built her, and if they were like any other race
that built machines, they could care for them. The ability to reverse
the tension of a spring, or twist a control rod, or reduce to zero the
friction in a nut and lock-washer, was not enough to repair the crack in
a cylinder head nor bearings welded to a crankshaft in an overheated
starting motor. There had been a lesson to learn. It had been learned.
_Daisy Etta_ would be repaired, and the next time—well, at least she
would know her own weaknesses.

Tom swung the two-cycle machine and edged in next to the Seven, with the
edge of his blade all but touching _Daisy Etta’s_ push-beam. They got
off and Peebles bent over the drum-tight right track.

“Watch yourself,” said Tom.

“Watch what?”

“Oh—nothin’, I guess.” He circled the machine, trained eyes probing over
frame and fittings. He stepped forward suddenly and grasped the
fuel-tank drain cock. It was closed. He opened it; golden oil gushed
out. He shut it off, climbed up on the machine and opened the fixel cap
on top of the tank. He pulled out the bayonet gauge, wiped it in the
crook of his knee, dipped and withdrew it.

The tank was more than three quarters full.

“What’s the matter?” asked Peebles, staring curiously at Tom’s drawn
face.

“Peeby, I opened the cock to drain this tank. I left it with oil runnin’
out on the ground. She shut herself off.”

“Now, Tom, you’re lettin’ this thing get you down. You just thought you
did. I’ve seen a main-line valve shut itself off when it’s worn bad, but
only ‘cause the fuel pump pulls it shut when the motor’s runnin’. But
not a gravity drain.”

“Main-line valve?” Tom pulled the seat up and looked. One glance was
enough to show him that this one was open.

“She opened this one, too.”

“O.K.—O.K. Don’t look at me like that!” Peebles was as near to
exasperation as he could possibly get. “What difference does it make?”

Tom did not answer. He was not the type of man who, when faced with
something beyond his understanding, would begin to doubt his own sanity.
His was a dogged insistence that what he saw and sensed was what had
actually happened. In him was none of the fainting fear of madness that
another, more sensitive, man might feel. He doubted neither himself nor
his evidence, and so could free his mind for searching out the consuming
“why” of a problem. He knew instinctively that to share “unbelievable”
happenings with anyone else, even if they had really occurred, was to
put even further obstacles in his way. So he kept his clamlike silence
and stubbornly, watchfully, investigated.

The slipped track was so tightly drawn up on the roller flanges that
there could be no question of pulling the master pin and opening the
track up. It would have to be worked back in place—a very delicate
operation, for a little force applied in the wrong direction would be
enough to run the track off altogether. To complicate things, the blade
of the Seven was down on the ground and would have to be lifted before
the machine could be maneuvered, and its hydraulic hoist was useless
without the motor.

Peebles unhooked twenty feet of half-inch cable from the rear of the
smaller dozer, scratched a hole in the ground under the Seven’s blade,
and pushed the eye of the cable through. Climbing over the moldboard, he
slipped the eye on to the big towing hook bolted to the underside of the
belly-guard. The other end of the cable he threw out on the ground in
front of the machine. Tom mounted the other dozer and swung into place,
ready to tow. Peebles hooked the cable onto Tom’s drawbar, hopped up on
the Seven. He put her in neutral, disengaged the master clutch, and put
the blade control over into “float” position, then raised an arm.

Tom perched upon the arm rest of his machine, looking backwards, moved
slowly, taking up the slack in the cable. It straightened and grew taut,
and as it did it forced the Seven’s blade upward. Peebles waved for
slack and put the blade control into “hold.” The cable bellied downward
away from the blade.

“Hydraulic system’s O.K., anyhow,” called Peebles, as Tom throttled
down. “Move over and take a strain to the right, sharp as you can
without fouling the cable on the track. We’ll see if we can walk this
track back on.”

Tom backed up, cut sharply to the right, and drew the cable out almost
at right angles to the other machine. Peebles held the right track of
the Seven with the brake and released both steering clutches. The left
track now could turn free, the right not at all. Tom was running at a
quarter throttle in his lowest gear, so that his machine barely crept
along, taking the strain. The Seven shook gently and began to pivot on
the taut right track, unbelievable footpounds of energy coming to bear
on the front of the track where it rode high up on the idler wheel.
Peebles released the right brake with his foot and applied it again in a
series of skilled, deft jerks. The track would move a few inches and
stop again, force being applied forward and sideward alternately, urging
the track persuasively back in place. Then, a little jolt and she was
in, riding true on the five truck rollers, the two track carrier
rollers, the driving sprocket and the idler.

Peebles got off and stuck his head in between the sprocket and the rear
carrier, squinting down and sideways to see if there were any broken
flanges or roller bushes. Tom came over and pulled him out by the seat
of his trousers. “Time enough for that when you get her in the shop,” he
said, masking his nervousness. “Reckon she’ll roll?”

“She’ll roll. I never saw a track in that condition come back that easy.
By gosh, it’s as if we was tryin’ to help!”

“They’ll do it sometimes,” said Tom, stiffly. “You better take the
tow-tractor, Peeby. I’ll stay with this’n.”

“Anything you say.”

And cautiously they took the steep slope down, Tom barely holding the
brakes, giving the other machine a straight pull all the way. And so
they brought _Daisy Etta_ down to Peebles’ outdoor shop, where they
pulled her cylinder head off, took off her starting motor, pulled out a
burned clutch facing, had her quite helpless—

And put her together again.

* * *

“I tell you it was outright, cold-blooded murder,” said Dennis hotly.
“An’ here we are takin’ orders from a guy like that. What are we goin’
to do about it?” They were standing by the cooler—Dennis had run his
machine there to waylay Chub.

Chub Horton’s cigar went down and up like a semaphore with a short
circuit. “We’ll skip it. The blacktopping crew will be here in another
two weeks or so, an’ we can make a report. Besides, I don’t know what
happened up there any more than you do. In the meantime we got a runway
to build.”

“You don’t know what happened up there? Chub, you’re a smart man. Smart
enough to run this job better than Tom Jaeger even if he wasn’t crazy.
And you’re surely smart enough not to believe all that cock and bull
about that tractor runnin’ out from under that grease-monkey. Listen—”
he leaned forward and tapped Chub’s chest. “He said it was the governor.
I saw that governor myself an’ heard ol’ Peebles say there wasn’t a
thing wrong with it. Th’ throttle control rod had slipped off its yoke,
yeah— but you know what a tractor will do when the throttle control goes
out. It’ll idle or stall. It won’t run away, whatever.”

“Well, maybe so, but—”

“But nothin’! A guy that’ll commit murder ain’t sane. If he did it once,
he can do it again and I ain’t fixin’ to let that happen to me.”

Two things crossed Chub’s steady but not too bright mind at this. One
was that Dennis, whom he did not like but could not shake, was trying to
force him into something that he did not want to do. The other was that
under all of his swift talk Dennis was scared spitless.

“What do you want to do—call up the sheriff?” Dennis ha-ha-ed
appreciatively—one of the reasons he was so hard to shake. “I’ll tell
you what we can do. As long as we have you here, he isn’t the only man
who knows the work. If we stop takin’ orders from him, you can give ‘em
as good or better. An’ there won’t be anything he can do about it.”

“Doggone it, Dennis,” said Chub, with sudden exasperation. “What do you
think you’re doin’ —handin’ me over the keys to the kingdom or
something? What do you want to see me bossin’ around here for?” He stood
up. “Suppose we did what you said? Would it get the field built any
quicker? Would it get me any more money in my pay envelope? What do you
think I want—glory? I passed up a chance to run for councilman once. You
think I’d raise a finger to get a bunch of mugs to do what I say—when
they do it anyway?”

“Aw, Chub—-I wouldn’t cause trouble just for the fun of it. That’s not
what I mean at all. But unless we do something about that guy we ain’t
safe. Can’t you get that through your head?”

“Listen, windy. If a man keeps busy enough he can’t get into no trouble.
That goes for Tom—you might keep that in mind. But it goes for you, too.
Get back up on that rig an’ get back to the marl pit.” Dennis,
completely taken by surprise, turned to his machine.

“It’s a pity you can’t move earth with your mouth,” said Chub as he
walked off. “They could have left you to do this job singlehanded.”

Chub walked slowly toward the outcropping, switching at beach pebbles
with a grade stake and swearing to himself. He was essentially a simple
man and believed in the simplest possible approach to everything. He
liked a job where he could do everything required and where nothing
turned up to complicate things. He had been in the grading business for
a long time as an operator and survey party boss, and he was remarkable
for one thing—he had always held aloof from the cliques and internecine
politics that are the breath of life to most construction men. He was
disturbed and troubled at the back-stabbing that went on around him on
various jobs. If it was blunt, he was disgusted, and subtlety simply
left him floundering and bewildered. He was stupid enough so that his
basic honesty manifested itself in his speech and actions, and he had
learned that complete honesty in dealing with men above and below him
was almost invariably painful to all concerned, but he had not the wit
to act otherwise, and did not try to. If he had a bad tooth, he had it
pulled out as soon as he could. If he got a raw deal from a
superintendent over him, that superintendent would get told exactly what
the trouble was, and if he didn’t like it, there were other jobs. And if
the pulling and hauling of cliques got in his hair, he had always said
so and left. Or he had sounded off and stayed; his completely selfish
reaction to things that got in the way of his work had earned him a lot
of regard from men he had worked under. And so, in this instance, he had
no hesitation about choosing a course of action. Only—how did you go
about asking a man if he was a murderer?

He found the foreman with an enormous wrench in his hand, tightening up
the new track adjustment bolt they had installed in the Seven.

“Hey, Chub! Glad you turned up. Let’s get a piece of pipe over the end
of this thing and really bear down.” Chub went for the pipe, and they
fitted it over the handle of the four-foot wrench and hauled until the
sweat ran down their backs, Tom checking the track clearance
occasionally with a crowbar. He finally called it good enough and they
stood there in the sun gasping for breath.

“Tom,” panted Chub, “did you kill that Puerto Rican?”

Tom’s head came up as if someone had burned the back of his neck with a
cigarette.

“Because,” said Chub, “if you did you can’t go on runnin’ this job.”

Tom said, “That’s a lousy thing to kid about.”

“You know I ain’t kiddin’. Well, did you?”

“No!” Tom sat down on a keg, wiped his face with a bandanna. “What’s got
into you?”

“I just wanted to know. Some of the boys are worried about it.”

Tom’s eyes narrowed. “Some of the boys, huh? I think I get it. Listen to
me, Chub. Rivera was killed by that thing there.” He thumbed over his
shoulder at the Seven, which was standing ready now, awaiting only the
building of a broken cutting corner on the blade. Peebles was winding up
the welding machine as he spoke. “If you mean, did I put him up on the
machine before he was thrown, the answer is yes. That much I killed him,
and don’t think I don’t feel it. I had a hunch something was wrong up
there, but I couldn’t put my finger on it and I certainly didn’t think
anybody was going to get hurt.”

“Well, what was wrong?”

“I still don’t know.” Tom stood up. “I’m tired of beatin’ around the
bush, Chub, and I don’t much care anymore what anybody thinks. There’s
somethin’ wrong with that Seven, something that wasn’t built into her.
They don’t make tractors better’n that one, but whatever it was happened
up there on the mesa has queered this one. Now go ahead and think what
you like, and dream up any story you want to tell the boys. In the
meantime you can pass the word—nobody runs that machine but me,
understand? Nobody!”

“Tom—”

Tom’s patience broke. “That’s all I’m going to say about it! If anybody
else gets hurt, it’s going to be me, understand? What more do you want?”

He strode off, boiling. Chub stared after him, and after a long moment
reached up and took the cigar from his lips. Only then did he realize
that he had bitten it in two; half the butt was still inside his mouth.
He spat and stood there, shaking his head.

 

“How’s she going, Peeby?”

Peebles looked up from the welding machine. “Hi, Chub, have her ready
for you in twenty minutes.” He gauged the distance between the welding
machine and the big tractor. “I should have forty feet of cable,” he
said, looking at the festoons of arc and ground cables that hung from
the storage hooks in the back of the welder. “Don’t want to get a
tractor over here to move the thing, and don’t feel like cranking up the
Seven just to get it close enough.” He separated the arc cable and threw
it aside, walked to the tractor, paying the ground cable off his arm. He
threw out the last of his slack and grasped the round clamp when he was
eight feet from the machine. Taking it in his left hand, he pulled hard,
reaching out with his right to grasp the moldboard of the Seven, trying
to get it far enough to clamp on to the machine.

Chub stood there watching him, chewing on his cigar, absent-mindedly
diddling with the controls on the arc-welder. He pressed the
starter-button, and the six-cylinder motor responded with a purr. He
spun the work-selector dials idly, threw the arc generator switch—

A bolt of incredible energy, thin, searing, blue-white, left the
rodholder at his feet, stretched itself _fifty feet_ across to Peebles,
whose fingers had just touched the moldboard of the tractor. Peebles’
head and shoulders were surrounded for a second by a violet nimbus, and
then he folded over and dropped. A circuit breaker clacked behind the
control board of the welder, but too late. The Seven rolled slowly
backward, without firing, on level ground, until it brought up against a
road-roller.

Chub’s cigar was gone, and he didn’t notice it. He had the knuckles of
his right hand in his mouth, and his teeth sunk into the pudgy flesh.
His eyes protruded; he crouched there and quivered, literally frightened
out of his mind. For old Peebles was almost burned in two.

 

They buried him next to Rivera. There wasn’t much talk afterwards; the
old man had been a lot closer to all of them than they had realized
until now. Harris, for once in his rum-dumb, lighthearted life, was
quiet and serious, and Kelly’s walk seemed to lose some of its
litheness. Hour after hour Dennis’ flabby mouth worked, and he bit at
his lower lip until it was swollen and tender. Al Knowles seemed more or
less unaffected, as was to be expected from a man who had something less
than the brains of a chicken. Chub Horton had snapped out of it after a
couple of hours and was very nearly himself again. And in Tom Jaeger
swirled a black, furious anger at this unknowable curse that had struck
the camp.

And they kept working. There was nothing else to do. The shovel kept up
its rhythmic swing and dig, swing and dump, and the Dumptors screamed
back and forth between it and the little that there was left of the
swamp. The upper end of the runway was grassed off; Chub and Tom set
grade stakes and Dennis began the long job of cutting and filling the
humpy surface with his pan. Harris manned the other and followed him, a
cut behind. The shape of the runway emerged from the land, and then that
of the paralleling taxiway; and three days went by. The horror of
Peebles’ death wore off enough so that they could talk about it, and
very little of the talk helped anybody. Tom took his spells at
everything, changing over with Kelly to give him a rest from the shovel,
making a few rounds with a pan, putting in hours on a Dumptor. His arm
was healing slowly but clean, and he worked grimly in spite of it,
taking a perverse sort of pleasure from the pain of it. Every man on the
job watched his machine with the solicitude of a mother with her
first-born; a serious breakdown would have been disastrous without a
highly skilled mechanic.

The only concession that Tom allowed himself in regard to Peebles’ death
was to corner Kelly one afternoon and ask him about the welding machine.
Part of Kelly’s rather patchy past had been spent in a technical
college, where he had studied electrical engineering and women. He had
learned a little of the former and enough of the latter to get him
thrown out on his ear. So, on the off-chance that he might know
something about the freak arc, Tom put it to him.

Kelly pulled off his high-gauntlet gloves and batted sandflies with
them. “What sort of an arc was that? Boy, you got me there. Did you ever
hear of a welding machine doing like that before?”

“I did not. A welding machine just don’t have that sort o’ push. I saw a
man get a full jolt from a 400-amp welder once, an’ although it sat him
down it didn’t hurt him any.”

“It’s not amperage that kills people,” said Kelly, “it’s voltage.
Voltage is the pressure behind a current, you know. Take an amount of
water, call it amperage. If I throw it in your face, it won’t hurt you.
If I put it through a small hose you’ll feel it. But if I pump it
through the tiny holes on a Diesel injector nozzle at about twelve
hundred pounds, it’ll draw blood. But a welding arc generator just is
not wound to build up that kind of voltage. I can’t see where any short
circuit anywhere through the armature or field windings could do such a
thing.”

“From what Chub said, he had been foolin’ around with the work selector.
I don’t think anyone touched the dials after it happened. The selector
dial was run all the way over to the low current application segment,
and the current control was around the halfway marie. That’s not enough
juice to get you a good bead with a quarter-inch rod, let alone kill
somebody—or roll a tractor back thirty feet on level ground.”

“Or jump fifty feet,” said Kelly. “It would take thousands of volts to
generate an arc like that.”

“Is it possible that something in the Seven could have pulled that arc?
I mean, suppose the arc wasn’t driven over, but was drawn over? I tell
you, she was hot for four hours after that.”

Kelly shook his head. “Never heard of any such thing. Look, just to have
something to call them, we call direct current terminals positive and
negative, and just because it works in theory we say that current flows
from negative to positive. There couldn’t be any more positive
attraction in one electrode than there is negative drive in the other;
see what I mean?”

“There couldn’t be some freak condition that would cause a sort of
oversize positive field? I mean one that would suck out the negative
flow all in a heap, make it smash through under a lot of pressure like
the water you were talking about through an injector nozzle?”

“No, Tom. It just don’t work that way, far as anyone knows. I dunno,
though—there are some things about static electricity that nobody
understands. All I can say is that what happened couldn’t happen and if
it did it couldn’t have killed Peebles. And you know the answer to
that.”

Tom glanced away at the upper end of the runway, where the two graves
were. There was bitterness and turbulent anger naked there for a moment,
and he turned and walked away without another word. And when he went
back to have another look at the welding machine, _Daisy Etta_ was gone.

Al Knowles and Harris squatted together near the water cooler.

“Bad,” said Harris.

“Nevah saw anythin’ like it,” said Al. “Ol’ Tom come back f’m the shop
theah just’ _raisin_ Cain. ‘Weah’s ‘at Seven gone? Weah’s ‘at Seven?’ I
never heered sech cah’ins on.”

“Dennis did take it, huh?”

“Sho’ did.”

Harris said, “He came spoutin’ around to me a while back, Dennis did.
Chub’d told him Tom said for everybody to stay off that machine. Dennis
was mad as a wet hen. Said Tom was carryin’ that land o’ business too
far. Said there was probably somethin’ about the Seven Tom didn’t want
us to find out. Might incriminate him. Dennis is ready to say Tom killed
the kid.”

“Reckon he did, Harris?”

Harris shook his head. “I’ve known Tom too long to think that. If he
won’t tell us what really happened up on the mesa, he has a reason for
it. How’d Dennis come to take the dozer?”

“Blew a front tire on his pan. Came back heah to git anothah rig—maybe a
Dumptor. Saw th’ Seven standin’ theah ready to go. Stood theah lookin’
at it and cussin’ Tom. Said he was tired of bashin’ his kidneys t’pieces
on them othah rigs an’ bedamned if he would take suthin’ that rode good
fo’ a change. I tol’ him ol’ Tom’d raise th’ roof when he found him on
it. He had a couple mo’ things t’say ‘bout Tom then.”

“I didn’t think he had the guts to take the rig.”

“Aw, he talked hisself blind mad.”

They looked up as Chub Horton trotted up, panting. “Hey, you guys, come
on. We better get up there to Dennis.”

“What’s wrong?” asked Harris, climbing to his feet. “Tom passed me a
minute ago lookin’ like the

wrath o’ God and hightailin’ it for the swamp fill. I asked him what was
the matter and he hollered that Dennis had took the Seven. Said he was
always talkin’ about murder, and he’d get his fill of it foolin’ around
that machine.” Chub went wall-eyed, licked his lips beside his cigar.

“Oh-oh,” said Harris quietly. “That’s the wrong kind o’ talk for just
now.”

“You don’t suppose he—”

“Come on!”

They saw Tom before they were halfway there. He was walking slowly, with
his head down. Harris shouted. Tom raised his face, stopped, stood there
waiting with a peculiarly slumped stance.

“Where’s Dennis?” barked Chub.

Tom waited until they were almost up to him and then weakly raised an
arm and thumbed over his shoulder. His face was green.

“Tom—is he—”

Tom nodded, and swayed a little. His granite jaw was slack.

“Al, stay with him. He’s sick. Harris, let’s go.”

Tom was sick, then and there. Very. Al stood gaping at him, fascinated.

Chub and Harris found Dennis. All of twelve square feet of him, ground
and churned and rolled out into a torn-up patch of earth. _Daisy Etta_
was gone.

 

Back at the outcropping, they sat with Tom while Al Knowles took a
Dumptor and roared away to get Kelly.

“You saw him?” he said dully after a time.

Harris said, “Yeh.”

The screaming Dumptor and a mountainous cloud of dust arrived, Kelly
driving, Al holding on with a death-grip to the dump-bed guards. Kelly
flung himself off, ran to Tom. “Tom—what is all this? Dennis dead? And
you ... you—”

Tom’s head came up slowly, the slackness going out of his long face, a
light suddenly coming into his eyes. Until this moment it had not
crossed his mind what these men might think.

“I—what?”

“Al says you killed him.”

Tom’s eyes flicked at Al Knowles, and Al winced as if the glance had
been a quirt.

Harris said, “What about it Tom?”

“Nothing about it. He was killed by that Seven. You saw that for
yourself.”

“I stuck with you all along,” said Harris slowly. “I took everything you
said and believed it.”

“This is too strong for you?” Tom asked.

Harris nodded. “Too strong, Tom.”

Tom looked at the grim circle of feces and laughed suddenly. He stood
up, put his back against a tall crate. “What do you plan to do about
it?”

There was a silence. “You think I went up there and knocked that windbag
off the machine and ran over him?” More silence. “Listen. I went up
there and saw what you saw. He was dead before I got there. That’s not
good enough either?” He paused and licked his lips. “So after I killed
him I got up on the tractor and drove it for enough away so you couldn’t
see or hear it when you got there. And then I sprouted wings and flew
back so’s I was halfway here when you met me_—ten minutes_ after I spoke
to Chub on my way up!”

Kelly said vaguely, “Tractor?”

“Well,” said Tom harshly to Harris, “was the tractor there when you and
Chub went up and saw Dennis?”

“No—”

Chub smacked his thigh suddenly. “You could of drove it into the swamp,
Tom.”

Tom said angrily, “I’m wastin’ my time. You guys got it all figured out.
Why ask me anything at all?’

“Aw, take it easy,” said Kelly. “We just want the facts. Just what did
happen? You met Chub and told him that Dennis would get all the
murderin’ he could take if he messed around that machine. That right?”

“That’s right.”

“Then what?”

“Then the machine murdered him.”

Chub, with remarkable patience, asked, “What did you mean the day
Peebles was killed when you said that something had queered the Seven up
there on the mesa?”

Tom said furiously, “I meant what I said. You guys are set to crucify me
for this and I can’t stop you. Well, listen. Something’s got into that
Seven. I don’t know what it is and I don’t think I ever will know. I
thought that after she smashed herself up that it was finished with. I
had an idea that when we had her tom down and helpless we should have
left her that way. I was dead right but it’s too late now. She’s killed
Rivera and she’s killed Dennis and she sure had something to do with
killing Peebles. And my idea is that she won’t stop as long as there’s a
human being alive on this island.”

“Whaddaya know!” said Chub.

“Sure, Tom, sure,” said Kelly quietly. “That tractor is out to get us.
But don’t worry; we’ll catch it and tear it down. Just don’t you worry
about it any more; it’ll be all right.”

“That’s right, Tom,” said Harris. “You just take it easy around camp for
a couple of days till you feel better. Chub and the rest of us will
handle things for you. You had too much sun.”

“You’re a swell bunch of fellows,” gritted Tom, with the deepest
sarcasm. “You want to live,” he shouted, “git out there and throw that
maverick bulldozer!”

“That maverick bulldozer is at the bottom of the swamp where you put
it,” growled Chub. His head lowered and he started to move in. “Sure we
want to live. The best way to do that is to put you where you can’t kill
anybody else. _Get him!”_

He leaped. Tom straightened him with his left and crossed with his
right. Chub went down, tripping Harris. Al Knowles scuttled to a toolbox
and dipped out a fourteen-inch crescent wrench. He circled around,
keeping out of trouble, trying to look useful. Tom loosened a haymaker
at Kelly, whose head seemed to withdraw like a turtle’s; it whistled
over, throwing Tom badly off balance. Harris, still on his knees,
tackled Tom’s legs; Chub hit him in the small of the back with a meaty
shoulder, and Tom went flat on his face. Al Knowles, holding the wrench
in both hands, swept it up and back like a baseball bat; at the top of
its swing Kelly reached over, snatched it out of his hands and tapped
Tom delicately behind the ear with it. Tom went limp.

 

It was late, but nobody seemed to feel like sleeping. They sat around
the pressure lantern, talking idly. Chub and Kelly played an
inconsequential game of casino, forgetting to pick up their points;
Harris paced up and down like a man in a cell, and Al Knowles was
squinched up close to the light, his eyes wide and watching, watching—

“I need a drink,” said Harris.

“Tens,” said one of the casino players.

Al Knowles said, “We shoulda killed him. We oughta kill him now.”

“There’s been too much killin’ already,” said Chub. “Shut up, you.” And
to Kelly, “With big casino,” sweeping up cards.

Kelly caught his wrist and grinned. “Big casino’s the ten of diamonds,
not the ten of hearts. Remember?”

“How long before the blacktopping crew will be here?” quavered Al
Knowles.

“Twelve days,” said Harris. “And they better bring some likker.”

“Hey, you guys.”

They fell silent.

“Hey!”

“It’s Tom,” said Kelly. “Building sixes, Chub.”

“I’m gonna go kick his ribs in,” said Knowles, not moving.

“I heard that,” said the voice from the darkness. “If I wasn’t hogtied—”

“We know what you’d do,” said Chub. “How much proof do you think we
need?”

“Chub, you don’t have to do any more to him!” It was Kelly, flinging his
cards down and getting up. “Tom, you want water?”

“Yes.”

“Siddown, siddown,” said Chub.

“Let him lie there and bleed,” Al Knowles said. “Nuts!” Kelly went and
filled a cup and brought it to Tom. The big Georgian was tied
thoroughly, wrists together, taut rope between elbows and elbows behind
his back, so that his hands were immovable over his solar plexus. His
knees and ankles were bound as well, although Knowles’ little idea of a
short rope between ankles and throat hadn’t been used.

“Thanks, Kelly.” Tom drank greedily, Kelly holding his head. “Goes
good.” He drank more. “What hit me?”

“One of the boys. ‘Bout the time you said the cat was haunted.”

“Oh, yeah.” Tom rolled his head and blinked with pain.

“Any sense asking you if you blame us?”

“Kelly, does somebody else have to get killed before you guys wake up?”

“None of us figure there will be any more killin’ —now.”

The rest of the men drifted up. “He willing to talk sense?” Chub wanted
to know.

Al Knowles laughed, “Hyuk! hyuk! Don’t he look dangerous now!”

Harris said suddenly, “Al, I’m gonna hafta tape your mouth with the skin
off your neck.”

“Am I the kind of guy that makes up ghost stories?”

“Never have that I know of, Tom.” Harris kneeled down beside him. “Never
killed anyone before, either.”

“Oh, get away from me. Get away,” said Tom tiredly.

“Get up and make us,” jeered Al.

Harris got up and backhanded him across the mouth. Al squeaked, took
three steps backward and tripped over a drum of grease. “I told you,”
said Harris almost plaintively. “I _told_ you, Al.”

Tom stopped the bumble of comment. “Shut up!” he hissed. “SHUT UP!” he
roared.

They shut.

“Chub,” said Tom, rapidly, evenly. “What did you say I did with that
Seven?”

“Buried it in the swamp.”

“Yeh. Listen.”

“Listen at what?”

“Be quiet and listen!”

So they listened. It was another still, windless night, with a thin
crescent of moon showing nothing true in the black and muffled silver
landscape. The smallest whisper of surf drifted up from the beach, and
from far off to the right, where the swamp was, a scandalized frog
croaked protest at the manhandling of his mudhole. But the sound that
crept down, freezing their bones, came from the bluff behind their camp.

It was the unmistakable staccato of a starting engine.

“The Seven!”

“ ‘At’s right, Chub,” said Tom.

“Wh-who’s crankin’ her up?”

“Are we all here?”

“All but Peebles and Dennis and Rivera,” said Tom.

“It’s Dennis’ ghost,” moaned Al.

Chub snapped, “Shut up, lamebrain.”

“She’s shifted to Diesel,” said Kelly, listening. “She’ll be here in a
minute,” said Tom. “Y’know, fellas, we can’t all be crazy, but you’re
about to have a time convincin’ yourself of it.”

“You like this, doncha?”

“Some ways. Rivera used to call that machine _Daisy Etta,_ ‘cause she’s
_de siete_ in Spig. _Daisy Etta,_ she wants her a man.”

“Tom,” said Harris, “I wish you’d stop that chatterin’. You make me
nervous.”

“I got to do somethin’. I can’t run,” Tom drawled. “We’re going to have
a look,” said Chub. “If there’s nobody on that cat, we’ll turn you
loose.”

“Mighty white of you. Reckon you’ll get back before she does?”

“We’ll get back. Harris, come with me. We’ll get one of the pan
tractors. They can outrun a Seven. Kelly, take Al and get the other
one.”

“Dennis’ machine has a flat tire on the pan,” said Al’s quivering voice.

“Pull the pin and cut the cables, then! Git!” Kelly and Al Knowles ran
off.

“Good huntin’, Chub.”

Chub went to him, bent over. “I think I’m goin’ to have to apologize to
you, Tom.”

“No you ain’t. I’d a done the same. Get along now, if you think you got
to. But hurry back.”

“I got to. An’ I’ll hurry back.”

Harris said, “Don’t go way, boy.” Tom returned the grin, and they were
gone. But they didn’t hurry back. They didn’t come back at all.

It was Kelly who came pounding back, with Al Knowles on his heels, a
half hour later. “Al—gimme your knife.”

He went to work on the ropes. His face was drawn. “I could see some of
it,” whispered Tom. “Chub and Harris?”

Kelly nodded. “There wasn’t nobody on the Seven like you said.” He said
it as if there were nothing else in his mind, as if the most rigid
self-control was keeping him from saying it over and over.

“I could see the lights,” said Tom. “A tractor angling up the hill.
Pretty soon another, crossing it, lighting up the whole slope.”

“We heard it idling up there somewhere,” Kelly said. “Olive-drab
paint—couldn’t see it.”

“I saw the pan tractor turn over—oh, four, five times down the hill. It
stopped, lights still burning. Then something hit it and rolled it
again. That sure blacked it out. What turned it over first?”

“The Seven. Hanging up there just at the brow of the bluff. Waited until
Chub and Harris were about to pass, sixty, seventy feet below. Tipped
over the edge and rolled down on them with her clutches out. Must’ve
been going thirty miles an hour when she hit. Broadside. They never had
a chance. Followed the pan as it rolled down the hill and when it
stopped booted it again.”

“Want me to rub you’ ankles?” asked Al.

“You! Get outa my sight!”

“Aw, Tom—” whimpered Al.

“Skip it, Tom,” said Kelly. “There ain’t enough of us left to carry on
that way. Al, you mind your manners from here on out, hear?”

“Ah jes’ wanted to tell y’all. I knew you weren’t lyin’ ‘bout Dennis,
Tom, if only I’d stopped to think. I recollect when Dennis said he’d
take that tractuh out ... ‘membah, Kelly? ... He went an’ got the crank
and walked around to th’ side of th’ machine and stuck it in th’ hole.
It was barely in theah befo’ the startin’ engine kicked off. ‘Whadda ya
know!’ he says t’me. ‘She started by here’f! I nevah pulled that
handle!’ And I said ‘She sho’ rarin’ t’go!’ “

“You pick a fine time to ‘recollect’ something,” gritted Tom.
“C’mon—let’s get out of here.”

“Where to?”

“What do you know that a Seven can’t move or get up on?”

“That’s a large order. A big rock, maybe.”

“Ain’t nothing that big around here,” said Tom. Kelly thought a minute,
then snapped his fingers. “Up on the top of my last cut with the
shovel,” he said. “It’s fourteen feet if it’s an inch. I was pullin’ out
small rock an’ topsoil, and Chub told me to drop back and dip out marl
from a pocket there. I sumped in back of the original cut and took out a
whole mess o’ marl. That left a big neck of earth sticking thirty feet
or so out of the cliff. The narrowest part is only about four feet wide.
If _Daisy Etta_ tries to get us from the top, she’ll straddle the neck
and hang herself. If she tries to get us from below, she can’t get
traction to climb; it’s too loose and too steep.”

“And what happens if she builds herself a ramp?”

“We’ll be gone from there.”

“Let’s go.”

Al agitated for the choice of a Dumptor because of its speed, but was
howled down. Tom wanted something that could not get a flat tire and
that would need something really powerful to turn it over. They took the
two-cycle pan tractor with the bulldozer blade that had been Dennis’
machine and crept out into the darkness.

It was nearly six hours later that _Daisy Etta_ came and woke them up.
Night was receding before a paleness in the east, and a fresh ocean
breeze had sprung up. Kelly had taken the first lookout and Al the
second, letting Tom rest the night out. And Tom was far too tired to
argue the arrangement. Al had immediately fallen asleep on his watch,
but fear had such a sure, cold hold on his vitals that the first faint
growl of the big Diesel engine snapped him erect. He tottered on the
edge of the tall neck of earth that they slept on and squeaked as he
scrabbled to get his balance.

“What’s giving?” asked Kelly, instantly wide awake. “It’s coming,”
blubbered Al. “Oh my, oh my—” Kelly stood up and stared into the fresh,
dark dawn. The motor boomed hollowly, in a peculiar way heard twice at
the same time as it was thrown to them and echoed back by the bluffs
under and around them.

“It’s coming and what are we goin’ to do?” chanted Al. “What is going to
happen?”

“My head is going to fall off,” said Tom sleepily. He rolled to a
sitting position, holding the brutalized member between his hands. “If
that egg behind my ear hatches, it’ll come out a full-sized
jack-hammer.” He looked at Kelly. “Where is she?”

“Don’t rightly know,” said Kelly. “Somewhere down around the camp.”

“Probably pickin’ up our scent.”

“Figure it can do that?”

“I figure it can do anything,” said Tom. “Al, stop your moanin’.”

The sun slipped its scarlet edge into the thin slot between sea and sky,
and rosy light gave each rock and tree a shape and a shadow. Kelly’s
gaze swept back and forth, back and forth, until, minutes later, he saw
movement.

“There she is!”

“Where?”

“Down by the grease rack.”

Tom rose and stared. “What’s she doin’?”

After an interval Kelly said, “She’s workin’. Diggin’ a swale in front
of the fuel drums.”

“You don’t say. Don’t tell me she’s goin’ to give herself a grease job.”

“She don’t need it. She was completely greased and new oil put in the
crankcase after we set her up. But she might need fuel.”

“Not more’n half a tank.”

“Well, maybe she figures she’s got a lot of work to do today.” As Kelly
said this Al began to blubber. They ignored him.

The fuel drums were piled in a pyramid at the edge of the camp, in
forty-four-gallon drums piled on their sides. The Seven was moving back
and forth in front of them, close up, making pass after pass, gouging
earth up and wasting it out past the pile. She soon had a huge pit
scooped out, about fourteen feet wide, six feet deep and thirty feet
long, right at the very edge of the pile of drums.

“What you reckon she’s playin’ at?”

“Search me. She seems to want fuel, but I don’t ... look at that! She’s
stopped in the hole; she’s pivoting, smashing the top corner of the
moldboard into one of the drums on the bottom!”

Tom scraped the stubble on his jaw with his nails. “An’ you wonder how
much that critter can do! Why, she’s got the whole thing figured out.
She knows if she tried to punch a hole in a fuel drum that she’d only
kick it around. If she did knock a hole in it, how’s she going to lift
it? She’s not equipped to handle hose, so ... see? Look at her now! She
just gets herself lower than the bottom drum on the pile, and punches a
hole. She can do that then, with the whole weight of the pile holding it
down. Then she backs her tank under the stream of fuel runnin’ out!”

“How’d she get the cap off?”

Tom snorted and told them how the radiator cap had come off its hinges
as he vaulted over the hood the day Rivera was hurt.

“You know,” he said after a moment’s thought, “if she knew as much then
as she does now, I’d be snoozin’ beside Rivera and Peebles. She just
didn’t know her way around then. She run herself like she’d never run
before. She’s learned plenty since.”

“She has,” said Kelly, “and here’s where she uses it on us. She’s headed
this way.”

She was. Straight out across the roughed-out runway she came, grinding
along over the dew-sprinkled earth, yesterday’s dust swirling up from
under her tracks. Crossing the shoulder line, she took the rougher
ground skillfully, angling up over the occasional swags in the earth,
by-passing stones, riding free and fast and easily. It was the first
time Tom had actually seen her clearly running without an operator, and
his flesh crept as he watched. The machine was unnatural, her outline
somehow unreal and dreamlike purely through the lack of the small
silhouette of a man in the saddle. She looked hulked, compact,
dangerous.

“What are we gonna do?” wailed Al Knowles. “We’re gonna sit and wait,”
said Kelly, “and you’re gonna shut your trap. We won’t know for five
minutes yet whether she’s going to go after us from down below or from
up here.”

“If you want to leave,” said Tom gently, “go right ahead.” Al sat down.

Kelly looked ruminatively down at his beloved power shovel, sitting
squat and unlovely in the cut below them and away to their right. “How
do you reckon she’d stand up against the dipper stick?”

“If it ever came to a rough-and-tumble,” said Tom, “I’d say it would be
just too bad for _Daisy Etta._ But she wouldn’t fight. There’s no way
you could get the shovel within punchin’ range; _Daisy_ d just stand
there and laugh at you.”

“I can’t see her now,” whined Al.

Tom looked. “She’s taken the bluff. She’s going to try it from up here.
I move we sit tight and see if she’s foolish enough to try to walk out
here over that narrow neck. If she does, she’ll drop on her belly with
one truck on each side. Probably turn herself over trying to dig out.”

The wait then was interminable. Back over the hill they could hear the
laboring motor; twice they heard the machine stop momentarily to shift
gears. Once they looked at each other hopefully as the sound rose to a
series of bellowing roars, as if she were backing and filling; then they
realized that she was trying to take some particularly steep part of the
bank and having trouble getting traction. But she made it; the motor
revved up as she made the brow of the hill, and she shifted into fourth
gear and came lumbering out into the open. She lurched up to the edge of
the cut, stopped, throttled down, dropped her blade on the ground and
stood there idling. Al Knowles backed away to the very edge of the
tongue of earth they stood on, his eyes practically on stalks.

“O.K.—put up or shut up,” Kelly called across harshly.

“She’s looking the situation over,” said Tom. “That narrow pathway don’t
fool her a bit.”

_Daisy Ettas_ blade began to rise, and stopped just clear of the ground.
She shifted without clashing her gears, began to back slowly, still at
little more than an idle.

“She’s gonna jump!” screamed Al. “I’m gettin’ out of here!”

“Stay here, you fool,” shouted Kelly. “She can’t get us as long as we’re
up here! If you go down, she’ll hunt you down like a rabbit.”

The blast of the Seven’s motor was the last straw for Al. He squeaked
and hopped over the edge, scrambling and sliding down the almost sheer
face of the cut. He hit the bottom running.

_Daisy Etta_ lowered her blade and raised her snout and growled forward,
the blade loading. Six, seven, seven and a half cubic yards of dirt
piled up in front of her as she neared the edge. The loaded blade bit
into the narrow pathway that led out to their perch. It was almost all
soft, white, crumbly marl, and the great machine sank nose down into it,
the monstrous overload of topsoil spilling down on each side.

“She’s going to bury herself!” shouted Kelly.

“No—wait.” Tom caught his arm. “She’s trying to turn—she made it! She
made it! She’s ramping herself down to the flat!”

“She is—and she’s cut us off from the bluff!”

The bulldozer, blade raised as high as it could possibly go, the
hydraulic rod gleaming clean in the early light, freed herself of the
last of their tremendous load, spun around and headed back upward,
sinking her blade again. She made one more pass between them and the
bluff, making a cut now far too wide for them to jump, particularly to
the crumbly footing at the bluff’s edge. Once down again, she turned to
face their haven, now an isolated pillar of marl, and revved down,
waiting.

“I never thought of this,” said Kelly guiltily. “I knew we’d be safe
from her ramping up, and I never thought she’d try it the other way!”

“Skip it. In the meantime, here we sit. What happens—do we wait up here
until she idles out of fuel, or do we starve to death?”

“Oh, this won’t be a siege, Tom. That thing’s too much of a killer.
Where’s Al? I wonder if he’s got guts enough to make a pass near here
with our tractor and draw her off?”

“He had just guts enough to take our tractor and head out,” said Tom.
“Did you know?”

“He took our—_what?”_ Kelly looked out toward where they had left their
machine the night before. It was gone. “Why the dirty little yellow
rat!”

“No sense cussin’,” said Tom steadily, interrupting what he knew was the
beginning of some really flowery language. “What else could you expect?”
_Daisy Etta_ decided, apparently, how to go about removing their
splendid isolation. She uttered the snort of too-quick throttle, and
moved into their peak with a corner of her blade, cutting out a huge
swipe, undercutting the material over it so that it fell on her side and
track as she passed. Eight inches disappeared from that side of their
little plateau. “Oh-oh. That won’t do a-tall,” said Tom.

“Fixin’ to dig us down,” said Kelly grimly. “Take her about twenty
minutes. Tom, I say leave.”

“It won’t be healthy. You just got no idea how fast that thing can move
now. Don’t forget, she’s a good deal more than she was when she had a
man runnin’ her. She can shift from high to reverse to fifth speed
forward like that”—he snapped his fingers— “and she can pivot faster’n
you can blink and throw that blade just where she wants it.”

The tractor passed under them, bellowing, and their little table was
suddenly a foot shorter.

“Awright,” said Kelly. “So what do you want to do? Stay here and let her
dig the ground out from under our feet?”

“I’m just warning you,” said Tom. “Now listen. We’ll wait until she’s
taking a load. It’ll take her a second to get rid of it when she knows
we’re gone. We’ll split—she can’t get both of us. You head out in the
open, try to circle the curve of the bluff and get where you can climb
it. Then come back over here to the cut. A man can scramble off a
fourteen-foot cut faster’n any tractor ever built. I’ll cut in close to
the cut, down at the bottom. If she takes after you, I’ll get clear all
right. If she takes after me, I’ll try to make the shovel and at least
give her a ran for her money. I can play hide an’ seek in an’ around and
under that dipper-stick all day if she wants to play.”

“Why me out in the open?”

“Don’t you think those long laigs o’ yours can outrun her in that
distance?”

“Reckon they got to,” grinned Kelly. “O.K., Tom.” They waited tensely.
_Daisy Etta_ backed close by, started another pass. As the motor blatted
under the load, Tom said, “Now!” and they jumped. Kelly, catlike as
always, landed on his feet. Tom, whose knees and ankles were black and
blue with rope bruises, took two staggering steps and fell. Kelly
scooped him to his feet as the dozer’s steel prow came around the bank.
Instantly she was in fifth gear and howling down at them. Kelly flung
himself to the left and Tom to the right, and they pounded away, Kelly
out toward the runway, Tom straight for the shovel. _Daisy Etta_ let
them diverge for a moment, keeping her course, trying to pursue both;
then she evidently sized Tom up as the slower, for she swung toward him.
The instant’s hesitation was all Tom needed to get the little lead
necessary. He tore up to the shovel, his legs going like pistons, and
dived down between the shovel’s tracks.

As he hit the ground, the big manganese-steel moldboard hit the right
track of the shovel, and the impact set all forty-seven tons of the
great machine quivering. But Tom did not stop. He scrabbled his way
under the rig, stood up behind it, leaped and caught the sill of the
rear window, clapped his other hand on it, drew himself up and tumbled
inside. Here he was safe for the moment; the huge tracks themselves were
higher than the Seven’s blade could rise, and the floor of the cab was a
good sixteen inches higher than the top of the track. Tom went to the
cab door and peeped outside. The tractor had drawn off and was idling.

“Study away,” gritted Tom, and went to the big Murphy Diesel. He
unhurriedly checked the oil with the bayonet gauge, replaced it, took
the governor cut-out rod from its rack and inserted it in the governor
casing. He set the master throttle at the halfway mark, pulled up the
starter-handle, twitched the cutout. The motor spit a wad of blue smoke
out of its hooded exhaust and caught. Tom put the rod back, studied the
fuel-flow glass and pressure gauges, and then went to the door and
looked out again. The Seven had not moved, but it was revving up and
down in that uneven fashion it had shown up on the mesa. Tom had the
extraordinary idea that it was gathering itself to spring. He slipped
into the saddle, threw the master clutch. The big gears that half-filled
the cab obediently began to turn. He kicked the brake-locks loose with
his heels, let his feet rest lightly on the pedals as they rose.

Then he reached over his head and snapped back the throttle. As the
Murphy picked up he grasped both hoist and swing levers and pulled them
back. The engine howled; the two-yard bucket came up off the ground with
a sudden jolt as the cold friction grabbed it. The big machine swung
hard to the right; Tom snapped his hoist lever forward and checked the
bucket’s rise with his foot on the brake. He shoved the crowd lever
forward; the bucket ran out to the end of its reach, and the heel of the
bucket wiped across the Seven’s hood, taking with it the exhaust stack,
muffler and all, and the pre-cleaner on the air intake. Tom cursed. He
had figured on the machine’s leaping backward. If it had, he would have
smashed the castiron radiator core. But she had stood still, making a
split-second decision.

Now she moved, though, and quickly. With that incredibly fast shifting,
she leaped backwards and pivoted out of range before Tom could check the
shovel’s mad swing. The heavy swing-friction blocks smoked acridly as
the machine slowed, stopped and swung back. Tom checked her as he was
facing the Seven, hoisted his bucket a few feet and rehauled, bringing
it about hallway back, ready for anything. The four great dipper-teeth
gleamed in the sun. Tom ran a practiced eye over cables, boom and
dipperstick, liking the black polish of crater compound on the sliding
parts, the easy tension of well-greased cables and links. The huge
machine stood strong, ready and profoundly subservient for all its brute
power.

Tom looked searchingly at the Seven’s ruined engine hood. The gaping end
of the broken air-intake pipe stared back at him. “Aha!” he said. “A few
cupfuls of nice dry marl down there’ll give you something to chew on.”

Keeping a wary eye on the tractor, he swung into the bank, dropped his
bucket and plunged it into the marl. He crowded it deep, and the Murphy
rocked him in the saddle. He looked back over his shoulder through the
door and saw the Seven backing off again. She had run up and delivered a
terrific punch to the counterweight at the back of the cab. Tom grinned
tightly. She’d have to do better than that. There was nothing back there
but eight or ten tons of solid steel. And he didn’t much care at the
moment whether or not she scratched his paint.

He swung back again, white marl running away on both sides of the heaped
bucket. The shovel rode perfectly now, for a shovel is counter-weighted
to balance true when standing level with the bucket loaded. The hoist
and swing frictions and the brake linings had heated and dried
themselves of the night’s condensation moisture, and she answered the
controls in a way that delighted the operator in him. He handled the
swing lever lightly, back to swing to the right, forward to swing to the
left, following the slow dance the Seven had started to do, stepping
warily back and forth like a fighter looking for an opening. Tom kept
the bucket between himself and the tractor, knowing that she could not
hurl a tool that was built to smash hard rock for twenty hours a day and
like it.

_Daisy Etta_ bellowed and rushed in. Tom snapped the hoist lever back
hard, and the bucket rose, letting the tractor run underneath. Tom
punched the bucket trip, and the great steel jaw opened, cascading marl
down on the broken hood. The tractor’s fan blew it back in a huge
billowing cloud. The instant that it took Tom to check and dump was
enough, however, for the tractor to dance back out of the way, for when
he tried to drop it on the machine to smash the coiled injector tubes on
top of the engine block, she was gone.

The dust cleared away, and the tractor moved in again, feinted to the
left, then swung her blade at the bucket, which was just clear of the
ground. Tom swung to meet her, her feint having gotten her in a little
closer than he liked, and bucket met blade with a shower of sparks and a
clank that could be heard for half a mile. She had come in with her
blade high, and Tom let out a wordless shout as he saw that the A-frame
brace behind the blade had caught between two of his dipper-teeth. He
snatched at his hoist lever and the bucket came up, lifting with it the
whole front end of the bulldozer.

_Daisy Etta_ plunged up and down and her tracks dug violently into the
earth as she raised and lowered her blade, trying to shake herself free.
Tom rehauled, trying to bring the tractor in closer, for the boom was
set too low to attempt to lift such a dead weight. As it was, the
shovel’s off track was trying its best to get off the ground. But the
crowd and rehaul frictions could not handle her alone; they began to
heat and slip.

Tom hoisted a little; the shovel’s off track came up a foot off the
ground. Tom cursed and let the bucket drop, and in an instant the dozer
was free and running clear. Tom swung wildly at her, missed. The dozer
came in on a long curve; Tom swung to meet her again, took a vicious
swipe at her which she took on her blade. But this time she did not
withdraw after being hit, but bored right in, carrying the bucket before
her. Before Tom realized what she was doing, his bucket was around in
front of the tracks and between them, on the ground. It was as swift and
skillful a maneuver as could be imagined, and it left the shovel without
the ability to swing as long as _Daisy Etta_ could hold the bucket
trapped between the tracks.

Tom crowded furiously, but that succeeded only in lifting the boom
higher in the air, since there is nothing to hold a boom down but its
own weight. Hoisting did nothing but make his frictions smoke and rev
the engine down dangerously close to the stalling point.

Tom swore again and reached down to the cluster of small levers at his
left. These were the gears. On this type of shovel, the swing lever
controls everything except crowd and hoist. With the swing lever, the
operator, having selected his gear, controls the travel—that is, power
to the tracks—in forward and reverse; booming up and booming down; and
swinging. The machine can do only one of these things at a time. If she
is in travel gear, she cannot swing. If she is in swing gear, she cannot
boom up or down. Not once in years of operating would this inability
bother an operator; now, however, nothing was normal.

Tom pushed the swing gear control down and pulled up on the travel. The
clutches involved were jaw clutches, not frictions, so that he had to
throttle down to an idle before he could make the castellations mesh. As
the Murphy revved down, _Daisy Etta_ took it as a signal that something
could be done about it, and she shoved furiously into the bucket. But
Tom had all controls in neutral and all she succeeded in doing was to
dig herself in, her sharp new cleats spinning deep into the dirt.

Tom set his throttle up again and shoved the swing lever forward. There
was a vast crackling of drive chains; and the big tracks started to
turn.

_Daisy Etta_ had sharp cleats; her pads were twenty inches wide and her
tracks were fourteen feet long, and there were fourteen tons of steel on
them. The shovel’s big flat pads were three feet wide and twenty feet
long, and forty-seven tons aboard. There was simply no comparison. The
Murphy bellowed the feet that the work was hard, but gave no indications
of stalling. _Daisy Etta_ performed the incredible feat of shifting into
a forward gear while she was moving backwards, but it did her no good.
Round and round her tracks went, trying to drive her forward, gouging
deep; and slowly and surely she was forced backward toward the cut wall
by the shovel.

Tom heard a sound that was not part of a straining machine; he looked
out and saw Kelly up on top of the cut, smoking, swinging his feet over
the edge, making punching motions with his hands as if he had a ringside
seat at a big fight—which he certainly had.

Tom now offered the dozer little choice. If she did not turn aside
before him, she would be born back against the bank and her fuel tank
crushed. There was every possibility that, having her pinned there, Tom
would have time to raise his bucket over her and smash her to pieces.
And if she turned before she was forced against the bank, she would have
to free Tom’s bucket. This she had to do.

The Murphy gave him warning, but not enough. It crooned as the load came
off, and Tom knew then that the dozer was shifting into a reverse gear.
He whipped the hoist lever back, and the bucket rose as the dozer backed
away from him. He crowded it out and let it come smashing down—and
missed. For the tractor danced aside—and while he was in travel gear he
could not swing to follow it. _Daisy Etta_ charged then, put one track
on the bank and went over almost on her beam-ends, throwing one end of
her blade high in the air. So totally unexpected was it that Tom was
quite unprepared. The tractor flung itself on the bucket, and the
cutting edge of the blade dropped between the dipper teeth. This time
there was the whole weight of the tractor to hold it there. There would
be no way for her to free herself— but at the same time she had trapped
the bucket so far out from the center pin of the shovel that Tom
couldn’t hoist without overbalancing and turning the monster over.

_Daisy Etta_ ground away in reverse, dragging the bucket out until it
was checked by the bumper-blocks. Then she began to crab sideways, up
against the bank and when Tom tried tentatively to rehaul, she shifted
and came right with him, burying one whole end of her blade deep into
the bank.

Stalemate. She had hung herself up on the bucket, and she had
immobilized it. Tom tried to rehaul, but the tractor’s anchorage in the
bank was too solid. He tried to swing, to hoist. All the overworked
frictions could possibly give out was smoke. Tom grunted and throttled
to an idle, leaned out the window. _Daisy Etta_ was idling to, loudly
without her muffler, the stackless exhaust giving out an ugly flat
sound. But after the roar of the two great motors the partial silence
was deafening.

Kelly called down, “Double knockout, hey?”

“Looks like it. What say we see if we can’t get close enough to her to
quiet her down some?”

Kelly shrugged. “I dunno. If she’s really stopped herself, it’s the
first time. I respect that rig, Tom. She wouldn’t have got herself into
that spot if she didn’t have an ace up her sleeve.”

“Look at her, man! Suppose she was a civilized bulldozer and you had to
get her out of there. She can’t raise her blade high enough to free it
from those dipper-teeth, y’know. Think you’d be able to do it?”

“It might take several seconds,” Kelly drawled. “She’s sure high and
dry.”

“O.K., let’s spike her guns.”

“Like what?”

“Like taking a bar and prying out her tubing.” He referred to the coiled
brass tubing that carried the fuel, under pressure, from the pump to the
injectors. There were many feet of it, running from the pump reservoir,
stacked in expansion coils over the cylinder head.

As he spoke _Daisy Etta’s_ idle burst into that maniac revving up and
down characteristic of her.

“What do you know!” Tom called above the racket. “Eavesdropping!”

Kelly slid down the cut, stood up on the track of the shovel and poked
his head in the window. “Well, you want to get a bar and try?”

“Let’s go!”

Tom went to the toolbox and pulled out the pinch bar that Kelly used to
replace cables on his machine, and swung to the ground. They approached
the tractor warily. She revved up as they came near, began to shudder.
The front end rose and dropped and the tracks began to turn as she tried
to twist out of the vise her blade had dropped into.

“Take it easy, sister,” said Tom. “You’ll just bury yourself. Set still
and take it, now, like a good girl. You got it cornin’.”

“Be careful,” said Kelly. Tom hefted the bar and laid a hand on the
fender.

The tractor literally shivered, and from the rubber hose connection at
the top of the radiator, a blinding stream of hot water shot out. It
fanned and caught them both full in the face. They staggered back,
cursing.

“You O.K., Tom?” Kelly gasped a moment later. He had got most of it
across the mouth and cheek. Tom was on his knees, his shirt tail out,
blotting at his face.

“My eyes ... oh, my eyes—”

“Let’s see!” Kelly dropped down beside him and took him by the wrists,
gently removing Tom’s hands from his face. He whistled. “Come on,” he
gritted. He helped Tom up and led him away a few feet. “Stay here,” he
said hoarsely. He turned, walked back toward the dozer, picking up the
pinchbar. “You dirty—!” he yelled, and flung it like a javelin at the
tube coils. It was a little high. It struck the ruined hood, made a deep
dent in the metal. The dent promptly inverted with a loud _thung-g-g!_
and flung the bar back at him. He ducked; it whistled over his head and
caught Tom in the calves of his legs. He went down like a poled ox, but
staggered to his feet again.

“Come on!” Kelly snarled, and taking Tom’s arm, hustled him around the
turn of the cut. “Sit down! I’ll be right back.”

“Where you going? Kelly—be careful!”

“Careful and how!”

Kelly’s long legs ate up the distance back to the shovel. He swung into
the cab, reached back over the motor and set up the master throttle all
the way. Stepping up behind the saddle, he opened the running throttle
and the Murphy howled. Then he hauled back on the hoist lever until it
knuckled in, turned and leaped off the machine in one supple motion.

The hoist drum turned and took up slack; the cable straightened as it
took the strain. The bucket stirred under the dead weight of the
bulldozer that rested on it; and slowly, then, the great flat tracks
began to lift their rear ends off the ground. The great obedient mass of
machinery teetered forward on the tips of her tracks, the Murphy revved
down and under the incredible load, but it kept the strain. A strand of
the two-part hoist cable broke and whipped around, singing; and then she
was balanced— over-balanced—

And the shovel had hauled herself right over and had fallen with an
earth-shaking crash. The boom, eight tons of solid steel, clanged down
onto the blade of the bulldozer, and lay there, crushing it down tightly
onto the imprisoning row of dipper-teeth.

_Daisy Etta_ sat there, not trying to move now, racing her motor
impotently. Kelly strutted past her, thumbing his nose, and went back to
Tom.

“Kelly! I thought you were never coming back! What happened?”

“Shovel pulled herself over on her nose.”

“Good boy! Fall on the tractor?”

“Nup. But the boom’s laying across the top of her blade. Caught like a
rat in a trap.”

“Better watch out the rat don’t chew its leg off to get out,” said Tom,
drily. “Still runnin’, is she?”

“Yep. But we’ll fix that in a hurry.”

“Sure. Sure. How?”

“How? I dunno. Dynamite, maybe. How’s the optics?”

Tom opened one a trifle and grunted. “Rough. I can see a little, though.
My eyelids are parboiled, mostly. Dynamite, you say? Well—”

Tom sat back against the bank and stretched out his legs. “I tell you,
Kelly, I been too blessed busy these last few hours to think much, but
there’s one thing that keeps comin’ back to me—somethin’ I was mullin’
over long before the rest of you guys knew anything was up at all,
except that Rivera had got hurt in some way I wouldn’t tell you all
about. But I don’t reckon you’ll call me crazy if I open my mouth now
and let it all run out?”

“From now on,” Kelly said fervently, “nobody’s crazy. After this I’ll
believe anything.”

“O.K. Well, about that tractor. What do you suppose has got into her?”

“Search me. I dunno.”

“No—don’t say that. I just got an idea we can’t stop at ‘I dunno.’ We
got to figure all the angles on this thing before we know just what to
do about it. Let’s just get this thing lined up. When did it start? On
the mesa. How? Rivera was opening an old building with the Seven. This
thing came out of there. Now here’s what I’m getting at. We can dope
these things out about it: It’s intelligent. It can only get into a
machine and not into a man. It—”

“What about that? How do you know it can’t?”

“Because it had the chance to and didn’t. I was standing right by the
opening when it kited out. Rivera was upon the machine at the time. It
didn’t directly harm either of us. It got into the tractor, and the
tractor did. By the same token, it can’t hurt a man when it’s out of a
machine, but that’s all it wants to do when it’s in one. O.K.?

“To get on: once it’s in one machine it can’t get out again. We know
that because it had plenty of chances and didn’t take them. That scuffle
with the dipper-stick, f’r instance. My face woulda been plenty red if
it had taken over the shovel—and you can bet it would have if it could.”

“I got you so far. But what are we going to do about it?”

“That’s the thing. You see, I don’t think it’s enough to wreck the
tractor. We might bum it, blast it, take whatever it was that got into
it up on the mesa.”

“That makes sense. But I don’t see what else we can do than just break
up the dozer. We haven’t got a line on actually what the thing is.”

“I think we have. Remember I asked you all those screwy questions about
the arc that killed Peebles. Well, when that happened, I recollected a
flock of other things. One—when it got out of that hole up there, I
smelled that smell that you notice when you’re welding; sometimes when
lightning strikes real close.”

“Ozone,” said Kelly.

“Yeah—ozone. Then, it likes metal, not flesh. But most of all, there was
that arc. Now, that was absolutely screwy. You know as well as I
do—better— that an arc generator simply don’t have the push to do a
thing like that. It can’t kill a man, and it can’t throw an arc no fifty
feet. But it did. An’ that’s why I asked you if there could be
something—a field, or some such—that could suck current out of a
generator, all at once, faster than it could flow. Because this thing’s
electrical; it fits all around.”

“Electronic,” said Kelly doubtfully, thoughtfully.

“I wouldn’t know. Now then. When Peebles was killed, a funny thing
happened. Remember what Chub said? The Seven moved back—straight back,
about thirty feet, until it bumped into a roadroller that was standing
behind it. It did that with no fuel in the starting engine—without even
using the starting engine, for that matter—and with the compression
valves locked open!

“Kelly, that thing in the dozer can’t do much, when you come right down
to it. It couldn’t fix itself up after that joy-ride on the mesa. It
can’t make the machine do too much more than the machine can do
ordinarily. What it actually can do, seems to me, is to make a spring
push instead of pull, like the control levers, and make a fitting slip
when it’s supposed to hold, like the ratchet on the throttle lever. It
can turn a shaft, like the way it cranks its own starting motor. But if
it was so all-fired high-powered, it wouldn’t have to use the starting
motor! The absolute biggest job it’s done so far, seems to me, was when
it walked back from that welding machine when Peebles got his. Now, why
did it do that just then?”

“Reckon it didn’t like the brimstone smell, like it says in the Good
Book,” said Kelly sourly.

“That’s pretty close, seems to me. Look, Kelly— this thing _feels_
things. I mean, it can get sore. If it couldn’t it never woulda kept
driving in at the shovel like that. It can think. But if it can do all
those things, then it can be _scared!”_

“Scared? Why should it be scared?”

“Listen. Something went on in that thing when the arc hit it. What’s
that I read in a magazine once about heat—something about molecules
runnin’ around with their heads cut off when they got hot?”

“Molecules do. They go into rapid motion when heat is applied. But—”

“But nothin’. That machine was hot for four hours after that. But she
was hot in a funny way. Not just around the place where the arc hit,
like as if it was a welding arc. But hot all over—from the moldboard to
the fuel-tank cap. Hot everywhere. And just as hot behind the final
drive housings as she was at the top of the blade where the poor guy put
his hand.

“And look at this.” Tom was getting excited, as his words crystallized
his ideas. “She was scared—scared enough to back off from that welder,
putting everything she could into it, to get back from that welding
machine. And after that, she was sick. I say that because in the whole
time she’s had that whatever-ya-call-it in her, she’s never been near
men without trying to kill them, except for those two days after the arc
hit her. She had juice enough to start herself when Dennis came around
with the crank, but she still needed someone to run her till she got her
strength back.”

“But why didn’t she turn and smash up the welder when Dennis took her?”

“One of two things. She didn’t have the strength, or she didn’t have the
guts. She was scared, maybe, and wanted out of there, away from that
thing.”

“But she had all night to go back for it!”

“Still scared. Or ... oh, _that’s_ it! She had other things to do first.
Her main idea is to kill men— there’s no other way you can figure it.
It’s what she was built to do. Not the tractor—they don’t build ‘em
sweeter’n that machine; but the thing that’s runnin’ it.”

“What _is_ that thing?” Kelly mused. “Coming out of that old
building—temple—what have you—how old is it? How long was it there? What
kept it in there?”

“What kept it in there was some funny gray stuff that lined the inside
of the buildin’,” said Tom. “It was like rock, an’ it was like smoke.

“It was a color that scared you to look at it, and it gave Rivera and me
the creeps when we got near it. Don’t ask me what it was. I went up
there to look at it, and it’s gone. Gone from the building, anyhow.
There was a little lump of it on the ground. I don’t know whether that
was a hunk of it, or all of it rolled up into a ball. I get the creeps
again thinkin’ about it.”

Kelly stood up. “Well, the heck with it. We been beatin’ our gums up
here too long anyhow. There’s just enough sense in what you say to make
me want to try something nonsensical, if you see what I mean. If that
welder can sweat the Ol’ Nick out of that tractor, I’m on. Especially
from fifty feet away. There should be a Dumptor around here somewhere;
let’s move from here. Can you navigate now?”

“Reckon so, a little.” Tom rose and together they followed the cut until
they came on the Dumptor. They climbed on, cranked it up and headed
toward camp.

About halfway there Kelly looked back, gasped, and putting his mouth
close to Tom’s ear, bellowed against the scream of the motor, “Tom!
‘Member what you said about the rat in the trap biting off a leg?”

Tom nodded.

“Well, _Daisy_ did too! She’s left her blade an’ pushbeams an’ she’s
followin’ us in!”

 

They howled into the camp, gasping against the dust that followed when
they pulled up by the welder.

Kelly said, “You cast around and see if you can find a drawpin to hook
that rig up to the Dumptor with. I’m goin’ after some water an’ chow!”

Tom grinned. Imagine old Kelly forgetting that a dumptor had no drawbar!
He groped around to a toolbox, peering out of the narrow slit beneath
swollen lids, felt behind it and located a shackle. He climbed up on the
Dumptor, turned it around and backed up to the welding machine. He
passed the shackle through the ring at the end of the steering tongue of
the welder, screwed in the pin and dropped the shackle over the front
towing hook of the Dumptor. A dumptor being what it is, having no real
front and no real rear, and direct reversing gears in all speeds, it was
no trouble to drive it “backwards” for a change.

Kelly came pounding back, out of breath. “Fix it? Good. Shackle? No
drawbar! _Daisy’s_ closin’ up fast; I say let’s take the beach. We’ll be
concealed until we have a good lead out o’ this pocket, and the going’s
pretty fair, long as we don’t bury this jalopy in the sand.”

“Good,” said Tom as they climbed on and he accepted an open tin of K.
“Only go easy; bump around too much and the welder’ll slip off the hook.
An’ I somehow don’t want to lose it just now.”

They took off, zooming up the beach. A quarter of a mile up, they
sighted the Seven across the flat. It immediately turned and took a
course that would intercept them.

“Here she comes,” shouted Kelly, and stepped down hard on the
accelerator. Tom leaned over the back of the seat, keeping his eye on
their tow. “Hey! Take it easy! Watch it!

“Hey!”

But it was too late. The tongue of the welding machine responded to that
one bump too many. The shackle jumped up off the hook, the welder
lurched wildly, slewed hard to the left. The tongue dropped to the sand
and dug in; the machine rolled up on it and snapped it off, finally
stopped, leaning crazily askew. By a miracle it did not quite turn over.

Kelly tramped on the brakes and both their heads did their utmost to
snap off their shoulders. They leaped off and ran back to the welder. It
was intact, but towing it was now out of the question.

“If there’s going to be a showdown, it’s gotta be here.”

The beach here was about thirty yards wide, the sand almost level, and
undercut banks of sawgrass forming the landward edge in a series of
little hummocks and headlands. While Tom stayed with the machine,
testing starter and generator contacts, Kelly walked up one of the
little mounds, stood up on it and scanned the beach back the way he had
come. Suddenly he began to shout and wave his arms.

“What’s got into you?”

“It’s Al!” Kelly called back. “With the pan tractor!”

Tom dropped what he was doing, and came to stand beside Kelly. “Where’s
the Seven? I can’t see.”

“Turned on the beach and followin’ our track. Al! Al! You little skunk,
c’mere!”

Tom could now dimly make out the pan tractor cutting across directly
toward them and the beach.

“He don’t see _Daisy Etta,”_ remarked Kelly disgustedly, “or he’d sure
be headin’ the other way.”

Fifty yards away Al pulled up and throttled down. Kelly shouted and
waved to him. Al stood up on the machine, cupped his hands around his
mouth. “Where’s the Seven?”

“Never mind that! Come here with that tractor!”

Al stayed where he was. Kelly cursed and started out after him.

“You stay away from me,” he said when Kelly was closer.

“I ain’t got time for you now,” said Kelly. “Bring that tractor down to
the beach.”

“Where’s that _Daisy Etta?”_ Al’s voice was oddly strained.

“Right behind us.” Kelly tossed a thumb over his shoulder. “On the
beach.”

Al’s pop eyes clicked wide almost audibly. He turned on his heel and
jumped off the machine and started to run. Kelly uttered a wordless
syllable that was somehow more obscene than anything else he had ever
uttered, and vaulted into the seat of the machine. “Hey!” he bellowed
after Al’s rapidly diminishing figure. “You’re running’ right into her.”
Al appeared not to hear, but went pelting down the beach.

Kelly put her into fifth gear and poured on the throttle. As the tractor
began to move he whacked out the master clutch, snatched the overdrive
lever back to put her into sixth, rammed the clutch in again, all so
fast that she did not have time to stop rolling. Bucking and jumping
over the rough ground the fast machine whined for the beach.

Tom was fumbling back to the welder, his ears telling him better than
his eyes how close the Seven was—for she was certainly no nightingale,
particularly without her exhaust stack. Kelly reached the machine as he
did.

“Get behind it,” snapped Tom. “I’ll jamb the tierod with the shackle,
and you see if you can’t bunt her up into that pocket between those two
hummocks. Only take it easy—you don’t want to tear up that generator.
Where’s Al!”

“Don’t ask me. He run down the beach to meet _Daisy.”_

“He what?”

The whine of the two-cycle drowned out Kelly’s answer, if any. He got
behind the welder and set his blade against it. Then in a low gear,
slipping his clutch in a little, he slowly nudged the machine toward the
place Tom had indicated. It was a little hollow in between two
projecting banks. The surf and the high-tide mark dipped inland here to
match it; the water was only a few feet away.

Tom raised his arm and Kelly stopped. From the other side of the
projecting shelf, out of their sight now, came the flat roar of the
Seven’s exhaust. Kelly sprang off the tractor and went to help Tom, who
was furiously throwing out coils of cable from the rack back of the
welder. “What’s the game?”

“We got to ground that Seven some way,” panted Tom. He threw the last
bit of cable out to clear it of kinks and turned to the panel. “How was
it—about sixty volts and the amperage on ‘special application’?” He spun
the dials, pressed the starter button. The motor responded instantly.
Kelly scooped up ground clamp and rod holder and tapped them together.
The solenoid governor picked up the load and the motor hummed as a good
live spark took the jump.

“Good,” said Tom, switching off the generator. “Come on, Lieutenant
General Electric, figure me out a way to ground that maverick.”

Kelly tightened his lips, shook his head. “I dunno— unless somebody
actually clamps this thing on her.”

“No, boy, can’t do that. If one of us gets killed—” Kelly tossed the
ground clamp idly, his lithe body taut. “Don’t give me that, Tom. You
know I’m elected because you can’t see good enough yet to handle it. You
know you’d do it if you could. You—”

He stopped short, for the steadily increasing roar of the approaching
Seven had stopped, was blatting away now in that extraordinary irregular
throttling that _Daisy Etta_ affected.

“Now, what’s got into her?”

Kelly broke away and scrambled up the bank. “Tom!” he gasped. “Tom—come
up here!”

Tom followed, and they lay side by side, peering out over the top of the
escarpment at the remarkable tableau.

_Daisy Etta_ was standing on the beach, near the water, not moving.
Before her, twenty or thirty feet away, stood Al Knowles, his arms out
in front of him, talking a blue streak. _Daisy_ made far too much racket
for them to hear what he was saying.

“Do you reckon he’s got guts enough to stall her off for us?” said Tom.

“If he has, it’s the queerest thing that’s happened yet on this old
island,” Kelly breathed, “an’ that’s saying something.”

The Seven revved up till she shook, and then throttled back. She ran
down so low then that they thought she had shut herself down, but she
caught on the last two revolutions and began to idle quietly. And then
they could hear.

Al’s voice was high, hysterical. “—I come t’ he’p you, I come t’ he’p
you, don’ kill me, I’ll he’p you—” He took a step forward; the dozer
snorted and he fell to his knees. “I’ll wash you an’ grease you and
change yo’ ile,” he said in a high singsong.

“The guy’s not human,” said Kelly wonderingly. “He ain’t housebroke
either,” Tom chuckled.

“—lemme he’p you. I’ll fix you when you break down. I’ll he’p you kill
those other guys— ‘

“She don’t need any help!” said Tom.

“The louse,” growled Kelly. “The rotten little double-crossing polecat!”
He stood up. “Hey, you Al! Come out o’ that. I mean now! If she don’t
get you I will, if you don’t move.”

Al was crying now. “Shut up!” he screamed. “I know who’s bawss
hereabouts, an’ so do you!” He pointed at the tractor. “She’ll kill us
all off’n we don’t do what she wants!” He turned back to the machine.
“I’ll k-kill ‘em fo’ you. I’ll wash you and shine you up and f-fix yo’
hood. I’ll put yo’ blade back on. ...” Tom reached out and caught
Kelly’s leg as the tall man started out, blind mad. “Git back here,” he
barked. “What you want to do—get killed for the privilege of pinnin’ his
ears back?”

Kelly subsided and came back, threw himself down beside Tom, put his
face in his hands. He was quivering with rage.

“Don’t take on so,” Tom said. “The man’s plumb loco. You can’t argue
with him any more’n you can with _Daisy,_ there. If he’s got to get his,
Daisy’ll give it to him.”

“Aw, Tom, it ain’t that. I know he ain’t worth it, but I can’t sit up
here and watch him get himself killed. I can’t, Tom.”

Tom thumped him on the shoulder, because there were simply no words to
be said. Suddenly he stiffened, snapped his fingers.

“There’s our ground,” he said urgently, pointing seaward. “The water—the
wet beach where the surf runs. If we can get our ground clamp out there
and her somewhere near it—”

“Ground the pan tractor. Run it out into the water. It ought to
reach—partway, anyhow.”

“That’s it—c’mon.”

They slid down the bank, snatched up the ground clamp, attached it to
the frame of the pan tractor.

“I’ll take it,” said Tom, and as Kelly opened his mouth, Tom shoved him
back against the welding machine. “No time to argue,” he snapped, swung
on to the machine, slapped her in gear and was off. Kelly took a step
toward the tractor, and then his quick eye saw a bight of the ground
cable about to foul a wheel of the welder. He stooped and threw it off,
spread out the rest of it so it would pay off clear. Tom, with the
incredible single-mindedness of the trained operator, watched only the
black line of the trailing cable on the sand behind him. When it
straightened, he stopped. The front of the tracks were sloshing in the
gentle surf. He climbed off the side away from the Seven and tried to
see. There was movement, and the growl of her motor now running at a bit
more than idle, but he could not distinguish much.

Kelly picked up the rod-holder and went to peer around the head of the
protruding bank. Al was on his feet, still crooning hysterically,
sidling over toward _Daisy Etta._ Kelly ducked back, threw the switch on
the arc generator, climbed the bank and crawled along through the
sawgrass paralleling the beach until the holder in his hand tugged and
he knew he had reached the end of the cable. He looked out at the beach;
measured carefully with his eye the arc he would travel if he left his
position and, keeping the cable taut, went out on the beach. At no point
would he come within seventy feet of the possessed machine, let alone
fifty. She had to be drawn in closer. And she had to be maneuvered out
to the wet sand, or in the water—

Al Knowles, encouraged by the machine’s apparent decision not to move,
approached, though warily, and still running off at the mouth. “—we’ll
kill ‘em off an’ then we’ll keep it a secret and th’ bahges’ll come an’
take us offen th’ island and we’ll go to anothah job an’ kill us lots
mo’ ... an’ when yo’ tracks git dry an’ squeak we’ll wet ‘em up with
blood, and you’ll be rightly king o’ th’ hill... look yondah, look
yondah, _Daisy Etta,_ see them theah, by the otheh tractuh, theah they
are, kill ‘em, _Daisy,_ kill ‘em, _Daisy,_ an’ lemme he’p ... heah me.
_Daisy,_ heah me, say you heah me—” and the motor roared in response. Al
laid a timid hand on the radiator guard, leaning far over to do it, and
the tractor still stood there grumbling but not moving. Al stepped back,
motioned with his arm, began to walk off slowly toward the pan tractor,
looking backwards as he did so like a man training a dog. “C’mon, c’mon,
theah’s one theah, le’s _kill’m, kill’m, kill’m ..._”

And with a snort the tractor revved up and followed.

Kelly licked his lips without effect because his tongue was dry, too.
The madman passed him, walking straight up the center of the beach, and
the tractor, now no longer a bulldozer, followed him; and there the sand
was bone dry, sun-dried, dried to powder. As the tractor passed him,
Kelly got up on all fours, went over the edge of the bank onto the
beach, crouched there.

Al crooned, “I love ya, honey, I love ya, ‘deed I do—”

 

Kelly ran crouching, like a man under machine-gun fire, making himself
as small as possible and feeling as big as a barn door. The torn-up sand
where the tractor had passed was under his feet now; he stopped, afraid
to get too much closer, afraid that a weakened, badly grounded arc might
leap from the holder in his hand and serve only to alarm and infuriate
the thing in the tractor. And just then Al saw him.

“There!” he screamed; and the tractor pulled up short. “Behind you!
Get’m, _Daisy! Kill’m, kill’m,_ _kill’m_.”

Kelly stood up almost wearily, fury and frustration too much to be
borne. “In the water,” he yelled, because it was what his whole being
wanted “Get’er in the water! Wet her tracks, Al!”

“_Kill’m, kill’m_—”

As the tractor started to turn, there was a commotion over by the pan
tractor. It was Tom, jumping, shouting, waving his arms, swearing. He
ran out from behind his machine, straight at the Seven. _Daisy Etta’s_
motor roared and she swung to meet him, Al barely dancing back out of
the way. Tom cut sharply, sand spouting under his pumping feet, and ran
straight into the water. He went out to about waist deep, suddenly
disappeared. He surfaced, spluttering, still trying to shout. Kelly took
a better grip on his rod holder and rushed.

_Daisy Etta,_ in following Tom’s crazy rush, had swung in beside the pan
tractor, not fifteen feet away; and she, too, was now in the surf. Kelly
closed up the distance as fast as his long legs would let him; and as he
approached to within that crucial fifty feet, Al Knowles hit him.

Al was frothing at the mouth, gibbering. The two men hit full tilt; Al’s
head caught Kelly in the midriff as he missed a straight arm, and the
breath went out of him in one great _whoosh!_ Kelly went down like tall
timber, the whole world turned to one swirling red-gray haze. Al flung
himself on the bigger man, clawing, smacking, too berserk to ball his
fists.

“Ah’m go’ to kill you,” he gurgled. “She’ll git one, I’ll git t’other,
an’ then she’ll know—”

Kelly covered his face with his arms, and as some wind was sucked at
last into his laboring lungs, he flung them upward and sat up in one
mighty surge. Al was hurled upward and to one side, and as he hit the
ground Kelly reached out a long arm, and twisted his fingers into the
man’s coarse hair, raised him up, and came across with his other fist in
a punch that would have killed him had it landed square. But Al managed
to jerk to one side enough so that it only amputated a cheek. He fell
and lay still. Kelly scrambled madly around in the sand for his
welding-rod holder, found it and began to run again. He couldn’t see Tom
at all now, and the Seven was standing in the surf, moving slowly from
side to side, backing out, ravening. Kelly held the rod-clamp and its
trailing cable blindly before him and ran straight at the machine. And
then it came—that thin, soundless bolt of energy. But this time it had
its full force, for poor old Peebles’ body had not been the ground that
this swirling water offered. _Daisy Etta_ literally leaped backwards
toward him, and the water around her tracks spouted upward in hot steam.
The sound of her engine ran up and up, broke, took on the rhythmic,
uneven beat of a swing drummer. She threw herself from side to side like
a cat with a bag over its head. Kelly stepped a little closer, hoping
for another bolt to come from the clamp in his hand, but there was none,
for—

“The circuit breaker!” cried Kelly.

He threw the holder up on the deck plate of the Seven in front of the
seat, and ran across the little beach to the welder. He reached behind
the switchboard, got his thumb on the contact hinge and jammed it down.

_Daisy Etta_ leaped again, and then again, and suddenly her motor
stopped. Heat in turbulent waves blurred the air over her. The little
gas tank for the starting motor went out with a cannon’s roar, and the
big fuel tank, still holding thirty-odd gallons of Diesel oil followed.
It puffed itself open rather than exploded, and threw a great curtain of
flame over the ground behind the machine. Motor or no motor, then, Kelly
distinctly saw the tractor shudder convulsively. There was a crawling
movement of the whole frame, a slight wave of motion away from the fuel
tank, approaching the front of the machine, and moving upward from the
tracks. It culminated in the crown of the radiator core, just in front
of the radiator cap; and suddenly an area of six or seven square inches
literally _blurred_ around the edges. For a second, then, it was normal,
and finally it slumped molten, and liquid metal ran down the sides,
throwing out little sparks as it encountered what was left of the
charred paint. And only then was Kelly conscious of agony in his left
hand. He looked down. The welding machine’s generator had stopped,
though the motor was still turning, having smashed the friable coupling
on its drive shaft. Smoke poured from the generator, which had become
little more than a heap of slag. Kelly did not scream, though, until he
looked and saw what had happened to his hand—

When he could see straight again, he called for Tom, and there was no
answer. At last he saw something out in the water, and plunged in after
it. The splash of cold salt water on his left hand he hardly felt, for
the numbness of shock had set in. He grabbed at Tom’s shirt with his
good hand, and then the ground seemed to pull itself out from under his
feet. That was it, then—a deep hole right off the beach. The Seven had
run right to the edge of it, had kept Tom there out of his depth and—

He flailed wildly, struck out for the beach, so near and so hard to get
to. He gulped a stinging lungful of brine, and only the lovely shock of
his knee striking solid beach keep him from giving up to the luxury of
choking to death. Sobbing with effort, he dragged Tom’s dead weight
inshore and clear of the surf. It was then that he became conscious of a
child’s shrill weeping; for a mad moment he thought it was he himself,
and then he looked and saw that it was Al Knowles. He left Tom and went
over to the broken creature.

“Get up, you,” he snarled. The weeping only got louder. Kelly rolled him
over on his back—he was quite unresisting—and belted him back and forth
across the mouth until Al began to choke. Then he hauled him to his feet
and led him over to Tom.

“Kneel down, scum. Put one of your knees between his knees.” Al stood
still. Kelly hit him again and he did as he was told.

“Put your hands on his lower ribs. There. O.K.

Lean, you rat. Now sit back.” He sat down, holding his left wrist in his
right hand, letting the blood drop from the ruined hand. “Lean. Hold
it—sit back. Lean. Sit. Lean. Sit.”

Soon Tom sighed and began to vomit weakly, and after that he was all
right.

 

This is the story of _Daisy Etta,_ the bulldozer that went mad and had a
life of its own, and not the story of the flat-top _Marokuru_ of the
Imperial Japanese Navy, which has been told elsewhere. But there is a
connection. You will remember how the _Marokuru_ was cut off from its
base by the concentrated attack on Truk, how it slipped far to the south
and east and was sunk nearer to our shores than any other Jap warship in
the whole course of the war. And you will remember how a squadron of
five planes, having been separated by three vertical miles of water from
their flight deck, turned east with their bombloads and droned away for
a suicide mission. You read that they bombed a minor airfield in the
outside of Panama’s farflung defenses, and all hands crashed in the best
sacrificial fashion.

Well, that was no airfield, no matter what it might have looked like
from the air. It was simply a roughly graded runway, white marl against
brown scrub-grass.

 

The planes came two days after the death of _Daisy Etta,_ as Tom and
Kelly sat in the shadow of the pile of fuel drums, down in the coolth of
the swag that _Daisy_ had dug there to fuel herself. They were poring
over paper and pencil, trying to complete the impossible task of making
a written statement of what had happened on the island, and why they and
their company had failed to complete their contract. They had” found
Chub and Harris, and had buried them next to the other three. Al Knowles
was tied up in the camp, because they had heard him raving in his sleep,
and it seemed he could not believe that _Daisy_ was dead and he still
wanted to go around killing operators for her. They knew that there must
be an investigation, and they knew just how far their story would go;
and having escaped a monster like _Daisy Etta,_ life was far too sweet
for them to want to be shot for sabotage. And murder.

The first stick of bombs struck three hundred yards behind them at the
edge of the camp, and at the same instant a plane whistled low over
their heads, and that was the first they knew about it. They ran to Al
Knowles and untied his feet and the three of them headed for the bush.
They found refuge, strangely enough, inside the mound where _Daisy Etta_
had first met her possessor.

“Bless their black little hearts,” said Kelly as he and Tom stood on the
bluff and looked at the flaming wreckage of a camp and five medium
bombers below them. And he took the statement they had been sweating out
and tore it across.

“But what about him?” said Tom, pointing at Al Knowles, who was sitting
on the ground, playing with his fingers. “He’ll still spill the whole
thing, no matter if we do try to blame it all on the bombing.”

“What’s the matter with that?” said Kelly.

Tom thought a minute, then grinned. “Why, nothing! That’s just the sort
of thing they’ll expect from him!”
