[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon with his children Robin, Tandy, and Noël on Grenada
Island, West Indies 1958.

[]

Copyright © 2000 the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1953, 1954 by Theodore Sturgeon and the
Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. All rights reserved. No portion of
this book, except for brief review, may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without written
permission of the publisher.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover art by Ed Emshwiller

_A Saucer of Loneliness_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of
Native Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose
goals are to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective
linking various scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a
holistic view of arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish
and distribute literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

eISBN: 978-1-58394-751-7

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Sturgeon, Theodore.
      A saucer of loneliness / Theodore Sturgeon: edited by Paul
Williams
          p. cm. — (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon ; v. 7)
    Contents: A saucer of loneliness — The touch of your hand — The
world well lost — And my fear is great — The wages of synergy — The dark
room — Talent — A way of thinking — The silken swift — The clinic — Mr.
Costello, hero — The education of Drusilla Strange.
      1. Science fiction, American. I. Williams, Paul, 1948– II. Title.
III. Series: Sturgeon, Theodore. Short stories: v. 7.
    GV1149.5.C6 C54 2000
    PS3569.T875 A6 2000
813′.54—dc21 00-042356

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the seventh of a series of volumes that will collect all
of his short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel.
The volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized
chronologically by order of composition (insofar as it can be
determined). This seventh volume contains stories written between autumn
1952 and autumn 1953.

Preparation of each of these volumes would not be possible without the
hard work and invaluable participation of Noël Sturgeon, Debbie Notkin,
and our publishers, Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. I would also
like to thank, for their significant assistance with this volume, Kurt
Vonnegut, Jr., Carol Emshwiller, the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust,
Marion Sturgeon, Jayne Williams, Ralph Vicinanza, Nicole George, Paula
Morrison, Catherine Campaigne, Jennifer Privateer, Eric Weeks, Robin
Sturgeon, Kim Charnovsky, T. V. Reed, and all of you who have expressed
your interest and support.

 



BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON


_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry Medusa_] (1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)



THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES


1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News …_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (2010)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

_Editor’s Note_

_Other Books By This Author_

Foreword by Kurt Vonnegut, Jr.

_A Saucer of Loneliness_

_The Touch of Your Hand_

_The World Well Lost_

_… And My Fear Is Great …_

_The Wages of Synergy_

_The Dark Room_

_Talent_

_A Way of Thinking_

_The Silken-Swift_

_The Clinic_

_Mr. Costello, Hero_

_The Education of Drusilla Strange_

Story Notes by Paul Williams



FOREWORD


I CREATED A CHARACTER, Kilgore Trout, an impoverished, uncelebrated
science fiction writer, who made his debut in 1965 in my novel _God
Bless You, Mr. Rosewater_. Trout would subsequently make cameo
appearances in several more of my books, and in 1973 would star in
_Breakfast of Champions_.

Persons alert for wordplay noticed that Trout and Theodore Sturgeon were
both named for fish, and that their first names ended with “ore.” They
asked me if my friend Ted had been my model for Kilgore.

Answer: Very briefly, and in a way. Kilgore, like Ted when we first met
in 1958, was a victim of a hate crime then commonly practiced by the
American literary establishment. It wasn’t racism or sexism or ageism.
It was “genreism.” Definition: “The unexamined conviction that anyone
who wrote science fiction wasn’t really a writer, but rather a geek of
some sort.” A genuine geek, of course, is a carnival employee who is
displayed in a filthy cage and billed as “The Wild Man from Borneo.”

Genreism was still rampant in late autumn, 1958, when I was living in
Barnstable, Mass., on Cape Cod, and Ted and his wife Marion had just
rented a house near the water in Truro (also on the Cape), no place to
be when winter came. We knew each other’s work, but had never met.
Bingo! There we were face-to-face at last, at suppertime in my living
room.

Ted had been writing nonstop for days or maybe weeks. He was skinny and
haggard, underpaid and unappreciated outside the ghetto science fiction
was then. He announced that he was going to do a standing back flip,
which he did. He landed on his knees with a crash which shook the whole
house. When he got back on his feet, humiliated and laughing in agony,
one of the best writers in America was indeed, but only for a moment, my
model for Kilgore Trout.

Kurt Vonnegut, Jr.
New York, New York
November 1999



A SAUCER OF LONELINESS


IF SHE’S DEAD, I THOUGHT, I’ll never find her in this white flood of
moonlight on the white sea, with the surf seething in and over the pale,
pale sand like a great shampoo. Almost always, suicides who stab
themselves or shoot themselves in the heart carefully bare their chests;
the same strange impulse generally makes the sea-suicide go naked.

A little earlier, I thought, or later, and there would be shadows for
the dunes and the breathing toss of the foam. Now the only real shadow
was mine, a tiny thing just under me, but black enough to feed the
blackness of the shadow of a blimp.

A little earlier, I thought, and I might have seen her plodding up the
silver shore, seeking a place lonely enough to die in. A little later
and my legs would rebel against this shuffling trot through sand, the
maddening sand that could not hold and would not help a hurrying man.

My legs did give way then and I knelt suddenly, sobbing—not for her; not
yet—just for air. There was such a rush about me: wind, and tangled
spray, and colors upon colors and shades of colors that were not colors
at all but shifts of white and silver. If light like that were sound, it
would sound like the sea on sand, and if my ears were eyes, they would
see such a light.

I crouched there, gasping in the swirl of it, and a flood struck me,
shallow and swift, turning up and outward like flower petals where it
touched my knees, then soaking me to the waist in its bubble and crash.
I pressed my knuckles to my eyes so they would open again. The sea was
on my lips with the taste of tears and the whole white night shouted and
wept aloud.

And there she was.

Her white shoulders were a taller curve in the sloping foam. She must
have sensed me—perhaps I yelled—for she turned and saw me kneeling
there. She put her fists to her temples and her face twisted, and she
uttered a piercing wail of despair and fury, and then plunged seaward
and sank.

I kicked off my shoes and ran into the breakers, shouting, hunting,
grasping at flashes of white that turned to sea-salt and coldness in my
fingers. I plunged right past her, and her body struck my side as a wave
whipped my face and tumbled both of us. I gasped in solid water, opened
my eyes beneath the surface and saw a greenish-white distorted moon
hurtle as I spun. Then there was sucking sand under my feet again and my
left hand was tangled in her hair.

The receding wave towed her away and for a moment she streamed out from
my hand like steam from a whistle. In that moment I was sure she was
dead, but as she settled to the sand, she fought and scrambled to her
feet.

She hit my ear, wet, hard, and a huge, pointed pain lanced into my head.
She pulled, she lunged away from me, and all the while my hand was
caught in her hair. I couldn’t have freed her if I had wanted to. She
spun to me with the next wave, battered and clawed at me, and we went
into deeper water.

“Don’t … don’t … I can’t swim!” I shouted, so she clawed me again.

“Leave me alone,” she shrieked. “Oh, dear God, why can’t you _leave_”
(said her fingernails) _“me …”_ (said her fingernails) “_alone!_” (said
her small hard fist).

So by her hair I pulled her head down tight to her white shoulder; and
with the edge of my free hand I hit her neck twice. She floated again,
and I brought her ashore.

I carried her to where a dune was between us and the sea’s broad noisy
tongue, and the wind was above us somewhere. But the light was as
bright. I rubbed her wrists and stroked her face and said, “It’s all
right,” and, “There!” and some names I used to have for a dream I had
long, long before I ever heard of her.

She lay still on her back with the breath hissing between her teeth,
with her lips in a smile which her twisted-tight, wrinkled-sealed eyes
made not a smile but a torture. She was well and conscious for many
moments and still her breath hissed and her closed eyes twisted.

“Why couldn’t you leave me alone?” she asked at last. She opened her
eyes and looked at me. She had so much misery that there was no room for
fear. She shut her eyes again and said, “You know who I am.”

“I know,” I said.

She began to cry.

I waited, and when she stopped crying, there were shadows among the
dunes. A long time.

She said, “You don’t know who I am. Nobody knows who I am.”

I said, “It was in all the papers.”

“That!” She opened her eyes slowly and her gaze traveled over my face,
my shoulders, stopped at my mouth, touched my eyes for the briefest
second. She curled her lips and turned away her head. “Nobody knows who
I am.”

I waited for her to move or speak, and finally I said, “Tell _me_.”

“Who are you?” she asked, with her head still turned away.

“Someone who …”

“Well?”

“Not now,” I said. “Later, maybe.”

She sat up suddenly and tried to hide herself. “Where are my clothes?”

“I didn’t see them.”

“Oh,” she said. “I remember. I put them down and kicked sand over them,
just where a dune would come and smooth them over, hide them as if they
never were … I hate sand. I wanted to drown in the sand, but it wouldn’t
let me … You mustn’t look at me!” she shouted. “I hate to have you
looking at me!” She threw her head from side to side, seeking. “I can’t
stay here like this! What can I do? Where can I go?”

“Here,” I said.

She let me help her up and then snatched her hand away, half-turned from
me. “Don’t touch me. Get away from me.”

“Here,” I said again, and walked down the dune where it curved in the
moonlight, tipped back into the wind and down and became not dune but
beach. “Here.” I pointed behind the dune.

At last she followed me. She peered over the dune where it was
chest-high, and again where it was knee-high. “Back there?”

I nodded.

“So dark …” She stepped over the low dune and into the aching black of
those moon-shadows. She moved away cautiously, feeling tenderly with her
feet, back to where the dune was higher. She sank down into the
blackness and disappeared there. I sat on the sand in the light. “Stay
away from me,” she spat.

I rose and stepped back. Invisible in the shadows, she breathed, “Don’t
go away.” I waited, then saw her hand press out of the clean-cut
shadows. “There,” she said, “over there. In the dark. Just be a … Stay
away from me now … Be a—voice.”

I did as she asked, and sat in the shadows perhaps six feet from her.

She told me about it. Not the way it was in the papers.

She was perhaps seventeen when it happened. She was in Central Park in
New York. It was too warm for such an early spring day, and the hammered
brown slopes had a dusting of green of precisely the consistency of that
morning’s hoarfrost on the rocks. But the frost was gone and the grass
was brave and tempted some hundreds of pairs of feet from the asphalt
and concrete to tread on it.

Hers were among them. The sprouting soil was a surprise to her feet, as
the air was to her lungs. Her feet ceased to be shoes as she walked, her
body was consciously more than clothes. It was the only kind of day
which in itself can make a city-bred person raise his eyes. She did.

For a moment she felt separated from the life she lived, in which there
was no fragrance, no silence, in which nothing ever quite fit nor was
quite filled. In that moment the ordered disapproval of the buildings
around the pallid park could not reach her; for two, three clean breaths
it no longer mattered that the whole wide world really belonged to
images projected on a screen; to gently groomed goddesses in these steel
and glass towers; that it belonged, in short, always, always to someone
else.

So she raised her eyes, and there above her was the saucer.

It was beautiful. It was golden, with a dusty finish like that of an
unripe Concord grape. It made a faint sound, a chord composed of two
tones and a blunted hiss like the wind in tall wheat. It was darting
about like a swallow, soaring and dropping. It circled and dropped and
hovered like a fish, shimmering. It was like all these living things,
but with that beauty it had all the loveliness of things turned and
burnished, measured, machined, and metrical.

At first she felt no astonishment, for this was so different from
anything she had ever seen before that it had to be a trick of the eye,
a false evaluation of size and speed and distance that in a moment would
resolve itself into a sun-flash on an airplane or the lingering glare of
a welding arc.

She looked away from it and abruptly realized that many other people saw
it—saw _something_—too. People all around her had stopped moving and
speaking and were craning upward. Around her was a globe of silent
astonishment, and outside it she was aware of the life-noise of the
city, the hard-breathing giant who never inhales.

She looked up again, and at last began to realize how large and how far
away the saucer was. No: rather, how small and how very near it was. It
was just the size of the largest circle she might make with her two
hands, and it floated not quite eighteen inches over her head.

Fear came then. She drew back and raised a forearm, but the saucer
simply hung there. She bent far sideways, twisted away, leaped forward,
looked back and upward to see if she had escaped it. At first she
couldn’t see it; then as she looked up and up, there it was, close and
gleaming, quivering and crooning, right over her head.

She bit her tongue.

From the corner of her eye, she saw a man cross himself_. He did that
because he saw me standing here with a halo over my head, she thought_.
And that was the greatest single thing that had ever happened to her. No
one had ever looked at her and made a respectful gesture before, not
once, not ever. Through terror, through panic and wonderment, the
comfort of that thought nestled into her, to wait to be taken out and
looked at again in lonely times.

The terror was uppermost now, however. She backed away, staring upward,
stepping a ludicrous cakewalk. She should have collided with people.
There were plenty of people there, gasping and craning, but she reached
none. She spun around and discovered to her horror that she was the
center of a pointing, pressing crowd. Its mosaic of eyes all bulged and
its inner circle braced its many legs to press back and away from her.

The saucer’s gentle note deepened. It tilted, dropped an inch or so.
Someone screamed, and the crowd broke away from her in all directions,
milled about, and settled again in a new dynamic balance, a much larger
ring, as more and more people raced to thicken it against the efforts of
the inner circle to escape.

The saucer hummed and tilted, tilted …

She opened her mouth to scream, fell to her knees, and the saucer
struck.

It dropped against her forehead and clung there. It seemed almost to
lift her. She came erect on her knees, made one effort to raise her
hands against it, and then her arms stiffened down and back, her hands
not reaching the ground. For perhaps a second and a half the saucer held
her rigid, and then it passed a single ecstatic quiver to her body and
dropped it. She plumped to the ground, the backs of her thighs heavy and
painful on her heels and ankles.

The saucer dropped beside her, rolled once in a small circle, once just
around its edge, and lay still. It lay still and dull and metallic,
different and dead.

Hazily, she lay and gazed at the gray-shrouded blue of the good spring
sky, and hazily she heard whistles.

And some tardy screams.

And a great stupid voice bellowing “Give her air!” which made everyone
press closer.

Then there wasn’t so much sky because of the blueclad bulk with its
metal buttons and its leatherette notebook. “Okay, okay, what’s happened
here stand back figods sake.”

And the widening ripples of observation, interpretation and comment: “It
knocked her down.” “Some guy knocked her down.” “He knocked her down.”
“Some guy knocked her down and—” “Right in broad daylight this guy …”
“The park’s gettin’ to be …” onward and outward, the adulteration of
fact until it was lost altogether because excitement is so much more
important.

Somebody with a harder shoulder than the rest bulling close, a notebook
here, too, a witnessing eye over it, ready to change “… a beautiful
brunette …” to “an attractive brunette” for the afternoon editions,
because “attractive” is as dowdy as any woman is allowed to get if she
is a victim in the news.

The glittering shield and the florid face bending close: “You hurt bad,
sister?” And the echoes, back and back through the crowd, Hurt bad, hurt
bad, badly injured, he beat the hell out of her, broad daylight …”

And still another man, slim and purposeful, tan gabardine, cleft chin
and beard-shadow: “Flyin’ saucer, hm? Okay, Officer, I’ll take over
here.”

“And who the hell might you be, takin’ over?”

The flash of a brown leather wallet, a face so close behind that its
chin was pressed into the gabardine shoulder. The face said, awed:
“F.B.I.” and that rippled outward, too. The policeman nodded—the entire
policeman nodded in one single bobbing genuflection.

“Get some help and clear this area,” said the gabardine.

“Yes, _sir!_” said the policeman.

“F.B.I., F.B.I.,” the crowd murmured and there was more sky to look at
above her.

She sat up and there was glory in her face. “The saucer talked to me,”
she sang.

“You shut up,” said the gabardine. “You’ll have lots of chance to talk
later.”

“Yeah, sister,” said the policeman. “My God, this mob could be full of
Communists.”

“You shut up, too,” said the gabardine.

Someone in the crowd told someone else a Communist beat up this girl,
while someone else was saying she got beat up because she was a
Communist.

She started to rise, but solicitous hands forced her down again. There
were thirty police there by that time.

“I can walk,” she said.

“Now you just take it easy,” they told her.

They put a stretcher down beside her and lifted her onto it and covered
her with a big blanket.

“I can walk,” she said as they carried her through the crowd.

A woman went white and turned away moaning, “Oh, my God, how awful!”

A small man with round eyes stared and stared at her and licked and
licked his lips.

The ambulance. They slid her in. The gabardine was already there.

A white-coated man with very clean hands: “How did it happen, miss?”

“No questions,” said the gabardine. “Security.”

The hospital.

She said, “I got to get back to work.”

“Take your clothes off,” they told her.

She had a bedroom to herself then for the first time in her life.
Whenever the door opened, she could see a policeman outside. It opened
very often to admit the kind of civilians who were very polite to
military people, and the kind of military people who were even more
polite to certain civilians. She did not know what they all did nor what
they wanted. Every single day they asked her four million, five hundred
thousand questions. Apparently they never talked to each other because
each of them asked her the same questions over and over.

“What is your name?”

“How old are you?”

“What year were you born?”

Sometimes they would push her down strange paths with their questions.

“Now your uncle. Married a woman from Middle Europe, did he? Where in
Middle Europe?”

“What clubs or fraternal organizations did you belong to? Ah! Now about
that Rinkeydinks gang on 63rd Street. Who was _really_ behind it?”

But over and over again, “What did you mean when you said the saucer
talked to you?”

And she would say, “It talked to me.”

And they would say, “And it said—”

And she would shake her head.

There would be a lot of shouting ones, and then a lot of kind ones. No
one had ever been so kind to her before, but she soon learned that no
one was being kind to _her_. They were just getting her to relax, to
think of other things, so they could suddenly shoot that question at
her: “What do you mean it talked to you?”

Pretty soon it was just like Mom’s or school or any place, and she used
to sit with her mouth closed and let them yell. Once they sat her on a
hard chair for hours and hours with a light in her eyes and let her get
thirsty. Home, there was a transom over the bedroom door and Mom used to
leave the kitchen light glaring through it all night, every night, so
she wouldn’t get the horrors. So the light didn’t bother her at all.

They took her out of the hospital and put her in jail. Some ways it was
good. The food. The bed was all right, too. Through the window she could
see lots of women exercising in the yard. It was explained to her that
they all had much harder beds.

“You are a very important young lady, you know.”

That was nice at first, but as usual it turned out they didn’t mean her
at all. They kept working on her. Once they brought the saucer in to
her. It was inside a big wooden crate with a padlock, and a steel box
inside that with a Yale lock. It only weighed a couple of pounds, the
saucer, but by the time they got it packed, it took two men to carry it
and four men with guns to watch them.

They made her act out the whole thing just the way it happened with some
soldiers holding the saucer over her head. It wasn’t the same. They’d
cut a lot of chips and pieces out of the saucer and, besides, it was
that dead gray color. They asked her if she knew anything about that and
for once she told them.

“It’s empty now,” she said.

The only one she would ever talk to was a little man with a fat belly
who said to her the first time he was alone with her, “Listen, I think
the way they’ve been treating you stinks. Now get this: I have a job to
do. My job is to find out _why_ you won’t tell what the saucer said. I
don’t want to know what it said and I’ll never ask you. I don’t even
want you to tell me. Let’s just find out why you’re keeping it a
secret.”

Finding out why turned out to be hours of just talking about having
pneumonia and the flowerpot she made in second grade that Mom threw down
the fire escape and getting left back in school and the dream about
holding a wine glass in both hands and peeping over it at some man.

And one day she told him why she wouldn’t say about the saucer, just the
way it came to her: “Because it was talking to _me_, and it’s just
nobody else’s business.”

She even told him about the man crossing himself that day. It was the
only other thing she had of her own.

He was nice. He was the one who warned her about the trial. “I have no
business saying this, but they’re going to give you the full dress
treatment. Judge and jury and all. You just say what you want to say, no
less and no more, hear? And don’t let ’em get your goat. You have a
right to own something.”

He got up and swore and left.

First a man came and talked to her for a long time about how maybe this
Earth would be attacked from outer space by beings much stronger and
cleverer than we are, and maybe she had the key to a defense. So she
owed it to the whole world. And then even if the Earth wasn’t attacked,
just think of what an advantage she might give this country over its
enemies. Then he shook his finger in her face and said that what she was
doing amounted to working _for_ the enemies of her country. And he
turned out to be the man that was defending her at the trial.

The jury found her guilty of contempt of court and the judge recited a
long list of penalties he could give her. He gave her one of them and
suspended it. They put her back in jail for a few more days, and one
fine day they turned her loose.

That was wonderful at first. She got a job in a restaurant, and a
furnished room. She had been in the papers so much that Mom didn’t want
her back home. Mom was drunk most of the time and sometimes used to tear
up the whole neighborhood, but all the same she had very special ideas
about being respectable, and being in the papers all the time for spying
was not her idea of being decent. So she put her maiden name on the
mailbox downstairs and told her daughter not to live there any more.

At the restaurant she met a man who asked her for a date. The first
time. She spent every cent she had on a red handbag to go with her red
shoes. They weren’t the same shade, but anyway they were both red. They
went to the movies and afterward he didn’t try to kiss her or anything,
he just tried to find out what the flying saucer told her. She didn’t
say anything. She went home and cried all night.

Then some men sat in a booth talking and they shut up and glared at her
every time she came past. They spoke to the boss, and he came and told
her that they were electronics engineers working for the government and
they were afraid to talk shop while she was around—wasn’t she some sort
of spy or something? So she got fired.

Once she saw her name on a juke box. She put in a nickel and punched
that number, and the record was all about “the flyin’ saucer came down
one day, and taught her a brand new way to play, and what it was I will
not say, but she took me out of this world.” And while she was listening
to it, someone in the juke-joint recognized her and called her by name.
Four of them followed her home and she had to block the door shut.

Sometimes she’d be all right for months on end, and then someone would
ask for a date. Three times out of five, she and the date were followed.
Once the man she was with arrested the man who was tailing them. Twice
the man who was tailing them arrested the man she was with. Five times
out of five, the date would try to find out about the saucer. Sometimes
she would go out with someone and pretend that it was a real date, but
she wasn’t very good at it.

So she moved to the shore and got a job cleaning at night in offices and
stores. There weren’t many to clean, but that just meant there weren’t
many people to remember her face from the papers. Like clockwork, every
eighteen months, some feature writer would drag it all out again in a
magazine or a Sunday supplement; and every time anyone saw a headlight
on a mountain or a light on a weather balloon it had to be a flying
saucer, and there had to be some tired quip about the saucer wanting to
tell secrets. Then for two or three weeks she’d stay off the streets in
the daytime.

Once she thought she had it whipped. People didn’t want her, so she
began reading. The novels were all right for a while until she found out
that most of them were like the movies—all about the pretty ones who
really own the world. So she learned things—animals, trees. A lousy
little chipmunk caught in a wire fence bit her. The animals didn’t want
her. The trees didn’t care.

Then she hit on the idea of the bottles. She got all the bottles she
could and wrote on papers which she corked into the bottles. She’d tramp
miles up and down the beaches and throw the bottles out as far as she
could. She knew that if the right person found one, it would give that
person the only thing in the world that would help. Those bottles kept
her going for three solid years. Everyone’s got to have a secret little
something he does.

And at last the time came when it was no use any more. You can go on
trying to help someone who _maybe_ exists; but soon you can’t pretend
there is such a person any more. And that’s it. The end.

“Are you cold?” I asked when she was through telling me. The surf was
quieter and the shadows longer.

“No,” she answered from the shadows. Suddenly she said, “Did you think I
was mad at you because you saw me without my clothes?”

“Why shouldn’t you be?”

“You know, I don’t care? I wouldn’t have wanted … wanted you to see me
even in a ball gown or overalls. You can’t cover up my carcass. It
shows; it’s there whatever. I just didn’t want you to _see_ me. At all.”

“Me, or anyone?”

She hesitated. “You.”

I got up and stretched and walked a little, thinking. “Didn’t the F.B.I.
try to stop you throwing those bottles?”

“Oh, sure. They spent I don’t know how much taxpayers’ money gathering
’em up. They still make a spot check every once in a while. They’re
getting tired of it, though. All the writing in the bottles is the
same.” She laughed. I didn’t know she could.

“What’s funny?”

“All of ’em—judges, jailers, juke-boxes—people. Do you know it wouldn’t
have saved me a minute’s trouble if I’d told ’em the whole thing at the
very beginning?”

“No?”

“No. They wouldn’t have believed me. What they wanted was a new weapon.
Super-science from a super-race, to slap hell out of the super-race if
they ever got a chance, or out of our own if they don’t. All those
brains,” she breathed, with more wonder than scorn, “all that brass.
They think ‘super-race’ and it comes out ‘super-science.’ Don’t they
ever imagine a super-race has super-feelings, too—super-laughter, maybe,
or super-hunger?” She paused. “Isn’t it time you asked me what the
saucer said?”

“I’ll tell you,” I blurted.

_‘There is in certain living souls_

_A quality of loneliness unspeakable,_

_So great it must be shared_

_As company is shared by lesser beings._

_Such a loneliness is mine; so know by this_

_That in immensity_

_There is one lonelier than you_.”

“Dear Jesus,” she said devoutly, and began to weep. “And how is it
addressed?”

_“To the loneliest one_ …”

“How did you know?” she whispered.

“It’s what you put in the bottles, isn’t it?”

“Yes,” she said. “Whenever it gets to be too much, that no one cares,
that no one ever did … you throw a bottle into the sea, and out goes a
part of your own loneliness. You sit and think of someone somewhere
finding it … learning for the first time that the worst there is can be
understood.”

The moon was setting and the surf was hushed. We looked up and out to
the stars. She said, “We don’t know what loneliness is like. People
thought the saucer was a saucer, but it wasn’t. It was a bottle with a
message inside. It had a bigger ocean to cross—all of space—and not much
chance of finding anybody. Loneliness? We don’t know loneliness.”

When I could, I asked her why she had tried to kill herself.

“I’ve had it good,” she said, “with what the saucer told me. I wanted
to … pay back. I was bad enough to be helped; I had to know I was good
enough to help. No one wants me? Fine. But don’t tell me no one,
anywhere, wants my help. I can’t stand that.”

I took a deep breath. “I found one of your bottles two years ago. I’ve
been looking for you ever since. Tide charts, current tables, maps
and … wandering. I heard some talk about you and the bottles hereabouts.
Someone told me you’d quit doing it, you’d taken to wandering the dunes
at night. I knew why. I ran all the way.”

I needed another breath now. “I got a club foot. I think right, but the
words don’t come out of my mouth the way they’re inside my head. I have
this nose. I never had a woman. Nobody ever wanted to hire me to work
where they’d have to look at me. You’re beautiful,” I said. “You’re
beautiful.”

She said nothing, but it was as if a light came from her, more light and
far less shadow than ever the practiced moon could cast. Among the many
things it meant was that even to loneliness there is an end, for those
who are lonely enough, long enough.



THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND


“DIG THERE,” SAID OSSER, POINTING.

The black-browed man pulled back. “Why?”

“We must dig deep to build high, and we are going to build high.”

“Why?” the man asked again.

“To keep the enemy out.”

“There are no enemies.”

Osser laughed bitterly. “I’ll have enemies.”

“Why?”

Osser came to him. “Because I’m going to pick up this village and shake
it until it wakes up. And if it won’t wake up, I’ll keep shaking until I
break its back and it dies. Dig.”

“I don’t see why,” said the man doggedly.

Osser looked at the golden backs of his hands, turned them over, watched
them closing. He raised his eyes to the other.

“This is why,” he said.

His right fist tore the man’s cheek. His left turned the man’s breath to
a bullet which exploded as it left him. He huddled on the ground, unable
to exhale, inhaling in small, heavy, tearing sobs. His eyes opened and
he looked up at Osser. He could not speak, but his eyes did; and through
shock and pain all they said was “Why?”

“You want reasons,” Osser said, when he felt the man could hear him.
“You want reasons—all of you. You see both sides of every question and
you weigh and balance and cancel yourselves out. I want an end to
reason. I want things done.”

He bent to lift the bearded man to his feet. Osser stood half a head
taller and his shoulders were as full and smooth as the bottoms of
bowls. Golden hairs shifted and glinted on his forearms as he moved his
fingers and the great cords tensed and valleyed. He lifted the man clear
of the ground and set him easily on his feet and held him until he was
sure of his balance.

“You don’t understand me, do you?”

The man shook his head weakly.

“Don’t try. You’ll dig more if you don’t try.” He clapped the handle of
the shovel into the man’s hand and picked up a mattock. “Dig,” he said,
and the man began to dig.

Osser smiled when the man turned to work, arched his nostrils and drew
the warm clean air into his lungs. He liked the sunlight now, the
morning smell of the turned soil, the work he had to do and the idea
itself of working.

Standing so, with his head raised, he saw a flash of bright yellow, the
turn of a tanned face. Just a glimpse, and she was gone.

For a moment he tensed, frowning. If she had seen him she would be off
to clatter the story of it to the whole village. Then he smiled. Let
her. Let them all know. They must, sooner or later. Let them try to stop
him.

He laughed, gripped his mattock, and the sod flew. So Jubilith saw fit
to watch him, did she?

He laughed again. Work now, Juby later. In time he would have
everything.

Everything.

The village street wound and wandered and from time to time divided and
rejoined itself, for each house was built on a man’s whim—near, far,
high, small, separate, turned to or away. What did not harmonize
contrasted well, and over all it was a pleasing place to walk.

Before a shop a wood-cobbler sat, gouging out sabots; and he was next
door to the old leatherworker who cunningly wove immortal belts
of-square-knotted rawhide. Then a house, and another, and a cabin; a
space of green where children played; and the skeleton of a new building
where a man, his apron pockets full of hardwood pegs, worked
knowledgeably with a heavy mallet.

The cobbler, the leatherworker, the children and the builder all stopped
to watch Jubilith because she was beautiful and because she ran. When
she was by, they each saw the others watching, and each smiled and waved
and laughed a little, though nothing was said.

A puppy lolloped along after her, three legs deft, the fourth in the
way. Had it been frightened, it would not have run, and had Jubilith
spoken to it, it would have followed wherever she went. But she ignored
it, even when it barked its small soprano bark, so it curved away from
her, pretending it had been going somewhere else anyway, and then it sat
and puffed and looked after her sadly.

Past the smithy with its shadowed, glowing heart she ran; past the
gristmill with its wonderful wheel, taking and yielding with its heavy
cupped hands. A boy struck his hoop and it rolled across her path.
Without breaking stride, she leaped high over it and ran on, and the
glass-blower’s lips burst away from his pipe, for a man can smile or
blow glass, but not both at the same time.

When at last she reached Wrenn’s house, she was breathing deeply, but
with no difficulty, in the way possible only to those who run
beautifully. She stopped by the open door and waited politely, not
looking in until Oyva came out and touched her shoulder.

Jubilith faced her, keeping her eyes closed for a long moment, for Oyva
was not only very old, she was Wrenn’s wife.

“Is it Jubilith?” asked Oyva, smiling.

“It is,” said the girl. She opened her eyes.

Oyva, seeing their taut corners, said shrewdly, “A troubled Jubilith as
well. I’ll not keep you. He’s just inside.”

Juby found a swift flash of smile to give her and went into the house,
leaving the old woman to wonder where, where in her long life she had
seen such a brief flash of such great loveliness. A firebird’s wing? A
green meteor? She put it away in her mind next to the memory of a burst
of laughter—Wrenn’s, just after he had kissed her first—and sat down on
a three-legged stool by the side of the house.

A heavy fiber screen had been set up inside the doorway, to form a sort
of meander, and at the third turn it was very dark. Juby paused to let
the sunlight drain away from her vision. Somewhere in the dark before
her there was music, the hay-clean smell of flower petals dried and
freshly rubbed, and a voice humming. The voice and the music were open
and free, but choked a listener’s throat like the sudden appearance of a
field of daffodils.

The voice and the music stopped short, and someone breathed quietly in
the darkness.

“Is … is it Wrenn?” she faltered.

“It is,” said the voice.

“Jubilith here.”

“Move the screen,” said the voice. “I’d like the light, talking to you,
Jubilith.”

She felt behind her, touched the screen. It had many hinges and swung
easily away to the doorside. Wrenn sat cross-legged in the corner behind
a frame which held a glittering complex of stones.

He brushed petal-dust from his hands. “Sit there, child, and tell me
what it is you do not understand.”

She sat down before him and lowered her eyes, and his widened, as if
someone had taken away a great light.

When she had nothing to say, he prompted her gently: “See if you can put
it all into a single word, Jubilith.”

She said immediately, “Osser.”

“Ah,” said Wrenn.

“I followed him this morning, out to the foothills beyond the Sky-tree
Grove. He—”

Wrenn waited.

Jubilith put up her small hands, clenched, and talked in a rush.
“Sussten, with the black brows, he was with Osser. They stopped and
Osser shouted at him, and, when I came to where I could look down and
see them, Osser took his fists and hammered Sussten, knocked him down.
He laughed and picked him up. Sussten was sick; he was shaken and there
was blood on his face. Osser told him to dig, and Sussten dug, Osser
laughed again, he laughed … I think he saw me. I came here.”

Slowly she put her fists down. Wrenn said nothing.

Jubilith said, in a voice like a puzzled sigh, “I understand this: When
a man hammers something, iron or clay or wood, it is to change what he
hammers from what it is to what he wishes it to be.” She raised one
hand, made a fist, and put it down again. She shook her head slightly
and her heavy soft hair moved on her back. “To hammer a man is to change
nothing. Sussten remains Sussten.”

“It was good to tell me of this,” said Wrenn when he was sure she had
finished.

“Not good,” Jubilith disclaimed. “I want to understand.”

Wrenn shook his head. Juby cocked her head on one side like a wondering
bright bird. When she realized that his gesture was a refusal, a small
paired crease came and went between her brows.

“May I not understand this?”

“You _must_ not understand it,” Wrenn corrected. “Not yet, anyway.
Perhaps after a time. Perhaps never.”

“Ah,” she said. “I—I didn’t know.”

“How could you know?” he asked kindly. “Don’t follow Osser again,
Jubilith.”

She parted her lips, then again gave the small headshake. She rose and
went out.

Oyva came to her. “Better now, Jubilith?”

Juby tumed her head away; then, realizing that this was ill-mannered,
met Oyva’s gaze. The girl’s eyes were full of tears. She closed them
respectfully. Oyva touched her shoulder and let her go.

Watching the slim, bright figure trudge away, bowed with thought,
drag-footed, unseeing, Oyva grunted and stumped into the house.

“Did she have to be hurt?” she demanded.

“She did,” said Wrenn gently. “Osser,” he added.

“Ah,” she said, in just the tone he had used when Jubilith first
mentioned the name. “What has he done now?”

Wrenn told her. Oyva sucked her lips in thoughtfully. “Why was the girl
following him?”

“I didn’t ask her. But don’t you know?”

“I suppose I do,” said Oyva, and sighed. “That mustn’t happen, Wrenn.”

“It won’t. I told her not to follow him again.”

She looked at him fondly. “I suppose even you can act like a fool once
in a while.”

He was startled. “Fool?”

“She loves him. You won’t keep her from him by a word of advice.”

“You judge her by yourself,” he said, just as fondly. “She’s only a
child; in a day, a week, she’ll wrap someone else up in her dreams.

“Suppose she doesn’t?”

“Don’t even think about it.” A shudder touched his voice.

“I shall, though,” said Oyva with determination. “And you’d do well to
think about it, too.” When his eyes grew troubled, she touched his cheek
gently, “Now play some more for me.”

He sat down before the instrument, his hands poised. Then into the tiny
bins his fingers went, rubbing this dried-petal powder and that, and the
stones glowed, changing the flower-scents into music and shifting
colors.

He began to sing softly to the music.

They dug deep, day by day, and they built. Osser did the work of three
men, and sometimes six or eight others worked with him, and sometimes
one or two. Once he had twelve. But never did he work alone.

When the stone was three tiers above ground level, Osser climbed the
nearest rise and stood looking down at it proudly, at the thickness and
strength of the growing walls, at the toiling workers who lifted and
strained to make them grow.

“Is it Osser?”

The voice was as faint and shy as a fern uncurling, as promising as
spring itself.

He turned.

“Jubilith,” she told him.

“What are you doing here?”

“I come here every day,” she said. She indicated the copse which crowned
the hill. “I hide here and watch you.”

“What do you want?”

She laced her fingers. “I would like to dig there and lift stones.”

“No,” he said, and turned to study the work again.

“Why not?”

“Never ask me why. ‘Because I say so’—that’s all the answer you’ll get
from me—you or anyone.”

She came to stand beside him. “You build fast.”

He nodded. “Faster than any village house was ever built.” He could
sense the ‘why’ rising within her, and could feel it being checked.

“I want to build it, too,” she pleaded.

“No,” he said. His eyes widened as he watched the work. Suddenly he was
gone, leaping down the slope in great springy strides. He turned the
corner of the new wall and stood, saying nothing. The man who had been
idling turned quickly and lifted a stone. Osser smiled a quick, taut
smile and went to work beside him. Jubilith stood on the slope,
watching, wondering.

She came almost every day as the tower grew. Osser never spoke to her.
She watched the sunlight on him, the lithe strength, the rippling gold.
He stood like a great tree, squatted like a rock, moved like a
thundercloud. His voice was a whip, a bugle, the roar of a bull.

She saw him less and less in the village. Once it was a fearsome thing
to see. Early in the morning he appeared suddenly, overtook a man,
lifted him and threw him flat on the ground.

“I told you to be out there yesterday,” he growled, and strode away.

Friends came and picked the man up, held him softly while he coughed,
took him away to be healed.

No one went to Wrenn about it; the word had gone around that Osser and
his affairs were not to be understood by anyone. Wrenn’s function was to
explain those few things which could not be understood. But certain of
these few were not to be understood at all. So Osser was left alone to
do as he wished—which was a liberty, after all, that was enjoyed by
everyone else.

There came a twilight when Jubilith waited past her usual time. She
waited until by ones and twos the workers left the tower, until Osser
himself had climbed the hill, until he had paused to look back and be
proud and think of tomorrow’s work, until he, too, had turned his face
to the town. Then she slipped down to the tower and around it, and
carefully climbed the scaffolding on the far side. She looked about her.

The tower was now four stories high and seemed to be shaping toward a
roof. Circular in cross-section, the tower had two rooms on each floor,
an east-west wall between them on the ground floor, a north-south wall
on the next, and so on up.

There was a central well into which was built a spiral staircase—a
double spiral, as if one helix had been screwed into the other. This
made possible two exits to stairs on each floor at the same level,
though they were walled off one from the other. Each of the two rooms on
every floor had one connecting doorway. Each room had three windows in
it, wide on the inside, tapering through the thick stone wall to form
the barest slit outside.

A portion of the castellated roof was already built. It overhung the
entrance, and had slots in the overhang through which the whole entrance
face of the tower could be covered by one man lying unseen on the roof,
looking straight down.

Stones lay in a trough ready for placing, and there was some leftover
mortar in the box. Jubilith picked up a trowel and worked it
experimentally in the stuff, then lifted some out and tipped it down on
the unfinished top of the wall, just as she had seen Osser do so many
times. She put down the trowel and chose a stone. It was heavy—much
heavier than she had expected—but she made it move, made it lift, made
it seat itself to suit her on the fresh mortar. She ticked off the
excess from the join and stepped back to admire it in the fading light.

Two great clamps, hard as teeth, strong as a hurricane, caught her right
thigh and her left armpit. She was swung into the air and held helpless
over the unfinished parapet.

She was utterly silent, shocked past the ability even to gasp.

“I told you you were not to work here,” said Osser between his teeth. So
tall he was, so long were his arms as he held her high over his head,
that it seemed almost as far to the parapet as it was to the ground
below.

He leaned close to the edge and shook her. “I’ll throw you off. This
tower is mine to build, you hear?”

If she had been able to breathe, she might have screamed or pleaded with
him. If she had screamed or pleaded, he might have dropped her. But her
silence apparently surprised him. He grunted and set her roughly on her
feet. She caught at his shoulder to keep her balance, then quickly
transferred her hold to the edge of the parapet. She dropped her head
between her upper arms. Her long soft hair fell forward over her face,
and she moaned.

“I told you,” he said, really seeing her at last. His voice shook. He
stepped toward her and put out his hand. She screamed. “Be _quiet_!” he
roared. A moan shut off in mid-breath. “Ah, I told you, Juby. You
shouldn’t have tried to build here.”

He ran his great hands over the edge of the stonework, found the one she
had laid, the one that had cost her such effort to lift. With one hand,
he plucked it up and threw it far out into the shadows below.

“I wanted to help you with it,” she whispered.

“Don’t you understand?” he cried. “No one builds here who _wants_ to
help!”

She simply shook her head.

She tried to breathe deeply and a long shudder possessed her.

When it passed, she turned weakly and stood, her back partly arched over
the edge of the parapet, her hands behind her to cushion the stone. She
shook the hair out of her face; it fell away on either side like a
dawnlit bow-wave. She looked up at him with an expression of such
piteous confusion that his dwindling rage vanished altogether.

He dropped his eyes and shuffled one foot like a guilty child. “Juby,
leave me alone.”

Something almost like a smile touched her lips. She brushed her bruised
arm, then walked past him to the place where the scaffolding projected
above the parapet.

“Not that way,” he called. “Come here.”

He took her hand and led her to the spiral staircase at the center of
the tower. It was almost totally dark inside. It seemed like an age to
her as they descended; she was alone in a black universe consisting of a
rhythmic drop and turn, and a warm hard hand in hers, holding and
leading her.

When they emerged, he stopped in the strange twilight, a darkness for
all the world but a dazzle to them, so soaked with blackness were their
eyes. She tugged gently, but he would not release her hand. She moved
close to see his face. His eyes were wide and turned unseeing to the far
slopes; he was frowning, yet his mouth was not fierce, but irresolute.
Whatever his inward struggle was, it left his face gradually and
transferred itself to his hand. Its pressure on hers became firm, hard,
intense, painful.

“Osser!”

He dropped the hand and stepped back, shamed. “Juby, I will take you
to … Juby, do you want to understand?” He waved at the tower.

She said, “Oh, yes!”

He looked at her closely, and the angry, troubled diffidence came and
went. “Half a day there, half a day back again,” he said.

She recognized that this was as near as this feral, unhappy man could
come to asking a permission. “I’d like to understand,” she said.

“If you don’t, I’m going to kill you,” he blurted. He turned to the west
and strode off, not looking back.

Jubilith watched him go, and suddenly there was a sparkle in her wide
eyes. She slipped out of her sandals, caught them up in her hand, and
ran lightly and silently after him. He planted his feet strongly, like
the sure, powerful teeth of the mill-wheel gears, and he would not look
back. She sensed how immensely important it was to him not to look back.
She knew that right-handed men look back over their left shoulders, so
she drifted along close to him, a little behind him, a little to his
right. How long, how long, until he looked to see if she was coming?

Up and up the slope, to its crest, over … down … ah! Just here, just at
the last second where he could turn and look without stopping and still
catch a glimpse of the tower’s base, where they had stood. So he turned,
and she passed around him like a windblown feather, unseen.

And he stopped, looking back, craning. His shoulders slumped, and slowly
he turned to his path again—and there was Jubilith before him.

She laughed.

His jaw dropped, and then his lips came together in a thin, angry seal.
For a moment he stared at her; and suddenly, quite against his will,
there burst from him a single harsh bark of laughter. She put out her
hand and he came to her, took it, and they went their way together.

They came to a village when it was very late and very dark, and Osser
circled it. They came to another, and Jubilith thought he would do the
same, for he turned south; but when they came abreast of it, he struck
north again.

“We’ll be seen,” he explained gruffly, “but we’ll be seen coming from
the south and leaving northward.”

She would not ask where he was taking her, or why he was making these
elaborate arrangements, but already she had an idea. What lay to the
west was—not forbidden, exactly, but, say discouraged. It was felt that
there was nothing in that country that could be of value. Anyone
traveling that way would surely be remembered.

So through the village they went, and they dined quickly at an inn, and
went northward, and once in the darkness, veered west again. In a wood
so dark that she had taken his hand again, he stopped and built a fire.
He threw down springy boughs and a thick heap of ferns, and this was her
bed. He slept sitting up, his back to a tree trunk, with Jubilith
between him and the fire.

Jubilith awoke twice during the long night, once to see him with his
eyes closed, but feeling that he was not asleep; and once to see him
with his eyes open and the dying flames flickering in the pupils, and
she thought then that he was asleep, or at least not with her, but lost
in the pictures the flames painted.

In the morning they moved on, gathering berries for breakfast, washing
in a humorous brook. And during this whole journey, nothing passed
between them but the small necessary phrases: “You go first here.” “Look
out—it drops.” “Tired yet?”

For there was that about Jubilith which made explanations unnecessary.
Though she did not know where they were going, or why, she understood
what must be done to get them there within the framework of his desire:
to go immediately, as quickly as possible, undetected by anyone else.

She did only what she could to help and did not plague him with
questions which would certainly be answered in good time. So: “Here are
berries.” “Look, a red bird!” “Can we get through there, or shall we go
around?” And nothing more.

They did well, the weather was fine, and by mid-morning they had reached
the tumbled country of the Crooked Hills. Jubilith had seen them from
afar—great broken mounds and masses against the western sky—but no one
ever went there, and she knew nothing about them.

They were in open land now, and Jubilith regretted leaving the color and
aliveness of the forest. The grasses here were strange, like yet unlike
those near her village. They were taller, sickly, and some had odd ugly
flowers. There were bald places, scored with ancient rain-gullies, as if
some mighty hand had dashed acid against the soil. There were few
insects and no animals that she could see, and no birds sang. It was a
place of great sadness rather than terror; there was little to fear, but
much to grieve for.

By noon, they faced a huge curved ridge, covered with broken stones. It
looked as if the land itself had reared up and pressed back from a
hidden something on the other side—something which it would not touch.
Osser quickened their pace as they began to climb, although the going
was hard. Jubilith realized that they were near the end of their
journey, and uncomplainingly struggled along at the cruel pace he set.

At the top, they paused, giving their first attention to their wind, and
gradually to the scene before them.

The ridge on which they stood was nearly circular, and perhaps a mile
and a half in diameter. In its center was a small round lake with
unnaturally bare shores. Mounds of rubble sloped down toward it on all
sides, and farther back was broken stone.

But it was the next zone which caught and held the eye. The weed-grown
wreckage there was beyond description. Great twisted webs and ribs of
gleaming metal wove in and out of the slumped heaps of soil and masonry.
Nearby, a half-acre of laminated stone stood on the edge like a dinner
plate in a clay bank. What could have been a building taller than any
Jubilith had ever heard about lay on its side, smashed and bulging.

Gradually she began to realize the peculiarity of this place—All the
larger wreckage lay in lines directly to and from the lake in a
monstrous radiation of ruin.

“What is this place?” she asked at last.

“Don’t know,” he grunted, and went over the edge to slip down the steep
slope. When she caught up with him near the bottom, he said, “There’s
miles of this, west and north of here, much bigger. But this is the one
we came to see. Come.”

He looked to right and left as if to get his bearings, then plunged into
the tough and scrubby underbrush that vainly tried to cover those
tortured metal bones. She followed as closely as she could, beating at
the branches which he carelessly let whip back.

Just in front of her, he turned the corner of a sharp block of stone,
and when she turned it no more than a second later, he was gone.

She stopped, turned, turned again. Dust, weeds, lonely and sorrowful
ruins. No Osser. She shrank back against the stone, her eyes wide.

The bushes nearby trembled, then lashed. Osser’s head emerged. “What’s
the matter? Come on!” he said gruffly.

She checked an impulse to cry out and run to him, and came silently
forward. Osser held the bushes briefly, and beside him she saw a black
hole with broken steps leading downward.

She hesitated, but he moved his head impatiently, and she passed him and
led the way downward. When he followed, his wide flat body blocked out
the light. The darkness was so heavy, her eyes ached.

He prodded her in the small of the back. “Go on, go on!”

The foot of the steps came sooner than she expected and her knees
buckled as she took the downward step that was not there. She tripped,
almost fell, then somehow got to the side wall and braced herself there,
trembling.

“Wait,” he said, and the irrepressible smile quirked the corners of her
mouth. As if she would go anywhere!

She heard him fumbling about somewhere, and then there was a sudden
aching blaze of light that made her cry out and clap her hands over her
face.

“Look,” he said. “I want you to look at this. Hold it.”

Into her hands he pressed a cylinder about half the length of her
forearm. At one end was a lens from which the blue-white light was
streaming.

“See this little thing here,” he said, and touched a stud at the side of
the cylinder. The light disappeared, came on again.

She laughed delightedly, took the cylinder and played its light around,
switching it on and off. “It’s wonderful!” she cried. “Oh, wonderful!”

“You take this one,” he said, pleased. He handed her another torch and
took the first from her. “It isn’t as good, but it will help. I’ll go
first.”

She took the second torch and tried it. It worked the same way, but the
light was orange and feeble. Osser strode ahead down a slanting
passageway. At first there was a great deal of rubble underfoot, but
soon the way was clear as they went farther and deeper. Osser walked
with confidence, and she knew he had been here before, probably many
times.

“Here,” he said, stopping to wait for her. His voice echoed strangely,
vibrant with controlled excitement.

He turned his torch ahead, swept it back and forth.

They were at the entrance to a room. It was three times the height of a
man, and as big as their village green. She stared around, awed.

“Come,” Osser said again, and went to the far corner.

A massive, box-like object stood there. One panel, about eye-level, was
of a milky smooth substance, the rest of black metal. Projecting from
the floor in front of it was a lever. Osser grasped it confidently and
pulled. It yielded sluggishly, and returned to its original position.
Osser tugged again. There was a low growling sound from the box. Osser
pulled, released, pulled, released, each time a little faster. The sound
rose in pitch, higher and higher.

“Turn off your light,” he said.

She did so and blackness snapped in around them. As the dazzle faded
from her eyes, she detected a flicker of silver light before her, and
realized that it came from the milky pane in the box. As Osser pulled at
the lever and the whine rose and rose in pitch, the square got bright
enough for her to see her hands when she looked down at them.

And then—the pictures.

Jubilith had never seen pictures like these. They moved, for one thing;
for another, they had no color. Everything in them was black and white
and shades of gray. Yet everything they showed seemed very real.

Not at first, for there was flickering and stopped motion, and then slow
motion as Osser’s lever moved faster and faster. But at last the picture
steadied, and Osser kept the lever going at the same speed, flicking it
with apparent ease about twice a second, while the whine inside the box
settled to a steady, soft moan.

The picture showed a ball spinning against a black, light-flecked
curtain. It rushed close until it filled the screen, and still closer,
and Jubilith suddenly had the feeling that she was falling at tremendous
velocity from an unthinkable height. Down and down the scene went, until
at last the surface began to take on the qualities of a bird’s-eye view.
She saw a river and lakes, and a great range of hills—

And, at last, the city.

It was a city beyond fantasy, greater and more elaborate than
imagination could cope with. Its towers stretched skyward to pierce the
clouds themselves—some actually did. It had wide ramps on which traffic
crawled, great bridges across the river, parks over which the buildings
hung like mighty cliffs. Closer still the silver eye came to the scene,
and she realized that the traffic was not crawling, but moving faster
than a bird, faster than the wind. The vehicles were low and sleek and
efficient.

And on the walks were people, and the scene wheeled and slowed and
showed them. They were elaborately clothed and well-fed; they were
hurried and orderly at the same time. There was a square in which
perhaps a thousand of them, all dressed alike, were drawn up in lines as
straight as stretched string. Even as she watched, they all began to
move together, a thousand left legs coming forward, a thousand right
arms swinging back.

Higher, then, and more of the city—more and more of it, until the sense
of wonder filled her lungs and she hardly breathed; and still more of
it, miles of it. And at last a great open space with what looked like
sections of road crossing on it—but such unthinkable roads! Each was as
wide as her whole village and miles long. And on these roads, great
birdlike machines tilted down and touched and rolled, and swung and ran
and took the air, dozens of them every minute. The scene swept close
again, and it was as if she were in such a machine herself; but it did
not land. It raced past the huge busy crossroads and out to a coastline.

And there were ships, ships as long as the tallest buildings were high,
and clusters, dozens, hundreds of other vessels working and smoking and
milling about in the gray water. Huge machines crouched over ships and
lifted out cargoes; small, agile machines scurried about the docks and
warehouses.

Then at last the scene dwindled as the magic eye rose higher and higher,
faster and faster. Details disappeared, and clouds raced past and
downward, and at last the scene was a disc and then a ball floating in
starlit space.

Osser let the lever go and it snapped back to its original position.

The moan descended quickly in pitch, and the motion on the screen
slowed, flickered, faded and went out.

Jubilith let the darkness come. Her mind spun and shook with the impact
of what she had seen. Slowly she recovered herself. She became conscious
of Osser’s hard breathing. She turned on her dim orange torch and looked
at him. He was watching her.

“What was it?” she breathed.

“What I came to show you.”

She thought hard. She thought about his tower, about his refusal to let
her work on it, about his cruelty to those who had. She looked at him,
at the blank screen. And this was to supply the reason.

She shook her head.

He lowered himself slowly and squatted like an animal, hunched up tight,
his knees in his armpits. This lifted and crooked his heavy arms. He
rested their knuckles on the floor. He glowered at her and said nothing.
He was waiting.

On the way here, he had said, “I’ll kill you if you don’t understand.”
But he wouldn’t really, would he? Would he?

If he had towered over her, ranted and shouted, she would not have been
afraid. But squatting there, waiting, silent, with his great arms bowed
out like that, he was like some patient, preying beast.

She turned off the light to blot out the sight of him, and immediately
became speechless with terror at the idea of his sitting there in the
dark so close, waiting. She might run; she was so swift … but no;
crouched like that, he could spring and catch her before she could tense
a muscle.

Again she looked at the dead screen. “Will you … tell me something?” she
quavered.

“I might.”

“Tell me, then: When you first saw that picture, did you understand? The
very first time?”

His expression did not change. But slowly he relaxed. He rocked
sidewise, sat down, extended his legs. He was man again, not monster.
She shuddered, then controlled it.

He said, “It took me a long time and many visits. I should not have
asked you to understand at once.”

She again accepted the timid half-step toward an apology, and was
grateful.

He said, “Those were men and women just like us. Did you see that? Just
like us.”

“Their clothes—”

“Just like us,” he insisted. “Of course they dressed differently, lived
differently! In a world like that, why not? Ah, how they built, how they
built!”

“Yes,” she whispered. Those towers, the shining, swift vehicles, the
thousand who moved like one … “Who were they?” she asked him.

“Don’t you know? Think—think!”

“Osser, I want to understand. I truly want to!”

She hunted frantically for the right thing to say, the right way to
catch at this elusive thing which was so frighteningly important to him.
All her life she had had the answers to the questions she wanted to
understand. All she had ever had to do was to close her eyes and think
of the problem, and the answers soon came.

But not this problem.

“Osser,” she pleaded, “where is it, the city, the great complicated
city?”

“Say, ‘Where was it?’ ” he growled.

She caught his thought and gasped. “This? These ruins, Osser?”

“Ah,” he said approvingly. “It comes slowly, doesn’t it? No, Juby. Not
here. What was here was an outpost, a village, compared with the big
city. North and west, I told you, didn’t I? Miles of it. So big
that … so big—” He extended his arms, dropped them helplessly. Suddenly
he leaned close to her, began to talk fast, feverishly. “Juby, that
city—that world—was built by _people_. Why did they build and why do we
not? What is the difference between those people and ours?”

“They must have had …”

“They had nothing we don’t have. They’re the same kind of people; they
_used_ something we haven’t been using. Juby, I’ve got that something. I
can build. I can make others build.”

A mental picture of the tower glimmered before her. “You built it with
hate,” she said wonderingly. “Is that what they had—cruelty, brutality,
hatred?”

“Yes!”

“I don’t believe it! I don’t believe anyone could live with that much
hate!”

“Perhaps not. Perhaps they didn’t. But they _built_ with it. They built
because some men could flog others into building for them, building
higher and faster than all the good neighbors would ever do helping one
another.”

“They’d hate the man who made them build like that.”

Osser’s hands crackled as he pressed them together. He laughed, and the
echoes took everything that was unpleasant about that laughter and
filled the far reaches of the dark room with it.

“They’d hate him,” he agreed. “But he’s strong, you see. He was strong
in the first place, to make them build, and he’s stronger afterward with
what they built for him. Do you know the only way they can express their
hatred, once they find he’s too strong for them?”

Jubilith shook her head.

“They’d build,” he chuckled. “They’d build higher and faster than he
did. They would find the strongest man among them and _ask_ him to flog
them into it. That’s the way a great city goes up. A strong man builds,
and strong men follow, and soon the man who’s strongest of all makes all
the other strong ones do his work. Do you see?”

“And the … the others, the weak?”

“What of them?” he asked scornfully. “There are more of them than strong
ones—so there are more hands to do the strong man’s work. And why
shouldn’t they? Don’t they get the city to live in when it’s built?
Don’t they ride about in swift shining carriers and fly through the air
in the bird machines?”

“Would they be—happy?” she asked.

He looked at her in genuine puzzlement. “Happy?” He smashed a heavy fist
into his palm. “They’d have a _city_!” Again the words tumbled from him.
“How do you live, you and the rest of the village? What do you do when
you want a—well, a garden, food from the ground?”

“I dig up the soil,” she said. “I plant and water and weed.”

“Suppose you want a plow?”

“I make one. Or I do work for someone who has one.”

“Uh,” he grunted. “And there you are, hundreds of you in the village,
each one planting a little, smithing a little, thatching and cutting and
building a little. Everyone does everything except for how many—four,
five?—the leatherworker, old Griak who makes wooden pegs for house
beams, one or two others.”

“They like to do just one work. But anyone can do any of the work. Those
few, we take care of. Someone has to keep the skills alive.”

He snorted. “Put a strong man in the village and give him strong men to
do what he wants. Get ten villagers at once and make them all plant at
once. You’ll have food then for fifty, not ten!”

“But it would go to waste!”

“It would not, because it would all belong to the head man. He would
give it away as he saw fit—a lot to those who obeyed him, nothing to
those who didn’t. What was left over he could keep for himself, and
barter it out to keep building. Soon he would have the biggest house and
the best animals and the finest women, and the more he got, the stronger
he would be. And a city would grow_—a city!_ And the strong man would
give everyone better things if they worked hard, and protect them.”

“Protect them? Against what?”

“Against the other strong ones. There would be others.”

“And you—”

“I shall be the strongest of all,” he said proudly. He waved at the box.
“We were a great people once. We’re ants now—less than ants, for at
least the ants work together for a common purpose. I’ll make us great
again.” His head sank onto his hand and he looked somberly into the
shadows. “Something happened to this world. Something smashed the cities
and the people and drove them down to what they are today. Something was
broken within them, and they no longer dared to be great. Well, they
will be. I have the extra something that was smashed out of them.”

“What smashed them, Osser?”

“Who can know? I don’t. I don’t care, either.” He tapped her with a long
forefinger to emphasize. “All I care about is this: They were smashed
because they were not strong enough. I shall be so strong I can’t be
smashed.”

She said, “A stomach can hold only so much. A man asleep takes just so
much space. So much and no more clothing makes one comfortable. Why do
you want more than these things, Osser?”

She knew he was annoyed, and knew, too, that he was considering the
question as honestly as he could.

“It’s because I … I want to be strong,” he said in a strained voice.

“You _are_ strong.”

“Who knows that?” he raged, and the echoes giggled and whispered.

“I do. Wrenn. Sussten. The whole village.”

“The whole world will know. They will all do things for me.”

She thought, but everyone does everything for himself, all over the
world. Except, she added, those who aren’t able …

With that in mind, she looked at him, his oaken shoulders, his powerful,
bitter mouth. She touched the bruises his hands had left and the
beginnings of the understanding she had been groping for left her
completely.

She said dully, “Your tower … you’d better get back there.”

“Work goes on,” he said, smiling tightly, “whether I’m there or not, as
long as they don’t know my plans. They are afraid. But—yes, we can go
now.”

Rising, he flicked the stud of his torch. It flared blue-white, faded to
the weak orange of Jubilith’s, then died.

“The light …”

“It’s all right,” said Jubilith. “I have mine.”

“When they get like that, so dim, you can’t tell when they’ll go out.
Come—hurry! This place is full of corridors; without light, we could be
lost here for days.”

She glanced around at the crowding shadows. “Make it work again,” she
suggested.

He looked at the dead torch in his hand. “You,” he said flatly. He
tossed it. She caught it in her free hand, put her torch on the floor,
and held the broken one down so she could see it in the waning orange
glow. She turned it over twice, her sensitive hands feeling with every
part rather than with fingertips alone. She held it still and closed her
eyes; and then it came to her, and she grasped one end with her right
hand and the other with her left and twisted.

There was a faint click and the outer shell of the torch separated. She
drew off the butt end of it; it was just a hollow shell. The entire
mechanism was attached to the lens end and was now exposed.

She turned it over carefully, keeping her fingers away from the
workings. Again she closed her eyes and thought, and at last she bent
close and peered. She nodded, fumbled in her hair, and detached a copper
clasp. She bent and broke off a narrow strip of it and inserted it
carefully into the light mechanism. Very carefully, she pried apart two
small strands of wire, dipped a little deeper, hooked onto a tiny white
sphere, and drew it out.

“Poor thing,” she murmured under her breath.

“Poor what?”

“Spider’s egg,” she said ruefully. “They fight so to save them; and this
one will never hatch out now. It’s been burned.”

She picked up the butt-end housing, slipped the two parts together, and
twisted them until they clicked. She handed the torch to Osser.

“You’ve wasted time,” he complained, surly.

“No, I haven’t,” she said. “We’ll have light now.”

He touched the stud on the torch. The brilliant, comforting white light
poured from it.

“Yes,” he admitted quietly.

Watching his face as he handled the torch, she knew that if she could
read what was in his mind in that second, she would have the answer to
everything about him. She could not, however, and he said nothing, but
led the way across the room to the dark corridor.

He was silent all the way back to the broken steps.

They stood halfway up, letting their eyes adjust to the daylight which
poured down on them, and he said, “You didn’t even try the torch to see
if it would work, after you took out that egg.”

“I knew it would work.” She looked at him, amazed. “You’re angry.”

“Yes,” he said.

He took her torch and his and put them away in a niche in the ruined
stairwell, and they climbed up into the noon light. It was all but
intolerable, as the two suns were all but in syzygy, the blue-white
midget shining through the great pale gaseous mass of the giant, so that
together they cast only a single shadow.

“It will be hot this afternoon,” she said, but he was silent, steeped in
some bitterness of his own, so she followed him quietly without
attempting conversation.

Old Oyva stirred sleepily in her basking chair, and suddenly sat
upright.

Jubilith approached her, pale and straight. “Is it Oyva?”

“It is, Jubilith,” said the old woman. “I knew you would be back, my
dear. I’m sore in my heart with you.”

“Is he here?”

“He is. He has been on a journey. You’ll find him tired.”

“He should have been here, with all that has happened,” said Jubilith.

“He should have done exactly as he has done,” Oyva stated bluntly.

Jubilith recognized the enormity of her rudeness, and the taste of it
was bad in her mouth. One did not criticize Wrenn’s comings and goings.

She faced Oyva and closed her eyes humbly.

Oyva touched her. “It’s all right, child. You are distressed. Wrenn!”
she called. “She is here!”

“Come, Jubilith,” Wrenn’s voice called from the house.

“He knows? _No_ one knew I was coming here!”

“He knows,” said Oyva. “Go to him, child.”

Jubilith entered the house. Wrenn sat in his corner. The musical
instrument was nowhere in sight. Aside from his cushions, there was
nothing in the room.

Wrenn gave her his wise, sweet smile. “Jubilith,” he said. “Come close.”
He looked drawn and pale, but quite untroubled. He put a cushion by him
and she crossed slowly and sank down on it.

He was quiet, and when she was sure it was because he waited for her to
speak, she said, “Some things may not be understood.”

“True,” he agreed.

She kneaded her hands. “Is there never a change?”

“Always,” he said, “when it’s time.”

“Osser—”

“Everyone will understand Osser very soon now.”

She screwed up her courage. “Soon is not soon enough. I must know him
now.”

“Before anyone else?” he inquired mildly.

“Let everyone know now,” she suggested.

He shook his head and there was no appeal in it.

“Then let me. I shall be a part of you and speak of it only to you.”

“Why must you understand?”

She shuddered. It was not cold, or fear, but simply the surgings of a
great emotion.

“I love him,” she said. “And to love is to guard and protect. He needs
me.”

“Go to him then.” But she sat where she was, her long eyes cast down,
weeping. Wrenn said, “There is more, then?”

“I love …” She threw out an arm in a gesture which enfolded Wrenn, the
house, the village. “I love the people, too, the gardens, the little
houses; the way we go and come, and sing, and make music, and make our
own tools and clothes. To love is to guard and protect … and I love
these things, and I love Osser. I can destroy Osser, because he would
not expect it of me; and, if I did, I would protect all of you. But if I
protect him, he will destroy you. There is no answer to such a problem,
Wrenn; it is a road,” she cried, “with a precipice at each end, and no
standing still!”

“And understanding him would be an answer?”

“There’s no other!” She turned her face up to him, imploring. “Osser is
strong, Wrenn, with a—new thing about him, a thing none of the rest of
us have. He has told me of it. It is a thing that can change us, make us
part of him. He will build cities with our hands, on our broken bodies
if we resist him. He wants us to be a great people again—he says we
were, once, and have lost it all.”

“And do you regard that as greatness, Jubilith—the towers, the
bird-machines?”

“How did you know of them?… Greatness? I don’t know, I don’t know,” she
said, and wept. “I love him, and he wants to build a city with a wanting
greater than anything I have ever known or heard of before. Could he do
it, Wrenn? Could he?”

“He might,” said Wrenn calmly.

“He is in the village now. He has about him the ones who built his tower
for him. They cringe around him, hating to be near and afraid to leave.
He sent them one by one to tell all the people to come out to the
foothills tomorrow, to begin work on his city. He wants enough building
done in one hundred days to shelter everyone, because then, he says, he
is going to burn this village to the ground. Why, Wrenn—why?”

“Perhaps,” said Wrenn, “so that we may all face his strength and yield
to it. A man who could move a whole village in a hundred days just to
show his strength would be a strong man indeed.”

“What shall we do?”

“I think we shall go out to the foothills in the morning and begin to
build.”

She rose and went to the door.

“I know what to do now,” she whispered. “I won’t try to understand any
more. I shall just go and help him.”

“Yes, go,” said Wrenn. “He will need you.”

Jubilith stood with Osser on the parapet, and with him stared into the
dappled dawn. The whole sky flamed with the loom of the red sun’s light,
but the white one preceded it up the sky, laying sharp shadows in the
soft blunt ones. Birds called and chattered in the Sky-tree Grove, and
deep in the thickets the seven-foot bats grunted as they settled in to
sleep.

“Suppose they don’t come?” she asked.

“They’ll come,” he said grimly. “Jubilith, why are you here?”

She said, “I don’t know what you are doing, Osser. I don’t know whether
it’s right or whether you will keep on succeeding. I do know there will
be pain and difficulty and I—I came to keep you safe, if I could … I
love you.”

He looked down at her, as thick and dark over her as his tower was over
the foothills. One side of his mouth twitched.

“Little butterfly,” he said softly, “do you think _you_ can guard _me_?”

Everything beautiful about her poured out to him through her beautiful
face, and for a moment his world had three suns instead of two. He put
his arms around her. Then his great voice exploded with two syllables of
a mighty laugh. He lifted her and swung her behind him, and leaped to
the parapet.

Deeply shaken, she came to follow his gaze.

The red sun’s foggy limb was above the townward horizon, and silhouetted
against it came the van of a procession. On they came and on, the young
men of the village, the fathers. Women were with them, too, and
everything on wheels that the village possessed—flatbed wagons,
two-wheeled rickshaw carts, children’s and vendors’ and pleasure
vehicles. A snorting team of four tiger-oxen clawed along before a
heavily laden stone-boat, and men shared packs that swung in the center
of long poles.

Osser curled his lip. “You see them,” he said, as if to himself, “doing
the only thing they can think of. Push them, they yield. The clods!” he
spat. “Well, one day, one will push back. And when he does, I’ll break
him, and after that I’ll use him. Meantime—I have a thousand hands and a
single mind. We’ll see building now,” he crooned. “When they’ve built,
they’ll know what they don’t know now—that they’re men.”

“They’ve all come,” breathed Jubilith. “All of them. Osser—”

“Be quiet,” he said, leaning into the wind to watch, gloating. With the
feel of his hard hands still on her back, she discovered with a crushing
impact that there was no room in his heart for her when he thought of
his building. And she knew that there never would be, except perhaps for
a stolen moment, a touch in passing. With the pain of that realization
came the certainty that she would stay with him always, even for so
little.

The procession dipped out of sight, then slowly rose over and down the
near hill and approached the tower. It spread and thickened at the foot
of the slope, as men cast about, testing the ground with their picks,
eying the land for its color and vegetation and drainage … or was that
what they were doing?

Osser leaned his elbows on the parapet and shook his head pityingly at
their inefficiency. Look at the way they went about laying out houses!
And their own houses. Well, he’d let them mill about until they were
completely confused, and then he’d go down and make them do it his way.
Confused men are soft men; men working against their inner selves are
easy to divert from outside.

Beside him, Jubilith gasped.

“What is it?”

She pointed. “There—sending the men to this side, that side. See, by the
stone-boat? It’s Wrenn!”

“Nonsense!” said Osser. “He’d never leave his house. Not to walk around
among people who are sweating. He deals only with people who tell him
he’s right before he speaks.”

“It’s Wrenn, it is, it is!” cried Jubilith. She clutched his arm.
“Osser, I’m afraid!”

“Afraid? Afraid of what?… By the dying Red One, it _is_ Wrenn, telling
men what to do as if this was _his_ city.” He laughed. “There are few
enough here who are strong, Juby, but he’s the strongest there is. And
look at him scurry around for me!”

“I’m afraid,” Jubilith whimpered.

“They jump when he tells them,” said Osser reflectively, shading his
eyes. “Perhaps I was wrong to let them tire themselves out before I help
them do things right. With a man like him to push them … Hm. I think
we’ll get it done right the first time.”

He pushed himself away from the parapet and swung to the stairway.

“Osser, don’t, please don’t!” she begged.

He stopped just long enough to give her a glance like a stone thrown.
“You’ll never change my mind, Juby, and you’ll be hurt if you try too
often.” He dropped into the opening, went down three steps, five steps …

He grunted, stopped.

Jubilith came slowly over to the stairwell. Osser stood on the sixth
step, on tiptoe. Impossibly on tiptoe: the points of his sandals barely
touched the step at all.

He set his jaw and placed his massive hands one on each side of the
curved wall. He pressed them out and up, forcing himself downward. His
sandals touched more firmly; his toes bent, his heels made contact. His
face became deep red, and the cords at the sides of his neck ridged like
a weathered fallow-field.

A strained crackle came from his shoulders, and then the pent breath
burst from him. His hands slipped, and he came up again just the height
of the single stair-riser, to bob ludicrously like a boat at anchor, his
pointed toe touching and lifting from the sixth step.

He gave an inarticulate roar, bent double, and plunged his hands
downward as if to dive head-first down the stairs. His wrists turned
under and he yelped with the pain. More cautiously he felt around and
down, from wall to wall. It was as if the air in the stairway had
solidified, become at once viscous and resilient. Whatever was there was
invisible and completely impassable.

He backed slowly up the steps. On his face there was fury and
frustration, hurt and a shaking reaction.

Jubilith wrung her hands. “Please, please, Osser, be care—”

The sound of her voice gave him something to strike out at, and he spun
about, raising his great bludgeon of a fist. Jubilith stood frozen, too
shocked to dodge the blow.

“_Osser_!”

Osser stopped, tensed high, fist up, like some terrifying monument to
vengeance. The voice had been Wrenn’s—Wrenn speaking quietly, even
conversationally, but magnified beyond belief. The echoes of it rolled
off and were lost in the hills.

“_Come watch men building, Osser_!”

Dazed, Osser lowered his arm and went to the parapet.

Far below, near the base of the hill, Wrenn stood, looking up at the
tower. When Osser appeared, Wrenn turned his back and signaled the men
by the stone-boat. They twitched away the tarpaulin that covered its
load.

Osser’s hands gripped the stone as if they would powder it. His eyes
slowly widened and his jaw slowly dropped.

At first it seemed like a mound of silver on the rude platform of the
ox-drawn stone-boat. Gradually he perceived that it was a machine, a
machine so finished, so clean-lined and so businesslike that the
pictures he had shown Jubilith were clumsy toys in comparison.

It was Sussten, a man Osser had crushed to the ground with two heavy
blows, who sprang lightly up on the machine and settled into it. It
backed off the platform, and Osser could hear the faintest of whines
from it. The machine rolled and yet it stepped; it kept itself
horizon-level as it ran, its long endless treads dipping and rising with
the terrain, its sleek body moving smooth as a swan. It stopped and then
went forward, out to the first of a field of stakes that a crew had been
driving.

The flat, gleaming sides of the machine opened away and forward and
locked, and became a single blade twice the width of the machine. It
dropped until its sharp lower edge just touched the ground, checked for
a moment, and then sank into the soil.

Dirt mounded up before it until flakes fell back over the wide
moldboard. The machine slid ahead, and dirt ran off the sides of the
blade to make two straight windrows. And behind the machine as it
labored, the ground was flat and smooth; and it was done as easily as a
smoothing hand in a sandbox. Here it was cut and there it was filled,
but everywhere the swath was like planed wood, all done just as fast as
a man can run.

Osser made a sick noise far back in his tight throat.

Guided by the stakes, the machine wheeled and returned, one end of the
blade now curved forward to catch up the windrow and carry it across the
new parallel cut. And now the planed soil was twice as wide.

As it worked, men worked, and Osser saw that, shockingly, they moved
with no less efficiency and certainty than the machine. For Osser, these
men had plodded and sweated, drudged, each a single, obstinate unit to
be flogged and pressed. But now they sprinted, sprang; they held, drove,
measured and carried as if to swift and intricate music.

A cart clattered up and from it men took metal spikes, as thick as a
leg, twice as tall as a man. Four men to a spike, they ran with them to
staked positions on the new-cut ground, set them upright. A man flung a
metal clamp around the spike. Two men, one on each side, drove down on
the clamp with heavy sledges until the spike would stand alone. And
already those four were back with another spike.

Twenty-six such spikes were set, but long before they were all out of
the wagon, Sussten spun the machine in its own length and stopped. The
moldboard rose, hinged, folded back to become the silver sides of the
machine again. Sussten drove forward, nosed the machine into the first
of the spikes, which fitted into a slot at the front of the machine.
There was the sound of a frantic giant ringing a metal triangle, and the
spike sank as if the ground had turned to bread.

Leaving perhaps two hand’s-breadths of the spike showing, the machine
slid to the next and the next, sinking the spikes so quickly that it had
almost a whole minute to wait while the spike crew set the very last
one. At that a sound rolled out of the crowd, a sound utterly unlike any
that had ever been heard during the building of the tower—a friendly,
jeering roar of laughter at the crew who had made the machine wait.

Men unrolled heavy cable along the lines of spikes; others followed
right behind them, one with a tool which stretched the cable taut, two
with a tool that in two swift motions connected the cable to the tops of
the sunken spikes. And by the time the cable was connected, two
flatbeds, a buckboard and a hay wagon had unloaded a cluster of
glistening machine parts. Men and women swarmed over them, wrenches,
pliers and special tools in hand, bolting, fitting, clamping,
connecting. Three heavy leads from the great ground cable were
connected; a great parabolic wire basket was raised and guyed.

Wrenn ran to the structure and pulled a lever. A high-pitched scream of
force dropped sickeningly in pitch to a jarring subsonic, and rose
immediately high out of the audible range.

A rosy haze enveloped the end of the new machine, opposite the ground
array and under the basket. It thickened, shimmered, and steadied, until
it was a stable glowing sphere with an off-focus muzziness barely
showing all around its profile.

The crowd—not a group now, but a line—cheered and the line moved
forward. Every conceivable village conveyance moved in single file
toward the shining sphere, and, as each stopped, heavy metal was
unloaded. Cast-iron stove legs could be recognized, and long strips of
tinning solder, a bell, a kettle, the framing of a bench. The
blacksmith’s anvil was there, and parts of his forge. Pots and skillets.
A ratchet and pawl from the gristmill. The weights and pendulum from the
big village clock.

As each scrap was unloaded, exactly the number of hands demanded by its
weight were waiting to catch it, swing it from its conveyance into the
strange sphere. They went in without resistance and without sound, and
they did not come out. Wagon after wagon, pack after handsack were
unloaded, and still the sphere took and took.

It took heavy metal of more mass than its own dimensions. Had the metal
been melted down into a sphere, it would have been a third again, half
again, twice as large as the sphere, and still it took.

But its color was changing. The orange went to burned sienna and then to
a strident brown. Imperceptibly this darkened until at last it was
black. For a moment, it was a black of impossible glossiness, but this
softened. Blacker and blacker it became, and at length it was not a good
thing to look into—the blackness seemed to be hungry for something more
intimate than metal. And still the metals came and the sphere took.

A great roar came from the crowd; men fell back to look upward. High in
the west was a glowing golden spark which showed a long blue tail. It
raced across the sky and was gone, and moments later the human roar was
answered by thunder from above.

If the work had been swift before, it now became a blur. Men no longer
waited for the line of wagons to move, but ran back along it to snatch
metal and stagger forward again to the sphere. Women ripped off
bracelets and hammered earrings and threw them to the implacable
melanosphere. Men threw in their knives, even their buttons. A rain of
metal was sucked silently into the dazzling black.

Another cry from the crowd, and now there was hurried anguish in it;
again the craning necks, the quick gasp. The golden spark was a
speed-blurred ovoid now, the blue tail a banner half a horizon long. The
roar, when it came, was a smashing thunder, and the blue band hung where
it was long after the thing had gone.

A moan of urgency, caught and maintained by one exhausted throat after
another, rose and fell and would not leave. Then it was a happy shout as
Sussten drove in, shouldering the beautiful cutting machine through the
scattering crowd. Its blade unfolded as it ran, latched high and stayed
there like a shining forearm flung across the machine’s silver face.

As the last scrambling people dove for safety, Sussten brought the huge
blade slashing downward and at the same time threw the machine into its
highest speed. It leaped forward as Sussten leaped back. Unmanned, it
rushed at the sphere as if to sweep it away, crash the structure that
contained it. But at the last microsecond, the blade struck the ground;
the nose of the machine snapped upward, and the whole gleaming thing
literally vaulted into the sphere.

No words exist for such a black. Some people fell to their knees, their
faces covered. Some turned blindly away, unsteady on their feet. Some
stood trembling, fixed on it, until friendly hands took and turned them
and coaxed them back to reality.

And at last a man staggered close, squinting, and threw in the heavy
wrought-iron support for an inn sign—

And the sphere refused it.

Such a cry of joy rose from the village that the sleeping bats in the
thickets of Sky-Tree Grove, two miles away, stirred and added their
porcine grunting to the noise.

A woman ran to Wrenn, screaming, elbowing, unnoticed and unheard in the
bedlam. She caught his shoulder roughly, spun him half around, pointed.
Pointed up at the tower, at Osser.

Wrenn thumbed a small disc out of a socket in his belt and held it near
his lips.

_“Osser!”_ The great voice rang and echoed, crushing the ecstatic noises
of the people by its sheer weight. _“Osser, come down or you’re a dead
man!”_

The people, suddenly silent, all stared at the tower. One or two cried,
“Yes, come down, come down …” but the puniness of their voices was
ludicrous after Wrenn’s magnified tones, and few tried again.

Osser stood holding the parapet, legs wide apart, eyes wide—too
wide—open. His hands curled over the edge, and blood dripped slowly from
under the cuticles.

_“Come down, come down …”_

He did not move. His eyeballs were nearly dry, and unnoticed saliva lay
in a drying streak from one corner of his mouth.

“_Jubilith, bring him down!”_

She was whimpering, begging, murmuring little urgencies to him. His
biceps were as hard as the parapet, his face as changeless as the stone.

“_Jubilith, leave him! Leave him and come!”_ Wrenn, wise Wrenn, sure,
unshakable, imperturbable Wrenn had a sob in his voice; and under such
amplification the sob was almost big enough to be voice for the sobs
that twisted through Jubilith’s tight throat.

She dropped to one knee and put one slim firm shoulder under Osser’s
wrist. She drove upward against it with all the lithe strength of her
panicked body. It came free, leaving a clot of fingertip on the stone.
Down she went again, and up again at the other wrist; but this was
suddenly flaccid, and her tremendous effort turned to a leap. She
clutched at Osser, who tottered forward.

For one endless second they hung there, while their mutual center of
gravity made a slow deliberation, and then Jubilith kicked frantically
at the parapet, abrading her legs, mingling her blood with his on the
masonry. They went together back to the roof. Jubilith twisted like a
falling cat and got her feet down, holding Osser’s great weight up.

They spun across the roof in an insane staggering dance; then there was
the stairway (with its invisible barrier gone) and darkness (with his
hand in hers now, holding and leading) and a sprint into daylight and
the shattering roar of Wrenn’s giant voice_: “Everybody down, down
flat!_”

And there was a time of running, pulling Osser after her, and Osser
pounding along behind her, docile and wide-eyed as a cat-ox. And then
the rebellion and failure of her legs, and the will that refused to let
them fail, and the failure of that will; the stunning agony of a cracked
patella as she went down on the rocks, and the swift sense of infinite
loss as Osser’s hand pulled free of hers and he went lumbering blindly
along, the only man on his feet in the wide meadow of the fallen.

Jubilith screamed and someone stood up—she thought it was old Oyva—and
cried out.

Then the mighty voice again, “_Osser! Down, man_!” Blearily, then, she
saw Osser stagger to a halt and peer around him.

“_Osser, lie down_!”

And then Osser, mad, drooling, turning toward her. His eyes protruded
and he slashed about with his heavy fists. He came closer, unseeing,
battling some horror he believed in with great cuts and slashes that
threatened elbow and shoulder joints by the wrenching of their unimpeded
force.

His voice—but not his, rather the voice of an old, wretched
crone—squeaking out in a shrill falsetto, “Not down, never down, but up.
I’ll build, build, build, break to build, kill to build, and all the
ones who can do everything, anything, everything, they will build
everything for me. I’m strong!” he shrieked, soprano. “All the people
who can do anything are less than one strong man …”

He jabbered and fought, and suddenly Wrenn rose, quite close by, his
left hand enclosed in a round flat box. He moved something on its
surface and then waved it at Osser, in a gesture precisely like the
command to a guest to be seated.

Down went Osser, close to Jubilith, with his face in the dirt and his
eyes open, uncaring. On him and on Jubilith lay the invisible weight of
the force that had awaited him in the stairway.

The breath hissed out of Jubilith. Had she not been lying on her side
with her face turned skyward in a single convulsive effort toward air,
she would never have seen what happened. The golden shape appeared in
the west, seen a fraction of a second, but blazoned forever in tangled
memories of this day. And simultaneously the earth-shaking cough of the
machine as its sphere disappeared. She could not see it move, but such a
blackness is indelible, and she sensed it when it appeared in the high
distances as its trajectory and that of the golden flyer intersected.

Then there was—_Nothing_.

The broad blue trail swept from the western horizon to the zenith, and
sharply ended. There was no sound, no concussion, no blaze of light. The
sphere met the ship and both ceased to exist.

Then there was the wind, from nowhere, from everywhere, all the wind
that ever was, tearing in agony from everywhere in the world to the
place where the sphere had been, trying to fill the strange space that
had contained exactly as much matter as the dead golden ship. Wagons,
oxen, trees and stones scraped and flew and crashed together in the
center of that monstrous implosion.

The weight Wrenn had laid on Jubilith disappeared, but her sucking lungs
could find nothing to draw in. There was air aplenty, but none of it
would serve her.

Finally she realized that there was unconsciousness waiting for her if
she wanted it. She embraced it, sank into it, and left the world to its
wailing winds.

Ages later, there was weeping.

She stirred and raised her head.

The sphere machine was gone. There was a heap of something down there,
but it supported such a tall and heavy pillar of roiling dust that she
could not see what it was. There, and there, and over yonder, in twos
and threes, silent, shaken people sat up, some staring about them, some
just sitting, waiting for the shock-stopped currents of life to flow
back in.

But the weeping …

She put her palm on the ground and inched it, heel first, in a weak
series of little hops, until she was half sitting.

Osser was weeping.

He sat upright, his feet together and his knees wide apart, like a
little child. He rocked. He lifted his hands and let them fall, lifted
them and punctuated his crying with weak poundings on the ground. His
mouth was an O, his eyes were single squeezed lines, his face was wet,
and his crying was the most heartrending sound she had ever heard.

She thought to speak to him, but knew he would not hear. She thought to
go to him, but the first shift of weight sent such agony through her
broken kneecap that she almost fainted.

Osser wept.

She turned away from him—suppose, later, he should remember that she had
seen this?—and then she knew why he was crying. He was crying because
his tower was gone. Tower of strength, tower of defiance, tower of hope,
tower of rebellion and hatred and an ambition big enough for a whole
race of city-builders, gone without a fight, gone without the triumph of
taking him with it, gone in an instant, literally in a puff of wind.

“Where does it hurt?”

It was Wrenn, who had approached unseen through the blinding, sick
compassion that filled her.

“It hurts there.” She pointed briefly at Osser.

“I know,” said Wrenn gently. He checked what she was about to say with a
gesture. “No, we won’t stop him. When he was a little boy, he never
cried. He has been hurt more than most people, and nothing ever made him
cry, ever. We all have a cup for tears and a reservoir. No childhood is
finished until all the tears flow from the reservoir into the cup. Let
him cry; perhaps he is going to be a man. It’s your knee, isn’t it?”

“Yes. Oh, but I can’t stand to hear it, my heart will burst!” she cried.

“Hear him out,” said Wrenn softly, taking medication from a flat box at
his waist. He ran feather-fingers over her knee and nodded. “You have
taken Osser as your own. Keep this weeping with you, all of it. It will
fit you to him better through the healing time.”

“May I understand now?”

“Yes, oh yes … and since he has taught you about hate, you will hate me
for it.”

“I couldn’t hate you, Wrenn.”

Something stirred within his placid eyes—a smile, a pointed shard of
knowledge—she was not sure. “Perhaps you could.”

He kept his eyes on his careful bandaging, and as he worked, he spoke.

“Stop a man in his work to tell him that each of his fingers bears a
pattern of loops and whorls, and you waste his time. It is a thing he
knows, a thing he has seen for himself, a thing which can be checked on
the instant—in short, an obvious, unremarkable thing. Yet, if his
attention is not called to it, it is impossible to teach him that these
patterns are exclusive, original with him, unduplicated anywhere.
Sparing him the truism may cost him the fact.

“It is that kind of truism through which I shall pass to reach the
things you must understand. So be patient with me through the familiar
paths; I promise you a most remarkable turning.

“We are an ancient and resourceful species, and among the many things we
have—our happiness, our simplicity, our harmony with each other and with
ourselves—some are the products of intelligence, per se, but most of the
good things spring from a quality which we possess in greater degree
than any other species yet known. That is—logic.

“Now, there is the obvious logic: you may never have broken your knee
before, but you knew, in advance, that if you did it would cause you
pain. If I hold this pebble so, you may correctly predict that it will
drop when I release it, though you have never seen this stone before.
This obvious logic strikes deeper levels as well; for example, if I
release the stone and it does not fall, logic tells you not only that
some unpredicted force is now acting on it, but a great many things
about that force: that it equals gravity in the case of this particular
pebble; that it is in stasis; that it is phenomenal, since it is out of
the statistical order of things.

“The quality of logic, which we (so far as is known) uniquely possess,
is this: any of us can do literally anything that anyone else can do.
You need ask no one to solve the problems that you face every day,
providing they are problems common to all. To cut material so that a
sleeve will fit a shoulder, you pause, you close your eyes; the way to
cut the material then comes to you, and you proceed. You never need do
anything twice, because the first way is the most logical. You may
finish the garment and put it away without trying it on for fit, because
you know you have done it right and it is perfect.

“If I put you before a machine which you had never seen before, which
had a function unknown to you, and which operated on principles you had
never heard of, and if I told you it was broken and needed repairing,
you would look at it carefully, inside, outside, top and bottom, and you
would close your eyes, and suddenly you would understand the principles.
With these and the machine, function would explain itself. The step from
that point to the location of a faulty part is self-evident.

“Now I lay before you parts which are identical in appearance, and ask
you to install the correct one. Since you thoroughly understand the
requirements now, the specifications for the correct part are
self-evident. Logic dictates the correct tests for the parts. You will
rapidly reject the tight one, the heavy one, the too soft one, and the
too resilient one, and you will repair my machine. And you will walk
away without testing it, since you now know it will operate.”

Wrenn continued, “You—all of us—live in this way. We build no cities
because we don’t need cities. We stay in groups because some things need
more than two hands, more than one head, or voice, or mood. We eat
exactly what we require, we use only what we need.

“And that is the end of the truism, wherein I so meticulously describe
to you what you know about how you live. The turning: Whence this
familiar phenomenon, this closing of the eyes and mysterious appearance
of the answer? There have been many engrossing theories about it, but
the truth is the most fascinating of all.

“We have all spoken of telepathy, and many of us have experienced it. We
cannot explain it, as yet. But most of us insist on a limited
consideration of it; that is, we judge its success or failure by the
amount of detail sent and received. We expect _facts_ to be transmitted,
_words_, idea sequences—or perhaps pictures; the clearer the picture,
the better the telepathy.

“Perhaps one day we will learn to do this; it would be diverting. But
what we actually _do_ is infinitely more useful.

“You see, we _are_ telepathic, not in the way of conveying details, but
in the much more useful way of conveying _a manner of thinking_.

“Let us try to envisage a man who lacks this quality. Faced with your
broken machine, he would be utterly at a loss, unless he had been
specially trained in this particular field. Do not overlook the fact
that he lacks the conditioning of a whole life of the kind of sequence
thinking which is possible to us. He would probably bumble through the
whole chore in an interminable time, trying one thing and then another
and going forward from whatever seems to work. You can see the tragic
series of pitfalls possible for him in a situation in which an alternate
three or four or five consecutive steps are possible, forcing step six,
which is wrong in terms of the problem.

“Now, take the same man and train him in this one job. Add a talent, so
that he learns quickly and well. Add years of experience—terrible,
drudging thought!—to his skill. Face him with the repair problem and it
is obvious that he will repair it with a minimum of motion.

“Finally, take this skilled man and equip him with a device which
constantly sends out the habit-patterns of his thinking. Long practice
has made him efficient in the matter; in terms of machine function he
knows better than to question whether a part turns this way or that,
whether a rod or tube larger than x diameter is to be considered.
Furthermore, imagine a receiving device which absorbs these sendings
whenever the receiver is faced with an identical problem. The skilled
sender controls the unskilled receiver as long as the receiver is
engaged in the problem. Anything the receiver does which is counter to
the basic patterns of the sender is automatically rejected as illogical.

“And now I have described our species. We have an unmatchable unitary
existence. Each of us with a natural bent—the poets, the musicians, the
mechanics, the philosophers—each gives of his basic thinking method
every time anyone has an application for it. The expert is unaware of
being tapped—which is why it has taken hundreds of centuries to
recognize the method. Yet, in spite of what amounts to a veritable race
intellect, we are all very much individuals. Because each field has many
experts, and each of those experts has his individual approach, only
that which is closest both to the receiver _and_ his problem comes in.
The ones without special talents live fully and richly with all the
skills of the gifted. The creative ones share with others in their field
as soon as it occurs to any expert to review what he knows; the one step
forward then instantly presents itself.

“So much for the bulk of our kind. There remain a few specializing
_non_-specialists. When you are faced with a problem to which no logical
solution presents itself, you come to one of these few for help. The
reason no solution presents itself is that this is a new line of
thinking, or (which is very likely) the last expert in it has died. The
non-specialist hears your problem and applies simple logic to it.
Immediately, others of his kind do the same. But, since they come from
widely divergent backgrounds and use a vast variety of methods, one of
them is almost certain to find the logical solution. This is your
answer—and through you, it is available to anyone who ever faces this
particular problem.

“In exceptional cases, the non-specializing specialist encounters a
problem which, for good reason, is better left out of the racial
‘pool’—as, for example, a physical or psychological experiment within
the culture, of long duration, which general knowledge might alter. In
such cases, a highly specialized hypnotic technique is used on the
investigators, which has the effect of cloaking thought on this
particular matter.

“And if you began to fear that I was never coming to Osser’s unhappy
history, you must understand, my dear, I have just given it to you.
Osser was just such an experiment.

“It became desirable to study the probable habit patterns of a species
like us in every respect except for our unique attribute. The problem
was attacked from many angles, but I must confess that using a live
specimen was my idea.

“By deep hypnosis, the telepathic receptors in Osser were severed from
the rest of his mind. He was then allowed to grow up among us in real
and complete freedom.

“You saw the result. Since few people recognize the nature of this
unique talent, and even fewer regard it as worth discussion, this
strong, proud, highly intelligent boy grew up feeling a hopeless
inferior, and never knowing exactly why. Others did things, made things,
solved problems, as easily as thinking about them, while Osser had to
study and sweat and piece and try out. He had to assert his superiority
in some way. He did, but in as slipshod a fashion as he did everything
else.

“So he was led to the pictures you saw. He was permitted to make what
conclusions he wished—they were that we are a backward people, incapable
of building a city. He suddenly saw in the dreams of a mechanized,
star-reaching species a justification of himself. He could not
understand our lack of desire for possessions, not knowing that our
whole cultural existence is based on sharing—that it is not only
undesirable, but impossible for us to hoard an advanced idea, a new
comfort. He would master us through strength.

“He was just starting when you came to me about him. You could get no
key to his problem because we know nothing about sick minds, and there
was no expert you could tap. I couldn’t help you—you, of all
people—because you loved him, and because we dared not risk having him
know what he was, especially when he was just about to take action.

“Why he chose this particular site for his tower I do not know. And why
he chose the method of the tower I don’t know either, though I can
deduce an excellent reason. First, he had to use his strength once he
became convinced that in it lay his superiority. Second, he had to _try
out_ this build-with-hate idea—the bugaboo of all other man-species, the
trial-and-error, the inability to know what will work and what will not.

“And so we learned through Osser precisely what we had learned in other
approaches—that a man without our particular ability must not live among
us, for, if he does, he will destroy us.

“It is a small step from that to a conclusion about a whole race of them
coexisting with us. And now you know what happened here this afternoon.”

Jubilith raised her head slowly. “A whole ship full of … of what Osser
was?”

“Yes. We did the only thing we could. Quick, quite painless. We have
been watching them for a long time—years. We saw them start. We computed
their orbit—even to the deceleration spiral. We chose a spot to launch
our interceptor.” He glanced at Osser, who was almost quiet, quite
exhausted. “What sheer hell he must have gone through, to see us build
like that. How could he know that not one of us needed training,
explanation, or any but the simplest orders? How could he rationalize to
himself our possession of machines and devices surpassing the wildest
dreams of the godlike men he admired so? How could he understand that,
having such things, we use them only when we must, and that otherwise we
live in ways which will not violate the walking, working animal we are?”

She turned to him a mask so cold, so beautiful, he forgot for a moment
to breathe. “Why did you do it? You had other logics, other approaches.
Did you have to do _that_ to him?”

He studiously avoided a glance at Osser. “I said you might hate me,” he
murmured. “Jubilith, the men in that ship were so like Osser that the
experiment could not be passed by. We had astronomical data, historical,
cultural—as far as our observations could go—and ethnological. But only
by analogy could we get such a psychological study. And it checked too
well. As for having him see this thing, today … building, Jubilith, is
sometimes begun by tearing down.”

He looked at her with deep compassion. “This was not the site chosen for
the launching of the interceptor. We uprooted the whole installation,
brought it here, rebuilt it, just for Osser; just so that he could stand
on his tower and see it happen. He had to be broken, leveled to the
earth. Ah-h-h …” he breathed painfully, “Osser has earned what he will
have from now on.”

“He can be—well again?”

“With your help.”

“So very right, you are,” she snarled suddenly. “So sure that this or
that species is fit to associate with superiors like us.” She leaned
toward him and shook a finger in his startled face. The courtly awe
habitual to all when speaking to such as Wrenn had completely left her.

“So fine we are, so mighty. And didn’t we build cities? Didn’t we have
giant bird-machines and shiny carts on our streets? Didn’t we let our
cities be smashed—haven’t you seen the ruins in the west? Tell me,” she
sparked, “did we ruin them ourselves, because one superior city insisted
on proving its superiority over another superior city?”

She stopped abruptly to keep herself from growling like an animal, for
he was smiling blandly, and his smile got wider as she spoke. She turned
furiously, half away from him, cursing the broken knee that held her so
helpless.

“Jubilith.”

His voice was so warm, so kind and so startling in these surroundings,
held such a bubbling overtone of laughter that she couldn’t resist it.
She turned grudgingly.

In his hand he held a pebble. When her eye fell to it he rolled it, held
it between thumb and forefinger, and let it go.

It stayed motionless in mid-air. “Another factor, Jubilith.”

She almost smiled. She looked down at his other hand, and saw it aiming
the disc-shaped force-field projector at low power.

He lifted it and, with the field, tossed the pebble into the air and
batted it away. “We have no written history, Jubilith. We don’t need
one, but once in a while it would be useful.

“Jubilith, our culture is one of the oldest in the Galaxy. If we ever
had such cities, there are not even legends about it.”

“But I saw—”

“A ship came here once. We had never seen a humanoid race. We welcomed
them and helped them. We gave them land and seeds. Then they called a
flotilla, and the ships came by the hundreds.

“They built cities and, at that, we moved away and left them alone,
because we don’t _need_ cities. Then they began to hate us. They
couldn’t hate us until they had tall buildings to do it in. They hated
our quiet; they hated our understanding. They sent missionaries to
change our ways. We welcomed the missionaries, fed them and laughed with
them, but when they left us glittering tools and humble machines to
amuse us, we let them lie where they were until they rotted.

“In time they sent no more missionaries. They joked about us and forgot
us. And then they built a city on land we had not given them, and
another, and another. They bred well, and their cities became infernally
big. And finally they began to build that one city too many, and we
turned a river and drowned it. They were pleased. They could now rid
themselves of the backward natives.”

Jubilith closed her eyes, and saw the tumbled agony of the mounds,
radiating outward from a lake with its shores too bare. “All of them?”
she asked.

Wrenn nodded. “Even one might be enough to destroy us.” He nodded toward
Osser, who had begun to cry again.

“They seemed … good,” she said, reflectively. “Too fast, too big … and
it must have been noisy, but—”

“Wait,” he said. “You mean the people in the picture Osser showed you?”

“Of course. They were the city-builders you—we—destroyed, weren’t they?”

“They were not! The ones who built here were thin, hairy, with
backward-slanting faces and webs between their fingers. Beautiful, but
they hated us … The pictures, Jubilith, were made on the third planet of
a pale star out near the Rim; a world with one Moon; a world of humans
like Osser … the world where that golden ship came from.”

“How?” she gasped.

“If logic is good enough,” Wrenn said, “it need not be checked. Once we
were so treated by humanoids, we built the investigators. They are not
manned. They draw their power from anything that radiates, and they home
on any planet which could conceivably rear humans. They are, as far as
we know, indetectible. We’ve never lost one. They launch tiny flyers to
make close searches—one of them made the pictures you saw. The pictures
and other data are coded and sent out into space and, where distances
warrant it, other investigators catch the signal and add power and send
them on.

“Whenever a human or humanoid species builds a ship, we watch it. When
they send their ships to this sector, we watch their planet _and_ their
ship. Unless we are sure that those people have the ability we have, to
share all expertness and all creative thinking with all who want it—they
don’t land here. And no such species ever will land here.”

“You’re so sure.”

“We explore no planets, Jubilith. We like it here. If others like us
exist—why should they visit us?”

She thought about it, and slowly she nodded. “I like it here,” she
breathed.

Wrenn knelt and looked out across the rolling ground. It was late, and
most of the villagers had gone home. A few picked at the mound of
splinters at the implosion center. Their limbs were straight and their
faces clear. They owned little and they shared their souls.

He rose and went to Osser, and sat down beside him, facing him, his back
to Jubilith. “M-m-mum, mum, mum, mum, mum-mum-mum,” he intoned.

Osser blinked at him. Wrenn lifted his hand and his ring, green and gold
and a shimmering oval of purple, caught the late light. Osser looked at
the ring. He reached for it. Wrenn moved it slightly. Osser’s hand
passed it and hit the ground and lay there neglected. Osser gaped at the
ring, his jaws working, his teeth not meeting.

“Mum, mum, _mummy_, where’s your mummy, Osser?”

“In the house,” said Osser, looking at the ring.

Wrenn said, “You’re a good little boy. When we say the word, you won’t
be able to do anything but what _you_ can do. When we say the key,
you’ll be able to do anything _anybody_ can do.”

“All right,” Osser said.

“Before I give the word, tell me the key. You must remember the key.”

“That ring. And ‘last ’n’ lost.’ ”

“Good, Osser. Now listen to me. Can you hear me?”

“Sure.” He grabbed at the ring.

“I’m going to change the key. It isn’t ‘last ’n’ lost’ any more. ‘Last
’n’ lost’ is no good now. Forget it.”

“No good?”

“Forget it. What’s the key?”

“I—forgot.”

“The key,” said Wrenn patiently, “is this.” He leaned close and
whispered rapidly.

Jubilith was peering out past the implosion center to the townward path.
Someone was coming, a tiny figure.

“Jubilith,” Wrenn said. She looked up at him. “You must understand
something.” His voice was grave. His hair reached for an awed little
twist of wind, come miles to see this place. The wind escaped and ran
away down the hill.

Wrenn said, “He’s very happy now. He was a happy child when first I
heard of him, and how like a space-bound human he could be. Well, he’s
that child again. He always will be, until the day he dies. I’ll see
he’s cared for. He’ll chase the sunbeams, a velvet red one and a needle
of blue-white; he’ll eat and he’ll love and be loved just as is right
for him.”

They looked at Osser. There was a blue insect on his wrist. He raised it
slowly, slowly, close to his eyes, and through its gauze wings he saw
the flame-and-silver sunset. He laughed.

“All his life?”

“All his life,” said Wrenn. “With the bitterness and the trouble wiped
away, and no chance to mature again into the unfinished thing that
fought the world with the conviction it had something extra.”

Then he dropped the ring into Jubilith’s hand. “But if you care to, he
said, watching her face, the responsive motion of her sensitive
nostrils, the most delicate index of her lower lip, “if you care to, you
can give him back everything I took away. In a moment, you can give him
more than he has now; but how long would it take you to make him as
happy?”

She made no attempt to answer him. He was Wrenn, he was old and wise; he
was a member of a unique species whose resources were incalculable; and
yet he was asking her to do something he could not do himself. Perhaps
he was asking her to correct a wrong. She would never know that.

“Just the ring,” he said, “and the touch of your hand.”

He went away, straight and tall, quickening his pace as, far away, the
patient figure she had been watching earlier rose and came to meet him.
It was Oyva.

Jubilith thought, “He needs her.”

Jubilith had never been needed by anyone.

She looked at her hand and in it she saw all she was, all she could ever
be in her own right; and with it, the music of ages; never the words,
but all of the pressures of poetry. And she saw the extraordinary
privacy of love in a world which looked out through her eyes, placed all
of its skills in her hands, to do with as she alone wished.

With a touch of her hand … what a flood of sensation, what a bursting in
of voices and knowledge, for a child!

How long a child?

She closed her eyes, and quietly the answer came, full of pictures; the
lute picked up and played; the instant familiarity with the most
intricate machine; the stars seen otherwise, and yet again otherwise,
and every seeing an honest beauty. A thousand discoveries, and manhood
with a rush.

She slipped the ring on her finger, and dragged herself over to him. She
put her arms around him and his cheek came down to the hollow of her
throat and burrowed there.

He said, sleepily, “Is it nighttime, Mummy?”

“For just a little while,” said Jubilith.



THE WORLD WELL LOST


ALL THE WORLD KNEW THEM AS LOVERBIRDS, though they were certainly not
birds, but humans. Well, say humanoids. Featherless bipeds. Their stay
on Earth was brief, a nine-day wonder. Any wonder that lasts nine days
on an Earth of orgasmic trideo shows; time-freezing pills;
synapse-inverter fields which make it possible for a man to turn a
sunset to perfumes, a masochist to a fur-feeler; and a thousand other
euphorics—why, on such an Earth, a nine-day wonder is a wonder indeed.

Like a sudden bloom across the face of the world came the peculiar magic
of the loverbirds. There were loverbird songs and loverbird trinkets,
loverbird hats and pins, bangles and baubles, coins and quaffs and
tidbits. For there was that about the loverbirds which made a deep
enchantment. No one can be told about a loverbird and feel this curious
delight. Many are immune even to a solidograph. But watch loverbirds,
only for a moment, and see what happens. It’s the feeling you had when
you were twelve, and summer-drenched, and you kissed a girl for the very
first time and knew a breathlessness you were sure could never happen
again. And indeed it never could—unless you watched loverbirds. Then you
are spellbound for four quiet seconds, and suddenly your very heart
twists, and incredulous tears sting and stay; and the very first move
you make afterward, you make on tiptoe, and your first word is a
whisper.

This magic came over very well on trideo, and everyone had trideo; so
for a brief while the Earth was enchanted.

There were only two loverbirds. They came down out of the sky in a
single brassy flash, and stepped out of their ship, hand in hand. Their
eyes were full of wonder, each at the other, and together at the world.
They seemed frozen in a full-to-bursting moment of discovery; they made
way for one another gravely and with courtesy, they looked about them
and in the very looking gave each other gifts—the color of the sky, the
taste of the air, the pressures of things growing and meeting and
changing. They never spoke. They simply _were_ together. To watch them
was to know of their awestruck mounting of staircases of bird notes, of
how each knew the warmth of the other as their flesh supped silently on
sunlight.

They stepped from their ship, and the tall one threw a yellow powder
back to it. The ship fell in upon itself and became a pile of rubble,
which collapsed into a pile of gleaming sand, which slumped compactly
down to dust and then to an airblown emulsion so fine that Brownian
movement itself hammered it up and out and away. Anyone could see that
they intended to stay. Anyone could know by simply watching them that
next to their wondrous delight in each other came their delighted wonder
at Earth itself, everything and everybody about it.

Now, if terrestrial culture were a pyramid, at the apex (where the power
is) would sit a blind man, for so constituted are we that only by
blinding ourselves, bit by bit, may we rise above our fellows. The man
at the apex has an immense preoccupation with the welfare of the whole,
because he regards it as the source and structure of his elevation,
which it is, and as an extension of himself, which it is not. It was
such a man who, in the face of immeasurable evidence, chose to find a
defense against loverbirds, and fed the matrices and coordinates of the
loverbird image into the most marvelous calculator that had ever been
built.

The machine sucked in symbols and raced them about, compared and waited
and matched and sat still while its bulging memory, cell by cell, was
silent, was silent—and suddenly, in a far corner, resonated. It grasped
this resonance in forceps made of mathematics, snatched it out
(translating furiously as it snatched) and put out a fevered tongue of
paper on which was typed:


DIRBANU

Now this utterly changed the complexion of things. For Earth ships had
ranged the cosmos far and wide, with few hindrances. Of these
hindrances, all could be understood but one, and that one was Dirbanu, a
transgalactic planet which shrouded itself in impenetrable fields of
force whenever an Earth ship approached. There were other worlds which
could do this, but in each case the crews knew why it was done. Dirbanu,
upon discovery, had prohibited landings from the very first until an
ambassador could be sent to Terra. In due time one did arrive (so
reported the calculator, which was the only entity that remembered the
episode) and it was obvious that Earth and Dirbanu had much in common.
The ambassador, however, showed a most uncommon disdain of Earth and all
its work, curled his lip and went wordlessly home, and ever since then
Dirbanu had locked itself tight away from the questing Terrans.

Dirbanu thereby became of value, and fair game, but we could do nothing
to ripple the bland face of her defenses. As this impregnability
repeatedly proved itself, Dirbanu evolved in our group mind through the
usual stages of being: the Curiosity, the Mystery, the Challenge, the
Enemy, the Enemy, the Enemy, the Mystery, the Curiosity, and finally
That-which-is-too-far-away-to-bother-with, or the Forgotten.

And suddenly, after all this time, Earth had two genuine natives of
Dirbanu aboard, entrancing the populace and giving no information. This
intolerable circumstance began to make itself felt throughout the
world—but slowly, for this time the blind men’s din was cushioned and
soaked by the magic of the loverbirds. It might have taken a very long
time to convince the people of the menace in their midst had there not
been a truly startling development:

A direct message was received from Dirbanu.

The collective impact of loverbird material emanating from transmitters
on Earth had attracted the attention of Dirbanu, which promptly informed
us that the loverbirds were indeed their nationals, that in addition
they were fugitives, that Dirbanu would take it ill if Earth should
regard itself as a sanctuary for the criminals of Dirbanu but would, on
the other hand, find it in its heart to be very pleased if Earth saw fit
to return them.

So from the depths of its enchantment, Terra was able to calculate a
course of action. Here at last was an opportunity to consort with
Dirbanu on a friendly basis—great Dirbanu which, since it had force
fields which Earth could not duplicate, must of necessity have many
other things Earth could use; mighty Dirbanu before whom we could kneel
in supplication (with purely-for-defense bombs hidden in our pockets)
with lowered heads (making invisible the knife in our teeth) and ask for
crumbs from their table (in order to extrapolate the location of their
kitchens).

Thus the loverbird episode became another item in the weary procession
of proofs that Terra’s most reasonable intolerance can conquer
practically anything, even magic.

Especially magic.

So it was that the loverbirds were arrested, that the _Starmite 439_ was
fitted out as a prison ship, that a most carefully screened crew was
chosen for her, and that she struck starward with the cargo that would
gain us a world.

Two men were the crew—a colorful little rooster of a man and a great dun
bull of a man. They were, respectively, Rootes, who was Captain and
staff, and Grunty, who was midship and inboard corps. Rootes was cocky,
springy, white and crisp. His hair was auburn and so were his eyes, and
the eyes were hard. Grunty was a shambler with big gentle hands and
heavy shoulders half as wide as Rootes was high. He should have worn a
cowl and rope-belted habit. He should, perhaps, have worn a burnoose. He
did neither, but the effect was there. Known only to him was the fact
that words and pictures, concepts and comparisons were an endless
swirling blizzard inside him. Known only to him and Rootes was the fact
that he had books, and books, and books, and Rootes did not care if he
had or not. Grunty he had been called since he first learned to talk,
and Grunty was name enough for him. For the words in his head would not
leave him except one or two at a time, with long moments between. So he
had learned to condense his verbal messages to breathy grunts, and when
they wouldn’t condense, he said nothing.

They were primitives, both of them, which is to say that they were
doers, while Modern Man is a thinker and/or a feeler. The thinkers
compose new variations and permutations of euphoria, and the feelers
repay the thinkers by responding to their inventions. The ships had no
place for Modern Man, and Modern Man had only the most casual use for
the ships.

Doers can cooperate like cam and pushrod, like ratchet and pawl, and
such linkage creates a powerful bond. But Rootes and Grunty were unique
among crews in that these machine parts were not interchangeable. Any
good captain can command any good crew, surroundings being equivalent.
But Rootes would not and could not ship out with anyone but Grunty, and
Grunty was just that dependent. Grunty understood this bond, and the
fact that the only way it could conceivably be broken would be to
explain it to Rootes. Rootes did not understand it because it never
occurred to him to try, and had he tried, he would have failed, since he
was inherently non-equipped for the task. Grunty knew that their unique
bond was, for him, a survival matter. Rootes did not know this, and
would have rejected the idea with violence.

So Rootes regarded Grunty with tolerance and a modified amusement. The
modification was an inarticulate realization of Grunty’s complete
dependability. Grunty regarded Rootes with … well, with the ceaseless,
silent flurry of words in his mind.

There was, besides the harmony of functions and the other link,
understood only by Grunty, a third adjunct to their phenomenal
efficiency as a crew. It was organic, and it had to do with the stellar
drive.

Reaction engines were long forgotten. The so-called “warp” drive was
used only experimentally and on certain crash-priority war-craft where
operating costs were not a factor. The _Starmite_ 439 was, like most
interstellar craft, powered by an RS plant. Like the transistor, the
Referential Stasis generator is extremely simple to construct and very
difficult indeed to explain. Its mathematics approaches mysticism and
its theory contains certain impossibilities which are ignored in
practice. Its effect is to shift the area of stasis of the ship and
everything in it from one point of reference to another. For example,
the ship at rest on the Earth’s surface is in stasis in reference to the
ground on which it rests. Throwing the ship into stasis in reference to
the center of the Earth gives it instantly an effective speed equal to
the surface velocity of the planet around its core—some one thousand
miles per hour. Stasis referential to the sun moves the Earth out from
under the ship at the Earth’s orbital velocity. GH stasis “moves” the
ship at the angular velocity of the sun about the Galactic Hub. The
galactic drift can be used, as can any simple or complex mass center in
this expanding universe. There are resultants and there are multipliers,
and effective velocities can be enormous. Yet the ship is constantly in
stasis, so that there is never an inertia factor.

The one inconvenience of the RS drive is that shifts from one referent
to another invariably black the crew out, for psychoneural reasons. The
blackout period varies slightly between individuals from one to two and
a half hours. But some anomaly in Grunty’s gigantic frame kept his
blackout periods down to thirty or forty minutes, while Rootes was
always out for two hours or more. There was that about Grunty which made
moments of isolation a vital necessity, for a man must occasionally be
himself, which in anyone’s company Grunty was not. But after stasis
shifts Grunty had an hour or so to himself while his commander lay
numbly spread-eagled on the blackout couch, and he spent these in
communions of his own devising. Sometimes this meant only a good book.

This, then, was the crew picked to man the prison ship. It had been
together longer than any other crew in the Space Service. Its record
showed a metrical efficiency and a resistance to physical and psychic
debilitations previously unheard of in a trade where close confinements
on long voyages had come to be regarded as hazards. In space, shift
followed shift uneventfully, and planetfall was made on schedule and
without incident. In port Rootes would roar off to the fleshpots, in
which he would wallow noisily until an hour before takeoff, while Grunty
found, first, the business office, and next, a bookstore.

They were pleased to be chosen for the Dirbanu trip. Rootes felt no
remorse at taking away Earth’s new delight, since he was one of the very
few who was immune to it. (“Pretty,” he said at his first encounter.)
Grunty simply grunted, but then, so did everyone else. Rootes did not
notice, and Grunty did not remark upon, the obvious fact that though the
loverbirds’ expression of awestruck wonderment in each other’s presence
had, if anything, intensified, their extreme pleasure in Earth and the
things of Earth had vanished. They were locked, securely but
comfortably, in the after cabin behind a new transparent door, so that
their every move could be watched from the main cabin and control
console. They sat close, with their arms about one another, and though
their radiant joy in the contact never lessened, it was a shadowed
pleasure, a lachrymose beauty like the wrenching music of the wailing
wall.

The RS drive laid its hand on the moon and they vaulted away. Grunty
came up from blackout to find it very quiet. The loverbirds lay still in
each other’s arms, looking very human except for the high joining of
their closed eyelids, which nictated upward rather than downward like a
Terran’s. Rootes sprawled limply on the other couch, and Grunty nodded
at the sight. He deeply appreciated the silence, since Rootes had filled
the small cabin with earthy chatter about his conquests in port, detail
by hairy detail, for two solid hours preceding their departure. It was a
routine which Grunty found particularly wearing, partly for its content,
which interested him not at all, but mostly for its inevitability.
Grunty had long ago noted that these recitations, for all their detail,
carried the tones of thirst rather than of satiety. He had his own
conclusions about it, and, characteristically, kept them to himself. But
inside, his spinning gusts of words could shape themselves well to it,
and they did. “And man, she moaned!” Rootes would chant. “And take
money? She _gave_ me money. And what did I do with it? Why, I bought up
some more of the same.” _And what you could buy with a shekel’s worth of
tenderness, my prince!_ his silent words sang. “… across the floor and
around the rug until, by damn, I thought we’re about to climb the wall.
Loaded, Grunty-boy, I tell you, I was loaded!” _Poor little one_ ran the
hushed susurrus, _thy poverty is as great as thy joy and a tenth as
great as thine empty noise_. One of Grunty’s greatest pleasures was
taken in the fact that this kind of chuntering was limited to the first
day out, with barely another word on the varied theme until the next
departure, no matter how many months away that might be. _Squeak to me
of love, dear mouse_, his words would chuckle. _Stand up on_ _your
cheese and nibble away at your dream_. Then, wearily, _But oh, this
treasure I carry is too heavy a burden, in all its fullness, to be so
tugged at by your clattering vacuum!_

Grunty left the couch and went to the controls. The preset courses
checked against the indicators. He logged them and fixed the finder
control to locate a certain mass-nexus in the Crab Nebula. It would
chime when it was ready. He set the switch for final closing by the
push-button beside his couch, and went aft to wait.

He stood watching the loverbirds because there was nothing else for him
to do.

They lay quite still, but love so permeated them that their very poses
expressed it. Their lax bodies yearned each to each, and the tall one’s
hand seemed to stream toward the fingers of his beloved, and then back
again, like the riven tatters of a torn fabric straining toward oneness
again. And as their mood was a sadness too, so their pose, each and
both, together and singly, expressed it, and singly each through the
other silently spoke of the loss they had suffered, and how it ensured
greater losses to come. Slowly the picture suffused Grunty’s thinking,
and his words picked and pierced and smoothed it down and murmured
finally, _Brush away the dusting of sadness from the future, bright
ones. You’ve sadness enough for now. Grief should live only after it is
truly born, and not before_.

His words sang,

_Come fill the cup and in the fire of spring_

_Your winter garment of repentance fling._

_The bird of time has but a little way_

_To flutter—and the bird is on the wing_.

and added _Omar Khayyam, born circa 1073_, for this, too, was one of the
words’ functions.

And then he stiffened in horror; his great hands came up convulsively
and clawed the imprisoning glass …

They were smiling at him.

They were smiling, and on their faces and on and about their bodies
there was no sadness.

They had _heard_ him!

He glanced convulsively around at the Captain’s unconscious form, then
back to the loverbirds.

That they should recover so swiftly from blackout was, to say the least,
an intrusion; for his moments of aloneness were precious and more than
precious to Grunty, and would be useless to him under the scrutiny of
those jeweled eyes. But that was a minor matter compared to this other
thing, this terrible fact that they _heard_.

Telepathic races were not common, but they did exist. And what he was
now experiencing was what invariably happened when humans encountered
one. He could only send; the loverbirds could only receive. And they
_must not_ receive him! No one must. No one must know what he was, what
he thought. If anyone did, it would be a disaster beyond bearing. It
would mean no more flights with Rootes. Which, of course, meant no
flights with anyone. And how could he live—where could he go?

He turned back to the loverbirds. His lips were white and drawn back in
a snarl of panic and fury. For a blood-thick moment he held their eyes.
They drew closer to one another, and together sent him a radiant,
anxious, friendly look that made him grind his teeth.

Then, at the console, the finder chimed.

Grunty turned slowly from the transparent door and went to his couch. He
lay down and poised his thumb over the push-button.

He _hated_ the loverbirds, and there was no joy in him. He pressed the
button, the ship slid into a new stasis, and he blacked out.

The time passed.

“Grunty!”

“?”

“You feed them this shift?”

“Nuh.”

“Last shift?”

“Nuh.”

“What the hell’s matter with you, y’big dumb bastich? What you expect
them to live on?”

Grunty sent a look of roiling hatred aft. “Love,” he said.

“Feed ’em,” snapped Rootes.

Wordlessly Grunty went about preparing a meal for the prisoners. Rootes
stood in the middle of the cabin, his hard small fists on his hips, his
gleaming auburn head tilted to one side, and watched every move. “I
didn’t used to have to tell you anything,” he growled, half
pugnaciously, half worriedly. “You sick?”

Grunty shook his head. He twisted the tops of two cans and set them
aside to heat themselves, and took down the water suckers.

“You got it in for those honeymooners or something?”

Grunty averted his face.

“We get them to Dirbanu alive and healthy, hear me? They get sick, you
get sick, by God. I’ll see to that. Don’t give me trouble, Grunty. I’ll
take it out on you. I never whipped you yet, but I will.”

Grunty carried the tray aft. “You hear me?” Rootes yelled.

Grunty nodded without looking at him. He touched the control and a small
communication window slid open in the glass wall. He slid the tray
through. The taller loverbird stepped forward and took it eagerly,
gracefully, and gave him a dazzling smile of thanks. Grunty growled low
in his throat like a carnivore. The loverbird carried the food back to
the couch and they began to eat, feeding each other little morsels.

A new stasis, and Grunty came fighting up out of blackness. He sat up
abruptly, glanced around the ship. The Captain was sprawled out across
the cushions, his compact body and outflung arm forming the poured-out,
spring-steel laxness usually seen only in sleeping cats. The loverbirds,
even in deep unconsciousness, lay like hardly separate parts of
something whole, the small one on the couch, the tall one on the deck,
prone, reaching, supplicating.

Grunty snorted and hove to his feet. He crossed the cabin and stood
looking down on Rootes.

_The hummingbird is a yellowjacket_, said his words, _Buzz and dart,
hiss and flash away. Swift and hurtful, hurtful …_

He stood for a moment, his great shoulder muscles working one against
the other, and his mouth trembled.

He looked at the loverbirds, who were still motionless. His eyes slowly
narrowed.

His words tumbled and climbed, and ordered themselves:

_I through love have learned three things,_

_Sorrow, sin and death it brings._

_Yet day by day my heart within_

_Dares shame and sorrow, death and sin_.…

And dutifully he added _Samuel Ferguson, born 1810_. He glared at the
loverbirds and brought his fist into his palm with a sound like a club
on an anthill. They had heard him again, and this time they did not
smile, but looked into each other’s eyes and then turned together to
regard him, nodding gravely.

Rootes went through Grunty’s books, leafing and casting aside. He had
never touched them before. “Buncha crap,” he jeered. _“Garden of the
Plynck. Wind in the Willows. Worm Ouroborous_. Kid stuff.”

Grunty lumbered across and patiently gathered up the books the Captain
had flung aside, putting them one by one back into their places,
stroking them as if they had been bruised.

“Isn’t there nothing in here with pictures?”

Grunty regarded him silently for a moment and then took down a tall
volume. The Captain snatched it, leafed through it. “Mountains,” he
growled. “Old houses.” He leafed. “Damn boats.” He smashed the book to
the deck. “Haven’t you got _any_ of what I want?”

Grunty waited attentively.

“Do I have to draw a diagram?” the Captain roared. “Got that ol’ itch,
Grunty. You wouldn’t know. I feel like looking at pictures, get what I
mean?”

Grunty stared at him, utterly without expression, but deep within him a
panic squirmed. The Captain never, _never_ behaved like this in
mid-voyage. It was going to get worse, he realized. Much worse. And
quickly.

He shot the loverbirds a vicious, hate-filled glance. If they weren’t
aboard …

There could be no waiting. Not now. Something had to be done.
Something …

“Come on, come on,” said Rootes. “Goddlemighty Godfrey, even a deadbutt
like you must have _something_ for kicks.”

Grunty turned away from him, squeezed his eyes closed for a tortured
second, then pulled himself together. He ran his hand over the books,
hesitated, and finally brought out a large, heavy one. He handed it to
the Captain and went forward to the console. He slumped down there over
the file of computer tapes, pretending to be busy.

The Captain sprawled onto Grunty’s couch and opened the book.
“Michelangelo, what the hell,” he growled. He grunted, almost like his
shipmate. “Statues,” he half-whispered, in withering scorn. But he ogled
and leafed at last, and was quiet.

The loverbirds looked at him with a sad tenderness, and then together
sent beseeching glances at Grunty’s angry back.

The matrix-pattern for Terra slipped through Grunty’s fingers, and he
suddenly tore the tape across, and across again. A filthy place, Terra.
_There is nothing_, he thought, _like the conservatism of license_.
Given a culture of sybaritics, with an endless choice of mechanical
titillations, and you have a people of unbreakable and hidebound
formality, a people with few but massive taboos, a shockable, narrow,
prissy people obeying the rules—even the rules of their calculated
depravities—and protecting their treasured, specialized pruderies. In
such a group there are words one may not use for fear of their fanged
laughter, colors one may not wear, gestures and intonations one must
forego, on pain of being torn to pieces. The rules are complex and
absolute, and in such a place one’s heart may not sing lest, through its
warm free joyousness, it betray one.

And if you must have joy of such a nature, if you must be free to be
your pressured self, then off to space … off to the glittering black
loneliness. And let the days go by, and let the time pass, and huddle
beneath your impenetrable integument, and wait, and wait, and every once
in a long while you will have that moment of lonely consciousness when
there is no one around to see; and then it may burst from you and you
may dance, or cry, or twist the hair on your head till your eyeballs
blaze, or do any of the other things your so unfashionable nature
thirstily demands.

It took Grunty half a lifetime to find this freedom: No price would be
too great to keep it. Not lives, nor interplanetary diplomacy, nor Earth
itself were worth such a frightful loss.

He would lose it if anyone knew, and the loverbirds knew.

He pressed his heavy hands together until the knuckles crackled.
Dirbanu, reading it all from the ardent minds of the loverbirds; Dirbanu
flashing the news across the stars; the roar of reaction, and then
Rootes, Rootes, when the huge and ugly impact washed over him …

So let Dirbanu be offended. Let Terra accuse this ship of fumbling, even
of treachery—anything but the withering news the loverbirds had stolen.

Another new stasis, and Grunty’s first thought as he came alive in the
silent ship was _It has to be soon_.

He rolled off the couch and glared at the unconscious loverbirds. The
helpless loverbirds.

Smash their heads in.

Then Rootes … what to tell Rootes?

The loverbirds attacked him, tried to seize the ship?

He shook his head like a bear in a beehive. Rootes would never believe
that. Even if the loverbirds could open the door, which they could not,
it was more than ridiculous to imagine those two bright and slender
things attacking anyone—especially so rugged and massive an opponent.

Poison? No—there was nothing in the efficient, unfailingly beneficial
food stores that might help.

His glance strayed to the Captain, and he stopped breathing.

Of _course!_

He ran to the Captain’s personal lockers. He should have known that such
a cocky little hound as Rootes could not live, could not strut and
prance as he did, unless he had a weapon. And if it was the kind of
weapon that such a man would characteristically choose—

A movement caught his eye as he searched.

The loverbirds were awake.

That wouldn’t matter.

He laughed at them, a flashing, ugly laugh. They cowered close together
and their eyes grew very bright.

They knew.

He was aware that they were suddenly very busy, as busy as he. And then
he found the gun.

It was a snug little thing, smooth and intimate in his hand. It was
exactly what he had guessed, what he had hoped for—just what he needed.
It was silent. It would leave no mark. It need not even be aimed
carefully. Just a touch of its feral radiation and throughout the body
the axones suddenly refuse to propagate nerve impulses. No thought
leaves the brain, no slightest contraction of heart or lung occurs
again, ever. And afterward, no sign remains that a weapon has been used.

He went to the serving window with the gun in his hand. _When he wakes,
you will be dead_, he thought. _Couldn’t recover from stasis blackout.
Too bad. But no one’s to blame, hm? We never had Dirbanu passengers
before. So how could we know?_

The loverbirds, instead of flinching, were crowding close to the window,
their faces beseeching, their delicate hands signing and signaling,
frantically trying to convey something.

He touched the control, and the panel slid back.

The taller loverbird held up something as if it would shield him. The
other pointed at it, nodded urgently, and gave him one of those
accursed, hauntingly sweet smiles.

Grunty put up his hand to sweep the thing aside, and then checked
himself.

It was only a piece of paper.

All of the cruelty of humanity rose up in Grunty_. A species that can’t
protect itself doesn’t deserve to live_. He raised the gun.

And then he saw the pictures.

Economical and accurate, and for all their subject, done with the
ineffable grace of the loverbirds themselves, the pictures showed three
figures:

Grunty himself, hulking, impassive, the eyes glowing, the tree-trunk
legs and hunched shoulders.

Rootes, in a pose so characteristic and so cleverly done that Grunty
gasped. Crisp and clean, Rootes’ image had one foot up on a chair, both
elbows on the high knee, the head half turned. The eyes fairly sparkled
from the paper.

And a girl.

She was beautiful. She stood with her arms behind her, her feet slightly
apart, her face down a little. She was deep-eyed, pensive, and to see
her was to be silent, to wait for those downcast lids to lift and break
the spell.

Grunty frowned and faltered. He lifted a puzzled gaze from these
exquisite renderings to the loverbirds, and met the appeal, the earnest,
eager, hopeful faces.

The loverbird put a second paper against the glass.

There were the same three figures, identical in every respect to the
previous ones, except for one detail: they were all naked.

He wondered how they knew human anatomy so meticulously.

Before he could react, still another sheet went up.

The loverbirds, this time—the tall one, the shorter one, hand in hand.
And next to them a third figure, somewhat similar, but tiny, very round,
and with grotesquely short arms.

Grunty stared at the three sheets, one after the other. There was
something … something …

And then the loverbird put up the fourth sketch, and slowly, slowly,
Grunty began to understand. In the last picture, the loverbirds were
shown exactly as before, except that they were naked, and so was the
small creature beside them. He had never seen loverbirds naked before.
Possibly no one had.

Slowly he lowered the gun. He began to laugh. He reached through the
window and took both the loverbirds’ hands in one of his, and they
laughed with him.

Rootes stretched easily with his eyes closed, pressed his face down into
the couch, and rolled over. He dropped his feet to the deck, held his
head in his hands and yawned. Only then did he realize Grunty was
standing just before him.

“What’s the matter with you?”

He followed Grunty’s grim gaze.

The glass door stood open.

Rootes bounced to his feet as if the couch had turned white-hot.
“Where—what—”

Grunty’s crag of a face was turned to the starboard bulkhead. Rootes
spun to it, balanced on the balls of his feet as if he were boxing. His
smooth face gleamed in the red glow of the light over the airlock.

“The lifeboat … you mean they took the lifeboat? They got away?”

Grunty nodded.

Rootes held his head. “Oh, fine,” he moaned. He whipped around to
Grunty. “And where the hell were you when this happened?”

“Here.”

“Well, what in God’s name happened?” Rootes was on the trembling edge of
foaming hysteria.

Grunty thumped his chest.

“You’re not trying to tell me you let them go?”

Grunty nodded, and waited—not for very long.

“I’m going to burn you down,” Rootes raged. “I’m going to break you so
low you’ll have to climb for twelve years before you get a barracks to
sweep. And after I get done with you I’ll turn you over to the Service.
What do you think they’ll do to you? What do you think they’re going to
do to _me_?”

He leapt at Grunty and struck him a hard, cutting blow to the cheek.
Grunty kept his hands down and made no attempt to avoid the fist. He
stood immovable, and waited.

“Maybe those were criminals, but they were Dirbanu nationals,” Rootes
roared when he could get his breath. “How are we going to explain this
to Dirbanu? Do you realize this could mean war?”

Grunty shook his head.

“What do you mean? You know something. You better talk while you can.
Come on, bright boy—what are we going to tell Dirbanu?”

Grunty pointed at the empty cell. “Dead,” he said.

“What good will it do us to say they’re dead? They’re not. They’ll show
up again some day, and—”

Grunty shook his head. He pointed to the star chart. Dirbanu showed as
the nearest body. There was no livable planet within thousands of
parsecs.

“They didn’t go to Dirbanu!”

“Nuh.”

“Damn it, it’s like pulling rivets to get anything out of you. In that
lifeboat they go to Dirbanu—which they won’t—or they head out, maybe for
years, to the Rim stars. That’s all they can do!”

Grunty nodded.

“And you think Dirbanu won’t track them, won’t bring ’em down?”

“No ships.”

“They have ships!”

“Nuh.”

“The loverbirds told you?”

Grunty agreed.

“You mean their own ship that they destroyed and the one the ambassador
used were all they had?”

“Yuh.”

Rootes strode up and back. “I don’t get it. I don’t begin to get it.
What did you do it for, Grunty?”

Grunty stood for a moment, watching Rootes’ face. Then he went to the
computing desk. Rootes had no choice but to follow. Grunty spread out
the four drawings.

“What’s this? Who drew these? _Them?_ What do you know. _Damn!_ Who is
the chick?”

Grunty patiently indicated all of the pictures in one sweep. Rootes
looked at him, puzzled, looked at one of Grunty’s eyes, then the other,
shook his head, and applied himself to the pictures again. “This is more
like it,” he murmured. “Wish I’d a’ known they could draw like this.”
Again Grunty drew his attention to all the pictures and away from the
single drawing that fascinated him.

“There’s you, there’s me. Right? Then this chick. Now, here we are
again, all buff naked. Damn, what a carcass. All right, all right, I’m
going on. Now, this is the prisoners, right? And who’s the little fat
one?”

Grunty pushed the fourth sheet over. “Oh,” said Rootes. “Here
everybody’s naked too. Hm.”

He yelped suddenly and bent close. Then he rapidly eyed all four sheets
in sequence. His face began to get red. He gave the fourth picture a
long, close scrutiny. Finally he put his finger on the sketch of the
round little alien. “This is … a … a Dirbanu—”

Grunty nodded. “Female.”

“Then those two—they were—”

Grunty nodded.

“So that’s it!” Rootes fairly shrieked in fury. “You mean we been
shipped out all this time with a coupla God damned _fairies?_ Why, if
I’d a’ known that I’d a’ killed ’em!”

“Yuh.”

Rootes looked up at him with a growing respect and considerable
amusement. “So you got rid of ’em so’s I wouldn’t kill ’em, and mess
everything up?” He scratched his head. “Well, I’ll be billy-be-damned.
You got a think-tank on you after all. Anything I can’t stand, it’s a
fruit.”

Grunty nodded.

“God,” said Rootes, “it figures. It really figures. Their females don’t
look anything like the males. Compared with them, our females are
practically identical to us. So the ambassador comes, and sees what
looks like a planet full of queers. He knows better but he can’t stand
the sight. So back he goes to Dirbanu, and Earth gets brushed off.”

Grunty nodded.

“Then these pansies here run off to Earth, figuring they’ll be at home.
They damn near made it, too. But Dirbanu calls ’em back, not wanting the
likes of them representing their planet. I don’t blame ’em a bit. How
would you feel if the only Terran on Dirbanu was a fluff? Wouldn’t you
want him out of there, but quick?”

Grunty said nothing.

“And now,” said Rootes, “we better give Dirbanu the good news.”

He went forward to the communicator.

It took a surprisingly short time to contact the shrouded planet.
Dirbanu acknowledged and coded out a greeting. The decoder over the
console printed the message for them:

GREETINGS STARMITE 439. ESYABLISH ORBIT. CAN YOU DROP PRISONERS TO
DIRBANU? NEVER MIND PARACHUTE.

“Whew,” said Rootes. “Nice people. Hey, you notice they don’t say come
on in. They never expected to let us land. Well, what’ll we tell ’em
about their lavender lads?”

“Dead,” said Grunty.

“Yeah,” said Rootes. “That’s what they want anyway.” He sent rapidly.

In a few minutes the response clattered out of the decoder.

STAND BY FOR TELEPATH SWEEP. WE MUST CHECK. PRISONERS MAY BE PRETENDING
DEATH.

“Oh-oh,” said the Captain. “This is where the bottom drops out.”

“Nuh,” said Grunty, calmly.

“But their detector will locate—oh—I see what you’re driving at. No
life, no signal. Same as if they weren’t here at all.”

“Yuh.”

The decoder clattered.

DIRBANU GRATEFUL. CONSIDER MISSION COMPLETE. DO NOT WANT BODIES. YOU MAY
EAT THEM.

Rootes retched. Grunty said, “Custom.”

The decoder kept clattering.

NOW READY FOR RECIPROCAL AGREEMENT WITH TERRA.

“We go home in a blaze of glory,” Rootes exulted. He sent,

TERRA ALSO READY. WHAT DO YOU SUGGEST?

The decoder paused, then:

TERRA STAY AWAY FROM DIRBANU AND DIRBANU WILL STAY AWAY FROM TERRA. THIS
IS NOT A SUGGESTION. TAKES EFFECT IMMEDIATELY.

“Why that bunch of bastards!”

Rootes pounded his codewriter, and although they circled the planet at a
respectful distance for nearly four days, they received no further
response.

The last thing Rootes had said before they established the first stasis
on the way home was: “Well, anyway—it does me good to think of those two
queens crawling away in that lifeboat. Why, they can’t even starve to
death. They’ll be cooped up there for _years_ before they get anywhere
they can sit down.”

It still rang in Grunty’s mind as he shook off the blackout. He glanced
aft to the glass partition and smiled reminiscently. “For years,” he
murmured. His words curled up and spun, and said,

_ … Yes; love requires the focal space_

_Of recollection or of hope,_

_Ere it can measure its own scope._

_Too soon, too soon comes death to show_

_We love more deeply than we know!_

Dutifully, then, came the words: _Coventry Patmore, born 1823_.

He rose slowly and stretched, revelling in his precious privacy. He
crossed to the other couch and sat down on the edge of it.

For a time he watched the Captain’s unconscious face, reading it with
great tenderness and utmost attention, like a mother with an infant.

His words said, _Why must we love where the lightning strikes, and not
where we choose?_

And they said, _But I’m glad it’s you, little prince. I’m glad it’s
you_.

He put out his huge hand and, with a feather touch, stroked the sleeping
lips.



 … AND MY FEAR IS GREAT …


HE HEFTED ONE CORNER OF THE BOX high enough for him to get his knuckle
on the buzzer, then let it sag. He stood waiting, wheezing. The door
opened.

“Oh! You _didn’t_ carry it up five flights!”

“No, huh?” he grunted, and pushed inside. He set the groceries down on
the sink top in the kitchenette and looked at her. She was
sixty-something and could have walked upright under his armpit with her
shoes on.

“That old elevator …” she said. “Wait. Here’s something.”

He wiped sweat out of his eyes and sensed her approach. He put out his
hand for the coin but it wasn’t a coin. It was a glass. He looked at it,
mildly startled. He wished it were beer. He tasted it, then gulped it
down. Lemonade.

“Slow-ly, slow-ly,” she said, too late. “You’ll get heat cramps. What’s
your name?” Her voice seemed to come from a distance. She seemed, in an
odd way, to stand at a distance as well. She was small as a tower is
small on the horizon.

“Don,” he grunted.

“Well, Donny,” she said, “sit down and rest.”

He had said, “Don,” not “Donny.” When he was in rompers he was “Donny.”
He turned to the door. “I got to go.”

“Wait a bit.”

He stopped without turning.

“That’s a beautiful watch for a boy like you.”

“I like it.”

“May I see it?”

Breath whistled briefly in his nostrils. She had her fingers lightly on
the heel of his hand before he could express any more annoyance than
that. Grudgingly, he raised his arm and let her look.

“Beautiful. Where did you get it?”

He looked at her, surlily. “In a store.”

Blandly she asked, “Did you buy it?”

He snatched his hand away. He swiped nervously, twice, with a hooked
index finger at his upper lip. His eyes were slits. “What’s it to you?”

“Well, did you?”

“Look, lady. I brought your groceries and I got my lemonade. It’s all
right about the watch, see? Don’t worry about the watch. I got to go
now.”

“You stole it.”

“Whaddaya—crazy? I didn’t steal no watch.”

“You stole that one.”

“I’m gettin’ outa here.” He reached for the knob.

“Not until you tell me about the watch.”

He uttered a syllable and turned the knob. The door stayed closed. He
twisted, pulled, pushed, twisted again. Then he whirled, his back
thudding against the door. His gangly limbs seemed to compact. His
elbows came out, his head down. His teeth bared like an animal’s. “Hey,
what is this?”

She stood, small and chunky and straight, and said in her far-away
voice, “Are you going to tell me?” Her eyes were a milky blue, slightly
protruding, and unreadable.

“You lemme out, hear?”

She shook her head.

“You better lemme out,” he growled. He took two steps toward her. “Open
that door.”

“You needn’t be frightened. I won’t hurt you.”

“Somebuddy’s goin’ to get hurt,” he said.

“Not—another—step,” she said without raising her voice.

He released an ugly bark of nervous laughter and took the other step.
His feet came forward and upward and his back slammed down on the floor.
For a moment he lay still, then his eyelids moved slowly, up and down
and up again while for a moment he gave himself over to the purest
astonishment. He moved his head forward so that he could see the woman.
She had not moved.

He sat up, clenching his jaw against pain, and scuttled backward to the
door. He helped himself rise with the doorpost, never taking his eyes
off her. “Jesus, I slipped.”

“Don’t curse in this house,” she said—just as mild, just as firm.

“I’ll say what I damn please!”

_Wham!_ His shoulders hit the floor again. His eyes were closed, his
lips drawn back. He lifted one shoulder and arched his spine. One long
agonized wheeze escaped through his teeth like an extrusion.

“You see, you didn’t slip,” said the woman. “Poor child. Let me help
you.”

She put her strong, small hand on his left biceps and another between
his shoulder blades. She would have led him to a chair but he pulled
away. “I’m awright,” he said. He said it again, as if unconvinced, and,
“What’d you … do?”

“Sit down,” she said solicitously. He cowered where he was. “Sit down,”
she said again, no more sharply, but there was a difference.

He went to the chair. He sidled along the wall, watching her, and he did
not go very fast, but he went. He sank down into it. It was a very low
chair. His long legs doubled and his knees thrust up sharply. He looked
like a squashed grasshopper. He panted.

“About the watch,” she prompted him.

He panted twice as fast for three breaths and whimpered, “I don’t want
no trouble, lady, just lemme go, huh?”

She pointed at his wrist.

“Awright, you want the watch?” Hysterically he stripped it off and
dangled it toward her. “Okay? Take it.” His eyes were round and
frightened and wary. When she made no move he put the watch on her
ancient gateleg table. He put his palms on the seat of the chair and his
feet walked two paces doorward, though he did not rise, but swiveled
around, keeping his face to her, eager, terrified.

“Where did you get it?”

He whimpered, wordless. He cast one quick, hungry look at the door,
tensed his muscles, met her gaze again, and slumped. “You gonna turn me
in?”

“Of course not!” she said with more force than she had used so far.

“You’re goin’ to, all the same.”

She simply shook her head, and waited.

He turned, finally, picked up the watch, snapped the flexible gold band.
“I swiped it—off Eckhart,” he whispered.

“Who?”

“Eckhart on Summit Av-noo. He lives behind the store. It was just laying
there, on the counter. I put a box of groceries on it and snagged it out
from under. You gonna tell?”

“Well, Donny! Don’t you feel better, now you’ve confessed?”

He looked up at her through his eyebrows, hesitated. “Yeah.”

“Is that the truth, Donny?”

“Uh-huh.” Then, meeting those calm, imponderable eyes, he said, “Well,
no. I dunno, lady. I dunno. You got me all mixed up. Can I go now?”

“What about the watch?”

“I don’t want it no more.”

“I want you to take it back where you got it.”

“_What?_” He recoiled, primarily because in shock he had raised his
voice and the sound of it frightened him. “Je—shucks, lady, you want him
to put me in the can?”

“My name is Miss Phoebe, not ‘lady.’ No, Donny, I think you’ll do it.
Just a moment.”

She sat at a shaky escritoire and wrote for a moment, while he watched.
Presently, “Here,” she said. She handed him the sheet. He looked at her
and then at the paper.

Dear Mr. Eckhart,

Inside the clasp of this watch your name and address is stamped.

Would you be good enough to see that it gets to its rightful owner?

Yours very truly,
(Miss) Phoebe Watkins

She took it out of his hand, folded it. She put the watch in an
envelope, folded that neatly into a square, dropped it in a second
envelope with the note, sealed it and handed it to Don.

“You—you’re givin’ it right back to me!”

“Am I?”

He lowered his eyes, pinched the top edge of the envelope, pulled it
through his fingers to crease the top edge sharply. “I know. You’re
gonna phone him. You’re gonna get me picked up.”

“You would be no good to me in the reformatory, Donny.”

He looked quickly at her eyes, one, then the other. “I’m gonna be some
good to you?”

“Tomorrow at four, I want you to come to tea,” she said abruptly.

“To what?”

“To tea. That means wash your face and hands and put on a tie and don’t
be late.”

_Wash your face and hands_. Nobody had dared to order him around like
that for years. And yet, instead of resentment, something sharp and
choking rose up in his throat. It was not anger. It was something which,
when swallowed, made his eyes wet. He frowned and blinked hard.

“You’d better go,” she said, before he could accept or refuse, “before
the stores close.” She didn’t even say which stores.

He rose. He pulled his shoulder blades together and his back cracked
audibly. He winced, and shambled to the door. He stood waiting, not
touching it, head down, patient, like a farm horse before a closed gate.

“What is it, Donny?”

“Ain’tcha gonna unlock it?”

“It was never locked.”

For a long moment he stood frozen, his back to her, his eyes down. Then
he put a slow hand to the knob, turned it. The door opened. He went out,
almost but not quite pausing at the threshold, almost but not quite
turning to look back. He closed the door quietly and was gone.

Miss Phoebe began to put her groceries away.

He did not come at four o’clock.

He came at four minutes before the hour, and he was breathing hard.

“Come in, Donny!” She held the door for him. He looked over his
shoulder, down the corridor, at the elevator gates and the big window
where feathery trees and wide sky showed, and then he came into the
room. He stood just inside, watching her as she moved to the
kitchenette. He looked around the room, looking for policemen, perhaps,
for bars on the windows.

There was nothing in the room but its old-not-antique furniture, the
bow-legged occasional chair with the new upholstery which surely looked
as old as it had before it was redone; there was the gateleg table, now
bearing a silver tea-service with a bit of brass showing at the shoulder
of the hot water pot, and a sugar bowl with delicate tongs which did not
match the rest of the set. There was the thin rug with its nap quite
swept off, and the dustless books; there was the low chair where he had
sat before with its tasseled antimacassars on back and arms.

“Make yourself at home,” said her quiet voice, barely competing but
competing easily with the susurrus of steam that rose from the kettle.

He moved a little further in and stopped awkwardly. His Adam’s apple
loomed mightily over the straining button of his collar. His tie was
blue and red, and he wore a horrendous sports jacket, much too small,
with a violent yellow-and-gray tweed weave. His trousers were the color
of baked earth, and had as much crease as his shoes had shine, and their
soles had more polish than the uppers. But he’d scrubbed his face till
his pimples bled, and his hair was raked back so hard that his forehead
gleamed like scoured porcelain.

When she faced him he stood his ground and said abruptly, before she
could tell him to sit down, “I din’ wanna come.”

“Didn’t you?”

“Well, I did, but I wasn’t gonna.”

“Why did you come, then?”

“I was scared not to.”

She crossed the room with a large platter of little sandwiches. There
were cheese and Spam and egg salad and liverwurst. They were not
delicacies; they were food. She put it down next to a small store-bought
chocolate cake and two bowls of olives, one ripe, one green, neither
stuffed. She said, “You had nothing to be afraid of.”

“No, huh?” He wet his lips, took a deep breath. The rehearsed antagonism
blurted out. “You done something to me yesterday I don’t know what it
was. How I know I ain’t gonna drop dead if I don’t show up or somep’n
like that?”

“I did nothing to you, child!”

“Somebuddy sure as h—sure did.”

“You did it to yourself.”

_“What?_”

She looked at him. “Angry people don’t live very long, Donny, did you
know? But sometimes—” Her eyes fell to her hand on the table, and his
followed. With one small age-mottled finger she traced around the
table’s edge, from the far side around one end. “—sometimes it takes a
long time to hurt them. But the hurt can come short and quickly, like
_this!_” and she drew her finger straight across from side to side.

Don looked at the table as if something were written on it in a strange
language. “All right, but you made it do that.”

“Come and sit down,” she said

But he hadn’t finished. “I took the watch back.”

“I knew you would.”

“Well, okay then. Thass what I come to tell you. That’s what you wanted
me for, isn’t it?”

“I asked you to _tea_. I didn’t want to bully you and I didn’t want to
discuss that silly watch—the matter is closed. It was closed yesterday.
Now _do_ come and sit down.”

“Oh,” he said. “I get it. You mean sit down or _else_.”

She fixed her eyes on his and looked at him without speaking and without
any expression at all until his gaze dropped. “Donny, go and open the
door.”

He backed away, felt behind him for the knob. He paused there, tense.
When she nodded he opened it.

“You’re free to go whenever you like. But before you do, I want you to
understand that there are a lot of people I could have tea with. I
haven’t asked anyone but you. I haven’t asked the grocery boy or the
thief or any of the other people you seem to be sometimes. Just _you_.”

He pulled the door to and stood yanking at his bony knuckles. “I don’t
know about none of that,” he said confusedly. He glanced down between
his ribs and his elbow at the doorknob. “I just din’ want you to think
you hadda put on no feedbag to fin’ out did I take the watch back.”

“I could have telephoned to Mr. Eckhart.”

“Well, din’t you?”

“Certainly not. There was no need. Was there?”

He came and sat down.

“Sugar?”

“Huh? Yeah—yeah.”

“Lemon, or cream?”

“You mean I can have whichever?”

“Of course.”

“Then both.”

“Both? I think perhaps the cream would curdle.”

“In lemon ice cream it don’t.”

She gave him cream. He drank seven cups of tea, ate all the sandwiches
and most of the cake. He ate quickly, not quite glancing over his
shoulder to drive away enemies who might snatch the food. He ate with a
hunger that was not of hours or days, but the hunger of years. Miss
Phoebe patiently passed and refilled and stoked and served until he was
done. He loosened his belt, spread out his long legs, wiped his mouth
with one sleeve and his brow with the other, closed his eyes and sighed.

“Donny,” she said when his jaws had stopped moving, “have you ever had
syphilis?”

The boy literally and immediately fell out of his chair. In this
atmosphere of doilies and rectitude he could not have been more jolted
by a batted ball on his mountainous Adam’s apple. He floundered on the
carpet, bumped the table, slopped her tea, and crawled back into his
seat with his face flaming.

“No,” he said, in a strangled voice.

She began then to talk to him quite calmly about social ills of many
kinds. She laid out the grub and smut and greed and struggle of his own
neighborhood streets as neatly and as competently as she had laid the
tea table. She spoke without any particular emphasis of the bawdy house
she had personally closed up after three reports to the police had no
effect. (She had called the desk sergeant, stated her name and
intentions, and had asked to be met at the house in twenty minutes. When
the police got there she had the girls lined up and two-thirds of their
case histories already written.) She spoke of playgrounds and civil
defense, of pool rooms, dope pushers, candy stores with beer taps in the
soda fountain and the visiting nurse service.

Don listened, fairly humming with reaction. He had seen all the things
she mentioned, good and bad. Some he had not understood, some he had not
thought about, some he wouldn’t dream of discussing in mixed company. He
knew vaguely that things were better than they had been twenty, fifty, a
hundred years ago, but he had never before been face to face with one of
those who integrate, correlate, extrapolate this progress, who dirty
their hands on this person or that in order to work for people.
Sometimes he bit the insides of his cheeks to keep from laughing at her
bluntness and efficiency—he wished he could have seen that desk
sergeant’s _face_!—or to keep from sniggering self-consciously at the
way unmentionables rolled off her precise tongue. Sometimes he was
puzzled and lost in the complexities of the organizations with which she
was so familiar. And sometimes he was slack-jawed with fear for her,
thinking of the retribution she must surely be in the way of, breaking
up rackets like that. But then his own aching back would remind him that
she had ways of taking care of herself, and a childlike awe would rise
up in him until he forgot to breathe.

There was no direct instruction in anything she said. It was purely
description. And yet he began to feel that in this complex lay duties
for him to perform. Exactly what they might be did not emerge. It was
simply that he felt, as never before, a functioning part, rather than an
excrescence, of his own environment.

He was never to remember all the details of that extraordinary
communion, nor the one which immediately followed; for somehow she had
stopped speaking and there was a long quiet between them. His mind was
so busy with itself that there seemed no break in this milling and
chewing of masses of previously unregarded ideas. For a time she had
been talking, for a time she did not talk, and in it all he was
completely submerged.

At length she said, “Donny, tell me something ugly.”

“What do you mean ugly?” The question and its answer had flowed through
him almost without contact; had she not insisted, he would have lapsed
into his busy silence again.

“Donny, something that you know about that you’ve done. Anything at all.
Something you’ve seen.”

It was easy to turn from introspection to deep recalls. “Went to one of
those summer camps that there paper runs for kids. I’s about seven, I
guess.”

“Donny,” she said after what may have been a long time, “go on.”

“Wasps,” he said, negotiating the divided sibilant with some difficulty.
“The ones that make paper nests.” Suddenly he turned quite pale. “They
stung me, it was on the big porch. The nurse, she came out an’ hugged me
and went away and came back with a bottle, ammonia it was, and put it on
where I’s stung.” He coughed. “Stuff stunk, but it felt fine. Then a
counselor, a big kid from up the street, he came with a long stick.
There was a ol’ rag tied on the end, it had kerosene on it. He lit it up
with a match, it burned all yellow and smoky. He put it up high by them
paper nests. The wasps, they come out howlin’, they flew right into the
fire. When they stopped comin’ he pushed at the nest and down it come.

“He gone on to the next one, and down the line, twelve, fifteen of them.
Every time he come to a new one, the wasps they flew into the fire. You
could see the wings go, not like burning, not like melting, sort of
_fzzz!_ they gone. They fall. They fall all over the floor, they wiggle
around, some run like ants, some with they legs burned off they just go
around in one place like a phonograph.

“Kids come from all over, watching bug-eyed, runnin’ around the porch,
stampin’ on them wasps with their wings gone, they can’t sting nobody.
Stamp on ’em and squeal and run away an’ run back and stamp some more.
I’m back near the door, I’m bawlin’. The nurse is squeezin’ me, watchin’
the wasps, wipin’ the ammonia on me any old place, she’s not watchin’
what she’s doin’. An’ all the time the fire goes an’ goes, the wasps fly
at it, never once a dumb damn wasp goes to see who’s at the other end of
the stick. An’ I’m there with the nurse, bawlin’. _Why am I bawlin’?_”
It came out a deep, basic demand.

“You must have been stung quite badly,” said Miss Phoebe. She was
leaning forward, her strange unlovely eyes fixed on him. Her lower lip
was wet.

“Nah! Three times, four …” He struggled hard to fit rich sensation to a
poverty of words. “It was me, see. I guess if I got stung every wasp
done it should get killed. Maybe burned even. But them wasps in the
nest-es, they din’t sting nobody, an’ here they are all … all _brave_,
that’s what, brave, comin’ and fallin’ and comin’ and fallin’ and
gettin’ squashed. Why? Fer _me_, thass why! Me, it was me, I hadda go
an’ holler because I got stung an’ make all that happen.” He screwed his
eyes tight shut and breathed as if he had been running. Abruptly his
eyes opened very wide and he pressed himself upward in his chair,
stretching his long bony neck as if he sat in rising water up to his
chin. “What am I talkin’ about, wasps? We wasn’t talkin’ about no wasps.
How’d we get talkin’ like this?”

She said, “It’s all part of the same thing.”

She waited for him to quiet down. He seemed to, at last. “I asked you to
tell me something ugly, and you did. Did it make you feel better?”

He looked at her strangely. _Wasn’t there something—oh, yes. Yesterday,
about the watch. She made him tell and then asked if he didn’t feel
better. Was she getting back to that damn watch? I guess not_, he
thought, and for some reason felt very ashamed. “Yeah, I feel some
better.” He looked into himself, found that what he had just said was
true, and started in surprise. “Why should that be?” he asked, and it
was the first time in his whole life he had asked such a question.

“There’s two of us carrying it now,” she explained.

He thought, and then protested, “There was twenty people there.”

“Not one of them knew why you were crying.”

Understanding flashed in him, bloomed almost to revelation. “God damn,”
he said softly.

This time she made no comment. Instead she said, “You learned something
about bravery that day, didn’t you?”

“Not until … now.”

She shrugged. “That doesn’t matter. As long as you understand, it
doesn’t matter how long it takes. Now, if all that happened just to make
you understand something about bravery, it isn’t an ugly thing at all,
is it?”

He did not answer, but his very silence was a response.

“Perhaps one day you will fly into the fire and burn your wings and die,
because it’s all you can do to save something dear to you,” she said
softly. She let him think about that for a moment and then said,
“Perhaps you will be a flame yourself, and see the brave ones fly at you
and lose their wings and die. Either way, you’d know a little better
what you were doing, because of the wasps, wouldn’t you?”

He nodded.

“The playgrounds,” she said, “the medicines, the air-raid watching, the
boys’ clubs, everything we were discussing … each single one of them
kills something to do its work, and sometimes what is killed is very
brave. It isn’t easy to know good from evil.”

“You know,” he blurted.

“Ah,” she said, “but there’s a reason for that. You’d better go now,
Donny.”

Everything she had said to him flew to him as she spoke it, rested
lightly on him, soaked in while he waited, and in time found a response.
This was no exception. When he understood what she had said he jumped up
guiltily covering the thoughtful and receptive self with
self-consciousness like a towel snatched up to cover nakedness.

“Yeah I got to, what time is it?” he muttered. “Well,” he said, “yeah. I
guess I should.” He looked about him as if he had forgotten some
indefinable thing, turned and gave her a vacillating smile and went to
the door. He opened it and turned. Silently and with great difficulty
his mouth moved. He pressed the lips together.

“Good-bye, Donny.”

“Yeah. Take it easy,” he said.

As he spoke he saw himself in the full-length mirror fixed to the closet
door. His eyes widened. It was himself he saw there—there was no doubt
of that. But there was no sharp-cut seam-strained sports jacket, no dull
and tattered shoes, no slicked-down hair smooth in front and
down-pointing shag at the nape. In the reflection he was dressed in a
dark suit. The coat matched the trousers. The tie was a solid color,
maroon, and was held by a clasp so low down that it could barely be seen
in the V of the jacket. The shoes gleamed, not like enamel but like the
sheen of a new black-iron frying pan.

He gasped and blinked, and in that second the reflection told him only
that he was what he was, flashy and clumsy and very much out of place
here. He turned one long scared glance on Miss Phoebe and bolted through
the door.

Don quit his job at the market. He quit jobs often, and usually needed
no reason, but he had one this time. The idea of delivering another
package to Miss Phoebe made him sweat, and the sweat was copious and
cold. He did not know if it was fear or awe or shame, because he did not
investigate the revulsion. He acknowledged it and acted upon it and
otherwise locked the broad category labeled “Miss Phoebe” in the most
guarded passages of his mind.

He was, unquestionably, haunted. Although he refused to acknowledge its
source, he could not escape what can only be described as a sense of
function. When he sharked around the pool halls to pick up some
change—he carried ordinary seaman’s papers, so could get a forty-cent
bed at the Seaman’s Institute—he was of the nonproductive froth on the
brackish edges of a backwater, and he knew it acutely. When he worked as
helper in a dockside shop, refurbishing outdated streetcars to be
shipped to South America, his hand was unavoidably a link in a chain of
vision and enterprise starting with an idea and ending with a peasant
who, at this very moment, walked, but who would inevitably ride. Between
that idea and that shambling peasant were months and miles and dollars,
but the process passed through Don’s hands every time they lifted a
wrench, and he would watch them with mingled wonder and resentment.

He was a piece of nerve-tissue becoming aware of the proximity of a
ganglion, and dimly conscious of the existence, somewhere, of a brain.
His resentment stemmed from a nagging sense of loss. In ignorance he had
possessed a kind of freedom—he’d have called it loneliness while he had
it—which in retrospect filled him with nostalgia. He carried his
inescapable sense of _belonging_ like a bundle of thorns, light but most
irritating. It was with him in drunkenness and the fights, the movies
and the statistical shoutings of the baseball season. He never slept,
but was among those who slept. He could not laugh without the
realization that he was among the laughers. He no longer moved in a
static universe, or rested while the world went by, for his every action
had too obvious a reaction. Unbidden, his mind made analogies to remind
him of this, inverting everything to illuminate this unwanted duality.
The street, he found, pressed upward to his feet with a force equal to
his weight. A new job and he approached one another with an equal
magnetism, and he lost it or claimed it not by his effort or lack of it,
but by an intricate resultant compounded of all the forces working with
him matched against those opposed. On going to bed he would remove one
shoe, and wake from a reverie ten minutes later to find with annoyance
that he had sat motionless all that time to contemplate the weight of
the shoe versus the upward force of the hand that held it. No birth is
painless, and the stirrings of departure from a reactive existence are
most troubling, since habit opposes it and there is no equipment to
define the motivating ambition.

His own perceptions began to plague him. There had been a time when he
was capable of tuning out that which did not concern him. But whatever
it was that was growing within him extended its implacable sense of
kinship to more areas than those of human endeavor. _Why_, he would ask
himself insistently, _is the wet end of a towel darker than the dry end?
What do spiders do with their silk when they climb up a single strand?
What makes the brows of so many big executives tilt downward from the
center?_

He was not a reader, and though he liked to talk, his wharf-rat survival
instinct inhibited him from talking “different” talk, which is what his
“different” questions would be, for one does not expose oneself to the
sharp teeth of raillery.

He found an all-night cafe where the talk was as different as the
talkers could make it; where girls who were unsure of their difference
walked about with cropped hair and made their voices boom, and seedy
little polyglots surreptitiously ate catsup and sugar with their single
interminable cup of coffee; where a lost man could exchange his broken
compass for a broken oar. He went there night after night, sitting alone
and listening, held by the fact that many of these minds were genuinely
questing. Armed with his strange understanding of opposites, he readily
recognized those on one side or the other of forces which most naturally
oppose one another, but since he could admire neither phrasing nor
intensity for their own sakes, he could only wonder at the misery of
these children perched so lonesomely on their dialectical seesaws,
mourning the fact that they did not get off the ground while refusing to
let anyone get on the other end. Once he listened raptly to a man with a
bleeding ear who seemed to understand the things he felt, but instead of
believing many things, this man believed in nothing. Don went away, sad,
wondering if there were anyone, anywhere who cared importantly that when
you yawn, an Italian will ask you if you’re hungry while a Swede will
think you need sleep; or that only six parallel cuts on a half-loaf of
bread will always get you seven slices.

So for many months he worked steadily so that his hands could drain off
tensions and let him think. When he had worked through every combination
and permutation of which he was capable, he could cast back and discover
that all his thoughts had stemmed from Miss Phoebe. His awe and fear of
her ceased to exist when he decided to go back, not to see her, but to
get more material.

A measure of awe returned, however, when he phoned. He heard her lift
the receiver, but she did not say, “Hello.” She said, “Why, Don! How are
you?”

He swallowed hard and said, “Good, Miss Phoebe.”

“Four o’clock tomorrow,” she said, and hung up.

He put the receiver back carefully and stood looking at the telephone.
He worked the tip of the finger-stop under his thumbnail and stood for a
long time in the booth, carefully cleaning away the thin parenthesis of
oily grime which had defied his brush that morning. When it was gone, so
was his fright, but it took a long time. _I’ve forgotten it all right_,
he thought, _but oh, my aching back!_

Belatedly he thought, _Why, she called me Don, not Donny_.

He went back to the cafe that night, feeling a fine new sense of
insulation. He had so much to look forward to that searches could wait.
And like many a searcher before him, he found what he was looking for as
soon as he stopped looking. It was a face that could not have drawn him
more if it had been luminous, or leaf-green. It was a face with strong
and definite lines, with good pads of laughter-muscles under the
cheekbones, and eye-sockets shaped to catch and hold laughter early and
long. Her hair was long and seemed black, but its highlights were not
blue but red. She sat with six other people around a large table, her
eyes open and sleeping, her good mouth lax and miserable.

He made no attempt to attract her attention, or to join the group. He
simply watched her until she left, which was some three or four hours
later. He followed her and so did another man. When she turned up the
steps of a brownstone a few blocks away the man followed her, and was
halfway up the steps when she was at the top, fumbling for a key. When
Don stopped, looking up, the man saw him and whirled. He blocked Don’s
view of the girl. To Don he was not a person at all, but something in
the way. Don made an impatient, get-out-of-the-way gesture with his
head, and only then realized that the man was at bay, terrified, caught
red-handed. His eyes were round and he drooled. Don stood looking
upward, quite astonished, as the man sidled down, glaring, panting, and
suddenly leapt past him and pelted off down the street.

Don looked from the shadowed, dwindling figure to the lighted doorway.
The girl had both hands on the side of the outer, open doorway and was
staring down at him with bright unbelief in her face. “Oh, dear God,”
she said.

Don saw that she was frightened, so he said, “It’s all right.” He stayed
where he was.

She glanced down the street where the man had gone and found it empty.
Slowly she came toward Don and stopped on the third step above him. “Are
you an angel?” she asked. In her voice was a childlike eagerness and the
shadow of the laughter that her face was made for.

Don made a small, abashed sound. “Me? Not me.”

She looked down the street and shuddered. “I thought I didn’t care any
more _what_ happened,” she said, as if she were not speaking to him at
all. Then she looked at him. “Anyway, thanks. Thanks. I don’t know what
he might’ve … if you …”

Don writhed under her clear, sincere eyes. “I didn’t do nothing.” He
backed off a pace. “What do you mean, am I a angel?”

“Didn’t you ever hear about a guardian angel?”

He had, but he couldn’t find it in himself to pursue such a line of
talk. He had never met anyone who talked like this. “Who was that guy?”

“He’s crazy. They had him locked up for a long time, he hurt a little
girl once. He gets like that once in a while.”

“Well, you want to watch out,” he said.

She nodded gravely. “I guess I care after all,” she said. “I’ll watch
out.”

“Well, take it easy;” he said.

She looked quickly at his face. His words had far more dismissal in them
than he had intended, and he suddenly felt miserable. She turned and
slowly climbed the steps. He began to move away because he could think
of nothing else to do. He looked back over his shoulder and saw her in
the doorway, facing him. He thought she was going to call out, and
stopped. She went inside without speaking again, and he suddenly felt
very foolish. He went home and thought about her all night and all the
next day. He wondered what her name was.

When he pressed the buzzer, Miss Phoebe did not come to the door
immediately. He stood there wondering if he should buzz again or go away
or what. Then the door opened. “Come in, Don.”

He stepped inside, and though he thought he had forgotten about the
strange mirror, he found himself looking for it even before he saw Miss
Phoebe’s face. It was still there, and in it he saw himself as before,
with the dark suit, the quiet tie, the dull, clean-buffed shoes. He saw
it with an odd sense of disappointment, for it had given him such a
wondrous shock before, but now reflected only what a normal mirror
would, since he was wearing such a suit and tie and shoes—but wait; the
figure in the reflection carried something and he did not. A paper
parcel … a wrapped bunch of flowers; not a florist’s elaboration, but
tissue-wrapped jonquils from a subway peddler. He blinked, and the
reflection was now quite accurate again.

All this took place in something over three seconds. He now became aware
of a change in the room, _it’s—oh, the light_. It had been almost glary
with its jewel-clean windows and scrubbed white woodwork, but now it was
filled with mellow orange light. Part of this was sunlight struggling
through the inexpensive blinds, which were drawn all the way down. Part
was something else he did not see until he stepped fully into the room
and into the range of light from the near corner. He gasped and stared,
and, furiously, he felt tears rush into his eyes so that the light
wavered and ran.

“Happy birthday, Don,” said Miss Phoebe severely.

Don said, “Aw.” He blinked hard and looked at the little round cake with
its eighteen five-and-dime candles. “Aw.”

“Blow them out quickly,” she said. “They run.”

He bent over the cake.

“Every one, mind,” she said. “In one breath.”

He blew. All the candles went out but one. He had no air left in his
lungs, and he looked at the candle in purple panic. In a childlike way,
he could not bring himself to break the rules she had set up. His mouth
yawped open and closed like that of a beached fish. He puffed his cheeks
out by pushing his tongue up and forward, leaned very close to the
candle, and released the air in his mouth with a tiny explosive pop. The
candle went out.

“Splendid. Open the blinds for me like a good boy.”

He did as he was asked without resentment. As she plucked the little
sugar candleholders out of the cake, he said, “How’d you know it was my
birthday?”

“Here’s the knife. You must cut it first, you know.”

He came forward. “It’s real pretty. I never had no birthday cake
before.”

“I’m glad you like it. Hurry now. The tea’s just right.”

He busied himself, serving and handing and receiving and setting down,
moving chairs, taking sugar. He was too happy to speak.

“Now then,” she said when they were settled. “Tell me what you’ve been
up to.”

He assumed she knew, but if she wanted him to say, why, he would. “I’m a
typewriter mechanic now,” he said. “I like it fine. I work nights in big
offices and nobody bothers me none. How’ve you been?”

She did not answer him directly, but her serene expression said that
nothing bad could ever happen to her. “And is that all? Just work and
sleep?”

“I been thinkin’,” he said. He looked at her curiously. “I thought a lot
about what you said.” She did not respond. “I mean about everything
working on everything else, an’ the wasps and all.” Again she was
silent, but now there was response in it.

He said, “I was all mixed up for a long time. Part of the time I was
mad. I mean, like you’re working for a boss who won’t let up on you,
thinks he owns you just because you work there. Used to be I thought
about whatever I wanted to, I could stop thinkin’ like turnin’ a light
off.”

“Very apt,” she remarked. “It was exactly that.”

He waited while this was absorbed. “After I was here I couldn’t turn off
the light; the switch was busted. The more I worked on things, the more
mixed-up they got.” In a moment he added, “For a while.”

“What things?” she asked.

“Hard to say,” he answered honestly. “I never had nobody to tell me
much, but I had some things pretty straight. It’s wrong to swipe stuff.
It’s right to do what they tell you. It’s wrong to play with yourself.
It’s right to go to church.”

“It’s right to worship,” she interjected. “If you can worship in a
church, that’s the best place to do it. If you can worship better in
another place, then that’s where you should go instead.”

_“That’s_ what I mean!” he barked, pointing a bony finger like a
revolver. “You say something like that, so sure and easy, an’ all
the—the fences go down. Everything’s all in the right box, see, an’ you
come along and shake everything together. You don’t back off from
nothing. You say what you want about anything, an’ you let me say
anything I want to you. Everything I ever thought was right or wrong
could be wrong or right. Like those wasps dyin’ because of me, and you
say they maybe died _for_ me, so’s I could learn something. Like you
sayin’ I could be a wasp or a fire, an’ still know what was what … I’ll
get mixed up again if I go on talkin’ about it.”

“I think not,” she said, and he felt very pleased. She said, “It’s in
the nature of things to be ‘shaken all together,’ as you put it. A bird
brings death to a worm and a wildcat brings death to the bird. Can we
say that what struck the worm and the bird was evil, when the wildcat’s
kittens took so much good from it? Or if the murder of the worm is good,
can we call the wildcat evil?”

“There isn’t no … no _altogether_ good or bad, huh.”

“Now, that is a very wrong thing to say,” she said with soft-voiced
asperity.

“You gone an’ done it again!” he exclaimed.

She did not smile with him. “There is an absolute good and an absolute
evil. They cannot be confused with right and wrong, or building and
destroying as we know them, because, like the cat and the worm, those
things depend on whose side you take. Don, I’m going to show you
something very strange and wonderful.”

She went to her little desk and got pencil and paper. She drew a circle,
and within it she sketched in an S-shaped line. One side of this line
she filled in with quick short strokes of her pencil:

[]

“This,” she said, as Don pored over it, “is the most ancient symbol
known to man. It’s called ‘yin and Yang.’ ‘Yin’ is the Chinese term for
darkness and earth. ‘Yang’ means light and sky. Together they form the
complete circle—the universe, the cosmos—everything. Nothing under
heaven can be altogether one of these things or the other. The symbol
means light and dark. It means birth and death. It is everything which
holds together and draws down, with everything that pours out and
disperses. It is male and female, hope and history, love and hate.
It’s—everything there is or could be. It’s why you can’t say the murder
of a worm by a bird is good or evil.”

“This here yin an’ Yang’s in everything we do, huh.”

“Yes.”

“It’s God an’ the Devil then.”

“_Good_ and the devil.” She placed her hand over the entire symbol. “God
is all of it.”

“Well, all right!” he exclaimed. “So it’s like I said. There ain’t a
‘altogether good’ and a ‘altogether bad’. Miss Phoebe, how you know
you’re right when you bust up some pusher’s business or close a house?”

“There’s a very good way of knowing, Don. I’m very glad you asked me
that question.” She all but beamed at him—she, who hardly ever even
smiled. “Now listen carefully. I am going to tell you something which it
took me many years to find out. I am going to tell you because I do not
see why the young shouldn’t use it.

“Good and evil are active forces—almost like living things. I said that
nothing under heaven can be completely one of these things or the other,
and it’s true. But, Don—good and evil come to us from _somewhere_. They
reach this cosmos as living forces, constantly replenished—from
_somewhere_. It follows that there is a Source of good and a Source of
evil … or call them light and dark, or birth and death if you like.”

She put her finger on the symbol. “Human beings, at least with their
conscious wills, try to live here, in the Yang part. Many find
themselves on the dark side; some cross and recross the borderline. Some
set a course for themselves and drive it straight and true, and never
understand that the border itself turns and twists and will have them on
one side and then the other.

“In any case, these forces are in balance, and they must remain so. But
as they are living, vital forces, there must be those who willingly and
purposefully work with them.”

With his thumbnail he flicked the paper. “From this, everything’s so
even-steven you’d never know who you’re working for.”

“Not true, Don. There are ways of knowing.”

He opened his lips and closed them, turned away, shaking his head.

“You may ask me, Don,” she said.

“Well, okay. You’re one of ’em. Right?”

“Perhaps so.”

“Perhaps nothing. You knocked me flat on my noggin twice in a row an’
never touched me. You’re—you’re somethin’ special, that’s for sure. You
even knew about my birthday. You know who’s callin’ when the phone
rings.”

“There are advantages.”

“All right then, here’s what I’m gettin’ to, and I don’t want you to get
mad at me. What I want to know is, why ain’t you rich?”

“What do you mean by rich?”

He kicked the table leg gently. “Junk,” he said. He waved at the
windows. “Everybody’s got venetian blinds now. Look there, cracks in the
ceiling ‘n you’ll get a rent rise if you complain, long as it ain’t
leakin’. You know, if I could do the things you do, I’d have me a big
house an’ a car. I’d have flunkies to wash dishes an’ all like that.”

“I wouldn’t be rich if I had all those things, Don.”

He looked at her guardedly. He knew she was capable of a preachment,
though he had been lucky so far. “Miss Phoebe,” he said respectfully,
“You ain’t goin’ to tell me the—uh—inner riches is better’n a fishtail
Cadillac.”

“I’ll ask _you_,” she said patiently. “Would you want a big house and
servants and all those things?”

“Well, _sure!_”

“Why?”

“Why? Well, because, because—well, that’s the way to live, that’s all.”

“Why is it the way to live?”

“Well, anyone can see why.”

“Don, answer the question. Why is that the way to live?”

“Well,” he said. He made a circular gesture and put his hand down
limply. He wet his lips. “Well, because you’d have what you wanted.” He
looked at her hopefully and realized he’d have to try again. “You could
make anyone do what you wanted.”

“Ah,” she said. “Why would you want to do that?”

“So you wouldn’t have to do your own work.”

“Aside from personal comfort—why would you want to be able to tell other
people what to do?”

“You tell me,” he said with some warmth.

“The answers are in you if you’ll only look, Don. Tell me: Why?”

He considered. “I guess it’d make me feel good.”

“Feel good?”

“The boss. The Man. You know. I say jump, they jump.”

“Power?”

“Yeah, that’s it, power.”

“Then you want riches so you’ll have a sense of power.”

“You’re in.”

“And you wonder why I don’t want riches. Don, I’ve _got_ power.
Moreover, it was given me and it’s mine. I needn’t buy it for the rest
of my life.”

“Well, now …” he breathed.

“You can’t imagine power in any other terms than cars and swimming
pools, can you?”

“Yes I can,” he said instantly. Then he grinned and added, “But not
yet.”

“I think that’s more true than you know,” she said, giving him her
sparse smile. “You’ll come to understand it.”

They sat in companionable silence. He picked up a crumb of cake icing
and looked at it. “Real good cake,” he murmured, and ate it. Almost
without change of inflection, he said, “I got a real ugly one to tell
you.”

She waited, in the responsive silence he was coming to know so well.

“Met a girl last night.”

He was not looking at her and so did not see her eyes click open, round
and moist. He hooked his heel in the chair rung and put his fist on the
raised knee, thumb up. He lowered his head until the thumb fitted into
the hollow at the bridge of his nose. Resting his head precariously
there, rolling it slightly from time to time as if he perversely enjoyed
the pressure and the ache, he began to speak. And if Miss Phoebe found
surprising the leaps from power to birthday cake to a girl to what
happened in the sewer, she said nothing.

“Big sewer outlet down under the docks at Twenny-Seventh,” he said. “Was
about nine or ten, playing there. Kid called Renzo. We were inside the
pipe, it was about five feet high, and knee-deep in storm water. Saw
somethin’ bobbin’ in the water, got close enough to look. It was the
hind feet off a dead rat, a great big one, and _real_ dead. Renzo, he
was over by the outlet tryin’ to see if he could get up on a towboat out
there, and I thought it might be fine if I could throw the rat on his
back on account he didn’t have no shirt on. I took hold of the rat’s
feet and pulled but that rat, he had his head stuck in a side-pipe
somehow, an’ I guess he swole some too. I guess I said something and
Renzo he come over, so there was nothin’ for it then but haul the rat
out anyway. I got a good hold and yanked, an’ something popped an’ up he
came. I pulled ’im right out of his skin. There he was wet an’ red an’
bare an’ smellin’ a good deal. Renzo, he lets out a big holler,
laughin’, I can still hear it in that echoey pipe. I’m standin’ there
like a goofball, starin’ at this rat. Renzo says, ‘Hit’m quick, Doc, or
he’ll never start breathin’!’ I just barely got the idea when the legs
come off the rat an’ it fell in the water with me still holdin’ the
feet.”

It was very quiet for a while. Don rocked his head, digging his thumb
into the bridge of his nose. “Renzo and me we had a big fight after. He
tol’ everybody I had a baby in the sewer. He tol’ ’em I’s a first-class
stork. They all started to call me Stork. I hadda fight five of ’em in
two days before they cut it out.

“Kid stuff,” he said suddenly, too loudly, and sat upright, wide-eyed,
startled at the sound. “I know it was kid stuff, I can forget it. But it
won’t … it won’t forget.”

Miss Phoebe stirred, but said nothing. Don said, “Girls. I never had
nothing much to do with girls, kidded ’em some if there was somebody
with me started it, and like that. Never by myself. I tell you how it
is, it’s—” He was quiet for a long moment. His lips moved as if he were
speaking silently, words after words until he found the words he wanted.
He went on in precisely the same tone, like an interrupted tape
recorder. “—like this, I get so I like a girl a whole lot, I want to get
close to her, I think about her like any fellow does. So before I can
think much about it, let alone _do_ anything, zing! I’m standin’ in that
stinkin’ sewer, Renzo’s yellin’ ‘Hit’m quick, Doc,’ an’ all the rest of
it.” He blew sharply from his nostrils. “The better a girl smells,” he
said hoarsely, “the worse it is. So I think about girls, I think about
babies; I think about babies, it’s Renzo and me and that echo.
Laughin’,” he mumbled, “him laughin’.

“I met a girl last night,” he said clearly, “I don’t want ever to think
about like that. I walked away. I don’t know what her name is. I want to
see her some more. I’m afraid. So that’s why.”

After a while he said, “That’s why I told you.”

And later, “You were a big help before, the wasps.” As he spoke he
realized that there was no point in hurrying her; she had heard him the
first time and would wait until she was ready. He picked up another
piece of icing, crushed it, tossed the pieces back on the plate.

“You never asked me,” said Miss Phoebe, “about the power I have, and how
it came to me.”

“Din’t think you’d say. I wouldn’t, if I had it. This girl was—”

“Study,” said Miss Phoebe. “More of it than you realize. Training and
discipline and, I suppose, a certain natural talent which,” she said,
fixing him sternly with her eyes as he was about to interrupt, “I am
sure you also have. To a rather amazing degree. I have come a long way,
a long hard way, and it isn’t so many years ago that I first began to
feel this power … I like to think of you with it, young and strong
and … and good, growing greater year by year. Don, would you like the
power? Would you work hard and patiently for it?”

He was very quiet. Suddenly he looked up at her. “What?”

She said—and for once the control showed—“I thought you might want to
answer a question like that.”

He scratched his head and grinned. “Gee, I’m sorry, Miss Phoebe, but for
that one second I was thinkin’ about … something else, I guess. Now,” he
said brightly, “what was it you wanted to know?”

“What was this matter you found so captivating?” she asked heavily. “I
must say I’m not used to talking to myself, Don.”

“Ah, don’t jump salty, Miss Phoebe,” he said contritely. “I’ll pay
attention, honest. It’s just that I—you din’t say word _one_ about what
I told you. I guess I was tryin’ to figure it out by myself if you
wasn’t goin’ to help.”

“Perhaps you didn’t wait long enough.”

“Oh.” He looked at her and his eyes widened. _“Oh!_ I never thought of
that. Hey, go ahead, will you?” He drew his knees together and clasped
them, turned to face her fully.

She nodded with a slightly injured satisfaction. “I asked you, Don, if
you’d like the kind of power I have, for yourself.”

_“Me?”_ he demanded, incredulously.

“You. And I also asked you if you would work hard and patiently to get
it.”

“Would I! Look, you don’t really think, I mean, I’m just a—”

“We’ll see,” she said.

She glanced out the window. Dusk was not far away. The curtains hung
limp and straight in the still air. She rose and went to the windows,
drew the blinds down. The severe velour drapes were on cranes. She swung
them over the windows. They were not cut full enough to cover
completely; each window admitted a four-inch slit of light. But that
side of the building was in shadow, and she turned back to find Don
blinking in deep obscurity. She went back to her chair.

“Come closer,” she said. “No, not that way—facing me. That’s it. Your
back to the window. Now, I’m going to cover my face. That’s because
otherwise the light would be on it; I don’t want you to look at me or at
anything but what you find inside yourself.” She took a dark silk scarf
from the small drawer in the end of the gateleg table. “Put your hands
out. Palms down. So.” She dropped the scarf over her face and hair, and
felt for his hands. She slipped hers under his, palms upward, and leaned
forward until she could grasp his wrists. “Hold mine that way too. Good.

“Be absolutely quiet.”

He was. She said, “There’s something the matter. You’re all tightened
up. And you’re not close enough. Don’t move! I mean, in your mind … ah,
I see. You’ll have your questions answered. Just trust me.” A moment
later she said, “That’s _much_ better. There’s something on your mind,
though, a little something. Say it, whatever it is.”

“I was thinkin’, this is a trapeze grip, like in the circus.”

“So it is! Well, it’s a good contact. Now, don’t think of anything at
all. If you want to speak, well, do; but nothing will be accomplished
until you no longer feel like talking.

“There is a school of discipline called Yoga,” she said quietly. “For
years I have studied and practiced it. It’s a lifetime’s work in itself,
and still it’s only the first part of what I’ve done. It has to do with
the harmony of the body and the mind, and the complete control of both.
My breathing will sound strange to you. Don’t be frightened; it’s
perfectly all right.”

His hands lay heavily in hers. He opened his eyes and looked at her but
there was nothing to see, just the black mass of her silk-shrouded head
and shoulders in the dim light. Her breathing deepened. As he became
more and more aware of other silences, her breathing became more and
more central in his attention. He began to wonder where she was putting
it all; an inhalation couldn’t possibly continue for so long, like the
distant hiss of escaping steam. And when it dwindled, the silence was
almost too complete, for too long; no one could hold such a deep breath
for as long as that! And when at last the breath began to come out
again, it seemed as if the slow hiss went on longer even than the
inhalation. If he had wondered where she was putting it, he now wondered
where she was getting it.

And at last he realized that the breathing was not deep at all, but
shallow in the extreme; it was just that the silence was deeper and her
control greater than he had imagined.

His hands—

“It tingles. Like electric,” he said aloud.

His voice did not disturb her in the least. She made no answer in any
area. The silence deepened, the darkness deepened, the tingling
continued and grew … not grew; it spread. When he first felt it, it had
lived in a spot on each wrist, where it contacted hers. Now it uncoiled,
sending a thin line of sensation up into his forearms and down into his
hands. He followed its growth, fascinated. Around the center of each
palm the tingling drew a circle, and sent a fine twig of feeling growing
into his fingers, and at the same time he could feel it negotiating the
turn of his elbows.

He thought it had stopped growing, and then realized that it had simply
checked its twig-like creeping, and was broadening; the line in his arms
and fingers was becoming a band, a bar of feeling. It crossed his mind
that if this bothered him at all he could pull his hands away and break
the contact, and that if he did that Miss Phoebe would not resent it in
any way. And, since he knew he was free to do it, knew it without
question, he was not tempted. He sat quietly, wonder-struck, tasting the
experience.

With a small silent explosion there were the tingling, hair-thin lines
of sensation falling like distant fireworks through his chest and
abdomen, infusing his loins and thighs and the calves of his legs. At
the same time more of them crept upward through his neck and head,
flared into and around his ears, settled and boiled and shimmered
through his lobes and cheeks, curled and clasped the roots of his
eyelids. And again there was the feeling of the lines broadening, fusing
one with the other as they swelled. Distantly he recognized their
ultimate; they would grow inward and outward until they were a complete
thing, bounded exactly by everything he was, every hair, every contour,
every thought and function.

He opened his eyes, and the growth was not affected. The dark mass of
Miss Phoebe’s head was where it had been, friendly and near and
reassuring. He half-smiled, and the sparkling delicate little lines of
feeling on his lips yielded to the smile, played in it like
infinitesimal dolphins, gave happy news of it to all the other threads,
and they all sang to his half-smile and gave him joy. He closed his eyes
comfortably, and cheerful filaments reached for one another between his
upper and lower lashes.

An uncountable time passed. Time now was like no time he knew of,
drilling as it always had through event after event, predictable and
obedient to rust, springtime, and the scissoring hands of clocks. This
was a new thing … not a suspension, for it was too alive for that. It
was different, that’s all, different the way this feeling was, and now
the lines and bands and bars were fused and grown, and he was filled, he
was, himself, of a piece with what had once been the tingling of a spot
on his wrist.

It was a feeling, still a feeling, but it was a substance too,
Don-sized, Don-shaped. A color … no, it wasn’t a color, but if it had
been a color it was beginning to glow and change. It was glowing as
steel glows in the soaking pits, a color impossible to call black
because it is red inside; and now you can see the red; and now the red
has orange in it, and now in the orange is yellow, and when white shows
in the yellow you may no longer look, but still the radiation beats
through you, intensifying … not a color, no; this thing had no color and
no light, but if it had been a color, this would have been its spectral
growth.

And this was the structure, this the unnamable _something_ which now
found itself alive and joyous. It was from such a peak that the living
thing rose as if from sleep, became conscious of its own balance and
strength, and leapt heavenward with a single cry like all the
satisfying, terminal resolving chords of all music, all uttered in a
wingbeat of time.

Then it was over not because it was finished, like music or a meal, but
because it was perfect, like foam or a flower caught in the infrangible
amber of memory. Don left the experience without surfeit, without
tension, without exhaustion. He sat peacefully with his hands in Miss
Phoebe’s, not dazzled, not numb, replenished in some luxurious volume
within him which kept what it gained for all of life, and which had an
infinite capacity. But for the cloth over her face and the odd fact that
their hands were dripping with perspiration, they might just that second
have begun. It may even have been that second.

Miss Phoebe disengaged her hands and plucked away the cloth. She was
smiling—really smiling, and Don understood why she so seldom smiled, if
this were the expression she used for such experiences.

He answered the smile, and said nothing, because about perfect things
nothing can be said. He went and dried his hands and then pulled back
the drapes and raised the blinds while she straightened the chairs.

“The ancients,” said Miss Phoebe, “recognized four elements: earth, air,
fire and water. This power can do anything those four elements can do.”
She put down the clean cups, and went to get her crumb brush. “To start
with,” she added.

He placed the remark where it would soak in, and picked up a piece of
icing from the cake plate. This time he ate it. “Why is a wet towel
darker than a dry one?”

“I—why, I hadn’t thought,” she said. “It is, now that you mention it.
I’m sure I don’t know why, though.”

“Well, maybe you know this,” he said. “Why I been worrying about it so
much?”

“Worrying?”

“You know what I mean. That and why most motors that use heat for power
got to have a cooling system, and why do paper towels tear where they
ain’t perf’rated, and a zillion things like that. I never used to.”

“Perhaps it’s … yes, I know. Of _course_!” she said happily. “You’re
getting a—call it a kinship with things. A sense of interrelationship.”

“Is that good?”

“I think it is. It means I was right in feeling that you have a natural
talent for what I’m going to teach you.”

“It takes up a lot of my time,” he grumbled.

“It’s good to be alive all the time,” she said. She poured. “Don, do you
know what a revelation is?”

“I heard of it.”

“It’s a sudden glimpse of the real truth. You had one about the wasps.”

“I had it awful late.”

That doesn’t matter. You had it, that’s the important thing. You had one
with the rat, too.”

“I did?”

“With the wasps you had a revelation of sacrifice and courage. With the
rat—well, you know yourself what effect it has had on you.”

“I’m the only one I know has no girl,” he said.

“That is exactly it.”

“Don’t tell me it’s s’posed to be that way!”

“For you, I—I’d say so.”

“Miss Phoebe, I don’t think l know what you’re talkin’ about.”

She looked at her teacup. “I’ve never been married.”

“Me too,” he said somberly. “Wait, is that what you—”

“Why do people get married?”

“Kids.”

“Oh, that isn’t all.”

He said, with his mouth full, “They wanna be together, I guess. Team up,
like. One pays the bills, the other runs the joint.”

“That’s about it. Sharing. They want to share. You know the things they
share.”

“I heard,” he said shortly.

She leaned forward. “Do you think they can share anything like what
we’ve had this afternoon?”

_“That_ I never heard,” he said pensively.

“I don’t wonder. Don, your revelation with the rat is as basic a picture
of what is called ‘original sin’ as anything I have ever heard.”

“Original sin,” he said thoughtfully. “That’s about Adam an’—no, wait. I
remember. Everybody’s supposed to be sinful to start with because it
takes a sin to get’m started.”

“Once in a while,” she said, “it seems as if you know so few words
because you don’t need them. That was beautifully put. Don, I think that
awful thing that happened to you in the sewer was a blessing. I think
it’s a good thing, not a bad one. It might be bad for someone else, but
not for you. It’s kept you as you are so far. I don’t think you should
try to forget it. It’s a warning and a defense. It’s a weapon against
the ‘yin’ forces. You are a very special person, Don. You were made for
better things than—than others.”

“About the wasps,” he said. “As soon as you started to talk I begun to
feel better. About this, I don’t feel better.” He looked up to the point
where the wall met the ceiling and seemed to be listening to his own
last phrase. He nodded definitely. “I don’t feel better. I feel worse.”

She touched his arm. It was the only time she had made such a gesture.
“You’re strong and growing and you’re just eighteen.” Her voice was very
kind. “It would be a strange thing indeed if a young man your age didn’t
have his problems and struggles and tempta—I mean, battles. I’m sorry I
can’t resolve it for you, Don. I wish I could. But I know what’s right.
Don’t I, Don, don’t I?”

“Every time,” he said glumly. “But I …” His gaze became abstracted.

She watched him anxiously. “Don’t think about her,” she whispered.
“Don’t. You don’t have to. Don, do you know that what we did this
afternoon was only the very beginning, like the first day of
kindergarten?”

His eyes came back to her, bright. “Yeah, huh. Hey, how about that.”

“When would you like to do some more?”

“Now?”

“Bless you, no! We both have things to do. And besides, you have to
think. You know it takes time to think.”

“Yeah, okay. When?”

“A week.”

“Don’t worry about me, I’ll be here. Hey, I’m gonna be late for work.”

He went to the door. “Take it easy,” he said.

He went out and closed the door but before the latch clicked he pushed
it open again. He crossed the room to her.

He said, “Hey, thanks for the birthday cake. It was …” His mouth moved
as he searched. “It was a good birthday cake.” He took her hand and
shook it heartily. Then he was gone.

Miss Phoebe was just as pink as the birthday cake. To the closed door
she murmured, “Take it easy.”

Don was in a subway station two nights later, waiting for an express.
The dirty concrete shaft is atypical and mysterious at half-past four in
the morning. The platforms are unlittered and deserted, and there is a
complete absence of the shattering roar and babble and bustle for which
these urban entrails are built. An approaching train can be heard
starting and running and stopping sometimes ten or twelve minutes before
it pulls in, and a single set of footfalls on the mezzanine above will
outlast it. The few passengers waiting seem always to huddle together
near one of the wooden benches, and there seems to be a kind of inverse
square law in operation, for the closer they approach one another the
greater the casual unnoticing manners they affect, though they will all
turn to watch someone walking toward them from two hundred feet away.
And when angry voices bark out, the effect is more shattering than it
would be in a cathedral.

A tattered man slept uneasily on the bench. Two women buzz-buzzed
ceaselessly at the other end. A black-browed man in gray tweed strode
the platform, glowering, looking as if he were expected to decide on the
recall of the Ambassador to the Court of St. James by morning.

Don happened to be looking at the tattered man, and the way the old
brown hat was pulled down over the face (it could have been a headless
corpse, and no one would have been the wiser), when the body shuddered
and stirred. A strip of stubbled skin emerged between the hat and the
collar, and developed a mouth into which was stuffed a soggy collection
of leaf-mold which may have been a cigar butt yesterday. The man’s hand
came up and fumbled around, coming away with most of the soggy thing.
The jaws worked, the lips smacked distastefully. The hand pushed the hat
brim up only enough to expose a red eye, which glared at the butt. The
hat fell again, and the hand pitched the butt away.

At this point the black-browed man hove to, straddle-legged in front of
the bench. He opened his coat and hooked his thumbs in the armholes of
his waistcoat. He tilted his head back, half-closed his eyes, and
sighted through the cleft on his chin at the huddled creature on the
bench. “You!” he grated, and everyone swung around to stare at him. He
thumped the sleeping man’s ankle with the side of his foot. “You!”
Everyone looked at the bench.

The tattered man said “Whuh-wuh-wuh-wuh,” and smacked his lips. Suddenly
he was bolt upright, staring.

“You!” barked the black-browed man. He pointed to the butt. “Pick that
up!”

The tattered man looked at him and down at the butt. His hand strayed to
his mouth, felt blindly on and around it. He looked down again at the
butt and dull recognition began to filter into his face. “Oh sure boss,
sure,” he whined. He cringed low, beginning to stoop down off the bench
but afraid to stop talking, afraid to turn his gaze away from the danger
point. “I don’t make no trouble for anybody, mister, not me, honest I
don’t,” he wheedled. “A feller gets down on his luck, you know how it
is, but I never make trouble, mister …”

“Pick it up!”

“Oh sure, sure, right away, boss.”

At this point Don, to his own intense amazement, felt himself
approaching the black-browed man. He tapped him on the shoulder.

“Mister,” he said. He prayed that his tight voice would not break.
“Mister, make _me_ pick it up, huh?”

_“What?”_

Don waved at the tattered man. “A two-year-old kid could push him
around. So what are you proving, you’re a big man or something? Make
_me_ pick up the butt, you’re such a big man.”

“Get away from me,” said the black-browed man. He took two quick paces
backwards. “I know what you are, you’re one of those subway hoodlums.”

Don caught a movement from the corner of his eye. The tattered man had
one knee on the platform, and was leaning forward to pick up the butt.
“Get away from that,” he snapped, and kicked the butt onto the local
tracks.

“Sure, boss, sure, I don’t want no …”

“Get away from me, both of you,” said the black-browed man. He was
preparing for flight. Don suddenly realized that he was afraid—afraid
that he and the tattered man might join forces, or perhaps even that
they had set the whole thing up in advance. He laughed. The black-browed
man backed into a pillar. And just then a train roared in, settling the
matter.

Something touched Don between the shoulder blades and he leaped as if it
had been an ice pick. But it was one of the women. “I just had to tell
you, that was very brave. You’re a fine young man,” she said. She
sniffed in the direction of the distant tweed-clad figure and marched to
the train. It was a local. Don watched it go, and smiled. He felt good.

“Mister, you like to save my life, you did. I don’t want no trouble, you
unnerstan’, I never do. Feller gets down on his luck once in a wh—”

“Shaddup!” said Don. He turned away and froze. Then he went back to the
man and snatched off the old hat. The man cringed.

“I know who you are. You just got back from the can. You got sent up for
attackin’ a girl.”

“I ain’t done a _thing_,” whispered the man. “Gimme back my hat, please,
mister?”

Don looked down at him. He should walk away, he ought to leave this hulk
to rot, but his questing mind was against him. He threw the hat on the
man’s lap and wiped his fingers on the side of his jacket. “I saw you
stayin’ out of trouble three nights ago on Mulberry Street. Followin’ a
girl into a house there.”

“It was you chased me,” said the man. “Oh God.” He tucked himself up on
the bench in a uterine position and began to weep.

“Cut that out,” Don snarled. “I ain’t hit you. If I wanted I coulda
thrown you in front of that train, right?”

“Yeah, instead you saved me f’m that killer,” said the man brokenly.
“Y’r a prince, mister. Y’r a real prince, that’s what you are.”

“You goin’ to stay away from that girl?”

“_Your girl?_ Look, I’ll never even walk past her house no more. I’ll
kill anybody looks at her.”

“Never mind that. Just _you_ stay away from her.”

The express roared in. Don rose and so did the man. Don shoved him back
to the bench. “Take the next one.”

“Yeah, sure, anything you say. Just you say the word.”

Don thought, _I’ll ask him what it is that makes it worth the risk,
chance getting sent up for life just for a thing like that_. Then, _No_,
he thought. _I think I know why_. He got on the train.

He sat down and stared dully ahead. _A man will give up anything, his
freedom, his life even, for a sense of power_.

Q. _How much am I giving up?_

A. _How should I know?_

He looked at the advertisements. “Kulkies are better.” “The better skin
cream.” He wondered if anyone ever wanted to know what these things were
better _than_. “For that richer, creamier, safer lather.” “Try Miss
Phoebe for that better, more powerful power.”

He wondered, and wondered …

Summer dusk, all the offices closed, the traffic gone, no one and
nothing in a hurry for a little while. Don put his back against a board
fence where he could see the entrance, and took out a toothpick. She
might be going out, she might be coming home, she might be home and not
go out, she might be out and not come home. He’d stick around.

He never even got the toothpick wet.

She stood at the top of the steps, looking across at him. He simply
looked back. There were many things he might have done. Rushed across.
Waved. Done a time-step. Looked away. Run. Fallen down.

But he did nothing, and the single fact that filled his perceptions at
that moment was that as long as she stood there with russet gleaming in
her black hair, with her sad, sad cups-for-laughter eyes turned to him,
with the thin summer cloak whipping up and falling to her clean straight
body, why there was nothing he could do.

She came straight across to him. He broke the toothpick and dropped it,
and waited. She crossed the sidewalk and stopped in front of him,
looking at his eyes, his mouth, his eyes. “You don’t even remember me.”

“I remember you all right.”

She leaned closer. The whites of her eyes showed under her pupils when
she did that, like the high crescent moon in the tropics that floats
startlingly on its back. These two crescents were twice as startling. “I
don’t think you do.”

“Over there.” With his chin he indicated her steps. “The other night.”

It was then, at last, that she smiled, and the eyes held what they were
made for. “I saw him again.”

“He try anything?”

She laughed. “He _ran!_ He was afraid of me. I don’t think anybody was
ever afraid of me.”

“I am.”

“Oh, that’s the silliest—” She stopped, and again leaned toward him.
“You mean it, don’t you?”

He nodded. “Don’t ever be afraid of me,” she said gravely, “not _ever_.
What did you do to that man?”

“Nothin’. Talked to him.”

“You didn’t hurt him?”

He shook his head.

“I’m glad,” she said. “He’s sick and he’s ugly and he’s bad, too, I
guess, but I think he’s been hurt enough. What’s your name?”

“Don.”

She counted on her fingers. “Don is a Spanish grandee. Don is putting on
clothes. Don is the sun coming up in the morning. Don is … is the
opposite of up. You’re a whole lot of things, Don.” Her eyes widened.
“You laughed!”

“Was that wrong?”

“Oh, _no!_ But I didn’t know you ever laughed.”

“I watched you for three hours the other night and you didn’t laugh. You
didn’t even talk.”

“I would’ve talked if I’d known you were there. Where were you?”

“That all-night joint. I followed you.”

“Why?”

He looked at his shoeshine. With his other foot, he carefully stepped on
it. “Why did you follow me? Were you going to talk to me?”

“No!” he said. “No, by God, I wasn’t. I wouldn’ta.”

“Then why did you follow me?”

“I liked looking at you. I liked seeing you walk.” He glanced across at
the brownstone steps. “I didn’t want anything to happen to you, all
alone like that.”

“Oh, I didn’t care.”

“That’s what you said that night.”

The shadow that crossed her face crossed swiftly, and she laughed. “It’s
all right now.”

“Yeah, but what was it?”

“Oh,” she said. Her head moved in an impatient gesture, but she smiled
at the sky. “There was nothing and nobody. I left school. Daddy was mad
at me. Kids from school acted sorry for me. Other kids, the ones you
saw, they made me tired. I was tired because they were the same way all
the time about the same things all the time, and I was tired because
they kept me up so late.”

“What did you leave school for?”

“I found out what it was for.”

“It’s for learning stuff.”

“It isn’t,” she said positively. “It’s for learning how to learn. And I
know that already. I can learn anything. Why did you come here today?”

“I wanted to see you. Where were you going when you came out?”

“Here,” she said, tapping her foot. “I saw you from the window. I was
waiting for you. I was waiting for you yesterday too. What’s the
matter?”

He grunted.

“Tell me, tell me!”

“I never had a girl talk to me like you do.”

“Don’t you like the way I talk?” she asked anxiously.

“Oh for Pete’s sake it ain’t that!” he exploded. Then he half-smiled at
her. “It’s just I had a crazy idea. I had the idea you always talk like
this. I mean, to anybody.”

“I don’t, I don’t!” she breathed. “Honestly, you’ve got to believe that.
Only you. I’ve always talked to you like this.”

“What do you mean always?”

“Well, everybody’s got somebody to talk to, all their life. You know
what they like to talk about and when they like to be quiet, and when
you can be just silly and when they’d rather be serious and important.
The only thing you don’t know is their face. For that you wait. And then
one day you see the face, and then you have it all.”

“You ain’t talkin’ about _me_!”

“Yes I am.”

“Look,” he said. He had to speak between heartbeats. He had never felt
like this in his whole life before. “You could be—takin’ a—_awful_
chance.”

She shook her head happily.

“Did you ever think maybe everybody ain’t like that?”

“It doesn’t matter. I am.”

His face pinched up. “Suppose I just walked away now and never saw you
again.”

“You wouldn’t.”

“But suppose.”

“Why then I—I’d’ve had this. Talking to you.”

“Hey, you’re crying!”

“Well,” she said, “there you were, walking away.”

“You’d’ve called me back though.”

She turned on him so quickly a tear flew clear of her face and fell
sparkling to the back of his hand. Her eyes blazed. “Never that!” she
said between her teeth. “I want you to stay, but if you want to go, you
go, that’s all. All _I_ want to do is make you want to stay. I’ve
managed so far …”

“How many minutes?” he teased.

“Minutes? Years,” she said seriously.

“The—somebody you talked to, you kind of made him up, huh?”

“I suppose.”

“How could he ever walk away?”

“Easiest thing in the world,” she said. “Somebody like that, they’re
somebody to live up to. It isn’t always easy. You’ve been very patient,”
she said. She reached out and touched his cheek.

He snatched her wrist and held it, hard. “You know what I think,” he
said in a rough whisper, because it was all he had. “I think you’re out
of your goddam head.”

She stood very straight with her eyes closed. She was trembling.

“What’s your name, anyway?”

“Joyce.”

“I love you too, Joyce. Come on, I want you to meet a friend of mine.
It’s a long ride on the subway and I’ll tell you all about it.”

He tried hard but he couldn’t tell her all of it. For some of it there
were no words at all. For some of it there were no words he could use.
She was attentive and puzzled. He bought flowers from a cart, just a
few—red and yellow rosebuds.

“Why flowers?”

He remembered the mirror. That was one of the things he hadn’t been able
to talk about. “It’s just what you do,” he said, “bring flowers.”

“I bet she loves you.”

“Whaddaya mean, she’s pushin’ sixty!”

“All the same,” said Joyce, “if she does she’s not going to like me.”

They went up in the elevator. In the elevator he kissed her.

“What’s the matter, Don?”

“If you want to crawl around an’ whimper like a puppy-dog,” he
whispered, “if you feel useful as a busted broom-handle and worth about
two wet sneezes in a hailstorm—this is a sense of power?”

“I don’t understand.”

“Never mind.”

In the corridor he stopped. He rubbed a smudge off her nose with his
thumb. “She’s sorta funny,” he said. “Just give her a little time. She’s
quite a gal. She looks like Sunday school and talks the same way but she
knows the score. Joyce, she’s the best friend I ever had.”

“All right all right all _right!_ I’ll be good.”

He kissed where the smudge had been. “Come on.”

One of Miss Phoebe’s envelopes was stuck to the door by its flap. On it
was his name.

They looked at one another and then he took the envelope down and got
the note from it.

Don:

I am not at home. Please phone me this evening.

P. W.

“Don, I’m _sorry_!”

“I shoulda phoned. I wanted to surprise her.”

“Surprise her? She knew you were coming.”

“She didn’t know you were coming. Damn it anyway.”

“Oh it’s all right,” she said. She took his hand. “There’ll be other
times. Come on. What’ll you do with those?”

“The flowers? I dunno. Want ’em?”

“They’re hers,” said Joyce.

He gave her a puzzled look. “I got a lot of things to get used to. What
do you mean when you say somethin’ that way?”

“Almost exactly what I say.”

He put the flowers against the door and they went away.

The phone rang four times before Miss Phoebe picked it up.

“It is far too late,” she said frigidly, “for telephone calls. You
should have called earlier, Don. However, it’s just as well. I want you
to know that I am _very_ displeased with you. I have given you certain
privileges, young man, but among them is not that of calling on me
unexpectedly.”

“Miss—”

“Don’t interrupt. In addition, I have never indicated to you that you
were free to—”

“But Miss Ph—”

“—to bring to my home any casual acquaintance you happen to have scraped
up in heaven knows where—”

“Miss _Phoebe!_ Please! I’m in jail.”

“—and invade my—you are _what_?”

“Jail, Miss Phoebe, I got arrested.”

“Where are you now?”

“County. But you don’t need—”

“I’m coming right down,” said Miss Phoebe.

“No, Miss Phoebe, I didn’t call you for that. You go back to b—”

Miss Phoebe hung up.

Miss Phoebe strode into the County Jail with grim familiarity, and
before her red tape disappeared like confetti in a blast-furnace. Twelve
minutes after she arrived she had Don out of his cell and into a private
room, his crisp new jail-record card before her, and was regarding him
with a strange expression of wooden ferocity.

“Sit there,” she said, as the door clicked shut behind an awed and
reverberating policeman.

Don sat. He was rumpled and sleepy, angry and hurt. But he smiled when
he said, “I never thought you’d come. I never expected that, Miss
Phoebe.”

She did not respond. Instead she said coldly, “Indeed? Well, young man,
the matters I have to discuss will not wait.” She sat down opposite him
and picked up the card.

“Miss Phoebe,” he said, “could you be wrong about what you said about me
and girls … that original sin business, and all? I’m all mixed up, Miss
Phoebe. I’m all mixed up!” In his face was a desperate appeal.

“Be quiet,” she said sternly. She was studying the card. “This,” she
said, putting the card down on the table with a dry snap, “tells a great
deal but says nothing. Public nuisance, indecent exposure, suspicion of
rape, impairing the morals of a minor, resisting an officer, and
destruction of city property. Would you care to explain this—this
catalogue to me?”

“What you mean, tell you what happened?”

“That is what I mean.”

“Miss Phoebe, where is she? What they done with her?”

“With whom? You mean the girl? I do not know; moreover, it doesn’t
concern me and it should no longer concern you. Didn’t she get you into
this?”

“I got her into it. Look, could you find out, Miss Phoebe?”

“I do not know what I will do. You’d better explain to me what
happened.”

Again the look of appeal, while she coldly waited. He scratched his head
hard with both hands at once. “Well, we went to your house.”

“I am aware of that.”

“Well, you wasn’t home so we went out. She said take her father’s car. I
got a license; it was all right. So we went an’ got the car and rode
around. Well, we went to a place an’ she showed me how to dance some. We
went somewheres else an’ ate. Then we parked over by the lake. Then,
well, a cop come over and poked around an’ made some trouble an’ I got
mad an’ next thing you know here we are.”

“I asked you,” said Miss Phoebe evenly, “what happened?”

“Aw-w …” It was a long-drawn sound, an admixture of shame and
irritation. “We were in the car an’ this cop came pussy-footin’ up. He
had a big flashlight _this_ long. I seen him comin’. When he got to the
car we was all right. I mean, I had my arm around Joyce, but that’s
all.”

“What _had_ you been doing?”

“Talkin’, that’s all, just talkin’, and …”

“And what?”

“Miss Phoebe,” he blurted, “I always been able to say anything to you I
wanted, about anything. Listen, I _got_ to tell you about this. That
thing that happened, the way it is with me and girls because of the rat,
well, it just wasn’t there with Joyce, it was nothin’, it was like it
never happened. Look, you and me, we had that thing with the hands; it
was … I can’t say it, you know how good it was. Well, with Joyce it was
somepin’ different. It was like I could fly. I never felt like that
before. Miss Phoebe, I had too much these last few days, I don’t know
what goes on … you was right, you was always right, but this I had with
Joyce, that was right too, and they can’t both be right.” He reached
across the table, not quite far enough to touch her. The reaching was in
his eyes and his voice.

Miss Phoebe stiffened a spine already straight as a bowstring. “I have
asked you a simple question and all you can do is gibber at me. _What
happened in that car_?”

Slowly he came back to the room, the hard chair, the bright light, Miss
Phoebe’s implacable face. “That cop,” he said. “He claimed he seen us.
Said he was goin’ to run us in, I said what for, he said carryin’ on
like that in a public place. There was a lot of argument. Next thing you
know he told Joyce to open her dress, he said when it was the way he
seen it before he’d let me know. Joyce she begun to cry an’ I tol’ her
not to do it, an’ the cop said if I was goin’ to act like that he would
run us in for _sure_. You know, I got the idea if she’d done it he’da
left us alone after?

“So I got real mad, I climbed out of the car, I tol’ him we ain’t done
nothin’, he pushes me one side, he shines the light in on Joyce. She
squinchin’ down in the seat, cryin’, he says, ‘Come on, you, you know
what to do.’ I hit the flashlight. I on’y meant to get the light off
her, but I guess I hit it kind of hard. It come up and clonked him in
the teeth. Busted the flashlight too. That’s the city property I
destroyed. He started to cuss and I tol’ him not to. He hit me and
opened the car door an’ shoved me in. He got in the back an’ took out
his gun and tol’ me to drive to the station house.” He shrugged. “So I
had to. That’s all.”

“It is not all. You have not told me what you did before the policeman
came.”

He looked at her, startled. “Why, I—we …” His face flamed, “I love her,”
he said, with difficulty, as if he spoke words in a new and troublesome
tongue. “I mean I … do, that’s all.”

“What did you do?”

“I kissed her.”

“What else did you do?”

“I—” He brought up one hand, made a vague circular gesture, dropped the
hand. He met her gaze. “Like when you love somebody, that’s all.”

“Are you going to tell me exactly what you did, or are you not?”

“Miss Phoebe …” he whispered, “I ain’t never seen you look like that.”

“I want the whole filthy story,” she said. She leaned forward so far
that her chin was only a couple of inches from the table top. Her
protruding, milky eyes seemed to whirl, then it was as if a curtain over
them had been twitched aside, and they blazed.

Don stood up. “Miss Phoebe,” he said. “Miss Phoebe …” It was the voice
of terror itself.

Then a strange thing happened.

It may have been the mere fact of his rising, of being able, for a
moment, to stand over her, look down on her. “Miss Phoebe,” he said
“there—ain’t—no—filthy—story.”

She got up and without another word, marched to the door. As she opened
it the boy raised his fists. His wrists and forearms corded and writhed.
His head went back, his lungs filled, and with all his strength he
shouted the filthiest word he knew. It had one syllable, it was sibilant
and explosive, it was immensely satisfying.

Miss Phoebe stopped, barely in balance between one pace and the next,
momentarily paralyzed. It was like the breaking of the drive-coil on a
motion picture projector.

“They locked her up,” said Don hoarsely. “They took her away with two
floozies an’ a ole woman with DT’s. She ain’t never goin’ to see me
again. Her ole man’ll kill me if he ever sets eyes on me. You were all I
had left. Get the hell out of here …”

She reached the door as it was opened from the other side by a
policeman, who said, “What’s goin’ on here?”

“Incorrigible,” Miss Phoebe spat, and went out. They took Don back to
his cell.

The courtroom was dark and its pew-like seats were almost empty. Outside
it was raining, and the statue of Justice had a broken nose. Don sat
with his head in his hands, not caring about the case being heard, not
caring about his own, not caring about people or things or feelings. For
five days he had not cared about the whitewashed cell he had shared with
the bicycle thief; the two prunes and weak coffee for breakfast, the
blare of the radio in the inner court; the day in, day out screaming of
the man on the third tier who hoarsely “din’t do it I din’t do it I
din’t do …”

His name was called and he was led or shoved—he didn’t care which—before
the bench. A man took his hand and put it on a book held by another man
who said something rapidly. “I do,” said Don. And then Joyce was there,
led up by a tired kindly old fellow with eyes like hers and an unhappy
mouth. Don looked at her once and was sure she wasn’t even trying to
recognize his existence. If she had left her hands at her sides, she was
close enough for him to have touched one of them secretly, for they
stood side by side, facing the judge. But she kept her hands in front of
her and stood with her eyes closed, with her whole face closed, her
lashes down on her cheeks like little barred gates.

The cop, the lousy cop was there too, and he reeled off things about Don
and things about Joyce that were things they hadn’t done, couldn’t have
done, wouldn’t do … he cared about that for a moment, but as he listened
it seemed very clear that what the cop was saying was about two other
people who knew a lot about flesh and nothing about love; and after that
he stopped caring again.

When the cop was finished, the kindly tired man came forward and said
that he would press no charges against this young man if he promised he
would not see his daughter again until she was twenty-one. The judge
pushed down his glasses and looked over them at Don. “Will you make that
promise?”

Don looked at the tired man, who turned away. He looked at Joyce, whose
eyes were closed. “Sure,” he told the judge.

There was some talk about respecting the laws of society which were
there to protect innocence, and how things would be pretty bad if Don
ever appeared before that bench again, and next thing he knew he was
being led through the corridors back to the jail, where they returned
the wallet and fountain pen they had taken away from him, made him sign
a book, unlocked three sets of doors and turned him loose. He stood in
the rain and saw, half a block away, Joyce and her father getting into a
cab.

About two hours later one of the jail guards came out and saw him. “Hey,
boy. You like it here?”

Don pulled the wet hair out of his eyes and looked at the man, and
turned and walked off without saying anything.

“Well, hel_lo_!”

“Now you get away from me, girl. You’re just going to get me in trouble
and I don’t want no trouble.”

“I won’t make any trouble for you, really I won’t. Don’t you want to
talk to me?”

“Look, you know me, you heard ’bout me. Hey, you been sick?”

“No.”

“You look like you been sick. I was sick a whole lot. Fellow down on his
luck, everything happens. Here comes the old lady from the delicatessen.
She’ll see us.”

“That’s all right.”

“She’ll see you, she knows you, she’ll see you talkin’ to me. I don’t
want no trouble.”

“There won’t be any trouble. Please don’t be afraid. I’m not afraid of
you.”

“I ain’t scared of you either but one night that young fellow of yours,
that tall skinny one, he said he’ll throw me under a train if I talk to
you.”

“I have no fellow.”

“Yes you have, that tall skin—”

“Not any more. Not any more … talk to me for a while. Please talk to
me.”

“You sure? You sure he ain’t … you ain’t …”

“I’m sure. He’s gone, he doesn’t write, he doesn’t care.”

“You been sick.”

“No, no, no, no!… I want to tell you something: if ever you eat your
heart out over something, hoping and wishing for it, dreaming and
wanting it, doing everything you can to make yourself fit for it; and
then that something comes along, know what to do?”

“I do’ wan’ no trouble … yeah, grab it!”

“No. _Run!_ Close your eyes and turn your back and run away. Because
wanting something you’ve never had hurts, sometimes, but not like having
it and then losing it.”

“I never had _nothing_.”

“You did so. And you were locked up for years.”

“I didn’t have it, girl. I used it. It wasn’t mine.”

“You didn’t lose it, then; ah, I _see_!”

“If a cop comes along he’ll pinch me just because I’m talkin’ to you.
I’m just a bum, I’m down on my luck, we can’t stand out here like this.”

“Over there, then. Coffee.”

“I ain’t got but four cents.”

“Come on. I have enough.”

“What’sa matter with you, you want to talk to a bum like me!”

“Come on, come on … listen, listen to this:

_“ ‘It is late last night the dog was speaking of you; the snipe was
speaking of you in her deep marsh. It is you are_ _the lonely bird
throughout the woods; and that you may be without a mate until you find
me_.

_“ ‘You promised me and you said a lie to me, that you would be before
me where the sheep are flocked. I gave a whistle and three hundred cries
to you; and I found nothing there but a bleating lamb_.

_“‗You promised me a thing that was hard for you, a ship of gold under a
silver mast; twelve towns and a market in all of them, and a fine white
court by the side of the sea_.

_“ ‘You promised me a thing that is not possible; that you would give me
gloves of the skin of a fish; that you would give me shoes of the skin
of a bird, and a suit of the dearest silk in Ireland_.

_“ ‘My mother said to me not to be talking with you, today or tomorrow
or on Sunday. It was a bad time she took for telling me that, it was
shutting the door after the house was robbed_.…

_“ ‘You have taken the east from me, you have taken the west from me,
you have taken what is before me and what is behind me; you have taken
the moon, you have taken the sun from me, and my fear is great you have
taken God from me.’ ”_

“… That’s something I remembered. I remember, I remember everything.”

“That’s a lonesome thing to remember.”

“Yes … and no one knows who she was. A man called Yeats heard this Irish
girl lamenting, and took it down.”

“I don’t know, I seen you around, I never saw you like this, you been
sick.”

“Drink your coffee and we’ll have another cup.”

Dear Miss Phoebe:

Well dont fall over with surprise to get a letter from me I am not much
at letter writing to any body and I never thot I would wind up writing
to you.

I know you was mad at me and I guess I was mad at you too. Why I am
writing this is I am trying to figure out what it was all about. I know
why I was mad I was mad because you said there was something dirty about
what I did. Mentioning no names. I did not do nothing dirty and so thats
why I was mad.

But all I know about you Miss Phoebe is you was mad I dont know why. I
never done nothing to you I was ascared to in the first place and anyway
I thot you was my freind. I thot anytime there was something on my mind
I could not figure it out, all I had to do was to tell you. This one
time I was in more trouble then I ever had in my entire. All you did you
got mad at me.

Now if you want to stay mad at me thats your busnis but I wish you would
tell me why. I wish we was freinds again but okay if you dont want to.

Well write to me if you feel like it at the Seamans Institute thats
where I am picking up my mail these days I took a ride on a tank ship
and was sick most of the time but thats life.

I am going to get a new fountan pen this one wont spell right (joke). So
take it easy yours truly Don.

Don came out of the Seaman’s Institute and stood looking at the square.
A breeze lifted and dropped, carrying smells of fish and gasoline,
spices, sea-salt, and a slight chill. Don buttoned up his pea-jacket and
pushed his hands down into the pockets. Miss Phoebe’s letter was there,
straight markings on inexpensive, efficient paper, the envelope torn
almost in two because of the way he had opened it. He could see it in
his mind’s eye without effort.

My Dear Don:

Your letter came as something of a surprise to me. I thought you might
write, but not that you would claim unawareness of the reasons for my
feelings toward you.

You will remember that I spent a good deal of time and energy in
acquainting you with the nature of Good and the nature of Evil. I went
even further and familiarized you with a kind of union between souls
which, without me, would have been impossible to you. And I feel I made
quite clear to you the fact that a certain state of grace is necessary
to the achievement of these higher levels of being.

Far from attempting to prove to me that you were a worthy pupil of the
teachings I might have given you, you plunged immediately into actions
which indicate that there is a complete confusion in your mind as to
Good and Evil. You have grossly defiled yourself, almost as if you
insisted upon being unfit. You engaged in foul and carnal practices
which make a mockery of the pure meetings of the higher selves which
once were possible to you.

You should understand that the Sources of the power I once offered you
are ancient and sacred and not to be taken lightly. Your complete lack
of reverence for these antique matters is to me the most unforgivable
part of your inexcusable conduct. The Great Thinkers who developed these
powers in ancient times surely meant a better end for them than that
they be given to young animals.

Perhaps one day you will become capable of understanding the meaning of
reverence, obedience, and honor to ancient mysteries. At that time I
would be interested to hear from you again.

Yours very truly,
(Miss) Phoebe Watkins.

Don growled deep in his throat. Subsequent readings would serve to stew
all the juices from the letter; one reading was sufficient for him to
realize that in the note was no affection and no forgiveness. He
remembered the birthday cake with a pang. He remembered the painful hot
lump in his throat when she had ordered him to wash his face; she had
_cared_ whether he washed his face or not.

He went slowly down to the street. He looked older; he felt older. He
had used his seaman’s papers for something else besides entree to a
clean and inexpensive dormitory. Twice he had thought he was near that
strange, blazing loss of self he had experienced with Miss Phoebe, just
in staring at the living might of the sea. Once, lying on his back on
deck in a clear moonless night, he had been sure of it. There had been a
sensation of having been _chosen_ for something, of having been
fingertip-close to some simple huge fact, some great normal coalescence
of time and distance, a fusion and balance, like yin and Yang, in all
things. But it had escaped him, and now it was of little assistance to
him to know that his sole authority in such things considered him as
disqualified.

“Foul an’ carnal practices,” he said under his breath. _Miss Phoebe_, he
thought, _I bet I could tell you a thing or two about ‘reverence,
obedience an’ honor to ancient mysteries.’_ In a flash of deep
understanding, he saw that those who hold themselves aloof from the
flesh are incapable of comprehending this single fact about those who do
not: only he who is free to take it is truly conscious of what he does
when he leaves it alone.

Someone was in his way. He stepped aside and the man was still in the
way. He snapped out of his introspection and brought his sight back to
earth, clothed in an angry scowl.

For a moment he did not recognize the man. He was still tattered, but he
was clean and straight, and his eyes were clear. It was obvious that he
felt the impact of Don’s scowl; he retreated a short pace, and with the
step were the beginnings of old reflexes: to cringe, to flee. But then
he held hard, and Don had to stop.

“Y’own the sidewalk?” Don demanded. “Oh—it’s you.”

“I got to talk to you,” the man said in a strained voice.

“I got nothin’ to talk to you about,” said Don. “Get back underground
where you belong. Go root for cigar butts in the subway.”

“It’s about Joyce,” said the man.

Don reached and gathered together the lapels of the man’s old jacket. “I
told you once to stay away from her. That means don’t even talk about
her.”

“Get your hands off me,” said the man evenly.

Don grunted in surprise, and let him go. The man said, “I had somepin’
to tell you, but now you can go to hell.”

Don laughed. “What do you know! What are you—full of hash or somethin’?”

The man tugged at the lapels and moved to pass Don. Don caught his arm.
“Wait. What did you want to tell me?”

The man looked into his face. “Remember you said you was going to kill
me, I get near her?”

“I remember.”

“I seen her this morning. I seen her yesterday an’ four nights last
week.”

“The hell you did!”

“You got to get that through your head ‘fore I tell you anything.”

Don shook his head slowly. “This beats anything I ever seen. What
happened to you?”

As if he had not heard, the man said, “I found out what ship you was on.
I watched the papers. I figured you’d go to the Institoot for mail. I
been waitin’ three hours.”

Don grabbed the thin biceps. “Hey. Is somethin’ wrong with Joyce?”

“You give a damn?”

“Listen,” said Don, “I can still break your damn neck.”

The man simply shrugged. Baffled, Don said, between his teeth, “Talk.
You said you wanted to talk—go ahead.”

“Why ain’t you wrote to her?”

“What’s that to you?”

“It’s a whole lot to her.”

“You seem to know a hell of a lot.”

“I told you I see her all the time,” the man pointed out.

“She must talk a lot.”

“To me,” said the man, closing his eyes, “a whole lot.”

“She wouldn’t want to hear from me,” Don said. Then he barked, “What are
you tryin’ to tell me? You and her—what are you to her? You’re not
messin’ with her, comin’ braggin’ to me about it?”

The man put a hand on Don’s chest and pushed him away. There was disgust
on his face, and a strange dignity. “Cut it out,” he said. “Look, I
don’t like you. I don’t like doin’ what I’m doin’ but I got to. Joyce,
she’s been half crazy, see. I don’t know why she started to talk to me;
maybe she just didn’t care any more, maybe she felt so bad she wanted to
dive in a swamp an’ I was the nearest thing to it. She been talkin’ to
me, she … smiles when she sees me. She’ll eat with me, even.”

“You shoulda stayed away from her,” Don mumbled uncertainly.

“Yeah, maybe. And suppose I did, what would she do? If she didn’t have
me to talk to, maybe it would be someone else. Maybe someone else
wouldn’t … be as … leave her …”

“You mean, take care of her,” said Don softly.

“Well, if you want to call it that. Take up her time, anyway, she can’t
get into any other trouble.” He looked at Don beseechingly. “I ain’t
never laid a hand on her. You believe that?”

Don said, “Yeah, I believe that.”

“You going to see her?”

Don shook his head.

The man said in a breathy, shrill voice, “I oughta punch you in the
mouth!”

“Shaddup,” said Don miserably. “What you want me to see her for?”

Suddenly there were tears in the weak blue eyes. But the voice was still
steady. “I ain’t got nothin’. I’ll never have nothin’. This is all I can
do, make you go back. Why won’t you go back?”

“She wouldn’t want to see me,” said Don, “after what I done.”

“You better go see her,” whispered the man. “She thinks she ain’t fit to
live, gettin’ you in jail and all. She thinks it was her fault. She
thinks you feel the same way. She even … she even thinks that’s right.
You dirty rotten no-good lousy—” he cried. He suddenly raised his fists
and hit his own temples with them, and made a bleating sound. He ran off
toward the waterfront.

Don watched him go, stunned to the marrow. Then he turned blindly and
started across the street. There was a screeching of brakes, a flurry of
movement, and he found himself standing with one hand on the front
fender of a taxi.

“Where the hell you think you’re goin’?”

Stupidly, Don said, “What?”

“What’s the matter with you?” roared the cabby.

Don fumbled his way back to the rear door. “A lot, a whole lot,” he
said. He got in. “Thirty-Seven Mulberry Street,” he said.

It was three days later, in the evening, when he went to see Miss
Phoebe.

“Well!” she said when she opened to his ring.

“Can I come in?”

She did not move. “You received my letter?”

“Sure.”

“You understood …”

“I got the idea.”

“There were—ah—certain conditions.”

“Yeah,” said Don. “I got to be capable of understandin’ the meaning of
reverence, obedience, an’ honor to certain ancient mysteries.”

“Have you just memorized it, or do you feel you really are capable?”

“Try me.”

“Very well.” She moved aside. He came in, shoving a blue knitted cap
into his side pocket. He shucked out of the pea-jacket. He was wearing
blue slacks and a black sweater with a white shirt and blue tie. He was
as different from the scrubbed schoolboy neatness of his previous visit
as he was from the ill-fit flashiness of his first one. “How’ve you
been?”

“Well, thank you,” she answered coolly. “Sit down.”

They sat facing one another. Don was watchful, Miss Phoebe wary.
“You’ve … grown,” said Miss Phoebe. It was made not so much as a
statement but as an admission.

“I did a lot,” said Don. “Thought a lot. You’re so right about people in
the world that work for—call it yin an’ Yang—an’ know what they’re
doin’, why they’re doin’ it. All you got to do is look around you. Read
the papers.

She nodded. “Do you have any difficulty in determining which side these
people are on?”

“No more.”

“If that’s true,” she said, “it’s wonderful.” She cleared her throat.
“You’ve seen that—that girl again.”

“I couldn’t lie.”

“Are you willing to admit that beastliness is no substitute for the true
meeting of minds?”

“Absolutely.”

“Well!” she said. “This _is_ progress!” She leaned forward suddenly.
“Oh, Don, that wasn’t for you. Not you! You are destined for great
things, my boy. You have no idea.”

“I think I have.”

“And you’re willing to accept my teaching?”

“Just as much as you’ll teach me.”

“I’ll make tea,” she said, almost gaily. She rose and as she passed him
she squeezed his shoulder. He grinned.

When she was in the kitchenette he said, “Fellow in my neighborhood just
got back from a long stretch for hurting a little girl.”

“Oh?” she said. “What is his name?”

“I don’t know.”

“Find out,” she said. “They have to be watched.”

“Why?”

“Animals,” she said, “wild animals. They have to be caught and caged.”

He nodded. The gesture was his own, out of her range. He said, “I ate
already. Don’t go to no trouble.”

“Very well. Just some cookies.” She emerged with the tea service. “It’s
good to have you back. I’m rather surprised. I’d nearly given you up.”

He smiled. “Never do that.”

She poured boiling water from the kettle into the teapot and brought it
out. “You’re almost like a different person.”

“How come?”

“Oh, you—you’re much more self-assured.” She looked at him searchingly.
“More complete. I think the word for it is ‘integrated’. Actually, I
can’t seem to … to … Don, you’re not hiding anything from me, are you?”

“Me? Why, how could I do that?”

She seemed troubled. “I don’t know.” She gave him a quick glance, almost
spoke, then shook her head slightly.

“What’s the matter? I do something wrong?”

“No, oh no.”

They were quiet until the tea was steeped and poured.

“Miss Phoebe …?”

“What is it?”

“Just what did you think went on in that car before we got arrested?”

“Isn’t that rather obvious?”

“Well,” he said, with a quick smile, “to me, yeah. I was there.”

“You can be cleansed,” she said confidently.

“Can I now! Miss Phoebe, I just want to get this clear in my mind. I
think you got the wrong idea, and I’d like to straighten you out. I
didn’t go the whole way with that girl.”

“You didn’t?”

He shook his head. “Oh,” she said. “The policeman got there in time
after all.”

He put down his teacup very carefully. “We had lots of time. What I’m
telling you is we just didn’t.”

“Oh,” she said. “Oh!”

“What’s the matter, Miss Phoebe?”

“Nothing,” she said, tensely. “Nothing. This … puts a different
complexion on things.”

“I sort of thought you’d be glad.”

“But of course!” She whirled on him. “You are telling me the truth,
Don?”

“You can get in an’ out of County,” he reminded her. “There’s records of
her medical examination there that proves it, you don’t believe me.”

“Oh,” she said, “oh dear.” Suddenly her face cleared. “Perhaps I’ve
underestimated you. What you’re telling me is that you … you didn’t
_want_ to, is that it? But you said that the old memory of the rat left
you when you were with her. Why didn’t you—_why_?”

“Hey—easy, take it easy! You want to know why, it was because it wasn’t
time. What we had would last, it would keep. We din’t have to grab.”

“You … really felt that way about her?”

He nodded.

“I had no idea,” she said in a stunned whisper. “And afterward … did
you … do you still …”

“You can find out, can’t you? You know ways to find out what I’m
thinking.”

“I can’t,” she cried. “I can’t! Something has happened to you. I can’t
get in, it’s as if there were a steel plate between us!”

“I’m sorry,” he said with grave cheerfulness.

She closed her eyes and made some huge internal effort. When she looked
up, she seemed quite composed. “You are willing to work with me?”

“I want to.”

“Very well. I don’t know what has happened and I must find out, even if
I have to use … drastic measures.”

“Anything you say, Miss Phoebe.”

“Lie down over there.”

“On that? I’m longer than it is!” He went to the little sofa and
maneuvered himself so that at least his shoulder blades and head were
horizontal. “Like so?”

“That will do. Make yourself just as comfortable as you can.” She threw
a tablecloth over the lampshade and turned out the light in the
kitchenette. Then she drew up a chair near his head, out of his visual
range. She sat down.

It got very quiet in the room. “You’re sleepy, you’re so sleepy,” she
said softly. “You’re sl—”

“No I ain’t,” he said briskly.

“Please,” she said, “fall in with this. Just let your mind go blank and
listen to me.”

“Okay.”

She droned on and on. His eyes half closed, opened, then closed all the
way. He began to breathe more slowly, more deeply.

“… And sleep, sleep, but hear my voice, hear what I am saying, can you
hear me?”

“Yes,” he said heavily.

“Lie there and sleep, and sleep, but answer me truthfully, tell me only
the truth, the truth, answer me, whom do you love?”

“Joyce.”

“You told me you restrained yourself the night you were arrested. Is
this true?”

“Yes.”

Miss Phoebe’s eyes narrowed. She wet her lips, wrung her hands.

“The union you had with me, that flight of soul, was that important to
you?”

“Yes.”

“Would you like to do more of it?”

“Yes.”

“Don’t you realize that it is a greater, more intimate thing than any
union of the flesh?”

“Yes.”

“Am I not the only one with whom you can do it?”

“No.”

Miss Phoebe bit her lip. “Tell the truth, the truth,” she said raggedly.
“Who else?”

“Joyce.”

“Have you ever done it with Joyce?”

“Not yet.”

“Are you sure you can?”

“I’m sure.”

Miss Phoebe got up and went into the kitchenette. She put her forehead
against the cool tiles of the wall beside the refrigerator. She put her
fingertips on her cheeks, and her hands contracted suddenly, digging her
fingers in, drawing her flesh downward until her scalding, tight-shut
eyes were dragged open from underneath. She uttered an almost soundless
whimper.

After a moment she straightened up, squared her shoulders and went
noiselessly back to her chair. Don slumbered peacefully.

“Don, go on sleeping. Can you hear me?”

“Yes.”

“I want you to go down deeper and deeper and deeper, down and down to a
place where there is nothing at all, anywhere, anywhere, except my
voice, and everything I say is true. Down and down, deep, deep …” On and
on she went, until at last she reached down and gently rolled back one
of his eyelids. She peered at the eye, nodded with satisfaction.

“Stay down there, Don, stay there.”

She crouched in the chair and thought, hard. She knew of the difficulty
of hypnotically commanding a subject to do anything repugnant to him.
She also knew, however, that it is a comparatively simple matter to
convince a subject that a certain person is a pillow, and then fix the
command that a knife must be thrust into that pillow.

She pieced and fitted, and at last, “Don, can you hear me?”

His voice was a bare whisper, slurred, “Yes …”

“The forces of evil have done a terrible thing to Joyce, Don. When you
see her again she will look as before. She will speak and act as before.
But she is different. The real Joyce has been taken away. A substitute
has been put in her place. The substitute is dangerous. You will know,
when you see her. You will not trust her. You will not touch her. You
will share nothing with her. You will put her aside and have nothing to
do with her.

“But the real Joyce is alive and well, although she was changed. I saved
her. When she was replaced by the substitute, I took the real Joyce and
made her a part of me. So now when you talk to Miss Phoebe you are
talking to Joyce, when you touch Miss Phoebe you are touching Joyce,
when you kiss and hold and love Miss Phoebe you will be loving Joyce.
Only through Miss Phoebe can you know Joyce, and they are one and the
same. And you will never call Joyce by name again. Do you understand?”

“Miss … Phoebe is … Joyce now …”

“That’s right.”

Miss Phoebe was breathing hard. Her mouth was wet.

“You will remember none of this deep sleep, except what I have told you.
Don,” she whispered, “my dear, my dear …”

Presently she rose and threw the cloth off the lampshade. She felt the
teapot; it was still quite hot. She emptied the hot-water pot and filled
it again from the kettle. She sat down at the tea table, covered her
eyes, and for a moment the only sound in the room was her deep, slow,
controlled breathing as she oxygenated her lungs. She sat up, refreshed,
and poured tea.

“Don! Don! Wake up, Don!”

He opened his eyes and stared unseeingly at the ceiling. Then he raised
his head, sat up, shook himself.

“Goodness!” said Miss Phoebe. “You’re getting positively absent-minded.
I like to be answered when I speak to you.”

“Whuh? Hm?” He shook himself again and rose. “Sorry, Miss Phoebe. Guess
I sorta … did you ask me something?”

“The tea, the tea,” she said with pleasant impatience. “I’ve just
poured.”

“Oh,” he said. “Good.”

“Don,” she said, “we’re going to accomplish so _very_ much.”

“We sure are. And we’ll do it a hell of a lot faster with your help.”

“I beg—_what_?”

“Joyce and me,” he said patiently. “The things you can do, that planting
a reflection in a mirror the way you want it, and knowing who’s at the
door and on the phone and all … we can sure use those things.”

“I—I’m afraid I don’t …”

“Oh God, Miss Phoebe, don’t! I hate to see you cut yourself up like
this!”

“You were faking.”

“You mean just now, the hypnosis routine? No I wasn’t. You had me under
all right. It’s just that it won’t stick with me. Everything worked but
the commands.”

“That’s—impossible!”

“No it ain’t. Not if I had a deeper command to remember ’em—and
disregard ’em.”

“Why didn’t I think of that?” she said tautly. _“She_ did it!”

He nodded.

“She’s evil, Don, can’t you see? I was only trying to save—”

“I know what you were tryin’ to save,” he interrupted, not unkindly.
“You’re in real good shape for a woman your age, Miss Phoebe. This power
of yours, it keeps you going. Keeps your glands going. With you, that’s
a problem. With us, now, it’ll be a blessing. Pity you never thought of
that.”

“Foul,” she said, “how perfectly foul …”

“No it ain’t!” he rapped. “Look, maybe we’ll all get a chance to work
together after all, and if we do, you’ll get an idea what kind of chick
Joyce is. I hope that happens. But mind you, if it don’t, we’ll get
along. We’ll do all you can do, in time.”

“I’d _never_ cooperate with evil!”

“You went and got yourself a little mixed up about that, Miss Phoebe.
You told me yourself about yin an’ Yang, how some folks set a course
straight an’ true an’ never realize the boundary can twist around
underneath them. You asked me just tonight was I sure which was which,
an’ I said yes. It’s real simple. When you see somebody with power who
is usin’ it for what Yang stands for—good, an’ light, an’ all like that,
you’ll find he ain’t usin’ it for himself.”

“I wasn’t using it for myself!”

“No, huh?” He chuckled. “Who was it I was goin’ to kiss an’ hold just
like it was Joyce?”

She moaned and covered her face. “I just wanted to keep you pure,” she
said indistinctly.

“Now that’s a thing you got to get straightened out on. That’s a big
thing. Look here.” He rose and went to the long bookcase. Through her
fingers, she watched him. “Suppose this here’s all the time that has
passed since there was anything like a human being on earth.” He moved
his hand from one end of the top shelf to the other. “Maybe way back at
the beginning they was no more ’n smart monkeys, but all the same they
had whatever it is makes us human beings. These forces you talk about,
they were operatin’ then just like now. An’ the cave men an’ the savages
an’ all, hundreds an’ hundreds of years, they kept developing until we
got humans like us.

“All right. You talk about ancient mysteries, your Yoga an’ all. An’
this tie-up with virgins. Look, I’m going to show you somepin. You an’
all your studyin’ and copyin’ the ancient secrets, you know how ancient
they were? I’ll show you.” He put out his big hand and put three fingers
side by side on the “modern” end of the shelf. “Those three fingers
covers it—down to about fourteen thousand years before Christ. Well,
maybe the thing did work better without sex. But only by throwin’ sex
into study instead of where it was meant to go. Now you want to free
yourself from sex in your thinkin’, there’s a much better way than that.
You do it like Joyce an’ me. We’re a bigger unit together than you ever
could be by yourself. An’ we’re not likely to get pushed around by our
glands, like you. No offense, Miss Phoebe … so there’s your _really_
ancient mystery. Male an’ female together; there’s a power for you. Why
you s’pose people in love get to fly so high, get to feel like gods?” He
swept his hand the full length of the shelf. “A _real_ ancient one.”

“Wh—where did you learn all this?” she whispered.

“Joyce. Joyce and me, we figured it out. Look, she’s not just any chick.
She quit school because she learns too fast. She gets everything right
now, this minute, as soon as she sees it. All her life everyone around
her seems to be draggin’ their feet. An’ besides, she’s like a kid. I
don’t mean childish, I don’t mean simple; I mean, like she believes in
something even when there’s no evidence around for it, she keeps on
believing until the evidence comes along. There must be a word for
that.”

“Faith,” said Miss Phoebe faintly.

He came and sat down near her. “Don’t take it so hard, Miss Phoebe,” he
said feelingly. “It’s just that you got to stand aside for a later
model. If anybody’s going to do Yang work in a world like this, they got
to get rid of a lot of deadwood. I don’t mean you’re deadwood. I mean a
lot of your ideas are. Like that fellow was in jail about the little
girl, you say _watch ’im!_ one false move an’ back in the cage he goes.
And all that guy wanted all his life was just to have a couple people
around him who give a damn, ‘scuse me, Miss Phoebe. He never had that,
so he took what he could get from whoever was weaker’n him, and that was
only girls. You should see him now, he’s goin’ to be our best man.”

“You’re a child. You can’t undertake work like this. You don’t know the
powers you’re playing with.”

“Right. We’re goin’ to make mistakes. Some of ’em will be real bloopers,
an’ a lot of people are goin’ to get hurt. But we know what we’re doin’,
we know what we want to do. We see some guy in Congress is featherin’
his own nest instead of workin’ for all the people—especially the guy
who’s after power more than anything else—an’ we go after him. We fight
whoever wants to burn books. We fight whoever wants to make all the
people think a certain way—any certain way. But sure, we’ll fumble some
of the plays. An’ that’s where you come in. Are you on?”

“I—don’t quite—”

“We want your help,” he said, and bluntly added, “but if you can’t help,
don’t hinder.”

“You’d want to work with me after I … Joyce, Joyce will hate me!”

“Joyce ain’t afraid of you.”

Her face crumpled. He patted her clumsily on the shoulder. “Come on,
Miss Phoebe, what do you say?”

She sniffled, then turned red-rimmed, protruding eyes up to him. “If you
want me. I’d have to … I’d like to talk to Joyce.”

“Okay. JOYCE!”

Miss Phoebe started. “She—she’s not—_oh_!” she cried as the doorknob
turned. She said, “It’s locked.”

He grinned. “No it ain’t.”

Joyce came in. She went straight to Don, her eyes on his face,
searching, and did not look around her until her hand was in his. Then
she looked down at Miss Phoebe.

“This here, this is Joyce,” Don said.

Joyce and Miss Phoebe held each other’s eyes for a long moment, tense at
first, gradually softening. At last Miss Phoebe made a tremulous smile.

“I’d better make some tea,” she said, gathering her feet under her.

“I’ll help,” said Joyce. She turned her face to the tea tray, which
lifted into the air and floated to the kitchenette. She smiled at Miss
Phoebe. “You tell me what to do.”



THE WAGES OF SYNERGY


IT WAS THE WAY THEY WERE BREATHING, _she thought in despair and disgust,
that was making her mind run on like this. The breathing was open
throated in the darkness, consciously quiet though its intensity was
almost beyond control. It was quiet because of the thin walls in this
awful place, quiet to hide what should have been open and joyful. And as
the blind compulsion for openness and joy rose, so rose the necessity
for more control, more quiet. And then it was impossible to let her mind
rest and ride, to bring in that rare ecstatic sunburst. The walls were
growing thinner and thinner, surely—and outside people clustered,
listening. More and more people, her mind told her madly. People with
more and more ears, until she and Karl were trying to be quiet and
secret in the center of a hollow sphere of great attentive ears, a
mosaic of lobes and folds and inky orifices, all set together like fish
scales_.…

_Then the catch in his breath, the feeling of welcome, of
gratitude … the wrong gratitude, the wrong relief, for it was based only
on the fact that now it was over—but oh, be quiet_.

_The heaviness now, the stillness … quiet. Real quiet, this now, and no
pretense. She waited_.

_Anger flicked at her. Enough is enough. This weight, this stillness_.…

_Too much weight. Too much stillness_.…

_“Karl.” She moved_.

_“Karl!” She struggled, but quietly_.

_Then she knew why he was so quiet and so still. She looked numbly at
the simple fact, and for a long moment she breathed no more than he did,
and that was not at all, for he was dead. And then the horror. And then
the humiliation_.

_Her impulse to scream died as abruptly as he had died, but the_ _sheer
muscular spasm of it flung her away from him and out into the room. She
stood cowering away from the cold, the rhythmic flare of an illuminated
sign somewhere outside, and again she opened her throat so her gulping
breath would be silent_.

_She had to escape, and every living cell in her cried for shrieking
flight. But no; somehow she had to get dressed. Somehow she had to let
herself out, travel through corridors where the slightest glimpse of her
would cause an alarm. There were lights, and a great glaring acreage of
lobby to be crossed_.…

_And somehow she did all these things, and got away into the blessed,
noisy, uncaring city streets_.

Killilea sat at yet another bar, holding still another gin and water,
wondering if this were going to be another of those nights.

Probably. When you’re looking for someone, and you won’t go to the
police, and you know it’s no use to advertise in the papers because she
never reads the papers, and you don’t know anyone who might know where
she is, but you do know that if she is upset enough, unhappy enough, she
drinks in bars—why then, you go to bars. You go to good ones and dirty
ones, empty and bright and dusty and dark ones, night after night, never
knowing if she’s going to pieces in the one you went to last night, or
if she’ll be here tomorrow when you are somewhere else.

Someone sneezed explosively, and Killilea, whose nerves had always been
good and who was, besides, about as detached from his immediate
surroundings as a man can get, astonished himself by leaping off the bar
stool. His drink went _pleup_ and shot a little tongue of gin upwards,
to lick the side of his neck coldly. He swore and wiped it with the back
of his hand, and turned to look at the source of that monstrous human
explosion.

He saw a tall young man with bright red ears and what had doubtless been
a display handkerchief, with which he was scrubbing at the camel’s hair
sleeve of a girl in the booth opposite. Killilea’s nostrils distended in
mild disgust, while his lips spread in amusement just as mild. Sort of
thing that might happen to anybody, he thought, but my God, that fellow
must feel like a goon. And look at the guy in the booth with the girl.
Doesn’t know what to say. So what do you say? Don’t spit on my chick?
Too late. I’m going to punch you in the mouth? That wouldn’t help. But
if he doesn’t do something he can’t expect his lady-friend to be happy
about it.

Killilea ordered another drink and glanced back to the booth. The tall
young man was backing off in a veritable cloud of apologies; the girl
was dabbing at her sleeve with a paper napkin, and her friend still sat
speechless. He pulled his own handkerchief out, then put it back. He
leaned forward to speak, said nothing, straightened up again, miserably.

“Fine Sir Galahad you turned out to be,” said the girl.

“I don’t think Galahad was ever faced with just this situation,” her
escort replied reasonably. “I’m sorry.…”

“You’re sorry,” said the girl. “That helps a lot, don’t it?”

“I’m sorry,” the man said again. Then slightly annoyed, “What did you
expect me to do? Sneeze right back at him?”

She curled her lip. “That would’ve been better than just doing nothing.
Nothing, that’s you—_nothing_.”

“Look,” he said, half rising.

“Going someplace?” she asked nastily. “Go on then. I can get along. Beat
it.”

“I’ll take you home,” he said.

“Not me you won’t.”

“Okay,” he said. He got out of the booth and looked at her, licking his
lips unhappily. “Okay, then,” he said. He dropped a dollar bill on the
table and walked toward the door. She looked after him, her lower lip
protruding wet and sulky. “Thanks for the neighborhood movie,” she
yelled at him, in a voice that carried all over the room. His shoulders
gave a tight, embarrassed shrug. He grasped his lapels and gave his
jacket a pathetic, angry little tug downward and left without looking
back.

Killilea swung back to the bar and found he could see the booth in the
mirror. “Big deal,” said the girl, speaking into her open compact as if
it were a telephone.

The tall young man who had sneezed approached cautiously. “Miss—”

She looked up at him calculatingly.

“Miss, I couldn’t help hearing, and it was really my fault.”

“No it wasn’t,” she said. “Forget it! He didn’t mean nothing to me
anyway.”

“You’re real nice about it anyway,” said the young man. “I wish I could
do something.”

She looked at his face, his clothes. “Sit down,” she said.

“Waiter!” he said, and sat down.

Now Killilea looked into his drink and smiled. Smiles didn’t come easily
these days and he welcomed them. He thought about the couple behind him.
Suppose they had a great romance now. Suppose they got married and lived
for years and years until they were old, and held hands on their golden
wedding anniversary, and thought back to this night, this meeting:
“First time you saw me, you spit on me.…” First time he saw Prue, she’d
barged in on him in a men’s room. Crazy, crazy, the way things happen.

“The way things happen,” said a voice. “Crazy.”

“What?” Killilea demanded, startled. He turned to look at the man next
to him. He was a small man with pugnacious eyebrows and mild eyes, which
became troubled and shy at Killilea’s barking tone. He thumbed over his
shoulder and said placatingly, “Them.”

“Yeah,” said Killilea. “I was just thinking the same thing.”

The mild eyes looked comforted. The man said, “Crazy.”

The door opened. Someone came in. It wasn’t Prue. Killilea turned back
to the bar.

“Waitin’ for somebody?” said his neighbor.

“Yes,” said Killilea.

“I’ll beat it if your company gets here,” said the man with the mild
eyes. He breathed deeply, as if about to perform something brave. “Okay
if I talk to you in the meantime?”

“Oh hell yes,” said Killilea.

“Man needs somebody to talk to,” said his neighbor. There was a taut
silence as they both strove to find something to talk about, now that
the amenities had been satisfied. Suddenly the man said, “Hartog.”

“What?” said Killilea. “Oh. Killilea.” They shook hands gravely.
Killilea grunted, looked down at his hand. It was bleeding from a small
cut in the palm. “Now how the hell did I do that?”

“Let me see,” said the man called Hartog. “Oh, I say … I don’t know what
to … I think it was my fault.” He showed his right hand, on the middle
finger of which was a huge, gaudily designed ring with the gold plate
wearing off the corners of the mounting. The stone was gone, and one of
the mounting claws pointed up, sharp and gleaming. “I lost the stone
yesterday,” said Hartog. “I shouldn’t have worn it. Turned it around
inside my hand like always when I come to a place like this. But what
can I do?” He looked as if he were about to cry. He worried at the ring
until he could get it off, and dropped it into his pocket. “I just don’t
know what to say!”

“Hey, you didn’t cut my arm off, you know,” Killilea said
good-naturedly. “Don’t say anything. Not to me.” Killilea pointed at the
bartender. “Tell him what you’re drinking.”

They sipped companionably while the couple behind them laughed and
murmured, while the jukebox unwound identical sentiments in assorted
keys. “I fix refrigerators,” said Hartog.

“Chemist,” said Killilea.

“You don’t say. Mix prescriptions, and all?”

“That’s a pharmacist,” said Killilea. He was going to say more, but
decided against it. He was going to say that he was a biological chemist
specializing in partial synthesis, and that he’d developed one he wished
he could forget about, and that it had been so fascinating that Prue had
left him, and that that had made him leave chemistry to look for her.
But it would have been tiring to go through it all, and he was not used
to unburdening himself to people. Even so, as Hartog had said, a man
needs someone to talk to. I need Prue to talk to, he thought. I need
Prue, oh God, but I do. He said, abruptly, “You’re English.”

“I was once,” said Hartog. “How’d you know?”

“They call a drug store a chemist shop.”

“I forgot,” said Hartog; and this time, strangely, he seemed to be
talking to himself, chidingly. Without understanding, Killilea said,
“That’s all right.”

Hartog said, “I wonder if I spit on some girl she’ll pick me up.”

“It takes all kinds,” said Killilea.

“_All_ kinds,” said Hartog, and nodded sagely. “All want the same thing.
Each one wants to get it a different way. Hell of a thing to know what
one wants, not know how she wants it.”

“Keeps it interesting,” said Killilea.

Hartog fumbled a cigarette out of a pack without removing the pack from
his pocket. “One been hanging out at Roby’s, where I just was. You just
_know_ it about her, way she looks at everyone, way she watches.”
Killilea gave him matches. Hartog used one, blew it out with smoke from
his nostrils, and stared for a long time at the charred end. Funny
little thing. Skinny. Everything wrong—bony here, flat there, and she
got a big nose. Looks hungry. When you look at her you feel hungry too.”
He looked at Killilea swiftly, as if Killilea might be laughing at him.
Killilea was not. “You feel hungry, not for food, see what I mean?”

Killilea nodded.

Hartog said, “I couldn’t make it with her. Everything fine until you
make _this_ much—” he held a thumb and forefinger perhaps a sixteenth of
an inch apart—“of a pass. Then she cares.”

“A come-on.”

“Nup,” said Hartog. He closed his eyes to look at something behind them,
and shook his head positively. “I mean scared—_real_ scared. Show her a
snake, shoot off a gun, she wouldn’t scare like that.” He shrugged. He
picked up his glass, saw it was empty, and put it down again. Killilea
was aware that it was Hartog’s turn to buy. Then he noticed how
carefully Hartog was keeping his eyes off Killilea’s glass, which was
also empty, and he remembered the way the single cigarette had come out.
He beckoned the bartender, and Hartog thanked him. “Get up a parade,”
said Hartog. “Guys with ways to get a woman. Send ’em in one at a time
to this funny little thing I’m telling you about. One brings sweet talk.
One brings beads ’n’ bracelets. One brings troubles to get sympathy. One
brings sympathy for her troubles. One brings a fishtail Cadillac an’ a
four-carat blinker. One brings a hairy chest. All they going to do, all
the specialists, they going to scare her, they won’t get next to her
a-_tall_.”

“She doesn’t want it then.”

“You wouldn’t say that, you see her,” said Hartog, shaking his head.
“Must be some way, some one way. I got a theory, there’s a way to get to
anything, you can only think of it.”

Killilea swirled his drink. Bars are full of philosophers. But just now
he wasn’t collecting philosophers. “You selling something?” he asked
nastily.

“I’m in the refrigerator repair business,” said Hartog, apparently
unaware of the insult. His ash dropped on his coat, whereupon he tapped
his cigarette uselessly on the rim of an ashtray. “And why I keep
talking about her, I don’t know. Skinny, like I said. Her nose is big.”

“All right, you’re not selling,” said Killilea contritely.

“Got only one ear lobe,” said Hartog. “Saw when she pushed her hair back
to scratch her neck. What’s the matter, Mr. Killdeer?”

“Killilea,” said Killilea hoarsely. “Which ear?”

Hartog closed his eyes. “Right one.”

“The right one has a lobe, or the right one hasn’t?”

“Taken in parts,” said Hartog, “that’s a real homely woman. Taken
altogether, I don’t know why she makes a man feel like that, but damn if
she—”

Should I explain to this disyllabic solon, thought Killilea, that the
day I met Prue in the men’s room she charged out and went face-first
through the frosted-glass door and lost an earlobe? And that therefore I
would like very much to know if this … what had the idiot said? He’d
just come from … Roark’s …? Rory’s? _Roby’s!_

Killilea turned and bucketed out.

The bartender blinked as the door crashed open, and then his cold
professional gaze swung to Hartog. He advanced. Hartog sipped, licked
his lips, sipped again, and put the empty glass down. He met the
bartender’s eye.

“Your friend forget something?”

Hartog pulled a roll of bills from a jacket pocket, separated a twenty,
and dropped it on the bar. “Not a thing. Take it out of this. Build me
another. Have one yourself and keep the change.” He leaned forward
suddenly, and for the first time spoke in a broad Oxford accent. “You
know, old chap, I’m extraordinarily pleased with myself.”

She didn’t see him when he came into Roby’s, which wasn’t surprising. He
remembered how she used to lean close to see his expression when they
held hands. The only reason she had been in the men’s room the day they
met—what was it, four years ago? Five?—was that LADIES is a longer word
than MEN, but the sign on this particular one said GENTLEMEN, and since
it seemed to have more letters, she headed for it. She had glasses, good
ones, but she wouldn’t wear them, not without drawing the blinds first.

He moved to a table fifteen feet from hers and sat down. She was facing
him almost directly, wearing the old, impenetrable, inturning expression
he used to call her fogbound look. He had seen that face that way in
happiness and in fright, in calm rumination and in moments of confusion;
it was an expression to be read only in context. So he looked at the
hands he knew so well, and saw that the left was flat on the table and
the right palm upon it, pressing it from wrist to knuckles, over and
over in a forceful sliding motion that would leave the back of the right
hand hot and red and tender.

That’s all I need to know, he said to himself, and rose and went to her.
He put his big hand gently down on hers and said “It’s going to be all
right, Prue.”

He pulled a chair close to her and silently patted her shoulder while
she cried. When a waiter came near he waved the man away. In due time,
he said, “Come home, Prue.”

Her strange face whipped up, close to his. It was flogged, flayed,
scored with the cicatrices of sheer terror. He had her hands and gripped
them tightly as she started to rise. She sank down limply, and again she
had the fogbound face. “Oh no, Killy; no. Never. Hear me, Killy? Never.”

There was only one thing to say “—why?”—and since he knew that if he
said nothing, she must answer the question, he was quiet, waiting.

Prue, Prue … in his mind he paraphrased the odd fantasy of Hartog, the
barfly he had met this evening: Get up a parade. Ask the specialists,
one by one, what do you think of a girl like Prue? (Correction: what do
you think of Prue? There were no girls _like_ Prue.) Send in a permanent
secretary of the Ladies Auxiliary: _Sniff!_ Send in a social worker:
_Tsk!_ A Broadwayite: _Mmm_ … A roué: Ah …! The definition for Prue,
like beauty, could be found only in the eye of the beholder. Killilea
had one, a good one. For Killilea—perhaps because he was a steroid
chemist and familiar with complex and subtle matters—saw things from
altitudes and in directions which were not usual. Prue lived in ways
which, in aggregate, are called sophistication; but Killilea had learned
that the only true sophistication lies in exemplary and orthodox
behavior. It takes a wise, careful and deeply schooled gait to pace out
the complicated and shifting patterns of civilized behavior. It takes a
nimble and fleet hypocrisy to step from conflict to paradox among the
rules of decency. A moral code is an obstinate anagram indeed. So Prue,
thought Killilea, is an innocent.

And never to be with him again? Never? _Why?_

“It would kill you,” she explained finally.

He laughed suddenly. “We understand each other better than that, Prue.
What awful thing has happened to me, then? Or what wonderful thing has
happened to you?”

Then she told him about Karl. She told him all about it. “The men’s
floor of that silly hotel,” she finished. “It seemed a sort of—different
thing to do. We conspired … and it was funny.”

“Getting out of there wasn’t funny,” he conjectured.

“No,” she said.

“Poor Prue. I read about it in the papers.”

“What? The papers?”

“About Karl’s death, Miss Misty. Not about you!… He was quite an
important man, you know.”

“Was he?”

Killilea had long since ceased to be amazed at Prue’s utter inability to
be impressed by the things that impress everyone else. “He was a sort of
columnist. More like an essayist. Most people read him for his political
commentaries. Some people thought he was a poet. He shouldn’t have died.
We need people like him.”

“He liked _The Little Prince_ and mango chutney and he would rather look
at penguins than baby rabbits,” said Prue, stating her qualifications.
“I killed him, don’t you understand?”

“Prue, that’s ridiculous. They had an autopsy and everything. It was
heart failure.”

She put her left hand flat on the table and with the right pressed and
slid cruelly. “Prue,” he said. She stopped.

“I did, Killy. I know I did.”

“How do you know you did?”

That terror flitted across her face again.

“You can tell me, Prue.”

“Because.” She looked up into his face, leaning forward in that swift,
endearing, myopic way. She so seldom really wanted to look at anything,
he thought. The things she knows … the way she thinks … she doesn’t
_need_ to see. “Killy, I couldn’t bear it if you died. And you’d die.”

He snorted. Gently, then, he asked her, “That isn’t why you went away,
is it?”

“No,” she said without hesitation. “But it’s why I stayed away.”

He paused to digest that. “Why did you go away?”

“You weren’t you any more.”

“Who was I?”

“Someone who didn’t look at the snow before it had footprints, someone
who read very important papers all the way through the crepe Suzettes,
someone who didn’t feed the goldfish,” she said thoughtfully, and added,
“Someone who didn’t need me.”

“Prue,” he began, and cast about for words. He wished devoutly that he
could talk to her in terms of ketoprogesterone and the eleventh oxygen
in a four-ring synthesis. “Prue, I stumbled on something terribly
important. Something that … you know those old horror stories, all built
on the thesis that there are certain mysteries that man should not know?
I always sneered at them. I don’t any more. I was interested, and then
fascinated, and then I was frightened, Prue.”

“I know, Killy,” she said. There was deep understanding in her voice.
She seemed to be trying as hard as he was to find words. “It was
important.” The way she used the term included “serious” and “works of
the world” and even “pompous.”

“Don’t you see, Killy,” she said earnestly, “that you can have something
important, or you can have me? But you can’t have both.”

There was a gallant protest to be made at this point, and he knew better
than to make it. If he told her how very important she was, she would
look at him in astonishment—not because she could not realize her
importance to him, but because he would have so badly misused the term.
He understood her completely. There was room in his life for Prue and
his work when he built on his steroid nuclei as Bach built on a theme,
surely and with joy. But when the work became “important,” it excluded
Prue and crepe Suzettes and a lovingly bitten toe: music straight from a
sunset rather than a sunset taken through music; the special sting
across the sight from tears of happiness; and all the other brittle
riches that give way when that which is “important” grows greater to a
man than that which is vital. And she was perfectly right in saying that
he had not needed her then.

“I’ve dropped it now,” he said humbly. All of it. No more
fractionations. No more retained benzoquinones. No more laboratories, no
more chemistry. Sometimes,” he continued in her strange idiom, “there’s
a door to a flight of steps down to a long passageway, and it’s magic
every way you look. And on you go, down and around and along, until you
find where it all leads, and that’s a place as bad as a place can get.
It’s so bad you never want to go there again. It’s so bad you never want
the corridor again, or the steps. It’s so bad you’ll never go through
the door. You close it and you lock it and you never even go near the
door again.”

“You wouldn’t leave chemistry for me,” she said factually.

“No, I wouldn’t. I didn’t. Prue, I’m trying to tell you that I closed
the door eighteen months ago. Not for you. For me.”

“Oh, Killy!” She was deeply concerned. “Not you! But whatever have you
been doing instead?”

“Looking for you.”

“Oh dear,” she whispered.

“It’s all right. All those fellowships, the prizes—I don’t need
chemistry any more. I don’t even have to work. Prue, come with me. Come
home.”

She closed her eyes and her cheekbones seemed to rise toward them, so
tightly were they sealed. She shook her head very slowly, twice, and at
last a tear pressed through the lids. “I can’t, Killy. Don’t ask me,
don’t ever,” she choked.

The inconceivable thought struck him, and the fact that it was
inconceivable was the most eloquent thing which could be said about Prue
and Killilea. “Don’t you _want_ to?” he asked painfully.

“Want to? You don’t know, you can’t. Oh, I want _so_ much to.” She made
a swift, vague gesture which silenced him. “I can’t, Killy. You’d
_die_.”

He thought about Karl and the dreadful thing that had happened to her.
To call that experience traumatic would be fabulous understatement. But
what peculiar twist made her insist that _he_ might be harmed?

“Why are you so sure?” When he saw her face, he said, “You’ve got to
tell me, Prue. I’ll ask and ask until you do.”

She leaned close to see his eyes. She looked into one, and the other.
She touched his hair, a touch like the stirring of a warm wind. “Karl
wasn’t the first one. I … I killed Landey, Roger Landey.”

Killilea’s eyes widened. Landey, professor extraordinary, whose
philosophy courses were booked solid two years in advance, whose deep
wisdom and light touch had made legends before he was thirty … whose
death four months earlier had shocked even the _Evening Graphic_ into
putting out a black-bordered edition.

“You _can’t_ really believe that you—”

“And someone else too. His name … they told me his name at a party.” She
wrinkled her brow and shook the wrinkles away impatiently. “I had a name
for him that was much better. He was a round little man. He made you
want to pick him up and give him a hug. I called him Koala. I used to
see him in the park. I gave him some leaves once, that’s how I met him.”

“Leaves?”

“Koalas look like teddy-bears and all they ever eat is eucalyptus
leaves,” she explained. “I saw him every day in the park and I began to
wonder if he ever had any eucalyptus leaves, he reminded me so much of a
Koala, I s’pose I thought he was one. I got some and went to him and
gave them to him. He understood right away and laughed like … he laughed
like you, Killy.”

Killilea half-smiled through his distress, visualizing the scene; Prue
so grave and silent, wordlessly handing the leaves to the man who looked
like a koala … “Prue,” he breathed. “Oh Prue …”

“I killed him too. The same way as the others, just the same. Here,” she
said suddenly. “Look, he gave me this.” And from her pocketbook she drew
a small cube and dropped it into his hand. It looked like blue glass,
until he realized that it was not a cube but a chunk of monoclinic
crystal.

“What is it?”

“It’s lovely,” was her typical answer. “Cup it in your hands, make it
dark, and peek.”

He put his hands together with the crystal inside, and brought it up to
his eye. The crystal phosphoresced … no, he realized excitedly, it was
fluorescing with a beautiful deep-blue glow, which had about it the odd
“black-halo” characteristic of ultraviolet. But luminescents don’t
fluoresce without an energy source of some kind. Unless—“What is it?”

“You mean, what’s it made of? I don’t know. Isn’t it just lovely?”

“Who … who was this Koala?” he asked faintly.

“Someone very fine,” she said. Then she added, in a whisper, “That I
killed.”

“Don’t say that ever again, Prue,” he said harshly.

“All right. But it’s true no matter what I say.”

“What can I do?” he asked in despair. “How can I make you understand
that these are crazy coincidences, that you had nothing to do with
them?”

“Make me understand that I couldn’t kill you, too, the same way. Can you
do that?”

“Just take my word for it.”

“No.”

“Trust me. You used to trust me, Prue.”

“You used to tell me things that were so. You used to say things that
came true. But if you’d begun to say this table is not a table, that
lark isn’t singing, it’s a noise a cow makes … then I never could have
trusted you at all.”

“But—”

“Prove it to me, Killy. Find a way, I mean a real way, not words, not
just clever ideas all strung out like a diamond necklace, all dazzly and
going right around in a circle. Prove it a real way, like one of the
things you did in chemistry. Build it, and show it to me. You can’t show
me I didn’t kill those others, because I did. But show me I can’t kill
you, and I’ll come … come home.”

He looked at her for a long moment. Then he said, “I’ll prove it to
you.”

“You won’t ask me to come with you until you prove it?”

“I won’t ask you,” he said heavily.

“Oh, good, good,” she said thankfully. “Because I can see you, if you’ll
promise that. I can see you and talk with you. Killy, I’ve missed you so
very much.”

They were together for a while longer. They let the waiter serve them.
They exchanged addresses and left, and outside they parted.

Killilea thought, I had my work to keep me busy, and then I had Prue to
look for. And I used to figure if I couldn’t find her, I’d spend the
rest of my life looking. If I could find her, I’d spend the rest of my
life with her. I never thought what I might do if I found her and she
wouldn’t come home.

And here that’s happened. But instead of a great big empty
nothin’-to-do, I’ve got something to build.

Once I start. But where do I start?

Once home, he thought about that a great deal, while he smoked and
paced. Part of the time he thought, this is no job for me. It’s a
psychopathologist’s kick. And part of the time he thought, what can I
do? I know I can do it, if I can only find the right thing to do. But I
can’t. And all this time he felt very bad. Then at last he thought about
the one part of the problem you could pick up in your hand, look at,
wonder about, find out.… The crystal.

He sprang to the phone, scrabbled through his number book, and dialed
rapidly. The phone rang and rang at the other end, and Killilea was
about to give up when a fast-asleep voice said “Hello,” without a
question mark.

“Hi. Egg?”

The voice came awake with a roar. “That’s not Killilea?”

“Yup.”

“Well godslemighty, where you been? What have you been doing for the
last year? Hell, it’s more than a year.”

“Research,” said Killilea, as the receiver made a yawning noise at him.
“Gosh, Egmont, I just realized what time it is. I wake you?”

“Oh, that’s all right. Like the man says, I had to get up to answer the
phone anyway! What are you, up late or up early?”

“Egg, I’m racking my brains. Something I read someplace, a crystal with
a self-contained energy source that fluoresces.”

“There’s no such,” said Egmont.

“Blue. Right up near the u-v,” persisted Killilea.

“Know anything about the lattice?”

“No. It’s monoclinic, though.”

“Hm. Nup—hey—wait! There is such a thing, but nobody ever gets to see
one.”

“No?”

“Not for a while yet. High-level blue, you say? I think what you’re
talking about is stilbene, crystallized after an infusion of tritium.”

“Tritium!”

“Like I said, son. You won’t find ’em on the toy counters this
Christmas. Or next either, now that Pretorio checked out.”

“Oh. Was that one of his tricks?” Killilea asked.

“His big trick,” said Egmont. “Set up a whole line of constant light
sources that way. Bid fair to do for crystallography what Jo-blocks did
for the machine shop. Still a lot to do on it, though, and Pretorio was
the boy could do it. Why, Killy? What’s up?”

“Just got to worrying where I read about it. Egg, did you know Pretorio
personally?”

“Had lunch with him one time. He was thirty-eight chairs due north of
me. A convention banquet. Speaking of banquets and Pretorio, Killy,
remember my offer to take you to the Ethical Science Board dinner one of
these years?”

“Gosh yes! That’d be—”

“It wouldn’t be,” said the telephone. “I’m not going.”

“I thought you were—”

“AII het up about it? I was. I still am, about the main idea. But the
outfit is but dead.”

“I didn’t know.”

“What you expect?” barked Egmont. “Here’s the finest idea of the
century, see—to establish a genuine ethic for science, right across the
board; to study the possible end effects on humanity of any progress in
any science. They had Pretorio to run it, Landey the philosopher to
steer it, and Karl Monck to correlate it with politics. And they’re all
dead. So where do you go when your car’s suddenly missing a motor, the
steering gear and a driver? I tell you, Killy, if some mastermind had
set out to wreck the first real chance this crazy world ever had to get
onto itself, he couldn’t have done it more efficiently.”

“But couldn’t someone else—”

The wires sizzled. “Someone else,” Egmont inflected it like profanity.
“Those three were unique, but not as unique as the fact that they were
contemporaries. Where else are we going to find scientists who can buck
the trend of anti-science?”

“Huh?”

“Yes, anti-science! Even the politicians are saying we have to turn to
higher spiritual accomplishments _because_ of what science has created.
But their way of doing it will be to stop science from creating
anything. It’s a little like blaming the gunsmith every time somebody
gets shot, but that’s what’s happening. Hell, four-fifths of the stories
in science fiction magazines are anti-scientific.” Egmont paused to
breathe—at last—and said in more subdued tones, “Looka me. Off on a
hobby horse, straight out of a sound sleep. Sorry, Killy. I’m
lecturing.”

“Gosh no,” said Killilea. “Man’s got something important to get excited
about, he gets excited. Egg—”

_“Mmm?”_

“What did Pretorio look like?”

“Pretorio? Mild little guy. Pudgy.” There was a pause while Egmont
scanned a mental photograph. “He looked like one of those gentle little
tree-climbing bears in Australia, know what I mean?”

“Koala,” said Killilea.

“Something the matter, Killy?”

God yes. “No, Egg … look, go back to bed. Swell talking to you again.
I’ll give you a buzz for lunch or a beer or something, sometime.”

“Great,” said Egmont. “Do that. Soon, huh? Right.”

Slowly Killilea hung up and went to sit on the edge of his bed. He
thought, I quit chemistry because I was about to isolate the most
ghastly substance this earth has ever known, and I didn’t want it
isolated.

But I think someone has finished my work.…

Killilea, as anyone who met him could attest, was not an ordinary man.
The ways in which he was extraordinary did not include fictional
commonplaces like the easy familiarity with phones, cabs and the police
methods of a private eye and the adventure-hero’s fisty resourcefulness.
He was a scientist—or rather, an ex-scientist—rather more sure of things
he did not believe in than those in which he did. His personal habits
tended toward those of a hermit, though intellectually he recognized no
horizons. He was at a serious disadvantage with other people because of
a deep conviction that people were good. And though he had found that
most were good, the few who were not invariably caught him off-guard.
His work in biochemistry had been esoteric in the extreme, and he had
worked in it alone. But even if it had been more general an endeavor, he
would not comfortably have worked with anyone else.

So now he found himself very much alone; no allies, no confidants. Yet
he had always worked this way in the lab; you find a brick that fits a
brick, and see what you can build with them. Or you know what to build,
and you find the bricks that will do the job.

He called Prue late the next morning, and she was not at home. So he
went back to the restaurant where he had found her, not expecting to see
her, but simply because he felt he could think better there.

The table they had had was vacant. He sat down and ordered some lunch
and a bottle of ale, and stared at the chair she had used. Somewhere, he
thought, there is a lowest common denominator in all this. Somewhere the
deaths of three great liberal scientists in Prue’s arms, and the work I
have been doing are tied together. Because what I almost had was a thing
that would make men die that way. And since it was men it would work on,
and not women, then Prue isn’t the lowest common denominator.

Under the arch which separated the dining room from the bar a man
stopped and gasped audibly. Killy looked up into the man’s shocked face,
then turned around to find out what had so jolted him. A wall, some
tables—nothing else. Killy turned back again and now had time to
recognize the man—the philosophic barfly, Hartog. “Hi.”

Hartog came forward timidly. “Oh. Mr.—uh …”

“Killilea. You all right?”

Hartog hesitated, his hand on a chair. “I—I get a twinge now and again,”
he said. “I don’t want to horn in.”

“Sit down,” said Killilea. The man looked badly shaken.

“Well,” he said, and sat down. Killilea beckoned the waiter. “Had
lunch?”

Hartog shook his head. Killilea ordered a double sirloin. “Medium rare
all right?” and when Hartog agreed gratefully, sent the waiter off.

“Is your hand all right?” Hartog asked. “I’m real sorry about that.”

Killilea noticed he had removed the ring. “I told you last night to
forget it. Uh—while people are apologizing, I just remembered I belted
out of that bar sort of suddenly last night. Did I pay or not?”

“Yes, it’s all right,” said the other. His fierce brows drew together.
“I sort of had the idea you went after that funny little girl I was
telling you about.”

“You did?”

“Well, I don’t want to pry,” said Hartog mildly. “Just wondered how you
made out, that’s all.”

Killilea let the subject lie unnoticed until it went away. He finished
his ale and waved the bottle at the waiter.

“Women are trouble,” Hartog mumbled.

“I heard,” said Killilea.

“I like to know where I stand,” Hartog said reflectively. “Like if I
have a girl, I like to know is she my girl or not.”

“When you say _your_ girl,” asked Killilea, “what do you mean?”

“Well, you know. She’s not playing around.”

“Do you talk about women all the time?” Killilea demanded with some
irritation.

Hartog answered mildly, in his uninsulted way, “I guess I do. Does it
make you mad, your girl two-timing you? I mean,” he added quickly and
apologetically, “say you have a girl and she does play around.”

“It wouldn’t happen,” Killilea said bluntly. “Not to me.”

“You mean any woman does that to you, you’ll throw her out?”

“That’s not what I mean,” said Killilea. He pushed back a little and let
the waiter set out the steak and the two bottles of ale.

“Fidelity,” said Hartog. “What about fidelity? You don’t think it’s a
good thing?”

“I think it’s a bad thing,” said Killilea.

“Oh,” said Hartog.

“What’s the matter?”

Hartog, in two senses, addressed his steak. With his mouth full, he
said, “I had you figured as a man would stick by a woman, whatever.”

“You figured right.”

“But you just said—”

“Look,” said Killilea, “I don’t know what the word ‘fidelity’ was
supposed to mean when people first began to use it, but it’s come to
mean being faithful, not to a person, but to a set of regulations. It’s
a kind of obedience. A woman that brags about fidelity to her husband,
or a man that’s puffed up because he’s faithful to his wife—these people
are doing what one or two zebras, a few fleas, and millions of dogs
do—obey. Point is, they have to be trained to do it. They have to
develop a special set of muscles to stay obedient. It’s a—a task. I
think it’s a bad thing.”

“Yeah, but you—”

“Me,” said Killilea. “If what I have with someone needs no extra set of
muscles—if I don’t and couldn’t want anyone else—then I’ll stick with
it. Not because I’m obedient. But because I couldn’t do anything else.
I’d have to have the extra set of muscles to break away.”

“Yeah,” said Hartog, “but suppose your girl don’t feel the same way?”

“Then we wouldn’t have anything. See what I’m driving at? If you have to
work at it, it isn’t worth it.”

“So when you don’t have that kind of a life with someone, what do you
do—play the field, I guess, huh?”

“No,” said Killilea. “I have that kind of a life, or none at all.”

“Sounds like a lazy man’s way to me,” said Hartog, the timidity of his
eyes taking the sting out of the statement.

Killilea smiled again. “I said I wouldn’t work at it,” he said softly.
“I didn’t say I wouldn’t work _for_ it.”

“So you wait for the one woman you can live like that with,” said
Hartog, “and unless you find that one, you pass ’em all up, and if you
do find her, you pass up all the others. Right?”

“Right.”

Hartog said, “Those regulations you talked about, don’t they call for
just that kind of living?”

“I suppose.”

“Then what’s the difference?”

“I guess,” said Killilea, “it’s in the way you feel when you do it
because you want to and not because you’re told to.”

“Oh.”

“You know, you sound downright disappointed.”

Hartog met his eyes. “Do I? Well, maybe … I had a chick I thought maybe
you should meet. You are alone, aren’t you?”

“Yes,” said Killilea, and thought of Prue with a pang. Then his eyes
narrowed. “You were going on like this last night too. Are you _sure_
you’re in the refrigerator business?”

“Aw, don’t get salty,” said Hartog. “It’s just I hate to see anybody
lonesome when he don’t have to be.”

“You’re very kind,” said Killilea sourly. “I wish you hadn’t gone to the
trouble.”

“Shucks,” said Hartog. “You’re mad. You shouldn’t get mad. Just wanted
to do what I could, and only found out it was wrong by doing it.”

Killilea laughed, relenting.

“Killy.…”

He leapt to his feet. Prue had come in so quietly he had not seen her.
But then, she always moved like that.

“Hello,” said Hartog.

“I’ll come back later,” said Prue to Killilea.

With that, Hartog forked in a lump of steak as big as his two thumbs,
and rose. “I got to go anyhow,” he said slushily around it. He looked at
Killilea, fumbled toward his pocket.

“Forget it,” said Killilea. “I’ll pick up the tab.”

“Thanks,” said Hartog. “Thanks a lot. So long.”

“Good-by,” said Killilea.

“ ’By,” said Hartog to Prue.

Prue turned to Killilea. “I hadn’t hoped to see you so early today.”

Hartog hesitated embarrassedly, then went out through the arch “What’s
the matter, Prue?”

“I don’t like him,” she said in a low voice.

Killilea remembered, belatedly, Hartog’s account of his fruitIess
efforts to get somewhere with the funny little girl with one ear lobe.
He had a moment of fury, and quickly molded it into laughter by
application of some objectivity.

“He’s harmless,” he said. “Forget him, Prue. Sit down. Have you had
lunch?”

“I’d like an apple,” she said. “And some toast.”

He ordered them, deeply pleased in some strange way because it was
unnecessary to suggest anything else to her. It was good to know her so
well. Soft and strange and so very sure … Prue … he felt a surge of
longing that almost blinded him, and he all but put out his arms
hungrily to her. But with the impulse came the thought, I know so well
that an apple and some toast is her lunch, the only lunch she wants; and
I know just as well that she was just that sure when she said she
wouldn’t come home.

He took her hands and put his face close to hers so she could see how
serious he was. “Prue, I need help. You’ll help me, won’t you, Prue?”

“Oh yes.…”

“I’ll have to talk about ‘important’ things.”

“I don’t know if I can help with those,” she half-smiled.

“I’ll have to talk about chemistry.”

“I won’t understand.”

“I’ll have to talk about Koala and the others.…”

“Oh.…”

“You’ll help me, won’t you?”

“Killy, I’ll try.”

“Thank you, Prue.”

“Why don’t you ever call me ‘darling’ and ‘sweetheart’?”

“Because ‘Prue’ means all those things and says them better.”

Prue nodded gravely at his explanation, not flattered, not amused,
having asked and received information. She waited.

“I have a lot of pieces, but not enough,” he began. “I can put some
together, but not enough. They make some sense, but not enough.” He
lifted his glass and stared at the fine lacework of foam that clung to
the inside surface. With one finger he wiped away a little semicircle of
it, and then another, until he had the words he needed.

“Chemistry is a strange country where sometimes the whole is greater
than the sum of its parts, if you put the right parts on top. When one
reaction finishes with _blue_, and another reaction finishes with _hot_,
and you put the end products together and the result is bluer and hotter
than the blue one and the hot one before, that’s synergy.”

“Synergy,” Prue repeated dutifully.

“The thing that made me leave chemistry was something so fascinating
that I followed it too far, and so complicated that it would take me
most of the day to explain it to somebody who knew my branch as well as
I do. It’s up a broad highway and sharp left down a little road that no
one knows is there, and across a sticky place to a pathway, and then out
where no one’s ever been before.

“That’s an analogy, and so was what I was doing. I was trying to
understand what happens chemically throughout the whole sexual process.
That’s an orchestration, you know, with more pieces in its music than
any conductor ever used. There are subtle and tiny parts to be played by
finely made and exquisitely measured chemicals—so much from the strings,
so much from the brasses. And there are cues to be followed, so that the
flutes are silent until they can pick up the theme the horns give them.

“And that’s an analogy of an analogy, the music that sweeps on to its
climax and is scored from beginning to end. But there are even chemical
motifs that aren’t scored, for they happen before the music and after
it, in silence. In a man’s head, nestled deep down below and between the
halves of his brain, lies a little nubbin which has a strange and
wonderful power, for it can take a thought, or the very shadow of a
thought, and with it sound an A that can send the whole orchestra
rustling and trembling, tuning up. And there are chemical workers who
let the curtain down, send the musicians away to do other work—they’re
all very talented and can do many things—and pack away the chairs and
music stands.

“In my chemical analogy I made a working model of that process; if the
real thing was music, mine was poetry that strove to create the same
feelings; if the real thing was the course of a hunting swallow, mine
was the trajectory of a hungry stingray.

“I did it, and it worked, and I should have left it alone. Because
through it I found a substance which did to the music what you do when
you turn off your phono-amplifier. This substance killed, and it did it
just at that great final resolving crescendo. I isolated it because it
made the experiment fail and it had to be removed. The experiment then
succeeded—but I had found this terrible substance.… I left chemistry.”

His hands, twined together, crackled suddenly. She touched them to cool
them. “Killy, that was just an analogy, though. It wouldn’t work on a
person.”

He looked away from the hands to her face. “The analogy was too clear,
too close. Anyone who understood it could follow it through, and apply
it. You don’t need a Manhattan Project to make any but the first bomb.
All you need after that is a factory. You don’t need
scientists—engineers will do. And when they’re done with it, all you
need is mechanics.

“Prue, Prue … it’s synergy, you see? All the products of all the
ductless glands, tempered and measured to build the climax, and then the
tiny triggering, and the synergistic reaction flooding into the medulla,
where a marvelous being lives, telling the heart when to beat, the lungs
to expand, even instructing the microscopic fingers of the cilia which
nudge the nutrients through the yards of digestive tract. The medulla
simply stops, and everything stops. Yes, yes, heart failure,” he almost
sobbed.

“But Killy … you didn’t make any of it!”

“No, I didn’t. But I found out how, and I want no part of it.”

“A dream,” she said. “A horror. But—it’s something in a museum. It can’t
get out. Poison in a locked cabinet—a guillotine in a picture book—they
can’t get out to hurt people, Killy.”

“You’re my true Prue because you could never in a thousand years see how
this could get out and hurt people,” he said thickly. “Because you have
your world and you live in it your way, and it doesn’t touch this other,
where three billions teem and plan and ferment evil. Let me tell you the
ugly thing then.” He wet his lips. “Do you know what would happen with
this substance in a world where men can soberly plan the use of such a
thing as an H-bomb? I’ll tell you. It would be snatched up. It would be
synthesized by the bucket, by the thousand-gallon tank. It would be
sprayed out as a mist over human beings and their cities and their land.
And then the ghastly thing that has happened to you three times already
would happen to thousands, to millions of women.
_Leibestod_—love-death.”

Her face was chalky. “It was me, then. It’s been done to me.…”

“No!” he roared. Heads turned all over the restaurant, and that was a
blessing, because it brought him into the present where he had to
remember appearances and modes and manners, and, remembering, relieve
the awful pressure of what he was saying. “This synergy is purely a
complex of male functions. The synergic factor would be absorbed
painlessly and without warning, through the lungs, through any tiny
break in the skin. Then it would lie in wait until just the proper
impulse of just the mixture of hormones and enzymes, and all their
fractions, set it free. And that is.…”

“_Liebestod_,” she whispered.

“You still don’t realize how devilish this is. Being you, you can’t. You
see, it would do more than kill men and put their women through the hell
you already know. It would throw a city, a whole nation, a culture, into
an unthinkable madness. You know the number of pitiful sicknesses that
are traced to frustration. Who would dare to relieve frustration with a
ghostly killer like that loose in the land? What of the conflicts within
each man, once the thing was defined for him? (And defined it must be,
because the people must be warned!) Do you know of the old
psychology-class joke, ‘Don’t think of a white horse’? What else could a
man think of? He’d be afraid to read, he’d be afraid to sleep, he’d be
afraid to be alone, and he’d be afraid to be with others. In a week
there would be suicides and mutilations; in two they would start to
murder their women to get them out of sight. And all the while no man
would truly know whether the sleeping devil lay within him or not. He’d
feel it stir and murmur whether it was there or not.

“And their women would watch this, and slowly understand it. And the
little children would watch, and they would never understand it, and
perhaps that is the worst thing of all.

“And this is my accomplishment.”

Nothing, nothing at all could be said at that time. But she could be
with him. She could sit there and let him know she was close, while he
lost himself for a long moment in the terrible pictures that flashed and
burned across the inner surface of his closed eyelids.…

At last he could see again. He tried to smile at her, the kind of
tortured effort that a woman remembers all her life. “So you can come
home with me,” he said shakily.

“No, Killy.”

All he did was to close his eyes again.

“Don’t, Killy, please don’t,” she wept. “Listen to me. Understand me.
You didn’t make the factor—but someone has. You say there’s no way of
knowing whether it’s within you or not. Well, it was there in three men
who died, and it may be in you.”

“And it may not,” said Killilea hoarsely. “If not—good. And if it is—do
you think I’ve wanted to live, this last year and a half?”

“It doesn’t matter what you want!” she snapped. “Think of me. Think of
me, think of yourself dying that way, with me … and each time might be
the last, and it would all be a hell where every love-word was a
threat.… No, Killy!”

“What, then? What else?”

“You have to stop it. There’s got to be a way to stop it. You have a
clue—Landey and Karl and Koala. Think, Killy! What had they in common?”

“You,” he said cruelly.

Any other woman on earth would have killed him for that. But not Prue.
She didn’t even notice it, except as part of the subject in hand. “Yes,”
she said eagerly. “Why, then? Why me?”

“I wouldn’t know that.” Almost in spite of himself, his brain began to
search, to piece, to discard and rematch. “They were all scientists.
Well, not Karl Monck. I don’t know—maybe he was a sort of
thought-scientist. A human engineer.”

“They were all—good,” she said. “Gentle and thoughtful. They truly cared
about people.”

“They were all members of the Ethical Science Board. Pretorio founded
it. It’s going to die without them, too.”

“What was it supposed to do?”

“Synthesize. Make people understand science—not what it is, but what
it’s for. Make scientists in one branch understand scientists in
another—keep them working toward the same ends, with the same sense of
responsibility. A wonderful thing, but there’s no one left who has both
science and ethics to such a degree that the Board can be anything but a
social club.”

Her eyes glowed. This was a thing she could really understand. “Killy,
would anyone want to stop work like that?”

“Only a madman. Why, such a Board could—”

“I think I know what it could do. What kind of a madman, Killy?”

He thought about it. “Perhaps the old-time ‘robber-baron’—the
international munitions-maker, if he still existed, which he doesn’t,
since governments took over the munitions trade.”

“Or someone who might try to sell it to the highest bidder?”

“I wouldn’t think so, Prue. A man can get terribly twisted, but I can’t
believe a mind capable of reasoning a series of reactions as complex as
this one could fail to see consequences. And one very likely consequence
is the end of an environment where his riches would mean anything.”

“Every pathway has a big ‘NO’ sign,” she murmured.

“That’s what I’ve been living with,” he said bitterly.

They were silent until Prue said, “They were all like you.”

“What? Oh—those three … whatever do you mean, Prue? Karl with his deep
socio-political insights, me with nothing but bewilderment in the
everyday world. Landey, that philosophy of his … oh, Prue! He was a
scholar and a humorist; that isn’t me! And Pretorio, your koala—him and
his ENIAC brain! No, you couldn’t be more wrong.”

“I’m right,” she said. “They were like you. I couldn’t have been with
them if they weren’t.”

“Thank you,” he said ardently, “But how?”

“None of them were … pretty men,” she said slowly. “They all respected
_Homo sapiens_, and themselves for being members of it, for all they
feared it. They all feared it the way a good sailor fears a hurricane;
they feared it competently. They all laughed the way you do, from deep
down. And they all still knew how to wonder like children.”

“I don’t quite know what to say to that.”

“You can believe me. You can believe _me_, Killy.”

“I do, then; but that doesn’t help.” Again he plunged into thought,
seeking, turning, testing. “There’s only one single hypothesis so far.
It’s crazy. But—here goes. Someone was gunning for those three, maybe
because of the Ethical Science Board. He discovered my fractionations
and synthesis, maybe independently, maybe not. Maybe not,” he repeated,
and filed the question in his mental ‘pending’ folder.

“Anyway, he succeeds—I don’t know how; he injects the factor into those
three men without their knowing it; he divines that all three would find
you deeply appealing; he sees to it that each in turn meets you. He must
have kept a pretty close watch on things, all the time—” Prue
shuddered—“and so he kills them.”

Prue said, in a dead voice, “You can add to that.” She took his hand.
“There were not three, but four men he was after, and he wants you to
take me back home. If that doesn’t work he will try something else.
Killy, be careful, careful!”

“Why?” he asked, and cracked his knuckles against the side of his head.
“Why? What would anyone gain that way?”

“You said it yourself. It would cripple the Board, maybe kill it. Oh,
and another thing! If he knows about the factor, how to make it, how to
use it, he probably knows that you know it, too. He wouldn’t want that,
don’t you see? He wouldn’t want someone like you around, alert, watching
for some sign of that hellish thing, ready to tell the authorities, the
Government, the Board about it. He’d want that secret kept until it was
too late to stop it.

“You’ll have to find him and kill him.”

“I’m not a killer,” he said.

“There isn’t any other way. I’ll help you.”

“There are always other ways.” He was shocked.

“You’re so … damn … wonderful,” she said suddenly.

Again he was shocked. It was the first time he had ever heard her say
“damn.”

“I had a think,” she said detachedly. The phrase thrilled the part of
him that was always so nerve-alive to her; so many rich moments had
begun with her sudden, “Killy, had a think.…”

“Tell me your think,” he said.

“It was after I went away,” she said, “and I was alone, and I had the
think, and you weren’t there. I made a special promise to save it for
you. Here is the think: There is a difference between morals and ethics,
and I know what it is.”

“Tell me your think,” he said again.

“An act can be both moral and ethical. But under some circumstances a
moral act can be counter to ethics, and an ethical act can be immoral.”

“I’m with you so far,” he said.

“Morals and ethics are survival urges, both of them. But look: an
individual must survive within his group. The patterns of survival
within the group are morals.”

“Gotcha. And ethics?”

“Well, the group itself must survive, as a unit. The patterns of an
individual within the group, toward the end of group survival, are
ethics.”

Cautiously, he said, “You’d better go on a bit.”

“You’ll see it in a minute. Now, morals can dictate a pattern to a man
such that he survives within the group, but the group itself may have no
survival value. For example, in some societies it is immoral _not_ to
eat human flesh. But to refrain from it would be ethical, because that
would be toward group survival. See?”

“Hey.” His eyes glowed. “You’re pretty damn wonderful yourself. Lessee.
It was ‘moral’ to kill Jews under Hitler, but unethical in terms of the
survival of Humanity.”

“It was even against the survival of Germany.”

He looked at her in fond amazement. “Did you bring all this out because
of what I said—I’m not a killer?”

“Partly,” said Prue. “Even if I agreed that killing that hypothetical
devil of ours was immoral—which I wouldn’t—what about the ethics of it?”

He grinned. “Check, comma; mate. I’ll kill him.” The grin faded. “You
said ‘partly.’ Why else do I get this study in pragmatism?”

“I’ll tell you when you’re uncluttered a bit. That is, if you don’t
think of it yourself first. Now then: how do we find him?”

“We might wait until he goes after me.”

“Don’t even think that way!” she said, paling.

“I’m serious. If that’s the only way, then we’ll do it. But I admit I’d
rather think of another. Good gosh, Prue, he has an identity. He’s been
around, watching—he _must_ have been. He’s someone we know.”

“Start with the fractionations. Did you keep notes that anyone might
have seen?”

“Not after I began to suspect what I was getting to, and that was
comparatively early. Up to that point it was fairly routine. I told you
it went off into a side-road no one knew about.”

“Could anyone have studied your apparatus—what was left in the stills
and thingummies?”

“The stills and thingummies were cleaned enough and dismantled enough to
bewilder anyone, every day when I was through with them,” he said
positively. “You do just so much classified and secret work and you get
into habits like that. Of course, some of that apparatus was—no,” he
said, and shook his head. “It wouldn’t tell anyone anything unless they
knew the exact order in which the pieces were set up.”

“You weren’t a Board member at all,” she mused.

“Me? I was a hermit—remember? Oh sure, I knew I’d join it some time.
Matter of fact, I had a date for their banquet next month, which was
cancelled. Fellow who was taking me is dropping out because of those
deaths. Says the Board is dying or dead already.” Prue seemed to be
waiting for something, so he said “Why?” He thought he detected the
smallest slump of disappointment in her shoulders.

“Could there have been anything the Board was about to do that would be
undesirable or dangerous to anyone?”

“Now, that I wouldn’t know.” He scratched his ear. “I think I can find
out, though. Hold on. Don’t go away.” He sprang to his feet, stopped,
and turned back. “Prue,” he said softly, “you’re not going to go away
again, are you?”

“Not now,” she said, her eyes bright.

He went to the telephone, dropped in a coin and dialed Egmont’s number.
“Hello—Egg? Hiya. Killy here.”

“What is it you want, Killilea?”

Killilea had already started to talk by the time he realized how formal
and frigid Egmont’s voice was. A small frown appeared, but he went right
on. “Look, you were pretty much in on the Ethical Science Board doings
until recently, weren’t you?”

There was a pause. Then “Suppose I was?”

“Cut the rib, Egghead,” said Killilea. “This is serious. What I want to
find out is, do you know if Pretorio or Monck or Landey, singly or in
combination, had anything up their sleeves before they were killed? Some
bombshell, or very important announcement that they were about to spring
at a meeting?”

“Whatever I know, Killilea, I most certainly am not passing on to you. I
want to make that absolutely clear to you.”

Killilea’s jaw dropped. Like most men who genuinely liked people, he was
extraordinarily vulnerable to this sort of thing. “_Egg_! he gasped,
then, almost timidly, “This _is_ Egmont … Richard Egmont?”

“This is Egmont, and I have no information for you, not now or ever.”

_Click_!

Killilea walked slowly back to the table, rubbing his ear, which was
still stinging.

Prue looked up, and started. “Killy! What happened?”

He told her. “Egg,” he said. “Hell, I’ve known him for … what do you
suppose is eating … why, I never—”

Prue patted his arm. “I hate it when something hurts you. Why didn’t you
ask him what was wrong?”

“I didn’t have time,” said Killilea miserably. “Hey!” he barked.
“Somebody’s been working on him. If we can find out who—”

“That’s it, that’s it,” said Prue. “Call him again!”

Back in the booth, Killilea set his jaw and waited for the first sound
of Egmont’s voice. Being struck under his guard was one thing: going
after something he urgently wanted was something else again.

“Hello?”

“Listen, you,” growled KiIlilea. “Hang up on me and so help me I’ll come
over there to that office of yours, gag your secretary and kick your
door down. The only way you can get rid of me is over the phone.”

He could hear Egmont’s furious breathing. Finally, “I don’t care what
you do, you’re not getting any Board information out of me.”

“Hold it!” snapped Killilea as he sensed the other receiver coming down.
Egmont said “Well?”

“All I want to know is what’s gotten into you since last night. You
sound like I’d punched your grandmother, and I haven’t even seen her.”

“You’re a pandering little scut,” growled Egmont.

Killilea squeezed his eyes tight and bit back the rage that had begun to
churn inside him. “Egmont,” he said somberly, “we were friends for a
long time. If you did something I didn’t like I might write you off, but
damn it I’d tell you why first. At least you owe me that. Come on—tell
me what’s with you. I honest-to-God don’t know.”

“All right,” said Egmont, his voice shaking. “You asked for it. I’m
going to tell you a thing or two about your buddy that you don’t know.”

“Buddy? What buddy?”

“Just shut up and listen,” hissed Egmont. “You make me madder every time
you open your mouth. Jules Croy, that’s what buddy. You and your bright
and cheerful questions about the Board. This is the guy that’s taking
over what’s left of the Board and making a marching and chowder society
out of it—a damned jackal, a corpse-eater.”

“But I don’t—”

“More money than he knows what to do with, and nothing to do with his
time but hack up what’s left of the finest damn.…” He subsided to a
splutter, and then growled, “And you. Spying around, seeing what you can
pick up. You’re just right for it, too, the hermit with the big name in
science, back in circulation again, picking up loose ends. Well, anybody
I can get to won’t have any ends to give you. You louse!”

“Now you hold it right there,” flared Killilea. “That’s damn well
enough, Egmont. I’ve heard of this Croy—who hasn’t? But I wouldn’t know
him if he was in this phone booth with me. I’ve never had a single
damned word with him!”

Egmont’s voice was suddenly all disdainful amazement. “If I didn’t know
you were a rat by now, this would clinch it. Who’d you have lunch with
today?”

“Lunch? Oh—some character. A barfly I met last night. Name’s Hartog.
What’s that got to do with—”

“Lie to the end, won’t you? Well, it’ll amaze you to know that I ducked
into the bar at Roby’s for a standup lunch today at one-thirty and saw
you with my own eyes.”

“You better get those eyes retreaded,” snarled Killilea. “Why didn’t you
take the trouble to walk over and make sure?”

“If I ever got close enough to Jules Croy to talk to him, I’d tear his
head off. And from now on the same goes for you. And if I hear one
syllable from you on this phone again, I’ll slam this thing down so hard
I’ll shunt it clear down to your end.”

This time Killilea was ready, and had the receiver away from his ear
when the crash came.

“It seems,” he told Prue tiredly, “that I was seen having lunch with an
arch-villain, who has tainted me. I didn’t have lunch with anyone but
the man you saw. Hartog.”

“I don’t like him,” Prue said, for the second time that day.

“Who was the villain?”

“Name’s Croy, Jules Croy,” said Killilea. Prue shook her head vaguely.
“I’ve heard of him. One of those business octopi, finger in this, fifty
thousand shares in that. Always buying up educators and research people
with bequests. Egmont says he’s trying to make a sort of glorified
Parent-Teacher’s Association out of what’s left of the Ethical Science
Board. Egg’s always been real passionate about the Board, and it was
like losing an arm to him when it folded. I guess he needed something to
be real mad at, and the idea of me spying for this Croy supplied it.”

“What about this man you had lunch with, this Hartog?”

“Oh, he’s harmless. Interesting sometimes, the way one of those medical
museums that feature replicas of skin diseases in life-size wax models
is interesting. Did he give you a bad time?’

“Who—that little man?”

“I gather he made a series of passes.…”

“Oh,” she said. “That. That never bothers me, Killy. You know that.”

He knew it. When anyone irritated or bored her, she could leave the room
without stirring from her chair. Her fogbound mood was absolutely
impervious. “Oh,” he said. “I thought … but you say he annoyed you.”

“I didn’t. I said I didn’t like him. He … was the one who introduced me
to Landey. And Koala—Dr. Pretorio—he knew him too. Koala and I once went
to a party where he was. Compared to them, Hartog is such a little
snipe.”

“Knew Pretorio … hmm. Prue, did he know Karl Monck too?”

“I don’t know. I don’t think so. Killy, what is it?”

“Let me think … let me think.” Suddenly he brought his hand down on the
table, hard. “Prue! Hartog is the one who found you for me. He
introduced himself to me at a bar down the street … let me see if I can
remember exactly how … he questioned me in that funny way of his, I
remember. He made sure of my name—yes, and—”

He looked down at his right palm. “What is it?” asked Prue, terror in
her voice at the expression on his face.

“When we shook hands,” he said evenly, “he scratched me. Look. With a
ring he wore. A big cheap ring, the stone was missing, but the mounting
had an edge.”

Anger and terror mingled and mounted in the look they exchanged.

“I was right,” she whispered. “You see … if I’d come home last night—oh,
Killy!”

He looked at the hand. He felt as if he had been kicked in the stomach.

“Is there a—an antidote?”

He shook his head. “It’s not the sort of thing that has an antidote. I
mean, an acid poison can be counteracted by a base chemical of equal
strength and opposite action. But things like this—hormones, for
example. Progesterone and testosterone have opposite end effects, but a
very similar way of bringing them about. I’ve never made any of this
stuff, you know. I can’t tell exactly how it acts or how long it lasts
unless I do. It would surely have an active period, and then get
absorbed and excreted like any hormone. How long that would be, I don’t
really know. I’ve got to develop a test for it. Another test for it,” he
said, giving her a painful grin.

“Well, at least we know. Now—this nasty little Hartog. Do you suppose
Egmont was right? Could he really be this Jules Croy?”

“I guess he could. I’m trying to recall what happened today, at lunch.
He came in—yes, that’s right, he saw me and stopped dead, and I never
saw a more astonished man.”

“He sent you to me last night, didn’t he? He must have known you were
looking for me. He cut you with his ring, and he told you where I was,
and he must have been sure that—no wonder he was astonished! You
shouldn’t have been alive today! Well—what did he say?”

“An involved sort of philosophic conversation. As usual with him, it was
about sex.” He thought back. “What it amounted to, was an attempt to
pump me for information about you, and when that drew a blank, an effort
to find some other woman for me, and then some delving into why I wasn’t
at all interested. It all fits,” he said, almost awed. “The warped,
wealthy little misfit, trying to buy his way into the high levels of
science, trying to get control of the Ethical Science Board, removing
the men who would have no use for his kind. He’ll run it, Prue—it’ll
still attract every real scientist who has more humanity than a milling
machine—and the men he can’t control he’ll eliminate. He has my factor
as a weapon, and if that ever doesn’t work, he can certainly think of
other ways.”

“The factor—how did he get it?”

“That’s the one thing I can’t figure,” Killilea said grimly.

“We’ll ask him.” He looked at his watch. “Come on. We have things to do.
I need a laboratory.”

The first part was easy.

It was two nights later. Prue sat alone pale and unhappy-looking, at a
table at Roby’s. A cigarette burned to a long ash in the ashtray. An
untouched drink stood warming in front of her. And—

“Well, hello,” said Hartog.

“Oh,” she said. She gave him a fleeting smile. He sat down quickly,
opportunistically. “Expecting anyone?”

“No,” she said.

“Oh,” he said, in his ferocious, timid way. “Dined yet?”

“Not yet,” she said. She took out a cigarette and waited. He fumbled in
his pockets, and she glanced at the silver lighter lying next to her
cigarettes. He mumbled an apology, picked it up, used it. When he put it
down he looked puzzedly at his thumb. “I’m glad you came,” she said.

He was surprised and showed it. “I guess I’m glad too,” he said. He
circled his thumb with his other hand and might have pressed it, but she
reached out impulsively and took one of his hands in hers. “You haven’t
ever really talked to me,” she said softly. “You’ve never given me a
chance to really know you.”

He talked, then, and when the conversation edged over to his
preoccupation, it found her unperturbed. They dined. Afterward he said
he felt strange. She said she had a little apartment nearby. Perhaps
he’d be more comfortable there.…

She took him home.

She took his hat and coat and made him a drink and softly asked
permission to change, and slipped into the bedroom. Hartog sat and
sipped his drink and when he heard a sound behind him he said, “Come sit
by me.”

“All right,” said Killilea.

Hartog came up on the couch as if it had contained a spark coil.
Killilea circled the couch and pushed his chest. Hartog sat down again.

“Wh-what is this? The old badger game?”

“A much better game than that, Croy,” said KilliIea.

“Croy?”

“You’re not going to deny it,” said Killilea flatly. “Can you use a
jeweler’s loupe?”

“Use a what? What are you talking about? What is all this?”

“Here,” said Killilea. Hartog took the loupe hesitatingly.

“I want to show you something.” Killilea scooped the silver lighter off
the end table and sat down close to Hartog. He raised the snuffer-lid of
the lighter and held it close to Hartog’s face. “Look through the loupe.
Look right there, at the spark wheel.”

Hartog stared at him then screwed the loupe into his eye Killilea took
out a mechanical pencil and pointed with it. “Watch right there.” With
the tip of his finger on the side—not the rim—of the spark wheel, he
turned it. “See it, Croy?”

“No. Yes I do. A little hair.”

“Not a hair. A needle.”

“It worked fine, Killy,” said Prue from the bedroom doorway. She had not
changed. “He barely felt it.”

“A little more refined than cutting someone with a finger ring,” said
Killilea.

“What have you done to me? Let me out of here!”

“What did you do to him?” Prue asked coldly of Hartog, pointing at
Killilea.

“Is this some sort of a joke? I told you I was sorry about cutting you.
What sort of childish—”

“Shut up, Croy,” said Killilea tiredly. “I know who you are and what
you’re up to.”

“I don’t know what you mean. Why are you calling me Croy? What do you
want from me?”

“Not a thing. Not a thing in the world.” Killilea crossed to the door
and locked it. “Just sit there and take it easy.”

“You know your biochemistry,” said Prue. “You’re going to have heart
failure, poor man.”

Hartog looked at his thumb. “You mean you … that this is going to—why,
you idiot, that won’t work unless I—” he stopped.

Killilea grinned coldly. “Unless you what?” When Hartog didn’t answer,
Killilea said, “Hospitality has its limits, after all. Much as we enjoy
company …” The bantering dropped out of his voice. “You have the wrong
idea. You’re going to die, Croy. In a half hour or so. I didn’t have the
time or the apparatus to make up the factor you used on me. You’ve got a
dose of nice, simple, undetectable hormone poison.”

“No!” gasped Hartog. “You _can’t_! You mustn’t! You’ve got this all
wrong, Killilea. I swear it! I’m not what you think I am.…”

“Yes you are,” said Killilea blackly. “I think you’re a megalomaniac
name of Jules Croy. I think you got on to my research in hormone-complex
analogies. I think you used it to make some of the deadliest, most
hellish extract that ever appeared on this Earth. I’m sure that besides
myself no one but you knows about it, and inside the hour no one but I
will have it. It will be safe with me.”

“What are you going to do with it?” Hartog asked faintly.

“Forget it. Pretend it never existed.… I see you’re not denying anything
any more.”

“I’m Croy,” said the man, with his eyes closed. “You’re doing the right
thing with the factor. But you’re wrong about me. Believe me, you are.
And you’re wrong about no one else knowing.”

Killilea caught his breath “Who else knows?” he demanded.

“I can’t tell you that.”

“He’s lying,” said KilliIea. “Croy, we have thirty minutes or so to
kill, and there’s nothing that can save you now. Why go out full of
lies? Why not tell the truth?”

“There’s nothing you could do if I did … it’s too late now. I’m the only
one who could help.” He looked up at them piteously. “Am I going to die?
Am I really going to die?”

Killilea nodded.

“It’s a hard idea to get used to,” Croy said, as if to himself.

“Tough,” said Killilea. He wiped his forehead. “If you think we’re
enjoying this, we’re not.”

“I know that,” said Croy surprisingly.

“You’re taking this better than I thought you would.”

“Am I? I hate the idea of dying—no, I don’t. It’s the idea of being dead
I hate.”

“Still the barroom philosopher,” Killilea sneered.

“Don’t,” said Prue. “We don’t have to hurt him, Killy. We just want him
dead.”

“Thanks,” said Croy. He looked at Killilea. “I’m going to tell you
everything. I don’t expect you to believe it. You will, though. That
won’t help me, of course; I’ll be dead several weeks by that time. But
as you say, I have a few minutes to kill …”

He lay back. Sweat glistened on his upper lip. “You give me too much
credit. I’m no scientist. I wouldn’t know a ketosteroid from castor oil.
I’m just a little man with a big bank account. I s’pose everyone has his
poses. My analyst once told me I had a Haroun-al-Raschid pattern.
Dressing up in cheap clothes and pretending to be something less than I
was … giving sums of money secretly to this one and that one, not to
help, just to _affect_ people. Intrigues, secrets … the breath of life
to me. Breath of life … I feel awful. Is that symptomatic or
psychosomatic?”

“Symptomatic,” said Killilea. “Go on. If you want to.”

“It was Pretorio who got on to what you were doing. One of the few real
all-around scientists in this century. Immense ability to extrapolate.
He saw the directions your researches were taking you, and he got
alarmed when you quit reporting progress but kept on working.”

“But how did he _know_?”

“Through me. I own Zwing & Rockwood.”

Killilea clapped a hand to his head. “I _never_ thought of that!”

“What, Killy? Who’s Zwing and Rockwood?”

“Glassblowers! Work like mine calls for very special custom apparatus.
And step by step, as I ordered apparatus—”

“That’s it,” nodded Croy. “For Pretorio it wasn’t too tough. He was
working right along with you the whole time. Sometimes he was ahead.
Sometimes he would call and tell me exactly what piece of glass you’d
order next.”

“I _thought_ I was getting fantastically good service.”

“You were.”

“What on earth was Pretorio after? Why didn’t he come to me? How did you
happen to be working with him?”

“What was he after? What he told me was that he was afraid you didn’t
know the possibilities of what you were doing. He was so afraid of it
that he didn’t want to tip you off by asking you. After all, he was the
great extrapolator, you know. As for me, I was flattered. He had me
completely spellbound. You just don’t know what a tremendous man he was,
what an—an aura he had.”

“I do,” said Prue.

“I did absolutely everything he told me to do. Some of it I couldn’t
understand, but I trusted him completely.”

“And then he died.”

“I went sort of crazy after that, I guess. Didn’t know what to do with
myself. It was pretty bad. Then one day I got a call from a man with a
husky voice. He said Pretorio had left him instructions. I didn’t
believe him at first, but when he started giving me details that no one
but Pretorio could have told him, I had to believe.”

“Who was he?”

“He never told me. I never met him. He said it had to be that way
because he hadn’t Pretorio’s great reputation. But Pretorio’s work had
to go on. Well, I followed orders. You know about Landey, and then
Monck. I was blind, stupid, I guess. You’ll have to take my word for it
that I injected both of them and introduced them to her—” he indicated
Prue with his chin—“without knowing why they were dying. I thought it
was heart failure, just like everyone else. I didn’t even know she was
with them when they died.”

“What about Pretorio? You infected him, didn’t you?”

“No, damn it, I didn’t!” shouted Croy, his voice angry for the first
time since he had started his narrative. “That must have been an
accident—the one crazy accident that fell in line with the things I
arranged. Or maybe he injected himself by accident. It doesn’t take
much, you know.”

“I know,” said Killilea grimly.

“Well, the day came when I got orders to do the same for you. I didn’t
know until then who she was. When I found that out I got some thinking
done. It was like coming up out of a dream. I’d never doubted this man’s
word any more than I had Pretorio’s, but now I did. I saw then what
these deaths meant; I connected them with the Ethical Science Board that
I was supposed to take over and run for this man; I saw suddenly how you
four—Pretorio, Landey, Monck and yourself—would have stood in his way. I
called him back and refused to go on with him.

“He told me then what he was after. He told me what the factor was, what
it could do, how the world had to be protected from it. He told me that
you developed it, that unless you were stopped it would slip out of your
hands and plunge the world into ruin. And about the Board, he said the
world wasn’t ready for a group that would efficiently cross-fertilize
scientific specialties. We haven’t caught up, as a culture, with the
science we already have.

“I agreed with him and promised to go on.”

“Why—the man is crazy! And so are you, for swallowing that drivel!”

“Who swallowed it? I knew then he was crazy, that he was responsible for
the death of one of the finest men since Leonardo, that he’d made a
murderer out of me and put you two through hell … so I made up my mind
to play along with him until I could find out who he was. I was ready to
kill him, but how do you kill a man unless you can find him, and how do
you find him when you don’t know his name or what he looks like?” He
spread his hands, dropped them. “And that’s all. I know it looks bad for
me, and I guess I’ve earned what I’m getting. But—like I said … no one
but me can find him, and by the time you get proof of that I’ll be dead.
He’s going to kill you, you know. He’s got to. He can’t afford to have
anyone else know about the factor.” Killilea strode across to the sofa
and lifted a heavy fist.

“Killy!” cried Prue.

With difficulty Killilea lowered the fist. “You’re a liar,” he said
thickly. “If that ingenious story is true, why did you cut my hand with
the ring?”

“I told you. I had to play it his way. But I didn’t inject the factor!
It was something else—something that may have saved your life.
Progesterone.”

“Why on earth progesterone?”

“Orders were to tell you where _she_ was, see to it you went to her. You
were looking for her; you wanted her back. It was a wonderful setup for
his plan. I didn’t know too much about hormones, but I did what I could.
I had the stuff compounded; progesterone and a large charge of
SF—hyaluronidase, I think it was—to make it spread.”

“What on earth is that?” asked Prue.

“An enzyme. SF means ‘spreading factor,’ ” said Killilea. “Lectures
later, Prue. Go on, Croy.”

“You had enough progesterone in you to bank your fire for a week,” said
Croy. “By that time I hoped to have the whole thing cracked.”

“You sure were upset when you found me alive the next day.”

“I was upset when I found you were there. I wanted to get you out of my
sight. I didn’t know when my—my would-be boss might see you.”

“Then why all the talk about finding me another chick?”

“I wanted to see if the hormone was working. I wanted to find out where
you stood with _her_. But when she came in, there was nothing I could
do. It was all right, anyway. As long as you were together, he could
assume only that you were taking your time in making peace.”

“An answer for everything,” said Killilea. “How much of this do you
believe, Prue?”

“I don’t know,” she said, troubled. To Croy she said, “Why didn’t you
tell us this before? Why didn’t you tell me tonight at dinner? Or even
after you found Killy here?”

“Do you know of a scientist worth his salt that would even speak to me?”
Croy said wistfully. “The first chance I ever had to do something really
fine for science—I wasn’t going to jeopardize that by getting slapped
down when you found out who I was. Don’t you see that’s why I was so
pleased to be able to work with Pretorio?”

“I remember what Egmont said about him,” mused Killilea.

“Egmont,” said Croy. “The crystallographer? Yes; a good case in point.
He can’t stand the sight of me. When he found out I was behind the
scenes in the Board membership, I thought he would explode.”

“He did explode,” said Killilea. “Prue, we’ve got quite a story to tell
the Egg.”

“There’ll be time for that later. Killy, suppose he’s right? Suppose
there really is someone else who knows about your factor—someone as
dangerous as Croy says?”

“We’ll hear from him,” said Killilea.

“He won’t be as clumsy as I was,” said Croy. “I tell you you’ll be dead
before you know who killed you.”

“I guess I’ll have to chance it,” said Killilea. “You said if you lived
you could find him for us. At least you can tell us how, so we can try.”

“There would be only one way—to trace him when he calls me. He won’t
call me after I’m dead.”

Killilea watched Croy narrowly. “If you had a chance to catch him now,
would you do it?”

“Would I! If I only could!”

“We’ve killed you,” Prue pointed out.

“You did what you could; you were right as far as you knew. And I
suppose I have to pay for what I’ve done … I’m not angry at you two.”

“All right then. Either you’re the cleverest liar or one of the bravest
men I’ve ever met,” said Killilea. “Now I’m going to remind you of
something. You said that when he ordered you to inject me with the
factor, you balked. _You called him back_. Give us that phone number and
you’ve proved your point.”

“The phone number,” Croy breathed. “It hadn’t occurred to me, because he
always said it was useless to call except in the afternoon; he wouldn’t
be there at any other time.”

“Ever try it?”

“No.”

Killilea pointed to the phone. “Try it.”

“What shall I say?”

There was a heavy silence. “Get him here.”

“He wouldn’t come here.”

“He would if his whole plan depended on it,” said Killilea. “Come on,
Croy. You’re the boy for intrigue.”

Croy put his head in his hands.

“I knew he’d balk,” snarled Killilea.

“Shut up,” said Croy, startlingly. “Let me think.”

He crouched there. He covered his eyes, then suddenly raised his head.
“Give me the phone.”

“Better tell us first what you’re going to say.”

“Oh, Killy,” said Prue, “stop acting like a big bad private detective!
Let him do it his way!”

“No,” said Killilea. “He’s dying, Prue. And if he isn’t half-cracked
just now, we know he has been. How do we know he isn’t going to pull us
in the hole after him?”

“Phone him,” said Prue evenly.

Croy looked from one to the other, then took the phone from the end
table. From his wallet he took a piece of paper and dialed. “You better
be right,” Killilea whispered to Prue. He went to Croy and took the
paper out of his hand and put it in his own pocket. Through the silent
room the sound of the ringing signal rasped at them. At the sixth
unanswered ring Killilea said, “Even if he’s there now, Prue, it might
be just a trick.…”

Croy covered the transmitter. “I haven’t time for tricks,” he said. And
just then the receiver clicked, and a hoarse voice said, “Well?”

Prue gripped Killilea’s biceps so hard that he all but grunted. Croy,
pale but steady, said, “I’m in trouble.”

“It better be bad trouble,” said the voice. “I told you not to call me
this late.”

“It’s bad, right enough,” said Croy. The reversion to an English accent
under strain was quite noticeable. “She took me to her apartment.
Killilea was here.”

“Alive?”

“I should say so. Alive and very much aware of what’s happening. I hit
him with the poker.”

“Go hit him again.”

“I can’t—I can’t do that. Besides, he told her everything. She knows,
now, too.”

“Where is she?”

“Tied up. What shall I do?”

A long pause. No one breathed. “I’ll come over. Where is it?”

Croy gave the address and apartment number. “And hurry. I don’t know how
long he’ll stay under. Take you long?”

“Fifteen minutes.” _Click_. Croy looked up at them. “Have I got fifteen
minutes?” he asked. His face was wet.

Killilea looked at his watch. “How do you feel?”

“Not good.”

Killilea went into the bedroom and came out a moment later with a
hypodermic in his hand. “Lie down,” he said.

“Relax. Relax,” he said again, touching the side of Croy’s neck,
“completely. Better.” He slid the left sleeve up, squirted a drop of
fluid upward from the needle, and buried the gleaming point in the large
vein inside the elbow. “Just take it easy until he gets here. You’ll
last.”

“What is it?”

“Adrenalin.”

Croy closed his eyes. His lips were slightly cyanotic and his breathing
was shallow.

“Are you sure he’ll last?” asked Prue.

“Sure.” Killilea smiled tightly. “Believe him?”

“Mostly, I think.”

“Me too. Mostly. We could be making an awful mistake, Prue.”

“Mmm. Either way.”

He took a turn up and down the room. “Morals and ethics,” he said. “You
never really know, do you?”

“You do the best you can,” she said. “Killy, you do very well indeed.”

“Do I?”

“You react ethically much oftener than morally. You react ethically as
much as other people do morally.”

“What are you thinking about?”

“Killy, you never said a word to me about what I did. With those men,
Karl and the Koala.…”

“What word should I say?”

She looked at her hands. “You’ve read books. Insane jealousies and
bitterness and distrust.…”

“Oh,” he said. He thought hard for a moment. “The things you did
were … just little, unimportant, corroborative details. The big thing
was that you had gone. I didn’t like your going. But I didn’t feel that
a part of me was doing those things; which is the feeling jealous people
have. You didn’t stray when you were with me. You won’t when you come
back.”

“No,” she said almost inaudibly. “I won’t. But, Killy, that’s what I
mean when I say you don’t react morally. Morals, per se, would have
killed what we have together. Ethics—and here it’s just another name for
our respect for one another—have saved it. Another argument for the
higher survival value of ethics.”

They sat quietly then, together in the easy chair that was built for
one, and were quiet, until Killilea looked at his watch, extricated
himself from the chair, and went to Croy.

“It’s almost time, Croy,” he said levelly. “Go into your act. You feel
up to it?”

Croy swung his feet down and shook his head violently. “My face is made
of rubber and my heart thinks I’m running the three hundred meter,” he
said. “I’ll make it, though.”

“Come on, Prue.”

They went into the bedroom, turned out the light, and closed the door
until just a finger’s breadth of golden light showed from the living
room lamp.

They waited.

The doorbell rang. Croy started for the door. “That’s downstairs,”
Killilea murmured. “Push the button in the kitchenette. And don’t forget
the door here is locked when you try to open it. Speak fairly loud so he
will too. I’ll take your cues. And Croy, God help you if—”

Prue’s hand slid up and covered his mouth. “Good luck, Mr. Croy,” she
said.

The buzzer hissed like a snake. Croy drew a deep breath, crossed the
room, unlocked the door and opened it. “Where are they?” said a hoarse
voice.

“In there,” said Croy, “but wait … what are you going to do?”

“What do you expect?” said the newcomer. Killilea could see him
now—short, heavy, almost chinless; wide forehead, low hairline.

“You’re going to kill them,” said Croy.

“Do you have a better idea?”

“Have you thought about the details—what happens when the bodies are
found, what will the police do?”

The stranger opened his overcoat and from what must have been a special
pocket drew out a leather-covered wooden case. He set it on the table,
opened it, and took out a hypodermic. He grinned briefly. “Heart
failure. So common nowadays.”

“Two cases at once?”

“Hmm. You have something there. Well … I can take one of them away in my
car.”

“I was wondering,” Croy said tightly, “if you’d expect me to do it.”

The man regarded him without expression. “It’s a possibility.”

“It would mean I’d have to leave here alive. You wouldn’t want that,
would you?”

The man laughed. “Oh, I see! My dear fellow, you needn’t fear for
yourself. Aside from considerations of friendship—even admiration—I
couldn’t possibly complete my plans for the Board without you.”

Killilea, his eye fixed to the crack of the door, felt an urgent tugging
at his shoulder. Killilea backed away and let her work her way silently
around him so that she could see as well.

The man started toward the bedroom. Croy said evenly, “Where have I seen
you before?”

The man stopped without turning. The needle glinted in his hand. “I have
no idea. I doubt that you ever have.”

“I have, though. I have—someplace.…”

Prue gasped suddenly. Killilea took her shoulders and with one easy
motion flung her through the air. She landed on the middle of the bed.
The gasp alerted their visitor who dove for the door. Killilea stepped
aside and let it crash open. Light from the living room flooded the
man’s broad back as he stopped, blinking, in the darkness, peering from
one side to the other. Killilea stood up on tiptoe and with all his
strength brought the edge of his right hand down on the nape of the
man’s neck. He went down flat with no sound but his falling, and lay
still.

Killilea was gasping as if he had run up steps. He bent and lifted the
man’s shoulder. It fell back loosely. “Out, all right,” said Killilea.
“Prue, what got into you? You almost gave us away by making that
silly—Prue! What—”

She sat on the edge of the bed, her hands over her face, shuddering. He
put his arms around her. “It’s Koala,” she said. “Oh, Killy, it’s
Koala.…”

Croy was standing white-faced in the doorway. “What’s she say? What’s
koala mean?”

“It means a great deal. Turn him over and look at him, Croy. Maybe
you’ll remember where you saw him.”

Croy bent down and rolled the heavy body over. “He’s dead!”

Killilea left the bed and ran to Croy, knelt down. “Yeah,” he said.
“Yeah.” He picked up a broken tube of glass, looked at it, laid it down
on the carpet. Then he began running his fingers lightly over the front
of the man’s coat.

“Careful,” said Croy.

“Oh, but yes. Here it is.” Slowly and cautiously he unbuttoned jacket,
vest and shirt. The undershirt showed a small blood spot, just a drop.
From its center extended the needle. Using his handkerchief folded
twice, Killilea grasped it and pulled it out. It had penetrated only a
fraction of an inch. “Far enough,” said Killilea and Croy gave an
understanding grunt.

“Heart trouble,” said Killilea.

Croy said, “You’re still going to have … two bodies … to explain. And
you don’t even know who this one is.”

“Yes I do,” said Killilea. “You do too, if you’ll only look at him.” He
bent close. “Brown-tinted contact lenses,” he said. “I think his eyes
are blue. Right, Prue?”

She gave a long, shuddering sigh. “Yes,” she whispered. “And he had a
beard to hide that little chin.”

“Beard,” said Croy, and then dropped to his knees. _“Dr. Pretorio_!”

“It had to be. Now I feel like the boys at that dinner table where
Columbus demonstrated how to stand an egg on end.”

“But he’s … he was dead!”

“When we get his coffin dug up—if we bother—we’ll find out who really
was buried at Pretorio’s funeral,” said Killilea. “If anyone.”

“Why?” moaned Croy.

Killilea stood up and dusted off his hands. “Thought a lot of him,
didn’t you, Croy? Why did he do it? I guess we’ll never know in detail.
But I’d say his mind snapped. He got afraid of the Board, really his own
creation, when he discovered my factor, and wanted it for himself. The
Board needed wrecking, and he threw his own supposed death on the
wreckage, along with his great reputation. A mind like that, working
against society instead of for it, would be happier operating
underground. I wonder what he would have done with the factor?”

“He told me last week that the reorganized Board could run the world,”
said Croy in a small voice. “I thought he was flattering me. I thought
it was a figure of speech. Oh, God. Pretorio.” Tears ran down his face.

“You’ll have to give me a hand,” said Killilea. “We’ll get him down to
his car and leave him in it. And that will be that.”

“All right … do I have time?” asked Croy.

Killilea came to him. “Let’s see your tongue. Mmmm-hm!” He lifted Croy’s
damp wrist and looked thoughtful. “In your condition, I’d give you about
forty more years.”

Croy simply looked at him blankly. Killilea slapped him on the shoulder.
“Maybe it’s morals, and maybe it’s ethics,” he said kindly, “but neither
Prue nor I could sit and talk while we watched a man die. You got an
injection of dilute caffeine citrate to sweat you up, and some
adrenaline to make you tingle.”

Croy’s jaw opened and closed ludicrously. At last he said, “But I’m
supposed to … I have to pay for.…”

Killilea laughed. “Listen, philosopher. If you really feel nice and
guilty and want to get punished—live with it, don’t die for it just so
you can escape all those sleepless nights.”

Then Croy began to laugh.…

Together they got the heavy body downstairs while Prue scouted ahead.
They saw no one, though they had a drunken-friend story ready. They
arranged the corpse carefully behind the wheel and left it.

Back in the foyer of the apartment house, Killilea asked, “Which way do
you go?”

“Bilville.”

“You can’t go all the way out there this late!” Prue cried. “Go back
upstairs. You can make yourself quite comfortable there. There’s orange
juice in the refrigerator, and the clean towels are—”

“But won’t you—”

“No,” said Killilea flatly, “she won’t. I’m taking my wife home.”



THE DARK ROOM


THE WORLD ENDED AT THAT DAMN PARTY OF BECK’S.

At least if it had fallen into the sun, or if it had collided with a
comet, it would have been all right with me. I mean, I’d have been able
to look at that fellow in the barber chair, and that girl on the TV
screen, and somebody fresh from Tasmania, and I’d have been able to say,
“Ain’t it hell, neighbor?” and he would’ve looked at me with sick eyes,
feeling what I felt about it.

But this was much worse. Where you sit and look around, that’s the
center of the whole universe. Everything you see from there circles
around you, and you’re the center. Other people share a lot of it, but
they’re circling around out there too. The only one who comes right in
and sits with you, looking out from the same place, is the one you love.
That’s your world. Then one night you’re at a party and the one you love
disappears with a smooth-talking mudhead; you look around and they’re
gone; you worry and keep up the bright talk; they come back and the
mudhead calls you “old man” and is too briskly polite to you, and
she—she won’t look you in the eye. So the center of the universe is
suddenly one great big aching nothing, nothing at all—it’s the end of
your world. The whole universe gets a little shaky then, with nothing at
its center.

Of course, I told myself, this is all a crazy suspicion, and you, Tom
Conway, ought to hang your head and apologize. This sort of thing
happens to people, but not to us. Women do this to their husbands, but
Opie doesn’t do this to me—does she, _does she?_

We got out of there as soon as I could manage it without actually
pushing Opie out like a wheelbarrow. We left party noises behind us, and
I remember one deep guttural laugh especially that I took extremely
personally, though I knew better. It was black dark outside, and we had
to feel the margins of the path through our soles before our eyes got
accustomed to the night. Neither of us said anything. I could almost
sense the boiling, bottled-up surging agony in Opie, and I knew she felt
it in me, because we always felt things in each other that way.

Then we were through the arched gateway in the hedge and there was
concrete sidewalk under us instead of gravel. We turned north toward
where the car was parked and I glanced quickly at her. All I could see
was the turn of her throat, curved a bit more abruptly than usuaI
because of the stiff, controlled way she was holding her head.

I said to myself, something’s happened here and it’s bad. Well, I’ll
have to ask her. I know, I thought, with a wild surge of hope, I’ll ask
her what happened; I’ll ask her if it was the worst possible thing, and
she’ll say no, and then I’ll ask her if it’s the next worse, and so on,
until when I get to it I’ll be able to say things aren’t so bad after
all.

So I said, “You and that guy, did you—” and all the rest of it, in words
of one syllable. The thing I’m grateful to her about is that she didn’t
let one full second of silence go by before she answered me.

She said, “Yes.”

And that was the end of the world.

The end of the world is too big a thing to describe in detail. It’s too
big a thing to remember clearly. The next thing that happened, as far as
I can recall, is that there was gravel under my feet again and party
noises ahead of me, and Opie sprinting past me and butting me in the
chest to make me stop. “Where are you going?” she gasped.

I pushed her but she bounded right back against me. “Get out of the
way,” I said, and the sound of my voice surprised me.

“Where are you going?” she said again.

“Back there,” I said. “I’m going to kill him.”

“Why?”

I didn’t answer that because there wasn’t room inside me for such a
question, but she said, “He didn’t do it by himself, Tom. I was … I
probably did more than he did. Kill me.”

I looked down at the faint moon-glimmer that told where her face was. I
whispered, because my voice wouldn’t do anything else, “I don’t want to
kill you, Opie.”

She said, with an infinite weariness, “There’s less reason to kill him.
Come on. Let’s go—” I thought she was going to say “home,” and winced,
but she realized as much as I did that the word didn’t mean anything
anymore. “Let’s go,” she said.

When the world ends it doesn’t do it once and finish with the business.
It rises up and happens again, sometimes two or three times in a minute,
sometimes months apart but for days at a time. It did it to me again
then, because the next thing I can remember is driving the car. Next to
me where Opie used to sit was just a stretch of seat-cushion. Where
there used to be a stretch of seat-cushion, over next to the right-hand
door, Opie sat.

Back there in the path Opie had asked me a one-word question, and in me
there was no room for it. Now, suddenly, there was no room in me for
anything else. The word burst out of me, pressed out by itself.

_“Why?”_

Opie sat silently. I waited until I couldn’t stand it any longer and
then looked over at her. A streetlight fled past and the pale gold wash
of it raced across her face. She seemed utterly composed, but her eyes
were too wide, and I sensed that she’d held them that way long enough
for the eyeballs to dry and hurt her. “I asked you why,” I snarled.

“I heard you,” she said gently. “I’m just trying to think.”

“You don’t know why?”

She shook her head.

I looked straight through the windshield again and wrenched the wheel.
I’d damned near climbed a bank. I was going too fast, too. I knew she’d
seen it coming, and she hadn’t moved a muscle to stop it. I honestly
don’t think she cared just then.

I got the car squared away and slowed down a little. “You’ve got to know
why. A person doesn’t just—just go ahead and—and do something without a
reason.”

“I did,” she said in that too-tired voice.

I’d already said that people don’t just do things that way, so there was
no point in going over it again. Which left me nothing further to say.
Since she offered nothing more, we left it like that.

A couple of days later Hank blew into my office. He shut the door, which
people don’t usually do, and came over and half-sat on the desk,
swinging one long leg. “What happened?” he said.

Hank is my boss, a fine guy, and Opie’s brother.

“What happened to who?” I asked him. I was as casual as a guy can be who
is rudely being forced to think about something he’s trying to wall up.

He wagged his big head. “No games, Tom. What happened?”

I quit pretending. “So that’s where she is. Home to mother, huh?”

“Have you been really interested in where she is?”

“Cut it out, Hank. This ‘have you hurt my little sister, you swine’
routine isn’t like you.”

He had big amber eyes like Opie’s, and it was just as hard to tell what
flexed and curled behind them. Finally he said, “You know better than
that. You and Opie are grownups and usually behave like grownups.”

“We’re not now?”

“I don’t know. Tom, I’m not trying to protect Opie. Not from you. I know
you both too well.”

“So what _are_ you trying to do?”

“I just want to know what happened.”

“Why?” I rapped. There it was again: why, why, why.

He scratched his head. “Not to get sloppy about it, I want to know
because I think that you and Opie are the two finest bipeds that ever
got together to make a fine combo. I have one of these logical minds. A
fact plus a fact plus a force gives a result. If you know all the facts,
you can figure the result. I’ve been thinking for a lot of years that I
know all the facts about both of you, everything that matters. And
this—this just doesn’t figure. Tom, what happened?”

He was beginning to annoy me. “Ask Opie,” I spat. It sounded ugly. Why
not? It was ugly.

Hank swung the foot and looked at me. I suddenly realized that this guy
was miserable. “I did ask her,” he said in a choked voice.

I waited.

“She told me.”

That rocked me. “She told you what?”

“What happened. Saturday night, at Beck’s party.”

“She told you?” I couldn’t get over that. “What in time made her tell
you?”

“I made her. She held out for a long while and then let me have it, in
words of one syllable. I guess it was to shut me up.”

I put my head in my hands. It made a difference to have someone else in
on it. I didn’t know whether I cared for the difference or not.

I jumped up then and yelled at him. “So you know what happened and you
came bleating in here what happened, what happened! Why ask me, if you
know?”

“You got me wrong, Tom,” he said. His voice was so soft against my
yelling that it stopped me like a cut throat. “Yeah, I know what she
did. What I want to know is what happened to make her do it.”

I didn’t say anything.

“Have you talked to anyone about it?” he wanted to know.

I shook my head.

He spread his hands. “Talk to me about it.”

When I didn’t move, he leaned closer. “What do you say, Tom?”

“I say,” I breathed, “that I got work to do. We have a magazine to get
out. This is company time, remember?”

He got up off the desk right away. Did you ever listen to someone walk
away from you when you weren’t looking at him, and know by his footsteps
that he was hurt and angry?

He opened the door and hesitated. “Tom …”

“What?”

“If you’ve got nothing to do this evening … call me. I’ll come over.”

I glared at him. “Fat chance.”

He didn’t say anything else. Just went away. I sat there staring at the
open door. Here was a guy bragging how much he knew about me. Thinking
I’d want to call him, talk to him.

Fat chance.

I didn’t call him, either. Not until after eight o’clock. His phone
didn’t get through the first ring. He must have been sitting with his
hand on it. “Hank?” I said.

He said, “I’ll be right over,” and hung up.

I had drinks ready when he got there. He came in saying, the stupid way
people do, “How are you?”

“I’m dead,” I said. I was, too. No sleep for two nights; dead tired. No
Opie in the house. Dead. Dead inside.

He sat down and had sense enough to say nothing. When I could think of
something to say, it was, “Hank, I’m not going to say anything about
Opie that sounds lousy. But I have to check, I have to be sure. Just
what did she tell you?”

He sighed and said what Opie had done. What she had done to me, to a
marriage. She’d told him, all right. He said it and, “Better drink your
drink, Tom.”

I drank it. I needed to. Then I looked at him. “Now that’s on the
record, what do you do about it?”

Hank didn’t say anything. I covered my face and rocked back and forth.
“I guess this happens to lots of guys, their wives making it with
someone else. Sometimes it breaks them up, sometimes it doesn’t. How do
they live when it doesn’t?”

Hank just fiddled with a table lighter. I picked up my empty glass and
looked at it and all of a sudden the stem broke in two. Red blood began
welling out. Hank yelped and came to me with his handkerchief. He tied
it around my wrist and pulled it so tight it hurt. “Why is it so
important that Opie and I get back together, Hank? To you, I mean?”

He gave me a strange look and went into the bathroom. I heard him
rummaging around in the medicine chest. “There’s more in it than you and
Opie, Tom,” he called out. He came back in with bandages. “I guess
you’re so full of this that it’s around you every way you look, but
there are other things going on in the world, honest.”

“I guess there are, but they don’t seem to matter.”

“Hold still,” he said. “This’ll hurt.” He stuck the iodine on my cut. It
hurt like hell and I wished all hurts were as easy to take. He said,
“Something awful funny is going on at Beck’s.”

“What happened to me is funny?” I said.

“Shut up. You know what I mean.” He finished the bandage and went to the
bar. “Well, maybe you don’t. Look, how long have you known Beck?”

“Years.”

“How well?”

“As well as you can know a guy you went to school with, roomed with,
lent money to and had lunch with four times a week for eight-nine
years.”

“Ever notice anything odd about him?”

“No. Not Beck. The original predictable boy. Right-wing Republican,
solid-color tie, independent income, thinks ‘Rustle of Spring’ is opera,
drinks vermouth-and-soda in hot weather and never touches a martini
until 4 P.M. Likes to have people around, all kinds of people. The
wackier the better. But he never did, said, or thought a wacky thing in
his life.”

“Never? You did say never?”

“Never. Except—”

“Except?”

I looked at the bandage he had made. Very neat. “That rumpus room of
his. What got into him to fix it up that way I’ll never know. I almost
dropped dead when I saw it.”

“Why?”

“Have you been there?”

He nodded. Something uncoiled back of his eyes, and it reminded me so
much of Opie that I grunted the way a man does when he walks into a
wagon-tongue in the dark. I took a good pull at the glass he’d brought
and hung on to the subject, hard. “So you’ve been there. Does that look
like the setup of a man who’s surrounded himself all his life with
nothing more modern than Dutch Queen Anne?”

He didn’t say anything.

“I tell you I _know_. I think Beck would ride around in a Victorian
brougham if it wouldn’t make him conspicuous. He hates to be conspicuous
as much as he hates modern furniture.”

“A room can’t get more ‘modern’ than that one,” said Hank.

“Foam rubber and chromium,” I said reminiscently. “Fireplace of black
marble; high-gloss black Formica on the table-tops. Wall-to-wall
broad-looms and freeform scatter-rugs. Fluorescents, all in coves, yet.
The bookcase looks like a bar; the bar looks like a legitimate flight of
steps.”

“Maybe he’s a masochist, making himself unhappy in a house furnished the
way he hates it.”

“He’s no masochist, unless you figure the painful company of some of the
weirdies he invites to his parties. And he doesn’t live in a _house_
furnished in Science Fiction Modern. He lives in a house with alternate
Chinese Chippendale and that Dutch Queen Anne I was talking about. Only
that room, that one rumpus room, is modern; and what he did it for I’ll
never know. It must have cost him a young fortune.”

“It cost him what you might call a middle-aged fortune,” Hank said
bluntly. “I got the figures.”

I snapped out of the mild reminiscences. “Have you now! Hank, what’s the
burning interest in Beck and his decor?”

Hank got up, stretched, sat down again and leaned forward with such
earnestness and urgency that I drew back. “Tom, suppose I could prove
that it wasn’t her fault at all?”

I thought about it. Finally, between my teeth, I said, “If you could
really prove that, I know one mudhead that would get thoroughly killed.”

“There’ll be none of that talk,” he rapped. I squinted up at him and
decided not to protest. He really meant it. He went on, “You have _got_
to understand exactly what I mean.” He paused to chew words before he
let them out, then said, “I don’t want you to get up any wild hopes. I’m
not going to be able to prove Opie didn’t … didn’t do what she said she
did Saturday night. She did it, and that’s that. Shut up, now, Tom—don’t
say it! Not to me. She’s my sister; do you think I’m enjoying this?”
When I simmered down a bit, Hank said, “All I think I can prove is that
what happened was completely beyond her control, and that she’s
completely innocent in terms of intention, even if she is guilty in
terms of action.”

“I’d like that,” I said, with all my heart. “I’d like that just fine.
Only it’s hardly the kind of thing you can really prove.” I double-took
it. “What are you talking about?” I demanded angrily. “You mean she was
hypnotized?”

“I do not,” he said positively. “No amount of hypnotism would make her
do something she didn’t want to do, and I’m working on the premise that
she didn’t want to.”

“Dope, then?”

“I don’t think so. Did she look doped to you?”

“No.” I thought back carefully. “Besides, I never heard of a drug that
could do that to a woman that quickly and leave no after-effects.”

“There is none, and if there were it wasn’t used on her.”

“Cut out the guessing games then, and tell me what it was!”

He looked at me and his face changed. “Sorry,” he said softly. “I can’t.
I don’t know. But I mean to find out.”

“You better say more,” I said, dazed. “You lost me back there some
place.”

“You know where Klaus was picked up?”

I started. “The atom spy? No. What’s that got to do with it?”

“Maybe a lot,” said Hank. “Just a hunch I’ve got. Anyway, they got him
at one of Beck’s parties.”

“I’ll be damned,” I breathed. “I didn’t know that.”

“Most people don’t. It was one-two-three-hush. There was a Central
Intelligence agent there and Klaus walked over to him and spilled the
whole thing. The agent got him out of there and arrested him, then
checked his story. It checked all right. Do you know _Cry for Clara_?”

“Do I know it? I wish I’d never heard it. Seventeen weeks on the ‘Hit
Parade,’ and squalling out of every radio and every record store and
juke-box in creation. Do I know it?”

“Know who wrote it?”

“No.”

“Guy called Willy Simms. Never wrote a song before, never wrote one
since.”

“So?”

“He did the first draft at one of Beck’s parties.”

“I don’t see what that has to do with—”

He interrupted me. “The hen fight that put two nice deep fingernail
gouges across Marie Munro’s million-dollar face happened at Beck’s. A
schoolteacher did it—an otherwise harmless old biddy who’d never even
seen a Munro picture and hadn’t even spoken to The Face that evening.
The man who—”

“Wait a minute, wait a min—” I started, but he wouldn’t wait.

“The man who killed that preacher on Webb Street two weeks
ago—remember?—did it with Beck’s poker, which he threw out of Beck’s
rumpus room window like a damn javelin. That hilarious story—I heard you
telling it yourself—about the pansy breeder at the Flower Show.”

“Don’t tell me that one came from Beck’s.” I grinned in spite of myself.

“It did. Because of someone’s remark that nobody knows where dirty
stories originate. And _bing_, that one was originated on the spot.” He
paused. “By Lila Falsehaven.”

“Lila? You mean the white-haired old granny who writes children’s
books?” I drank on that. That was too fine. “Hank, what are you getting
at with all this?”

Hank pulled on an earlobe. “All these things I mentioned—all different,
all happening to different kinds of people. I think there’s a lowest
common denominator.”

“You’ve already told me that; they all happened at Beck’s parties.”

“The thing I’m talking about _makes_ things happen at Beck’s parties.”

“Aw, for Pete’s sake. Coincidence.…”

“Coincidence hell!” he rumbled. “Can’t you understand that I’ve known
about this thing for a long time now? I’m not telling you all these
things occurred to me just since Opie … uh … since last Saturday night.
I’m telling you that what Opie did is another one of those things.”

I grunted thoughtfully. “Lowest common denominator.… Heck, the main
thing all those people have in common is that they have nothing in
common.”

“That’s right,” Hank nodded. “That seems to be Beck’s rule-of-thumb:
always mix them up. A rich and a talented one, a weird one, a dull one.”

“Makes for a good party,” I said stupidly.

He had the good sense not to pick that one up. Good party. Swell party.
Opie.… No, I wouldn’t think about it. I said, “What’s this all about,
anyway? Why worry so much about Beck? It’s his business who he invites.
Strange things happen—sure, they’d happen at your house if you filled it
up with characters.”

“Here’s what it’s about. I want you to go back there and find out what
that lowest common denominator is.”

“Why?”

“For the magazine, maybe. It depends. Anyhow, kid, that’s an
assignment.”

“Stick it,” I said. “I’m not going back there.”

“Why not?”

“That’s the stupidest question yet!”

“Tom,” he said gently. “Getting riled up won’t help. I really want to
know why you don’t want to go back. Is it the place you can’t stand, or
the idea of seeing Opie there?”

“I don’t mind the place,” I said sullenly.

He was so pleased I was astonished. “Then you can go back. She will
never go there again.”

“You sound real positive.”

“I am. Things happen at Beck’s parties. But if they happen to you, you
don’t go back.”

“I don’t get it.”

“Neither do I. But that’s one of the things I want you to find out
about.”

“Hank, this is crazy!”

“Sure it’s crazy. And you’re just the man for the job.”

“Why, especially?”

“Because you know Beck better than most people. Because you have
something personal at stake. Because you’re a good reporter. And—well,
because you’re so damn normal.”

I didn’t feel normal. I said, “If you’re so interested in Beck and his
shindigs, why don’t you chase the story down yourself? You seem to know
what to look for.”

When he didn’t answer, I looked up. He had turned his back. After a
while he said, “I’m one of the ones who can’t go back.”

I thought that over. “You mean something happened to you?

“Yes, something happened to me,” he snarled in angry mimicry. “And that
part of it you can skip.”

For the first time I felt that little nubbin of intrigue that bites me
when I’m near a really hot story. “So you’ve taken care of my Saturday
nights. What am I supposed to do the rest of the week?”

“You’ve been around the magazine long enough not to ask me how to do
your work. I just mentioned a lot of people. Go find out why they did
the things they did.” And all of a sudden he stalked to the door,
scooped up his hat, growled a noise that was probably “Goodnight,” and
left.

I went to see Lila Falsehaven. It was no trouble at all to get her
address from Kiddy-Joy Books, Inc. She invited me to tea when I called
her up. Tea, no less. Me. Tom Conway.

She was a real greeting-card grandma. Steel-rimmed specs with the
thickest part at the lower edges. Gleaming, perfect, even false teeth. A
voice that reminded you of a silver plate full of warm spice cookies.
And on the table between us, a silver plate full of warm spice cookies.
“Cream?” she said. “Or lemon?”

“Straight.”—“I mean, neither, thank you. This place looks just like the
place where the Lila Falsehaven books are written.”

“Thank you,” she said, inclining her neat little head. She passed me tea
in a convoluted bone-china cup I could have sneezed off a mantel at
forty paces. “I’ve been told before that my books and my home and my
appearance are those of the perfect grandmother. I’ve never had a child,
you know. But I believe I’ve more grandchildren than anyone who ever
lived.” She delivered up an intricate old laugh like intricate old lace.

I tasted the tea. People should drink more tea. I put down the little
cup and leaned back and smiled at her. “I like it here.”

She blushed like a kid and smiled back. “And now—what can I do for you?
Surely that wicked magazine of yours doesn’t want a story by me. Or even
about me.”

“It’s not a wicked magazine,” I said loyally. “Just true-to-life. We
call them as we see them.”

“Some truths,” she said gently, “are better left uncalled.”

“You really believe that?”

“I really do,” she said.

“But the world isn’t what your grandchildren read about in your books.”

“My world is,” she said with conviction.

I had come here for something, and now was the time to get it. I shook
my head. “Not completely. Some of your world has flower shows with
pansies in them.”

She didn’t make a sound. She closed her eyes, and I watched her smooth
old skin turn to ivory and then to paper. I waited. At last her eyes
opened again. She looked straight at me, lifted one hand, then the
other, spread them apart and placed each on the carven chair-arms. I
looked at the hands, and saw each in turn relax as if by a deep effort
of will. Her eyes drew me right up out of my chair. Deep in them was a
spark, as hot, as bright, and quite as clean as a welding arc. The whole
sweet room held its breath.

“Mr. Conway,” she said in a voice that was very faint and very distinct,
“I believe in truth as I believe in innocence and in beauty, so I shall
not lie to you. I understand now that you came here to find out if I was
really the one who contrived that filthy anecdote. I was. But if you
came to find out why I did it, or what is in me that made it possible, I
cannot help you. I’m sorry. If I knew, if I only knew, perhaps I’d tell
you. Now you’d better go.”

“But—”

Then I found out that the clean bright fire so deep in her eyes could
repel as well as attract, and I was in the doorway with my hat in my
hand. I said, “I’m sor—” but the way she looked, the way she sat there
looking at me without moving, made it impossible for me to speak or bow,
or do anything but just get out. I knew I’d never be back, too, and that
was a shame. She’s a nice person. She lives in a nice place.

The whole thing was spoiled, and I felt lousy. Lousy.

My press card got me as far as Col. Briggs, and the memory of the time I
got Briggs out of a raided stag party just after the war got me the rest
of the way. If it hadn’t been for those two items, I’d never have seen
Klaus. The death house was damn near as hard to get into as it was to
get out of.

They gave me ten minutes and left me alone with him, though there was a
guard standing where he could see in. Klaus did not look as if he’d have
brought out the silver tea service even if he had one. All he did when I
came in was to say the name of the magazine under his breath, and said
that way it sounds pretty dirty. I sat down on the bunk beside him and
he got right up off it. I didn’t say anything, and after a while that
bothered him. I don’t suppose anyone did that to him, ever.

“Well, what is it? What do you want?” he snarled finally.

“You’d never guess,” I said.

“Am I guilty? Yes. Did I know what I was doing? Yes. Is it true that I
just want to see this crummy human race blown off this crummy planet as
soon as possible? Yes. Am I sorry? Yes—that I got caught. Otherwise—no.”
He shrugged. “That’s my whole story, you know it, everybody knows it.
I’ve been scooped dry and the bottom scraped. Why can’t you guys leave
me alone?”

“There’s still something I’d like to know, though.”

“Don’t you read the papers?” he asked. “Once I got nabbed I had no
secrets.”

“Look,” I said, “this guy Stevens—” Stevens was the Central Intelligence
man who had dragged him in.

“Yeah, Stevens,” Klaus snorted. “Our hero. I not only put him on page
one—he’s on boxes of breakfast cereal. You _really_ got to be a hero to
get on corn flakes.”

“He wasn’t a hero,” I said. “He didn’t know you from Adam and didn’t
care until you spilled to him.”

Klaus stopped his pacing and slowly turned toward me. “Do you believe
that?”

“Why not? That’s what happened.”

He came and sat beside me, looking at me as if I had turned into a
two-headed giraffe. “You know, I’ve told that to six million different
people and you’re the first one who ever believed it. What did you say
your name was? If you don’t mind my asking.”

“Conway,” I said.

“I’m glad you came,” he said. For him, that was really something.

He shoved back so he could lean against the wall and gave me a
cigarette. “What do you want to know?”

“Why you did it.”

He looked at me angrily, and I added quickly, “Not about the atom
secrets. About the spill.”

The angry look went away, but he didn’t say anything. I pushed a bit.
“You never made another mistake. Nobody in history ever operated as
quietly and cleverly as you did. No one in the world suspected you, and
as far as I’ve been able to discover no one was even about to. So you
suddenly find yourself at a party with a C.I.A. man, walk over, and
sing. Why?”

He thought about it. “It was a good party,” he said, after a bit. Then,
“I guess I figured the game had gone on long enough, that’s all.”

I snorted.

“What’s that for?” he wanted to know.

“You don’t really believe that.”

“I don’t?”

“You don’t,” I said positively. “That’s just something you figured out
after it happened. What I want to know is what went on in your head
before it happened.”

“You know a hell of a lot about how I think,” he said sneeringly.

“Sure I do,” I said, and when he was quiet, I added, “Don’t I?”

“Yeah,” he growled. “Yeah.” He closed his eyes to think about it, and
then said, “You just asked me the one thing I don’t know. One second I
was sitting there enjoying myself, and the next I was backing that
goonboy into the corner and telling him about my life of sin. It just
seemed a good idea at the time.”

The guard came then to let me out. “Thanks for coming,” Klaus said.

“That’s all right. You’re sure you can’t tell me?”

“Yes, I’m sure.”

“Shall I come back? Maybe after you think about it for a while.…”

He shook his head. “Wouldn’t do no good,” he said positively. “I know,
because I haven’t thought about anything else much since it happened.
But I’m glad somebody believes it, anyway.”

“So long. Drop me a note if you figure it out.”

I don’t know if he ever did. They burned him a few days later. I never
got a note.

I grabbed another name from the list I’d run up. Willy Simms. Song
writer.

I went into a music shop and asked the man if he had a record of _Cry
for Clara_. He looked as if he’d found root beer in a bock bottle.
“Still?” he breathed with a sort of weary amazement, and went and got
the record.

“Look,” I told him, “I think this platter is the most awful piece of
candy corn that ever rolled out of the Alley.” I don’t often explain
myself to people, but I couldn’t have even a total stranger think I
liked it.

He leaned across the counter. “Did you know,” he said in a much
friendlier tone of voice, “that Guy Lombardo is cutting it this week?”

I shared his tired wonder for a long moment, and then got out of there.

One and three-quarter million copies sold and still moving, and yet
Willy Simms still lived in a place with four flights of stairs up to it.
I found the door and leaned against the frame for a while, blowing hard.
When the spots went away from my eyes, I knocked. A wrinkled little man
opened the door.

“Is Willy Simms here?”

He looked at me and down at the flat record envelope I held. “What’s
that?”

_“Cry for Clara,”_ I said. He took it out of my hand and asked me how
much I paid for it. I told him. He held the door open with his foot,
scooped up a handful of change from an otherwise empty bookshelf, and
counted out the price into my hand. Then he broke the record in two on
his thigh, put the pieces together and broke them again, and slung them
into the fireplace at his right. “I’m Willy Simms,” he said. “Come on
in.”

I went in and stood just inside. I didn’t know what this little prune
would do next. I said, “My name’s Tom—”

“Drop your hat there,” he said. He crossed the room.

“I just dropped in to—”

“Drink?” he asked.

Since I never say no to that, and didn’t have to say yes because he was
already pouring, I just waited.

He came smiling with a glass. He had good teeth.

“Bourbon,” he said. “A man’s drink. Knew the minute I saw you you were a
bourbon man.”

I very much prefer rye. I said, “Once in a while—”

“Sure,” he said. “Nothing like Bourbon. Sit down.”

“Mr. Simms,” I said.

“Willy. Nobody ever called me mister. Used to be I wasn’t worth a
‘mister.’ Now I’m too good for it.” He salvaged his modesty as he said
this with a warm grin. “Maybe you think I shouldn’t of busted your
record.”

“Well,” I smiled, “I thought it a bit strange.”

“I don’t have a copy here and I won’t let one in. Two reasons,” he
barked, making a V with shiny-dry, bony fingers. “First, I don’t like
it. What I specially don’t like is the way people try to make me sit and
listen to it and tell me how good this part is and that part, and where
did I ever get the idea of going from the sub-dominant into an unrelated
minor. Yeah, that’s what one of them wanted to know.”

“I remember that part,” I said. “It’s—”

“Second,” said Willy Simms, “every time I bust one of those records it
reminds me I can afford to do it, and I like to be reminded.”

“Yeah,” I said. “That’s—”

“Besides,” he said, “any time I bust one, the party walks out of here
and buys another. It ain’t the royalty, you understand. It’s the score
I’m running up. They tell me it’ll sell two and a quarter million.”

“Two and a—”

“You’ve finished your drink,” he said. He took it out of my hand and
filled it again. I wished it was rye, raised it to him and then sipped.
“Willy,” I began.

“I never wrote a song before,” Willy said.

“Yes,” I answered. “So I—”

“And I’m going to tell you something I ain’t told nobody else. I’m going
to tell it to you, and from now on, I just decided, I’m going to tell
everybody.”

He leaned toward me excitedly. I realized that he was boiled. I knew
instinctively that it hadn’t made any difference in him; he was probably
this way cold sober too. He was obviously waiting for me to say
something, but by this time I didn’t want to spoil anything.

“So I’ll tell you first, and it’s this: I’m never going to write another
song, either.”

“But you’ve just begun to—”

“There’s a good reason for it,” he said. “Since you ask me, I’ll tell
you. I ain’t going to write another song because I can’t. It ain’t that
I don’t read or write music. They say Leadbelly couldn’t read music
either. And it ain’t that I don’t want to. I want to, all right. But did
you ever hear the old saying lightning never strikes twice in the same
place?”

That I could match. “Sure, and they say it’s always darkest before the
dawn, too, but that doesn’t—”

“The real reason,” said Willy Simms, “is this.” He paused dramatically.
“I’m tone deaf. I couldn’t carry a chord in a keyster. Do you see a
piano here, or even a harmonica?”

“Listen,” I said, “no one who was tone deaf could have—”

“Lightning,” he said gravely. “It struck, that’s all. Way down inside me
was one little crumb called _Cry for Clara_, and the lightning struck
and drove it out. But there was just the one little crumb there, and now
there is no more.”

“Shucks,” I said. “Maybe—”

“And I could be wrong even about that,” he said morosely. “I don’t
really believe even the little crumb was there. What I actually did just
can’t be done, not by me, anyway. Like a lobster writing a book. Like a
phonograph playing a pizza pie. Like us not having another drink.”

He demonstrated the impossibility of his last remark. I said, “There are
certain things a man can do and certain things—”

“Like a trip back to one of Beck’s parties,” he said. “Some things just
can’t happen.” He glowered at me suddenly. “You don’t happen to be a
friend of this Beck? This is the guy made me hate myself.”

“Me? Why, I—”

“If you were, I’d throw you right down those stairs out there, big as
you are.” He half rose, and for a split second I was genuinely alarmed.
He was one of those people who, in speaking of anger, acts it out,
pulsing temples, narrowed eyes and all. But he sank back and recovered
his disarming smile. “I been doing all the talking. What was it you came
to see me about?”

I opened my mouth, and hesitated. To my amazement, he waited. “I just
dropped up to sort of.…” I paused. He nodded encouragingly. “To find out
about—” I began, then stopped.

“I see everybody,” he confided. “Some people, now, they pick and choose
who comes in. Not me.”

I was at the door with my hat, which I’d picked up on the way. “Thanks
for the dr—”

“Well, don’t rush off.”

I searched valiantly for the one word which might serve me, and found
it. “Goodbye,” I said, and whipped through the door. I could hear Willy
Simms’ muffled voice through the panel: “All right, I’ll finish your
drink if you’re in such a damn hurry.”

All the way down the stairs I could hear him, though I could no longer
distinguish his words. Once he laughed. I got to the sidewalk and turned
left. There was a man standing by a tree a few yards down the street,
curbing a dog. “Hey,” I said.

He turned toward me, raising his eyebrows. “Who—me?”

I tapped his shoulder with my left index finger. “New York would have
the largest telephone book in the world,” I said, “if they didn’t have
to break it into five sections.”

He said, “Huh?”

“Don’t mind me,” I told him, “I just wanted to see if I could say a
whole sentence all the way through.” I tipped my hat and walked on. At
the corner I looked back. He was still standing there, staring at me.
When he saw me turn he called, “Whaddaya—wise?” I just waved at him and
went home.

“Beck,” I said into the phone, “I want to see you.” “Sure,” he said.
“You’re coming over Saturday, aren’t you?”

“Uh … yes. But I want to see you before that.”

“It’ll wait,” he said easily.

“No, it won’t,” I said. There must have been something special in my
voice because he asked me if anything was the matter.

“I don’t know, Beck,” I said honestly. “I mean, something is, but I
don’t know what.” I had an idea suddenly. “Beck, can I bring someone to
the party?”

“You know you can, Tom. Anyone you like.”

“My brother-in-law Hank.”

There was a long silence at the other end. Then, in a slightly strained
voice, Beck said, “Why him?”

“Why not?”

The silence again. Then, as if he had had a brainwave, Beck said easily,
“No reason. If he wants to come, bring him.”

“Thanks. Now, about seeing you before. How about tonight?”

“Tom, I’d love to, but I’m tied up. It’ll wait till Saturday, won’t it?”

“No,” I said. “Tomorrow?”

“I’m out of town tomorrow. I’m really very sorry, Tom.”

Abruptly, I said, “It’s about the lowest common denominator.”

“What?”

“Your parties,” I said patiently. “The people who go to them.”

He laughed suddenly. “The one thing they have in common is that they
have nothing in common.”

“That I know,” I said. “I meant the people who used to go to your
parties and don’t any more.”

The silence, but much shorter this time. “I’m looking at my book,” he
said. “Maybe I could squeeze in a few minutes with you tomorrow.”

“What time?” I said, keeping the humorless grin out of my voice.

“Two o’clock. Kelly’s all right?”

“At the bar. I’ll be there, Beck, and thanks.”

I hung up and scratched my chin. Lowest common denominator?

Hank’s phrase, that was. Hank. The guy who’d put me on to this weird
business. The guy who’d told me that if things happened to you at Beck’s
parties, you didn’t go back. The guy who said _he_ was never going back.

And wouldn’t say why.

Well, if I had anything to do with it he’d be back.

Opie, Lila Falsehaven, Klaus, Willy Simms, Hank. Each had done something
they shouldn’t—maybe _couldn’t_ was the word—have done. Each would
not—could not?—go back. Sometimes the thing was just silly, like Lila
Falsehaven’s dirty story. Sometimes it was deadly, like Klaus’s crazy
break.

Well, I told myself, keep plugging at it. Get enough case histories and
a basic law will show itself. Avogadro worked up a fine theory about the
behavior of gas molecules because he had enough molecules to work with.
Sociologists struggle toward theories without enough numbers to work
with, and they make some sort of progress. If I worked hard enough and
lived long enough, maybe I could pile up a couple hundred million case
histories of people who didn’t go to Beck’s parties any more, and come
out with an answer.

Meanwhile, I’d better talk to Hank.

This time I went to his office and closed the door. He picked up the
phone and said, “Sue, don’t ring this thing until I tell you.… I know, I
_know_. I don’t care. Tell him to wait.” Then he just lounged back and
looked at me.

“Hank,” I said, “about this assignment. How much are you willing to help
me?”

“All the way.”

“Okay,” I said. “Saturday night you have a date.”

“I have? Where?”

“Beck’s.”

He sat upright, his eyes still on my face. “No.”

“That’s what you mean by ‘all the way’?” I asked quietly.

“I said I’d help you. Me going there—that wouldn’t help anything.
Besides, Beck wouldn’t hold still for it.”

“Beck told me to bring you.”

“The hell he did!”

“Look, Hank, when I tell you—”

“Okay, okay, cool down, will you? I’m not calling you a liar.” He pulled
at his lip. “Tell me exactly what you said about it and what he said. As
near as you can remember it.”

I thought back. “I asked him if I could bring someone and he said sure.
Then I mentioned your name and he—well, sort of hesitated. So I wanted
to know why not, and he came off it right away. Said ‘If he wants to
come, bring him.’ ”

“The foxy little louse!” Hank said from between clenched teeth.

“What’s the matter?”

Hank got up, smacked his fist into his palm. “He meant exactly what he
said, Tom. Bring me—_if_ I want to come. Conversely, if I don’t want to
come, don’t bring me. I don’t want to, Tom.”

“Not even in the process of ‘going all the way’ to help me?” I asked
sarcastically.

He said tightly. “That’s right.” I must have looked pretty grim, because
he tried to explain. “If I could be sure it would break the case, Tom,
I’d do it no matter what. If you can convince me that that one single
act on my part is all you need, why, I’m your boy. Can you do that?”

“No,” I said in all honesty. “It might help like crazy, though. All
right,” I conceded reluctantly. “If you don’t want to go, you won’t, and
that’s that. Now—short of that, will you help?”

“Absolutely,” he said relievedly.

Then I aimed a forefinger at him and barked “Okay. Then you’ll tell me
what happened to you there, and why you won’t go back. You’ll tell me
now, and you won’t even try to wriggle out of it.”

It got real quiet in the office then. Hank’s eyes half-closed, and I had
seen that sleepy look before. Every time I had, somebody had gotten
himself rather badly hurt.

“I should have known better,” he said after a while, “than to put a real
reporter on something that concerned me. You really want that
information?”

I nodded.

“Tom,” he said, and his voice was almost a lazy yawn, “I’m going to
punch you right in the middle of your big fat mouth.”

“For asking you a businesslike question that you made my business?”

“Not exactly,” Hank said. “I’m going to tell you, and you’re going to
laugh, and when you laugh I’m going to let you have it.”

“I haven’t laughed at any of this yet,” I said.

“And you still want to know.”

I just waited.

“All right,” he said. He came around his desk, balled up his fist, and
eyed my face carefully. “I went to one of Beck’s parties, and right in
the middle of the proceedings I wet my pants.”

I bit down hard on the insides of my cheeks, but I couldn’t hold it. I
let out a joyful whoop. Then I caromed off the water cooler, slid eight
feet on the side of my head, and brought up against the wall. A great
cloud of luminous fog rolled in, swirled, then gradually began to clear.
I sat up. There was blood on my mouth and chin. Hank was standing over
me, looking very sad. He dropped a clean handkerchief where I could
reach it. I used it, then got my feet under me.

“Damn it, Tom, I’m sorry,” he said. The way he said it I believed him.
“But you shouldn’t’ve laughed. I told you you shouldn’t.”

I went to the desk-side chair and sat down. Hank drew me some water and
brought it over. “Dip the handkerchief,” he ordered. “Tom, this’ll make
more sense to you when you have a chance to think it over. Why don’t you
cut out?”

“I don’t have to, I guess,” I said with difficulty. “I guess if a thing
like that happened to.…”

“If it happened,” Hank said soberly, “it wouldn’t be funny, and God help
the man who laughed at it. It would shake your confidence like nothing
else could. You’d think of it suddenly in a bus, at a board meeting, in
the composing room. You’d think of it when you were tramping up and down
the office dictating. You’d remember that when it happened it came
without warning and there was nothing you could do about it until it was
over. It would be the kind of thing that just couldn’t happen—and
forever after you’d be afraid of its happening again.”

“And the last place in the world you’d go back to is the place where it
happened.”

“I’d go through hell first,” he said, his voice thick, like taking a
vow. “And … just to cap it, that damned Beck—”

“He laughed?”

“He did not,” said Hank viciously. “All he did was meet me at the door
when I was escaping, and tell me I’d do just as well not to come again.
He was polite enough, I guess, but he meant it.”

I dunked the handkerchief again and leaned over the glass desktop, where
I could see my reflection. I mopped at my chin. “This Beck,” I said. “He
certainly makes sure. Hank, all the other people who used to go to
Beck’s and don’t any more … do you suppose Beck told them all not to
come back?”

“I never thought of it. Probably so. Except maybe Klaus. He wasn’t going
anywhere after what he did.”

“I saw Willy Simms,” I told him. “He acted mad at Beck, and said
something about going there again being as impossible as writing another
song. He’s tone deaf, you know.”

“I didn’t know. What about Miss Falsehaven? Did you see her?”

“She wouldn’t be seen dead in the place. She’s half crazy with the
memory of what she did. To you or me, that would be nothing. To her it
was the end of the world.”

The end of the world. The end of the world. “Hank, I’m just dimly
beginning to understand what you meant about … Opie. That what she did
wasn’t her doing.” Suddenly, shockingly—I believe I was more startled
than Hank—I bellowed, “But it was in her to do it! There had to be that
one grain of—of whatever it took!”

“Maybe, maybe …,” he said gently. “I’d like to think not, though. I’d
like to think there is something there at Beck’s that puts the bee in
people’s bonnets. An alien bee, one that couldn’t under any other
circumstances exist with that person.” He blushed. “I’d feel better if I
could prove that.”

“I got to get out of here. I’m meeting Beck,” I said, after a glance at
his desk clock.

“Are you now?” He sat down again. “Give him my regards.”

I started out. “Tom—”

“Well?”

“I’m sorry I had to hit you. I had to. See?”

“Sure I see,” I said, and when I grinned it hurt. “If I didn’t see,
they’d be mixing a cast for your busted back by now.” I went out.

Beck was waiting for me when I rushed into Kelly’s. I picked up his
drink and started back to the corner.

“Not a table,” he bleated, following me. “I have a train to catch, Tom.
I told you that.”

“Come on,” I said. “This won’t take but a minute.” He came, grumbling,
and he let me maneuver him into the upholstered corner of a booth. I sat
down where he’d have to climb over me if the conversation should make
him too impulsive.

“Sorry I’m late, Beck. But I’m glad you’re in a hurry. I won’t have to
beat about the bush.”

“What’s on your mind?” he said, irritatingly looking at his watch and,
for a moment, closing his eyes as he calculated the minutes.

“Where’s your money come from?” I asked bluntly.

“Why, it—well, really, Tom. You’ve never—I mean—” He shifted gears and
began to get stuffy. “I’m not used to being catechized about my personal
affairs, old man. We are old friends, yes, but after all—”

“Shove it,” I said. “I’m the boy who knew you when, remember? We roomed
together in college, and unless my memory fails me it was State College,
as near to being a public school as you can find these days. We had
three neckties and one good blanket between us for more than two years,
and skipped forty-cent lunches for date money. That wasn’t so long ago,
Beck. You graduated into pushing a pen for an insurance company—right?
And when you left it you never took another job. But here you are with a
big ugly house full of big ugly furniture, a rumpus room by Hilton out
of Tropics, and a passion for throwing big noisy parties every week.”

“May I ask,” he said between his protruding front teeth, “why you are so
suddenly interested?”

“You look more than ever like a gopher,” I said detachedly, figuring it
wouldn’t hurt to make him mad. He always blurts things when he’s mad
enough. “Now, Beck—working around a magazine like ours, we get a lot of
advance stuff about things that are about to break. I’m just trying to
do you a favor, son.”

“I don’t see—”

“How would you make out,” I asked, “if they dragged out your income tax
returns for the last four years and balanced them against your real
property?”

“I’d make out nicely,” he said smugly. “If you must know, my income
comes from investments. I’ve done very well indeed.”

“What did you use for capital in the first place?”

“That’s really none of your business, Tom,” he said briskly, and I
almost admired him for the way he stood up to me. “But I might remind
you that you need very little capital to enter the market, and if you
can buy low and sell high just a few times in a row, you don’t have to
worry about capital.”

“You’re not a speculator, Beck,” I snorted, “Not _you!_ Why I never
figured you had the sense to pour pith out of a helmet. Who’s your
tipster?”

For some reason, that hit him harder than anything else I’d said.
“You’re being very annoying,” he said prissily, “and you’re going to
make me miss my train. I’ll have to leave now. I don’t know what’s
gotten into you, Tom. I don’t much care for this kind of thing, and I’m
sure I don’t know what this is all about.”

“I’ll go with you,” I said, “and explain the whole thing.”

“You needn’t bother,” he snapped. He got up, and so did I. I let him out
from behind the table and followed him to the door. The hat check girl
rummaged around and found a pigskin suitcase for him. I took it from her
before he could get a hand on it. “Give me that!” he yelled.

“Don’t stand here and argue,” I said urgently. “You’ll be late.” I
barreled on out to the curb and whistled. I whistle pretty well. Cabs
stopped three blocks in every direction. I shoved him into the nearest
one and climbed in after him. “You know you could never catch a cab like
I can,” I said. “I just want to help.”

“Central Depot,” Beck said to the driver. “Tom, what are you after? I’ve
never seen you like this.”

“Just trying to help,” I said. “A lot of people starting to talk about
you, Beck.”

He paled. “Really?”

“Oh, yes. What do you expect: hidden income, big parties that anyone can
come to, and all?”

“Lot of people have parties.”

“Nobody talks about them afterward the way they do about yours.”

“What are they saying, Tom?” He hated to be conspicuous.

“Why did you tell Willy Simms never to show his face at your house
again?” It was a shot in the dark, but the bell rang.

“I think I was quite reasonable with him,” Beck protested. “He talks all
the time, and he bored me. He bored everybody, every time he came.”

“He still talks all the time,” I said mysteriously, and dropped that
part of it. Beck began to squirm. “Personally, I think you get something
from the people who come to those brawls. And once you’ve gotten it, you
drop them.”

Beck leaned forward to speak to the driver, but for some reason his
voice wouldn’t work. He coughed and tried again. “Faster, driver.”

“So what I want to know is, what do you get from those people, and how
do you get it?”

“I don’t know what you mean, and I don’t see how any of this concerns
you.”

“Something happened to my wife last Saturday.”

“Oh,” he said. “Oh, dear.” Then, “Well, what do you suppose I got from
her?”

I put my hands behind me, lifted up, and sat on them. “I know you awful
well,” I grated, “which fact just saved your life. You don’t mean what
you just said, old man, do you?”

He went quite white. “Oh, good heavens, Tom, no! No! It was what you
said before—that I got something out of every one of these people. I’m
more sorry than I can say about—about Opie—I couldn’t help it, you know,
I was busy, there was a lot to do, there always is.… No, Tom, I didn’t
mean that the way you thought.”

He didn’t, either. Not Beck. There were some things that were just not
in Beck’s department. I took a deep, head-clearing breath and asked,
“Why did you tell Hank not to come back?”

“I’d rather not say exactly,” he said, pleading and sincere. “It was for
his own benefit, though. He … er … made rather a fool of himself. I
thought it would be a kindness if he could be angry at me instead of at
himself.”

I gave him a long careful look. He had never been very smart, but he had
always been as glib as floor wax. The cab turned into the station ramp
just then, so I came up with the big question. “Beck, does everybody who
goes to your parties sooner or later make a fool of himself?”

“Oh dear no,” he said, and I think if he had not been looking at his
watch and worrying, he would never have said what came out. “Some people
are immune.”

The cab stopped and he got out. “I’ll take it,” I said when his hand
went for his pocket. “You better run.” I hung my head out the window,
watching him, waiting, wondering if it would come, even after all this.
And it came.

From fifty feet away he called over his shoulder, “See you Saturday,
Tom!”

“Kelly’s,” I told the cabbie, and settled back.

So. I couldn’t make Beck so mad he’d exclude me from one of his
parties—and somehow or other the rich and dumb and smart and stupid and
ugly and big and famous and nowhere people who came there became prone
to making fools of themselves—and Beck got something out of it when they
did—and what did he want out of me? And what did he mean by “some people
are immune”? Immune … that was a peculiar word to use. Immune. There was
something in that house—in that room—that made people do things
that—Wait a minute. Hank and Miss Falsehaven and, if you wanted to be
broad about it, Opie—they had indeed made fools of themselves. But the
guy who killed the preacher with Beck’s poker—and Klaus the spy—that
wasn’t what you’d call foolishness. And then Willy Simms. Is the
creation of a hit song foolishness?

Lowest common denominator …

I paid off the cab and went in to Kelly’s to double the drink I’d missed
because Beck had been in such a hurry. I was drinking the second one
when some simple facts fell into place.

The next best thing to knowing what the answer is is to know where it
is. Beck was on his way out of town.

There was only one single thing that connected all these crazy facts:
Beck’s rumpus room.

A good thing I have credit at Kelly’s. I flew out of there so fast I
forgot to leave anything on the bar. Except a half shot of rye.

It wasn’t quite dark when I reached Beck’s, but that didn’t matter. The
house was set well back in its mid-city three acres. High board fences
guarded the sides, and a thick English privet hid it from the street.
Once I’d slipped through the gate and onto the lawn, I might as well
have been underground. The house was one of those turn-of-the-century
horrors, not quite chalet, not quite manse, with a little more
gingerbread than the moderns like and a little less than the Victorians
drooled about. It had gables and turrets and rooms scattered on slightly
different levels, so that the windows looked like the holes on an IBM
card.

I hefted the package I’d picked up at the hardware store on the way and,
sticking close to the north hedge, worked my way cautiously around to
the back.

One glance told me I couldn’t do business there. The house was built at
the very back of its property, and behind it ran a small street or a
large alley, whichever you like. The back of the house hung over it like
a cliff, and there was traffic and neighbors across the way. No, it
would have to be a side. I cursed, because I knew the rumpus room faced
the back with its huge picture windows of one-way glass; then I
remembered that the room was air-conditioned; the windows wouldn’t open
and couldn’t be cut because they were certainly double-pane jobs.

I tried two ground-floor windows, but they were locked. Another was
open, but barred. Then nothing but a bare, windowless stretch. On a
hunch I approached it, through the flowerbed at its base. And sure
enough, just at chest-height, hidden behind a phalanx of hollyhocks, was
a small window.

I got out the pen-lite flash I’d just bought and peered in. The window
was locked with one of those burglarproof cast-steel locks that screws a
rubber ferrule up against the frame. I was pleased. I got out the can of
aquarium cement and worked the stuff into a cone, which I placed against
the glass. Then I got out the glass cutter and scribed around the cone.
I rapped the cut circle once, and with a snap it broke out, with the
cone of putty holding it. I reached down and laid putty and glass on the
window sill, unscrewed the burglarproof lock, opened the window and
climbed in. With my putty-knife I carefully removed the broken pane, and
cracked it and the circle into small enough pieces to wrap up in the
brown paper from the parcel I carried. I measured the frame and cut the
one spare piece of window glass I’d brought along, and installed it
using the aquarium cement. The stuff’s black and doesn’t glare at you
the way clean, new putty does. I cleaned the new pane inside and out,
shut and locked the window, and carefully swept the sill and the floor
under it. I dumped the sweepings into my jacket pocket and stowed the
tools here and there in my jacket and pants. So now nobody ever had to
know I’d been here.

I was in a large storage closet which turned out to belong to the
butler’s pantry. That led to the kitchen, and that to the dining room,
and now I knew where I was. I went into the front hall and down toward
the back of the house. The door to the rumpus room was closed. On this
side it was all crudded up with carven wainscoting; golden oak and Ionic
columns. It was a sliding door; I rolled it back and on the other side
it was a flat slab of birch to match the shocking modern of the rumpus
room. Again I had that strange feeling of wonderment about Beck and his
single peculiarity.

I shut the door and crossed the dim room to the picture windows. There I
touched the button that closed the heavy drapes. There was a faint hum
and they began to move. As they did, all but sourceless light began to
grow in the room, until when they met the room was filled with a
pervasive golden glow.

And standing in the middle of the rug which I had just crossed, standing
yards away from any door and a long way from any furniture, was a girl.

The shock of it was almost physical. And for a split second I thought my
eyes registered a dazzle, like the subjective afterglow of a lightning
flash. Then I got hold of myself and met her long, level, green-eyed
gaze.

If a woman can be strong and elfin at once, she was. Her hair was
blue-black with a strange reddish light in it. Her skin was too
flawless, like something in a wax museum, but for all that it was real
and warm-looking. She was smiling, and I could see how her teeth met
edge to edge in that rarity, the perfect bite. Her low-cut dress was of
a heavy gold and purple brocade, and she must have had a dozen
petticoats under it. Sixteenth century—seventeenth century? In _this_
room?

“That was nice,” she said.

“It was?” I said stupidly.

“Yes, but it didn’t last. I suppose you’re immune.”

“Depends,” I said, looking at the neckline of her dress. Then I
remembered Beck’s strange remark.

She said, “You’re not supposed to be here. Not all alone.”

“I could say the same for you. But since we’re both here, we’re not
alone.”

“I’m not,” she said. “But you are.” And she laughed. “You’re Conway.”

“Oh. He told you about me, did he? Well, he never said a word about
you.”

“Of course not. He wouldn’t dare.”

“Do you live here?”

She nodded. “I’ve always lived here.”

“What do you mean always? Beck’s been here three—yes, it’s four years
now. And you’ve been here all this time?”

She nodded. “Since before that.”

“I’ll be damned,” I said. “Good for Beck. I thought he didn’t like
women.”

“He doesn’t need to.” I saw her gaze stray over my shoulder and fix on
something behind me. I whirled. Clinging to the drape was a spider as
big as a Stetson hat. I didn’t know whether it was going to jump or
what. With the same motion which began when I turned, I snatched up a
heavy ash stand made of links of chain welded together. Before I could
heave it the girl was beside me, holding it with both hands. “Don’t,”
she said. “You’ll break the window and people will come. I want you to
stay here for a while.”

“But the—”

“It isn’t real,” she said. I looked and the spider was gone. I turned
back to her. “What the hell goes on here?”

She sighed. “That wasn’t so good,” she said. “You were supposed to be
frightened. But you just got angry at it. Why weren’t you frightened?”

“I am now,” I said, glancing at the drapes. “I guess I get mad first and
scared later. What’s the idea? You put that thing there, didn’t you?”

She nodded.

“What for?”

“I was hungry.”

“I don’t get you.”

“I know.”

She moved to the divan, rustling wonderfully as she walked. She subsided
into the foam rubber, patted the seat next to her. I crossed slowly. You
don’t have to know what a thing’s all about to like it. I sat beside
her.

She cast her eyes down and smoothed her skirt. It was as if she were
waiting for something.

I didn’t give her long to wait. I pulled her to me and clawed at the
back of her dress. It slipped downward easily just as my cheek
encountered the heavy stubble on hers.

The heavy—

With a shout I sprang back, goggle-eyed. There on the couch sprawled a
heavy-set man with bad teeth and a four-day beard. He roared with rich
baritone laughter.

You don’t have to understand a situation to dislike it. I stepped
forward and let loose with my Sunday punch. It travels from my lower rib
to straight ahead, and by the time it gets where it’s going it has all
of me behind it. But this time it didn’t get anywhere. My elbow crackled
from the strain as my fist connected with nothing at all. But from the
seat of the divan came a large black cat. It leaped to the floor and
streaked across the room. I fell heavily onto the divan, bounced off,
and rushed the animal. It doubled back at the end of the room, eluded my
grasping fingers easily, and the next thing I knew it was climbing the
drapes, hand over hand.

Yes, hands; the cat had three-fingered hands and an opposed thumb.

When it got up about fifteen feet it tucked itself into a round ball
and—I think _spun_ is the word for it. I shook my head to clear it and
looked again. There was no sign of the animal; there was only a speaker
baffle I had not noticed before.

Speaker baffle?

Anyone who knows ultramodern knows there’s a convention against speakers
or lights showing. Everything has to be concealed or to look like
something else.

“That,” said the speaker in a sexless, toneless voice, “was more like
it.”

I backed away and sank down on the divan, where I could watch the
baffle.

“Even if you are immune, I can get something out of you.”

I said, “How do you mean immune?”

“There is nothing you wouldn’t do,” said the impersonal voice. “Now,
when I make somebody do something he _can’t_ do—then I feed. All I can
do with you is make you mad. Even then, you’re not mad at yourself at
all. Just the girl or the spider or whatever else.”

I suddenly realized the speaker wasn’t there any more. However, a large
spotted snake was on the rug near my feet. I dived on it, found in my
hand the ankle of the girl I had seen before. I backed off and sat down
again. “See?” she said in her velvet voice. “You don’t even scare much
now.”

“I won’t scare at all,” I said positively.

“I suppose not,” she said regretfully. Then she brightened. “But it’s
almost Saturday. _Then_ I’ll feed.”

“What are you, anyhow?”

She shrugged. “You haven’t a name for it. How could a thing like me have
a name anyhow? I can be anything I like.”

“Stay this way for a while.” I looked her up and down. “I like you fine
this way. Why don’t you come over here and be friendly?”

She stepped back a pace, shaking her head.

“Why not? It wouldn’t matter to you.”

“That’s right. I won’t though. You see, it wouldn’t matter to you.”

“I don’t get you.”

She said patiently, “In your position, some men wouldn’t want me. Some
would in spite of themselves, and when they found out what I was—or what
I _wasn’t_—they’d hate themselves for it. That I could use,” she
crooned, and licked her full lips. “But you—you want me the way I am
right now, and it doesn’t matter in the least to you that I might be
reptile, insect, or just plain hypocrite, as long as you got what you
want.”

“Wait a minute—this feeding. You feed on—hate?”

“Oh, no. Look, when a human being does something he’s incapable of,
like—oh, that old biddy who clawed the pretty actress—there’s a
glandular reaction set up that’s unlike any other. All humans have a
drive to live and a drive to die—a drive to build and a drive to
destroy. In most people they’re shaken down pretty well. But what I do
is to give them a big charge of one or the other, so the two parts are
thrown into conflict. That conflict creates a—call it a field, an aura.
That’s what feeds me. Now do you see?”

“Sort of like the way a mosquito injects a dilutant into the blood.” I
looked at her. “You’re a parasite.”

“If you like,” she said detachedly. “So are you, if you define
parasitism as sustaining oneself from other life-forms.”

“Now tell me about the immunity.”

“Oh, that. Very annoying. Like being hungry and finding you have nothing
but canned food and no opener. You know it’s there but you can’t get to
it. It’s quite simple. You’re immune because you’re capable of
anything—anything at all.”

“Like Superman?”

She curled her lip. “You? No, I’m sorry.”

“What then?”

She was thoughtful. “Do you remember asking me what I was? Well, down
through your history there have been a lot of names for such as I. All
wrong, of course. But the one that’s used most often is _conscience_. A
man’s natural conscience tells him when he’s done wrong. But any time
you see a case of a man’s conscience working on him, trying to destroy
him—you can bet one of us has been around. Any time you see a man doing
something utterly outside all his background and conditioning—you can be
sure one of us is there with him.”

I was beginning to understand a whole lot of things. “Why are you
telling me all this?”

“Why not? I like to talk, same as you do. It can’t do any harm. No one
would believe you. After a while you yourself won’t believe anything
I’ve told you. Humans _can’t_ believe in things that have no set size or
shape or weight or behavior. If an extra fly buzzes around your table;
if your morning-glory vine has a new shoot it lacked ten minutes ago—you
wouldn’t believe it. These things happen around all humans all the time,
and they never notice. They explain everything in terms of what they
already believe. Since they never believe in anything remotely
resembling us, we are free to pass and repass in front of their silly
eyes, feeding when and where we want.…”

“You can’t get away with it. Humans will catch up with you,” I blurted.
“Humans are learning to think in new ways. Did you ever hear of
non-Euclidean geometry? Do you know anything about non-Aristotelian
systems?”

She laughed. “We know about them. But by the time they are generally
accepted, we’ll no longer be parasites. We’ll be symbiotes. Some of us
already are. I am.”

“Symbiotes? You mean you depend on another life-form?”

“And it depends on me.”

“What does?”

She indicated the incongruous room. “Your silly friend Beck, of course.
Some of the people who are attracted to the feeding-grounds here are
operators—very shrewd. The last thing in the world they would ever do is
to pass on investment secrets to anyone. I see to it that they tell
Beck. And oh, _how_ they regret it! How _foolish_ they feel! And how I
feed! In exchange, Beck brings them here.”

“I _knew_ he couldn’t do it by himself!” I said. “Now tell me—why does
he have me hanging around here all the time?

“My doing.” She looked at me coolly. “One day I’m going to eat you. One
day I’ll find that can-opener. I’ll learn how to slam a door on you, or
pound you with a flatiron, and I’ll eat you like candy.”

I laughed at her. “You’ll have to find something I’ll regret doing
first.”

“There has to be something.” She yawned. “I have to work up a new edge
to my appetite,” she said lazily. “Go away.”

“She’s wrong,” Hank said, when I’d finished telling him the story. He’d
galloped over to my place when I called and just let me talk.

“Wrong how?”

“She said it was impossible for a human to believe this. Well, by God I
do.”

“I think I do myself,” I said. Then, “Why?”

“Why?” Hank repeated. He gave a thoughtful pull to his lower lip. “Maybe
it’s just because I want to believe in any theory that keeps Opie
clean—that makes what she did really out of character.”

“Opie,” I said. “Yes.”

He gave me a swift look. “Something I’ve been thinking about, Tom. That
night it happened—with Opie, I mean.…”

“Spill it if it bothers you,” I said, recognizing the expression.

“Thanks, Tom. Well … no matter what Opie was suffering from, no matter
how … uh … willing she might have been—these things take time. You can
see them happening.”

“So?”

_“Where were you when that guy started making passes at her?”_

I thought. I started to smile, cut it off. Then I got mad. “I don’t
remember.”

“Yes you do. Where were you, Tom?”

“Around.”

“You weren’t even in the room.”

“I wasn’t?”

“No.”

“Who told you?”

“You did,” he said. He began to get that sleepy look. “You’re a lousy
liar, Tom. When you duck a question, you’re saying yes. Who was the
babe, Tom?”

“I don’t know.”

_“What?”_

“I said I don’t know,” I said sullenly. “Just a babe.”

“Oh. You didn’t ask her her name.”

“Guess not.”

“And you raised all that fuss about Opie.”

“You leave Opie out of this!” I blazed. “There’s a big difference.”

“You ought to be hung by your thumbs,” he said pityingly. “But I guess
it isn’t your fault.” He snorted. “No wonder that parasite of Beck’s
can’t reach you. You don’t do anything you regret because you never
regret anything you do. Not one thing!”

“Well, why not?” I jumped to my feet. “Listen, Hank, I’m alive, see. I’m
alive all over. Everybody I know is killing off this part of themselves,
that part of themselves—parts that get hungry get starved, they die.
Don’t drink this, don’t look at that, don’t eat the other, when all the
time something in you is hungry for these things. It’s easily fed—and
once it’s fed it’s quiet. I’m alive, damn it, and I mean to stay alive!”

Hank went to the door. “I’m getting out of here,” he said in a shaking
voice. “I got to think of my sister. I don’t want you to get hurt. She
might not forgive me.”

He slammed the door. I kicked the end-table and busted a leg off it. The
door opened again. Hank said, “I’m going with you to Beck’s Saturday
night. I’ll pick you up here. Don’t leave until I get here.”

The front door at Beck’s stood wide, as it always did on Saturdays.
There was nothing to stop Hank or any other “graduate” from walking
right in. Unless the something was inside those people. Hank sure felt
it; I could tell by the way he jammed his hands in his pockets and
sauntered through the door. He looked so relaxed, but he radiated
tension.

It was the usual unusual type of party. Beck self-effacingly rode herd
on about nineteen of the goofiest assortment of people ever
collected—since last week. A famous lady economist. An alderman. A
pimply Leftist. A brace of German tourists, binoculars and all. A
dazed-looking farmer in store clothes. Somebody playing piano. Somebody
looking adoringly at the piano player—she obviously didn’t play.
Somebody else looking disgustedly at the piano player. He obviously did
play.

When we came in, Beck hurried over, chortling greetings, which dried up
completely when he recognized Hank. “Hank,” he gasped. “Really, old man,
I think—”

“Hiya, Beck,” Hank said. “Been quite a while.” He walked out into the
room and to the bar in the far corner. Beck gawped like a beached
haddock. “Tom,” Beck said, “you shouldn’t have taken a chance like—”

“I’m just as thirsty as he is,” I told him, and followed Hank.

I got a rye. “Hank.”

“What?” His eyes were on the crowd.

“When are you going to quit the silent treatment and tell me what you
have in mind?”

He looked at me, and the strain he was under must have been painful.
“Hey,” I said, “take it easy. Nothing’s going to happen to you. Our
hungry little friend here is an epicure. I don’t think she’s interested
in anything but the first rush of anguish she kicks up. You’re old
stuff.”

“I know,” he muttered. “I know … I guess.” He wiped his forehead. “Do
you see her?”

“No,” I said. “But then, how would I know her if I did see her? Maybe
she’s not in the room.”

“I think she is,” he said. “I think she’s stuck here.”

“That’s a thought. Hey! Her specialty is the incongruous—right? The
out-of-character. Well, that’s what this room is all about.”

He nodded. “That’s what I mean. And that’s what I’m going to check on,
but for sure. Here.”

He moved close to the bar and to me, and quickly and secretly passed me
something chunky and flat. “Hank!” I whispered. “A gun! What—”

“Take it. I have one too. Follow my cue when the time comes.”

I don’t like guns. But it was in my pocket before I could make any more
talk. I wondered if Hank had gone off his rocker. “Bullets wouldn’t make
no nevermind to her.”

“They aren’t for her,” he said, watching the crowd again.

“But—”

“Shut up. Tom,” he asked abruptly, “does somebody always do something
crazy at these shindigs? Every time?”

I remembered about the “investment” tips, the number of quiet, unnoticed
times people must have done things in this room that caused them
humiliation, regret. “Maybe so, Hank.”

“Early or late in the proceedings?”

“That I don’t know, Hank. I really don’t.”

“I can’t wait,” he muttered. “I can’t risk it. Maybe it only feeds once.
Here I go,” he said clearly.

I called to him, but he put his chin down between his collarbones and
went to the piano. I flashed a look around. I remember Beck’s face
watching Hank was white and strained.

Hank climbed right up on the piano, one foot on the bench, one foot on
the keys, both big feet on the exquisite finish of the top. The pianist
faltered and stopped. The ardent girl watching him squeaked. People
looked. People rushed to finish a sentence while they turned. Others
didn’t even notice. After all—those parties of Beck’s.…

“Parasite!” Hank bellowed. And do you know, four-fifths of that crowd
practically snapped to attention.

“He’s not immune,” Hank said. He was talking, apparently, to the place
where the wall met the ceiling. “Here’s your can-opener, parasite.
Listen to me.”

He paused, and in the sudden embarrassed silence Beck’s voice came
shakingly, stretched and gasping. “Get off there, you hear? Get—”

Hank pulled out his gun. “Shut up, Beck.” Beck sat right down on the
floor. Hank lifted his big head. “All he wants to do is live. He’d hate
to die. But how do you suppose he’d feel if he killed himself?”

There shouldn’t be silences like that. But it didn’t last long. Somebody
whimpered. Somebody shuffled. And then, in that voice I had heard here
before, on the crazy day I saw the spider and the cat with hands, I
heard a single syllable.

Starve a man for a day and a half, then put a piece of charcoal-crusted,
juicy-pink steak in his mouth. Set out glasses of a rough red wine, and
secretly substitute a vintage burgundy in one man’s glass. Drop a silky
mink over the shoulders of a shabby girl as she stands in front of a
mirror. Do any of these things and you’ll hear that sound, starting
suddenly, falling in pitch, turning to a sigh, then a breath.

“M-m-m-m-m …!”

“You won’t have long to take it, but it doesn’t take long, does it?”
asked Hank.

I thought, what the hell is he talking about? Who?

And then I pulled the gun out of my pocket.

Now I’ve got to talk about how much can run through a man’s mind, how
fast. In the time it took to raise the gun and aim it and pull the
trigger, I thought:

It’s Tom Conway he’s been talking about to the parasite.

Hank wants the parasite to take me.

It’s the parasite, not Hank, not I, who is raising this gun, aiming it.

This is Hank’s way to avenge himself on me. And why vengeance? Only
because I think differently from him. Doesn’t Hank know that to me my
thinking is right and needs no excuse?

And it’s a stupid vengeance, because it’s on Opie’s behalf, and surely
Opie wouldn’t want it; certainly it can’t benefit her.

The gun was aimed at my temple and I pulled the trigger.

I’m alive, I’m alive all over. Everybody has to die sometime, but oh,
the stupid, stupid, sick realization that you did it to yourself! That
you let yourself be killed, that you let your own finger tighten on the
trigger.

A gunshot is staccato, sharp, short. This was different. This was a
sound that started with a gunshot but sustained itself; it was a roar,
it filled the world. It roared and roared while the room hazed over,
spun, turned on its side as my cheek thumped the carpet. The roar went
on and on while the light faded, and through it I could hear their
screams, and Hank’s voice, distant but clear. “Everybody out! This place
is going to blow sky-high.” “Fire!” he shouted a second later “Fire!”
And, _“Beck, damn you, help me with Tom.”_

Nothing then but a sense of time passing, then cool air, darkness, and a
moment of lucidity I saw too clearly, heard too well. Everything hurt.
The roar was still going on as a background, I heard the gunshot, tasted
it bitterly, saw it as a flickering aurora in and of everything around
me, smelled it acrid and sharp and felt it. I was on the gravel path,
and frightened people poured out of the house.

“Stay with him!” Hank roared, and my head was cradled on Beck’s
trembling knees.

“But there is no fire—no fire,” Beck quavered.

And Hank was a black bulk in blackness, and his voice was distant as he
raced to the bushes. “Wait,” he said. “Wait.” He stooped back there, and
there was a dull explosion inside the house, and another, and white
light showed in the downstairs windows, turned to yellow, flickered and
grew.

Hank came back. “There’s a fire,” he said.

Beck screamed. “You’ll kill it!” He tried to rise. Hank caught his shirt
and held him down.

“Yes, I’ll kill it, you Judas!”

“You don’t understand,” Beck cried, “I can’t live without it.”

“Go back to your insurance company job. Make your own way, and don’t
harvest better people than yourself to feed monsters.” Flames shot from
the second-story windows. “But if you really can’t live without it—die,”
said Hank, and then he shouted, “Is everybody out?”

“All accounted for,” called a voice. I remember thinking then that if
they had counted heads and all were safe—who was that screaming in the
fire?

After that even the roar stopped.

First pain, and then enough light to filter through my closed lids. I
tried to move my right hand and failed. I opened my eyes and saw the
cast on my right forearm. I turned my head.

“Tom?”

I looked up at the speaking blur. Then it wasn’t a blur, it was Hank.

“You’re all right now, Tom. You’re home. My house.”

I turned from him and looked at the ceiling, the window, then back to
him. “You tried to kill me,” I said.

He shook his head. “I used you for bait. I had to know if it was in that
room. I had to know if it would feed. I had to know what it could do,
what it would do. I tried to shoot the gun out of your hand. I missed,
and hit your forearm. It’s broken. Your bullet creased your scalp. It
was awful close, Tom.”

“Suppose I’d killed myself?”

He said, “Bait is expendable.”

“You booby-trapped the house, didn’t you?”

“After your blow-by-blow instruction in burglary, it was no trouble.”

“You tried to kill me,” I said.

“I didn’t,” he said with finality.

I wondered—I really wondered—why what I had done was that important. And
it was as if Hank read my mind. “It’s because of the difference between
you and Opie,” he said. “Superficially, you and Opie did exactly the
same thing that night.

“But Opie’s own feelings about it will cost her something for the rest
of her life. And you didn’t even remember who you were with.”

I lay there like a block of wood. Hank went away. Maybe I slept. Next
thing I knew, Opie was there, kneeling by the bed.

“Tom,” she said brokenly. “Oh, Tom. I wish I were dead. Tom,” she said,
“I’ll spend the rest of my life making it up to you.…”

I thought, I wish that thing, whatever it was, hadn’t died in the fire.
I know what I am now, I thought. I’m immune. And knowing that gives me
enough anguish to feed the likes of you for a thousand years.



TALENT


MRS. BRENT AND PRECIOUS WERE SITTING on the farmhouse porch when little
Jokey sidled out from behind the barn and came cat-footing up to them.
Precious, who had ringlets and was seven years old and very clean,
stopped swinging on the glider and watched him. Mrs. Brent was reading a
magazine. Jokey stopped at the foot of the steps.

“MOM!” he rasped.

Mrs. Brent started violently, rocked too far back, bumped her knobby
hairdo against the clapboards, and said, “Good heavens, you little
br—darling, you frightened me!”

Jokey smiled.

Precious said, “Snaggletooth.”

“If you want your mother,” said Mrs. Brent reasonably, “why don’t you go
inside and speak to her?”

Disgustedly, Jokey vetoed the suggestion with “Ah-h-h …” He faced the
house. “MOM!” he shrieked, in a tone that spoke of death and disaster.

There was a crash from the kitchen, and light footsteps. Jokey’s mother,
whose name was Mrs. Purney, came out, pushing back a wisp of hair from
frightened eyes.

“Oh, the sweet,” she cooed. She flew out and fell on her knees beside
Jokey. “Did it hurt its little, then? Aw, did it was …”

Jokey said, “Gimme a nickel!”

“Please,” suggested Precious.

“Of course, darling,” fluttered Mrs. Purney. “My word, yes. Just as soon
as ever we go into town, you shall have a nickel. Two, if you’re good.”

“Gimme a nickel,” said Jokey ominously.

“But, darling, what for? What will you do with a nickel out here?”

Jokey thrust out his hand. “I’ll hold my breath.”

Mrs. Purney rose, panicked. “Oh, dear, don’t. Oh, please don’t. Where’s
my reticule?”

“On top of the bookcase, out of my reach,” said Precious, without
rancor.

“Oh, yes, so it is. Now, Jokey, you wait right here and I’ll just …” and
her twittering faded into the house.

Mrs. Brent cast her eyes upward and said nothing.

“You’re a little stinker,” said Precious.

Jokey looked at her with dignity. “Mom,” he called imperiously.

Mrs. Purney came to heel on the instant, bearing a nickel.

Jokey, pointing with the same movement with which he acquired the coin,
reported, “She called me a little stinker.”

“Really!” breathed Mrs. Purney, bridling. “I think, Mrs. Brent, that
your child could have better manners.”

“She has, Mrs. Purney, and uses them when they seem called for.”

Mrs. Purney looked at her curiously, decided, apparently, that Mrs.
Brent meant nothing by the statement (in which she was wrong) and turned
to her son, who was walking briskly back to the barn.

“Don’t hurt yourself, Puddles,” she called.

She elicited no response whatever and, smiling vaguely at Mrs. Brent and
daughter, went back to her kitchen.

“Puddles,” said Precious ruminatively. “I bet I know why she calls him
that. Remember Gladys’s puppy that—”

“Precious,” said Mrs. Brent, “you shouldn’t have called Joachim a word
like that.”

“I s’pose not,” Precious agreed thoughtfully. “He’s really a—”

Mrs. Brent, watching the carven pink lips, said warningly, “Precious!”
She shook her head. “I’ve asked you not to say that.”

“Daddy—”

“Daddy caught his thumb in the hinge of the car trunk. That was
different.”

“Oh, no,” corrected Precious. “You’re thinking of the time he opened
on’y the bottom half of the Dutch door in the dark. When he pinched his
thumb, he said—”

“Would you like to see my magazine?”

Precious rose and stretched delicately. “No, thank you, Mummy. I’m going
out to the barn to see what Jokey’s going to do with that nickel.”

“Precious …”

“Yes, Mummy.”

“Oh—nothing. I suppose it’s all right. Don’t quarrel with Jokey, now.”

“Not ‘less he quarrels with me,” she replied, smiling charmingly.

Precious had new patent leather shoes with hard heels and broad
ankle-straps. They looked neat and very shiny against her yellow socks.
She walked carefully in the path, avoiding the moist grasses that nodded
over the edges, stepping sedately over a small muddy patch.

Jokey was not in the barn. Precious walked through, smelling with
pleasure the mixed, warm smells of chaff-dust, dry hay and manure. Just
outside, by the wagon door, was the pigpen. Jokey was standing by the
rail fence. At his feet was a small pile of green apples. He picked one
up and hurled it with all his might at the brown sow. It went _putt!_ on
her withers, and she went _ergh!_

“Hey!” said Precious.

_Putt-ergh!_ Then he looked up at Precious, snarled silently, and picked
up another apple. _Putt-ergh!_

“Why are you doing that for?”

_Putt-ergh!_

“Hear that? My mom done just like that when I hit her in the stummick.”

“She did?”

“Now this,” said Jokey, holding up an apple, “is a stone. Listen.” He
hurled it. _Thunk-e-e-e-ergh!_

Precious was impressed. Her eyes widened, and she stepped back a pace.

“Hey, look out where you’re goin’, stoopid!”

He ran to her and grasped her left biceps roughly, throwing her up
against the railings. She yelped and stood rubbing her arm—rubbing off
grime, and far deeper in indignation than she was in fright.

Jokey paid her no attention. “You an’ your shiny feet,” he growled. He
was down on one knee, feeling for two twigs stuck in the ground about
eight inches apart. “Y’might’ve squashed ’em!

Precious, her attention brought to her new shoes, stood turning one of
them, glancing light from the toe-caps, from the burnished sides, while
complacency flowed back into her.

“What?”

With the sticks, Jokey scratched aside the loose earth and, one by one,
uncovered the five tiny, naked, blind creatures which lay buried there.
They were only about three-quarters of an inch long, with little
withered limbs and twitching noses. They writhed. There were ants, too.
Very busy ants.

“What are they?”

“Mice, stoopid,” said Jokey. “Baby mice. I found ’em in the barn.”

“How did they get there?”

“I put ’em there.”

“How long have they been there?”

“ ’Bout four days,” said Jokey, covering them up again. “They last a
long time.”

“Does your mother know those mice are out here?”

“No, and you better not say nothin’, ya hear?”

“Would your mother whip you?”

_“Her?”_ The syllable came out as an incredulous jeer.

“What about your father?”

“Aw, I guess he’d like to lick me. But he ain’t got a chance. Mom’d have
a fit.”

“You mean she’d get mad at him?”

“No, stoopid. A fit. You know, scrabbles at the air and get suds on her
mouth, and all. Falls down and twitches.” He chuckled.

“But—why?”

“Well, it’s about the on’y way she can handle Pop, I guess. He’s always
wanting to do something about me. She won’t let ‘um, so I c’n do
anything I want.”

“What do you do?”

“I’m talunted. Mom says so.”

“Well, what do you do?”

“You’re sorta nosy.”

“I don’t believe you can do anything, stinky.”

“Oh, I can’t?” Jokey’s face was reddening.

“No, you can’t! You talk a lot, but you can’t really do anything.”

Jokey walked up close to her and breathed in her face the way the man
with the grizzly beard does to the clean-cut cowboy who is tied up to
the dynamite kegs in the movies on Saturday.

“I can’t, huh?”

She stood her ground. “All right, if you’re so smart, let’s see what you
were going to do with that nickel!”

Surprisingly, he looked abashed. “You’d laugh,” he said.

“No, I wouldn’t,” she said guilelessly. She stepped forward, opened her
eyes very wide, shook her head so that her gold ringlets swayed, and
said very gently, “Truly I wouldn’t, Jokey …”

“Well—” he said, and turned to the pigpen. The brindled sow was rubbing
her shoulder against the railing, grunting softly to herself. She
vouchsafed them one small red-rimmed glance, and returned to her
thoughts.

Jokey and Precious stood up on the lower rail and looked down on the
pig’s broad back.

“You’re not goin’ to tell anybody?” he asked.

“ ’Course not.”

“Well, awright. Now lookit. You ever see a china piggy bank?”

“Sure I have,” said Precious.

“How big?”

“Well, I got one about this big.”

“Aw, that’s nothin’.”

“And my girl-friend Gladys has one _this_ big.”

“Phooey.”

“Well,” said Precious, “in town, in a big drugstore, I saw one THIS
big,” and she put out her hands about thirty inches apart.

“That’s pretty big,” admitted Jokey. “Now I’ll show you _something_.” To
the brindled sow, he said sternly, “You are a piggy bank.”

The sow stopped rubbing herself against the rails. She stood quite
still. Her bristles merged into her hide. She was hard and shiny—as
shiny as the little girl’s hard shoes. In the middle of the broad back,
a slot appeared—or had been there all along, as far as Precious could
tell. Jokey produced a warm sweaty nickel and dropped it into the slot.

There was a distant, vitreous, hollow bouncing click from inside the
sow.

Mrs. Purney came out on the porch and creaked into a wicker chair with a
tired sigh.

“They are a handful, aren’t they?” said Mrs. Brent.

“You just don’t know,” moaned Mrs. Purney.

Mrs. Brent’s eyebrows went up. “Precious is a model. Her teacher says
so. That wasn’t too easy to do.”

“Yes, she’s a very good little girl. But my Joachim is—talented, you
know. That makes it very hard.”

“How is he talented? What can he do?”

“He can do anything,” said Mrs. Purney after a slight hesitation.

Mrs. Brent glanced at her, saw that her tired eyes were closed, and
shrugged. It made her feel better. Why must mothers always insist that
their children are better than all others?”

“Now, my Precious,” she said, “—and mind you, I’m not saying this
because she’s my child—my Precious plays the piano very well for a child
her age. Why, she’s already in her third book and she’s not eight yet.”

Mrs. Purney said, without opening her eyes, “Jokey doesn’t play. I’m
sure he could if he wanted to.”

Mrs. Brent saw what an inclusive boast this might be, and wisely
refrained from further itemization. She took another tack. “Don’t you
find, Mrs. Purney, that it is easy to make a child obedient and polite
by being firm?”

Mrs. Purney opened her eyes at last, and looked troubledly at Mrs.
Brent. “A child should love its parents.”

“Oh, of course!” smiled Mrs. Brent. “But these modern ideas of
surrounding a child with love and freedom to an extent where it becomes
a little tyrant—well! I just can’t see that! Of course I don’t mean
Joachim,” she added quickly, sweetly. “He’s a _dear_ child, really …”

“He’s got to be given everything he wants,” murmured Mrs. Purney in a
strange tone. It was fierce and it was by rote. “He’s _got_ to be kept
happy.”

“You must love him very much,” snapped Mrs. Brent viciously, suddenly
determined to get some reaction out of this weak, indulgent creature.
She got it.

“I hate him,” said Mrs. Purney.

Her eyes were closed again, and now she almost smiled, as if the release
of those words had been a yearned-for thing. Then she sat abruptly
erect, her pale eyes round, and she grasped her lower lip and pulled it
absurdly down and to the side.

“I didn’t mean that,” she gasped. She flung herself down before Mrs.
Brent, and gabbled. “I didn’t mean it! Don’t tell him! He’ll do things
to us. He’ll loosen the house-beams when we’re sleeping. He’ll turn the
breakfast to snakes and frogs, and make that big toothy mouth again out
of the oven door. Don’t tell him! Don’t tell him!”

Mrs. Brent, profoundly shocked, and not comprehending a word of this,
instinctively put out her arms and gathered the other woman close.

“I can do lots of things,” Jokey said. “I can do anything.”

“Gee,” breathed Precious, looking at the china pig. “What are you going
to do with it now?”

“I dunno. I’ll let it be a pig again, I guess.”

“Can you change it back into a pig?”

“I don’t hafta, stoopid. It’ll be a pig by itself. Soon’s I forget about
it.”

“Does that always happen?”

“No. If I busted that ol’ china pig, it’d take longer, an’ the pig would
be all busted up when it changed back. All guts and blood,” he added,
sniggering. “I done that with a calf once.”

“Gee,” said Precious, still wide-eyed. “When you grow up you’ll be able
to do anything you want.”

“Yeah.” Jokey looked pleased. “But I can do anything I want now.” He
frowned. “I just sometimes don’t know what to do next.”

“You’ll know when you grow up,” she said confidently.

“Oh, sure. I’ll live in a big house in town and look out of the windows,
and bust up people and change ’em to ducks and snakes and things. I’ll
make flies as big as chicken hawks, or maybe as big as horses, and put
’em in the schools. I’ll knock down the big buildings an’ squash
people.”

He picked up a green apple and hurled it accurately at the brown sow.

“Gosh, and you won’t have to practice piano, or listen to any old
teachers,” said Precious, warming to the possibilities. “Why, you won’t
even have to—_oh_!”

“What’sa matter?”

“That beetle. I hate them.”

“Thass just a stag beetle,” said Jokey with superiority. “Lookit here.
I’ll show you something.”

He took out a book of matches and struck one. He held the beetle down
with a dirty forefinger, and put the flame in its head. Precious watched
attentively until the creature stopped scrabbling.

“Those things scare me,” she said when he stood up.

“You’re a sissy.”

“I am not.”

“Yes you are. _All_ girls are sissies.”

“You’re dirty and you’re a stinker,” said Precious.

He promptly went to the pigpen and, from beside the trough, scooped up a
heavy handful of filth. From his crouch, Jokey hurled it at her with a
wide overhand sweep, so that it splattered her from the shoulder down,
across the front of her dress, with a great wet gob for the toe of her
left shiny shoe.

“Now who’s dirty? Now who stinks?” he sang.

Precious lifted her skirt and looked at it in horror and loathing. Her
eyes filled with angry tears. Sobbing, she rushed at him. She slapped
him with little-girl clumsiness, hand-over-shoulder fashion. She slapped
him again.

“Hey! Who are you hitting?” he cried in amazement. He backed off and
suddenly grinned. “I’ll fix you,” he said, and disappeared without
another word.

Whimpering with fury and revulsion, Precious pulled a handful of grass
and began wiping her shoe.

Something moved into her field of vision. She glanced at it, squealed,
and moved back. It was an enormous stag beetle, three times life-size,
and it was scuttling toward her.

Another beetle—or the same one—met her at the corner.

With her hard black shiny shoes, she stepped on this one, so hard that
the calf of her leg ached and tingled for the next half-hour.

The men were back when she returned to the house. Mr. Brent had been
surveying Mr. Purney’s fence lines. Jokey was not missed before they
left. Mrs. Purney looked drawn and frightened, and seemed glad that Mrs.
Brent was leaving before Jokey came in for his supper.

Precious said nothing when asked about the dirt on her dress, and, under
the circumstances, Mrs. Brent thought better of questioning her too
closely.

In the car, Mrs. Brent told her husband that she thought Jokey was
driving Mrs. Purney crazy.

It was her turn to be driven very nearly mad, the next morning, when
Jokey turned up. Most of him.

Surprising, really, how much beetle had stuck to the hard black shoe,
and, when it was time, turned into what they found under their
daughter’s bed.



A WAY OF THINKING


I’LL HAVE TO START WITH AN ANECDOTE or two that you may have heard from
me before, but they’ll bear repeating, since it’s Kelley we’re talking
about.

I shipped out with Kelley when I was a kid. Tankships, mostly coastwise:
load somewhere in the oil country—New Orleans, Aransas Pass, Port
Arthur, or some such—and unload at ports north of Hatteras. Eight days
out, eighteen hours in, give or take a day or six hours. Kelley was
ordinary seaman on my watch, which was a laugh; he knew more about the
sea than anyone aft of the galley. But he never ribbed me, stumbling
around the place with my blue A.B. ticket. He had a sense of humor in
his peculiar quiet way, but he never gratified it by proofs of the
obvious—that he was twice the seaman I could ever be.

There were a lot of unusual things about Kelley, the way he looked, the
way he moved; but most unusual was the way he thought. He was like one
of those extraterrestrials you read about who can think as well as a
human being but not _like_ a human being.

Just for example, there was that night in Port Arthur. I was sitting in
a honky-tonk up over a bar with a red-headed girl called Red, trying to
mind my own business while watching a chick known as Boots, who sat
alone over by the jukebox. This girl Boots was watching the door and
grinding her teeth, and I knew why, and I was worried. See, Kelley had
been seeing her pretty regularly, but this trip he’d made the break and
word was around that he was romancing a girl in Pete’s place—a very
unpopular kind of rumor for Boots to be chewing on. I also knew that
Kelley would be along any minute because he’d promised to meet me here.

And in he came, running up that long straight flight of steps easy as a
cat, and when he got in the door everybody just hushed, except the
jukebox, and it sounded scared.

Now, just above Boots’ shoulder on a little shelf was an electric fan.
It had sixteen-inch blades and no guard. The very second Kelley’s face
showed in the doorway, Boots rose up like a snake out of a basket,
reached behind her, snatched that fan off the shelf and threw it.

It might as well have been done with a slow-motion camera as far as
Kelley was concerned. He didn’t move his feet at all. He bent sideways,
just a little, from the waist, and turned his wide shoulders. Very
clearly I heard three of those whining blade-tips touch a button on his
shirt _bip-bip-bip!_ and then the fan hit the doorpost.

Even the jukebox shut up then. It was _so_ quiet. Kelley didn’t say
anything and neither did anyone else.

Now, if you believe in do-as-you-get-done-to, and someone heaves an
infernal machine at you, you’ll pick it right up and heave it back. But
Kelley doesn’t think like you. He didn’t look at the fan. He just
watched Boots, and she was white and crazed-looking, waiting for
whatever he might have in mind.

He went across the room to her, fast but not really hurrying, and he
picked her out from behind that table, and he threw her.

_He threw her at the fan_.

She hit the floor and slid, sweeping up the fan where it lay, hitting
the doorjamb with her head, spinning out into the stairway. Kelley
walked after her, stepped over her, went on downstairs and back to the
ship.

And there was the time we shipped a new main spur gear for the starboard
winch. The deck engineer used up the whole morning watch trying to get
the old gear-wheel off its shaft. He heated the hub. He pounded it. He
put in wedges. He hooked on with a handy-billy—that’s a four-sheave
block-and-tackle to you—and all he did with that was break a U-bolt.

Then Kelley came on deck, rubbing sleep out of his eyes, and took one
brief look. He walked over to the winch, snatched up a crescent wrench,
and relieved the four bolts that held the housing tight around the
shaft. He then picked up a twelve-pound maul, hefted it, and swung it
just once. The maul hit the end of the shaft and the shaft shot out of
the other side of the machine like a torpedo out of its tube. The
gearwheel fell down on the deck. Kelley went forward to take the helm
and thought no more about it, while the deck crew stared after him,
wall-eyed. You see what I mean! Problem: Get a wheel off a shaft. But in
Kelly’s book it’s: Get the shaft out of the wheel.

I kibitzed him at poker one time and saw him discard two pair and draw a
winning straight flush. Why that discard? Because he’d just realized the
deck was stacked. Why the flush? God knows. All Kelley did was pick up
the pot—a big one—grin at the sharper, and leave.

I have plenty more yarns like that, but you get the idea. The guy had a
special way of thinking, that’s all, and it never failed him.

I lost track of Kelley. I came to regret that now and then; he made a
huge impression on me, and sometimes I used to think about him when I
had a tough problem to solve. What would Kelley do? And sometimes it
helped, and sometimes it didn’t; and when it didn’t, I guess it was
because I’m not Kelley.

I came ashore and got married and did all sorts of other things, and the
years went by, and a war came and went, and one warm spring evening I
went into a place I know on West 48th St. because I felt like drinking
tequila and I can always get it there. And who should be sitting in a
booth finishing up a big Mexican dinner but—no, not Kelley.

It was Milton. He looks like a college sophomore with money. His suits
are always cut just so, but quiet; and when he’s relaxed he looks as if
he’s just been tagged for a fraternity and it matters to him, and when
he’s worried you want to ask him has he been cutting classes again. It
happens he’s a damn good doctor.

He was worried, but he gave me a good hello and waved me into the booth
while he finished up. We had small talk and I tried to buy him a drink.
He looked real wistful and then shook his head. “Patient in ten
minutes,” he said, looking at his watch.

“Then it’s nearby. Come back afterward.”

“Better yet,” he said, getting up, “come with me. This might interest
you, come to think of it.”

He got his hat and paid Rudy, and I said, “Luego,” and Rudy grinned and
slapped the tequila bottle. Nice place, Rudy’s.

“What about the patient?” I asked as we turned up the avenue. I thought
for a while he hadn’t heard me, but at last he said, “Four busted ribs
and a compound femoral. Minor internal hemorrhage which might or might
not be a ruptured spleen. Necrosis of the oral frenum—or was while there
was any frenum left.”

“What’s a frenum?”

“That little strip of tissue under your tongue.”

“Ongk,” I said, trying to reach it with the tip of my tongue. “What a
healthy fellow.”

“Pulmonary adhesions,” Milton ruminated. “Not serious, certainly not
tubercular. But they hurt and they bleed and I don’t like ’em. And acne
rosacea.”

“That’s the nose like a stoplight, isn’t it?”

“It isn’t as funny as that to the guy that has it.”

I was quelled. “What was it—a goon-squad?”

He shook his head.

“A truck?”

“No.”

“He fell off something.”

Milton stopped and turned and looked me straight in the eye. “No,” he
said. “Nothing like anything. Nothing,” he said, walking again, “at
all.”

I said nothing to that because there was nothing to say.

“He just went to bed,” said Milton thoughtfully, “because he felt off
his oats. And one by one these things happened to him.”

“In _bed_?”

“Well,” said Milton, in a to-be-absolutely-accurate tone, “when the ribs
broke he was on his way back from the bathroom.”

“You’re kidding.”

“No I’m not.”

“He’s lying.”

Milton said, “I believe him.”

I know Milton. There’s no doubt that he believed the man. I said, “I
keep reading things about psychosomatic disorders. But a broken—what did
you say it was?”

“Femur. Thigh, that is. Compound. Oh, it’s rare, all right. But it can
happen, has happened. These muscles are pretty powerful, you know. They
deliver two-fifty, three-hundred-pound thrusts every time you walk up
stairs. In certain spastic hysteriae, they’ll break bones easily
enough.”

“What about all those other things?”

“Functional disorders, every one of ’em. No germ disease.”

“Now this boy,” I said, “_really_ has something on his mind.”

“Yes, he has.”

But I didn’t ask what. I could hear the discussion closing as if it had
a spring latch on it.

We went into a door tucked between storefronts and climbed three
flights. Milton put out his hand to a bell-push and then dropped it
without ringing. There was a paper tacked to the door.


DOC I WENT FOR SHOTS COME ON IN.

It was unsigned. Milton turned the knob and we went in.

The first thing that hit me was the smell. Not too strong, but not the
kind of thing you ever forget if you ever had to dig a slit trench
through last week’s burial pit. “That’s the necrosis,” muttered Milton.
“Damn it.” He gestured. “Hang your hat over there. Sit down. I’ll be out
soon.” He went into an inner room, saying, “Hi, Hal,” at the doorway.
From inside came an answering rumble, and something twisted in my throat
to hear it, for no voice which is that tired should sound that cheerful.

I sat watching the wallpaper and laboriously un-listening to those
clinical grunts and the gay-weary responses in the other room. The
wallpaper was awful. I remember a nightclub act where Reginald Gardiner
used to give sound-effect renditions of wallpaper designs. This one, I
decided, would run “Body to _weep …_ yawp, yawp; body to weep … yawp,
yawp,” very faintly, with the final syllable a straining retch. I had
just reached a particularly clumsy join where the paper utterly
demolished its own rhythm and went “Yawp yawp body to _weep_” when the
outer door opened and I leaped to my feet with the rush of utter guilt
one feels when caught in an unlikely place with no curt and lucid
explanation.

He was two long strides into the room, tall and soft-footed, his face
and long green eyes quite at rest, when he saw me. He stopped as if on
leaf springs and shock absorbers, not suddenly, completely controlled,
and asked, “Who are you?”

“I’ll be damned,” I answered. “Kelley!”

He peered at me with precisely the expression I had seen so many times
when he watched the little square windows on the one-armed bandits we
used to play together. I could almost hear the tumblers, see the drums;
not lemon … cherry … cherry … and _click!_ this time but
tankship … Texas … him!… and _click!_ “I be _god_dam,” he drawled, to
indicate that he was even more surprised than I was. He transferred the
small package he carried from his right hand to his left and shook
hands. His hand went once and a half times around mine with enough left
over to tie a half-hitch. “Where in time you been keepin’ yourse’f?
How’d you smoke me out?”

“I never,” I said. (Saying it, I was aware that I always fell into the
idiom of people who impressed me, to the exact degree of that
impression. So I always found myself talking more like Kelley than
Kelley’s shaving mirror.) I was grinning so wide my face hurt. “I’m glad
to see you.” I shook hands with him again, foolishly. “I came with the
doctor.”

“You a doctor now?” he said, his tone prepared for wonders.

“I’m a writer,” I said deprecatingly.

“Yeah, I heard,” he reminded himself. His eyes narrowed; as of old, it
had the effect of sharp-focusing a searchlight beam. “I heard!” he
repeated, with deeper interest. “Stories. Gremlins and flyin’ saucers
an’ all like that.” I nodded. He said, without insult, “Hell of a way to
make a living.”

“What about you?”

“Ships. Some dry-dock. Tank cleaning. Compass adjustin’. For a while had
a job holdin’ a insurance inspector’s head. You know.”

I glanced at the big hands that could weld or steer or compute certainly
with the excellence I used to know, and marveled that he found himself
so unremarkable. I pulled myself back to here and now and nodded toward
the inner room. “I’m holding you up.”

“No you ain’t. Milton, he knows what he’s doin’. He wants me, he’ll
holler.”

“Who’s sick?”

His face darkened like the sea in scud-weather, abruptly and deep down.
“My brother.” He looked at me searchingly. “He’s …” Then he seemed to
check himself. “He’s sick,” he said unnecessarily, and added quickly,
“He’s going to be all right, though.”

“Sure,” I said quickly.

I had the feeling that we were both lying and that neither of us knew
why.

Milton came out, laughing a laugh that cut off as soon as he was out of
range of the sick man. Kelley turned to him slowly, as if slowness were
the only alternative to leaping on the doctor, pounding the news out of
him. “Hello, Kelley. Heard you come in.”

“How is he, Doc?”

Milton looked up quickly, his bright round eyes clashing with Kelley’s
slitted fierce ones. “You got to take it easy, Kelley. What’ll happen to
him if you crack up?”

“Nobody’s cracking up. What do you want me to do?”

Milton saw the package on the table. He picked it up and opened it.
There was a leather case and two phials. “Ever use one of these before?”

“He was a pre-med before he went to sea,” I said suddenly.

Milton stared at me. “You two know each other?”

I looked at Kelley. “Sometimes I think I invented him.”

Kelley snorted and thumped my shoulder. Happily I had one hand on a
built-in china shelf. His big hand continued the motion and took the
hypodermic case from the doctor. “Sterilize the shaft and needle,” he
said sleepily, as if reading. “Assemble without touching needle with
fingers. To fill, puncture diaphragm and withdraw plunger. Squirt upward
to remove air an’ prevent embolism. Locate major vein in—”

Milton laughed. “Okay, okay. But forget the vein. Any place will do—it’s
subcutaneous, that’s all. I’ve written the exact amounts to be used for
exactly the symptoms you can expect. Don’t jump the gun, Kelley. And
remember how you salt your stew. Just because a little is good, it
doesn’t figure that a lot has to be better.”

Kelley was wearing that sleepy inattention which, I remembered, meant
only that he was taking in every single word like a tape recorder. He
tossed the leather case gently, caught it. “Now?” he said.

“Not now,” the doctor said positively. “Only when you have to.”

Kelley seemed frustrated. I suddenly understood that he wanted to do
something, build something, fight something. Anything but sit and wait
for therapy to bring results. I said, “Kelley, any brother of yours is
a—well, you know. I’d like to say hello, if it’s all—”

Immediately and together Kelley and the doctor said loudly, “Sure, when
he’s on his feet,” and “Better not just now, I’ve just given him a
sedat—” And together they stopped awkwardly.

“Let’s go get that drink,” I said before they could flounder any more.

“Now you’re talking. You too, Kelley. It’ll do you good.”

“Not me,” said Kelley. “Hal—”

“I knocked him out,” said the doctor bluntly. “You’ll cluck around
scratching for worms and looking for hawks till you wake him up, and he
needs his sleep. Come on.”

Painfully I had to add to my many mental images of Kelley the very first
one in which he was indecisive. I hated it.

“Well,” said Kelley, “let me go see.”

He disappeared. I looked at Milton’s face, and turned quickly away. I
was sure he wouldn’t want me to see that expression of sick pity and
bafflement.

Kelley came out, moving silently as always. “Yeah, asleep,” he said.
“For how long?”

“I’d say four hours at least.”

“Well all right.” From the old-fashioned clothes tree he took a battered
black engineer’s cap with a shiny, crazed patent leather visor. I
laughed. Both men turned to me, with annoyance, I thought.

On the landing outside I explained. “The hat,” I said. “Remember?
Tampico?”

“Oh,” he grunted. He thwacked it against his forearm.

“He left it on the bar of this gin mill,” I told Milton. “We got back to
the gangplank and he missed it. Nothing would do but he has to go back
for it, so I went with him.”

“You was wearin’ a tequila label on your face,” Kelley said. “Kept
tryin’ to tell the taxi man you was a bottle.”

“He didn’t speak English.”

Kelley flashed something like his old grin. “He got the idea.”

“Anyway,” I told Milton, “the place was closed when we got there. We
tried the front door and the side doors and they were locked like
Alcatraz. We made so much racket I guess if anyone was inside they were
afraid to open up. We could see Kelley’s hat in there on the bar.
Nobody’s _about_ to steal that hat.”

“It’s a good hat,” he said in an injured tone.

“Kelley goes into action,” I said. “Kelley don’t think like other
people, you know, Milt. He squints through the window at the other wall,
goes around the building, sets one foot against the corner stud, gets
his fingers under the edge of that corrugated iron siding they use.
‘I’ll pry this out a bit,’ he says. ‘You slide in and get my hat.’ ”

“Corrugated was only nailed on one-by-twos,” said Kelley.

“He gives one almighty pull,” I chuckled, “and the whole damn side falls
out of the building, I mean the second floor too. You never heard such a
clap-o’-thunder in your life.”

“I got my hat,” said Kelley. He uttered two syllables of a laugh. “Whole
second floor was a cathouse, an’ the one single stairway come out with
the wall.”

“Taxi driver just took off. But he left his taxi. Kelley drove back. I
couldn’t. I was laughing.”

“You was drunk.”

“Well, _some_,” I said.

We walked together quietly, happily. Out of Kelley’s sight, Milton
thumped me gently on the ribs. It was eloquent and it pleased me. It
said that it was a long time since Kelley had laughed. It was a long
time since he had thought about anything but Hal.

I guess we felt it equally when, with no trace of humor … more as if he
had let my episode just blow itself out until he could be heard … Kelley
said, “Doc, what’s with the hand?”

“It’ll be all right,” Milton said.

“You put splints.”

Milton sighed. “All right, all right. Three fractures. Two on the middle
finger and one on the ring.”

Kelley said, “I saw they were swollen.”

I looked at Kelley’s face and I looked at Milton’s, and I didn’t like
either, and I wished to God I were somewhere else, in a uranium mine
maybe, or making out my income tax. I said, “Here we are. Ever been to
Rudy’s, Kelley?”

He looked up at the little yellow-and-red marquee. “No.”

“Come on,” I said. “Tequila.”

We went in and got a booth. Kelley ordered beer. I got mad then and
started to call him some things I’d picked up on waterfronts from here
to Tierra del Fuego. Milton stared wall-eyed at me, and Kelley stared at
his hands. After a while Milton began to jot some of it down on a
prescription pad he took from his pocket. I was pretty proud.

Kelley gradually got the idea. If I wanted to pick up the tab and he
wouldn’t let me, his habits were those of _uno puñeto sin cojones_
(which a Spanish dictionary will reliably misinform you means “a
weakling without eggs”), and his affections for his forebears were
powerful but irreverent. I won, and soon he was lapping up a huge
combination plate of beef tostadas, chicken enchiladas, and pork tacos.
He endeared himself to Rudy by demanding salt and lemon with his tequila
and dispatching same with flawless ritual: hold the lemon between left
thumb and forefinger, lick the back of the left hand, sprinkle salt on
the wet spot, lift the tequila with the right, lick the salt, drink the
tequila, bite the lemon. Soon he was imitating the German second mate we
shipped out of Puerto Barrios one night, who ate fourteen green bananas
and lost them and all his teeth over the side, in gummed gutturals which
had us roaring.

But after that question about fractured fingers back there in the
street, Milton and I weren’t fooled any more, and though everyone tried
hard and it was a fine try, none of the laughter went deep enough or
stayed long enough, and I wanted to cry.

We all had a huge hunk of the Nesselrode pie made by Rudy’s beautiful
blond wife—pie you can blow off your plate by flapping a napkin … sweet
smoke with calories. And then Kelley demanded to know what time it was
and cussed and stood up.

“It’s only been two hours,” Milton said.

“I just as soon head home all the same,” said Kelley. “Thanks.”

“Wait,” I said. I got a scrap of paper out of my wallet and wrote on it.
“Here’s my phone. I want to see you some more. I’m working for myself
these days; my time’s my own. I don’t sleep much, so call me any time
you feel like it.”

He took the paper. “You’re no good,” he said. “You never were no good.”
The way he said it, I felt fine.

“On the corner is a newsstand,” I told him. “There’s a magazine called
_Amazing_ with one of my lousy stories in it.”

“They print it on a roll?” he demanded. He waved at us, nodded to Rudy,
and went out.

I swept up some spilled sugar on the tabletop and pushed it around until
it was a perfect square. After a while I shoved in the sides until it
was a lozenge. Milton didn’t say anything either. Rudy, as is his way,
had sense enough to stay away from us.

“Well, that did him some good,” Milton said after a while.

“You know better than that,” I said bitterly.

Milton said patiently. “Kelley thinks _we_ think it did him some good.
And thinking that does him good.”

I had to smile at that contortion, and after that it was easier to talk.
“The kid going to live?”

Milton waited, as if some other answer might spring from somewhere, but
it didn’t. He said, “No.”

“Fine doctor.”

“Don’t kid like that!” he snapped. He looked up at me. “Look, if this
was one of those—well, say pleurisy cases on the critical list, without
the will to live, why I’d know what to do. Usually those depressed cases
have such a violent desire to be reassured, down deep, that you can snap
’em right out of it if only you can think of the right thing to say. And
you usually can. But Hal’s not one of those. He wants to live. If he
didn’t want so much to live he’d’ve been dead three weeks ago. What’s
killing him is sheer somatic trauma—one broken bone after another, one
failing or inflamed internal organ after another.”

“Who’s doing it?”

“Damn it, _no_body’s doing it!” He caught me biting my lip. “If either
one of us should say Kelley’s doing it, the other one will punch him in
the mouth. Right?”

“Right.”

“Just so that doesn’t have to happen,” said Milton carefully, “I’ll tell
you what you’re bound to ask me in a minute: why isn’t he in a
hospital?”

“Okay, why?”

“He was. For weeks. And all the time he was there these things kept on
happening to him, only worse. More, and more often. I got him home as
soon as it was safe to get him out of traction for that broken thigh.
He’s much better off with Kelley. Kelley keeps him cheered up, cooks for
him, medicates him—the works. It’s all Kelley does these days.”

“I figured. It must be getting tough.”

“It is. I wish I had your ability with invective. You can’t lend that
man anything, give him anything … proud? God!”

“Don’t take this personally, but have you had consultations?”

He shrugged. “Six ways from the middle. And nine-tenths of it behind
Kelley’s back, which isn’t easy. The lies I’ve told him! Hal’s just
_got_ to have a special kind of Persian melon that someone is receiving
in a little store in Yonkers. Out Kelley goes, and in the meantime I
have to corral two or three doctors and whip ’em in to see Hal and out
again before Kelley gets back. Or Hal has to have a special
prescription, and I fix up with the druggist to take a good two hours
compounding it. Hal saw Grundage, the osteo man, that way, but poor old
Ancelowics the pharmacist got punched in the chops for the delay.”

“Milton, you’re all right.”

He snarled at me, and then went on quietly, “None of it’s done any good.
I’ve learned a whole encyclopedia full of wise words and some
therapeutic tricks I didn’t know existed. But …” He shook his head. “Do
you know why Kelley and I wouldn’t let you meet Hal?” He wet his lips
and cast about for an example. “Remember the pictures of Mussolini’s
corpse after the mob got through with it?”

I shuddered. “I saw ’em.”

“Well, that’s what he looks like, only he’s alive, which doesn’t make it
any prettier. Hal doesn’t know how bad it is, and neither Kelley nor I
would run the risk of having him see it reflected in someone else’s
face. I wouldn’t send a wooden Indian into that room.”

I began to pound the table, barely touching it, hitting it harder and
harder until Milton caught my wrist. I froze then, unhappily conscious
of the eyes of everyone in the place looking at me. Gradually the normal
sound of the restaurant resumed. “Sorry.”

“It’s all right.”

“There’s got to be some sort of reason!”

His lips twitched in a small acid smile. “That’s what you get down to at
last, isn’t it? There’s always a reason for everything, and if we don’t
know it, we can find it out. But just one single example of real
unreason is enough to shake our belief in everything. And then the fear
gets bigger than the case at hand and extends to a whole universe of
concepts labeled ‘unproven.’ Shows you how little we believe in
anything, basically.”

“That’s a miserable piece of philosophy!”

“Sure. If you have another arrival point for a case like this, I’ll buy
it with a bonus. Meantime I’ll just go on worrying at this one, and
feeling more scared than I ought to.”

“Let’s get drunk.”

“A wonderful idea.”

Neither of us ordered. We just sat there looking at the lozenge of sugar
I’d made on the tabletop. After a while I said, “Hasn’t Kelley any idea
of what’s wrong?”

“You know Kelley. If he had an idea he’d be working on it. All he’s
doing is sitting by watching his brother’s body stew and swell like
yeast in a vat.”

“What about Hal?”

“He isn’t lucid much any more. Not if I can help it.”

“But maybe he—”

“Look,” said Milton, “I don’t want to sound cranky or anything, but I
can’t hold still for a lot of questions like …” He stopped, took out his
display handkerchief, looked at it, put it away. “I’m sorry. You don’t
seem to understand that I didn’t take this case yesterday afternoon.
I’ve been sweating it out for nearly three months now. I’ve already
thought of everything you’re going to think of. Yes, I questioned Hal,
back and forth and sideways. Nothing. N-n-nothing.” That last word
trailed off in such a peculiar way that I looked up abruptly. “Tell me,”
I demanded.

“Tell you what?” Suddenly he looked at his watch. I covered it with my
hand. “Come on, Milt.”

“I don’t know what you’re—damn it, leave me alone, will you? If it was
anything important, I’d’ve chased it down long ago.”

“Tell me the unimportant something.”

“No.”

“Tell me why you won’t tell me.”

“Damn you, I’ll do that. It’s because you’re a crackpot. You’re a nice
guy and I like you, but you’re a crackpot.” He laughed suddenly, and it
hit me like the flare of a flashbulb. “I didn’t know you could look so
astonished!” he said. “Now take it easy and listen to me. A guy comes
out of a steak house and steps on a rusty nail, and ups and dies of
tetanus. But your crackpot vegetarian will swear up and down that the
man would still be alive if he hadn’t poisoned his system with meat, and
uses the death to prove his point. The perennial Dry will call the same
casualty a victim of John Barleycorn if he knows the man had a beer with
his steak. This one death can be ardently and wholeheartedly blamed on
the man’s divorce, his religion, his political affiliations or on a
hereditary taint from his great-great-grandfather who worked for Oliver
Cromwell. You’re a nice guy and I like you,” he said again, “and I am
not going to sit across from you and watch you do the crackpot act.”

“I do not know,” I said slowly and distinctly, “what the hell you are
talking about. And now you _have_ to tell me.”

“I suppose so,” he said sadly. He drew a deep breath. “You believe what
you write. No,” he said quickly, “I’m not asking you, I’m telling you.
You grind out all this fantasy and horror stuff and you believe every
word of it. More basically, you’d rather believe in the _outré_ and the
so-called ‘unknowable’ than in what I’d call _real_ things. You think
I’m talking through my hat.”

“I do,” I said, “but go ahead.”

“If I called you up tomorrow and told you with great joy that they’d
isolated a virus for Hal’s condition and a serum was on the way, you’d
be just as happy about it as I would be, but way down deep you’d wonder
if that was what was really wrong with him, or if the serum is what
really cured him. If on the other hand I admitted to you that I’d found
two small punctures on Hal’s throat and a wisp of fog slipping out of
the room—by God! see what I mean? You have a gleam in your eye already!”

I covered my eyes. “Don’t let me stop you now,” I said coldly. “Since
you are not going to admit Dracula’s punctures, what are you going to
admit?”

“A year ago Kelley gave his brother a present. An ugly little brute of a
Haitian doll. Hal kept it around to make faces at for a while and then
gave it to a girl. He had bad trouble with the girl. She hates
him—really hates him. As far as anyone knows she still has the doll. Are
you happy now?”

“Happy,” I said disgustedly. “But Milt—you’re not just ignoring this
doll thing. Why, that could easily be the whole basis of … hey, sit
down! Where are you going?”

“I told you I wouldn’t sit across from a damn hobbyist. Enter hobbies,
exit reason.” He recoiled. “Wait—_you_ sit down now.”

I gathered up a handful of his well-cut lapels. “We’ll both sit down,” I
said gently, “or I’ll prove to your heart’s desire that I’ve reached the
end of reason.”

“Yessir,” he said good-naturedly, and sat down. I felt like a damn fool.
The twinkle left his eyes and he leaned forward. “Perhaps now you’ll
listen instead of riding off like that. I suppose you know that in many
cases the voodoo doll does work, and you know why?”

“Well, yes. I didn’t think you’d admit it.” I got no response from his
stony gaze, and at last realized that a fantasist’s pose of authority on
such matters is bound to sit ill with a serious and progressive
physician. A lot less positively, I said, “It comes down to a matter of
subjective reality, or what some people call faith. If you believe
firmly that the mutilation of a doll with which you identify yourself
will result in your own mutilation, well, that’s what will happen.”

“That, and a lot of things even a horror story writer could find out if
he researched anywhere else except in his projective imagination. For
example, there are Arabs in North Africa today whom you dare not insult
in any way really important to them. If they feel injured, they’ll
threaten to die, and if you call the bluff they’ll sit down, cover their
heads, and damn well _die_. There are psychosomatic phenomena like the
stigmata, or wounds of the cross, which appear from time to time on the
hands, feet and breasts of exceptionally devout people. I know you know
a lot of this,” he added abruptly, apparently reading something in my
expression, “but I’m not going to get my knee out of your chest until
you’ll admit I’m at least capable of taking a thing like this into
consideration and tracking it down.”

“I never saw you before in my life,” I said, and in an important way I
meant it.

“Good,” he said, with considerable relief. “Now I’ll tell you what I
did. I jumped at this doll episode almost as wildly as you did. It came
late in the questioning because apparently it _really didn’t matter_ to
Hal.”

“Oh, well, but the subconscious—”

“Shaddup!” He stuck a surprisingly sharp forefinger into my collarbone.
“I’m telling you; you’re not telling me. I won’t disallow that a deep
belief in voodoo might be hidden in Hal’s subconscious, but if it is,
it’s where sodium amytal and word association and light and profound
hypnosis and a half-dozen other therapies give not a smidgin of
evidence. I’ll take that as proof that he carries no such conviction. I
guess from the looks of you I’ll have to remind you again that I’ve dug
into this thing in more ways for longer and with more tools than you
have—and I doubt that it means any less to me than it does to you.”

“You know, I’m just going to shut up,” I said plaintively.

“High time,” he said, and grinned. “No, in every case of voodoo damage
or death, there has to be that element of devout belief in the powers of
the witch or wizard, and through it a complete sense of identification
with the doll. In addition, it helps if the victim knows what sort of
damage the doll is sustaining—crushing, or pins sticking into it, or
what. And you can take my word for it that no such news has reached
Hal.”

“What about the doll? Just to be absolutely sure, shouldn’t we get it
back?”

“I thought of that. But there’s no way I know of getting it back without
making it look valuable to the woman. And if she thinks it’s valuable to
Hal, we’ll _never_ see it.”

“Hm. Who is she, and what’s her royal gripe?”

“She’s as nasty a piece of fluff as they come. She got involved with Hal
for a little while—nothing serious, certainly not on his part. He
was … he’s a big good-natured kid who thinks the only evil people around
are the ones who get killed at the end of the movie. Kelley was at sea
at the time and he blew in to find this little vampire taking Hal for
everything she could, first by sympathy, then by threats. The old badger
game. Hal was just bewildered. Kelley got his word that nothing had
occurred between them, and then forced Hal to lower the boom. She called
his bluff and it went to court. They forced a physical examination on
her and she got laughed out of court. She wasn’t the mother of anyone’s
unborn child. She never will be. She swore to get even with him. She’s
without brains or education or resources, but that doesn’t stop her from
being pathological. She sure can hate.”

“Oh. You’ve seen her.”

Milton shuddered. “I’ve seen her. I tried to get all Hal’s gifts back
from her. I had to say all because I didn’t dare itemize. All I wanted,
it might surprise you to know, was that damned doll. Just in case, you
know … although I’m morally convinced that the thing has nothing to do
with it. Now do you see what I mean about a single example of unreason?”

“ ’Fraid I do.” I felt upset and quelled and sat upon and I wasn’t fond
of the feeling. I’ve read too many stories where the scientist just
hasn’t the imagination to solve a haunt. It had been great, feeling
superior to a bright guy like Milton.

We walked out of there, and for the first time I felt the mood of a
night without feeling that an author was ramming it down my throat for
story purposes. I looked at the clean-swept, star-reaching cubism of the
Radio City area and its living snakes of neon, and I suddenly thought of
an Evelyn Smith story the general idea of which was “After they found
out the atom bomb was magic, the rest of the magicians who enchanted
refrigerators and washing machines and the telephone system came out
into the open.” I felt a breath of wind and wondered what it was that
had breathed. I heard the snoring of the city and for an awesome second
felt it would roll over, open its eyes, and … _speak_.

On the corner I said to Milton, “Thanks. You’ve given me a thumping
around. I guess I needed it.” I looked at him. “By the Lord I’d like to
find some place where you’ve been stupid in this thing.”

“I’d be happy if you could,” he said seriously

I whacked him on the shoulder. “See? You take all the fun out of it.”

He got a cab and I started to walk. I walked a whole lot that night,
just anywhere. I thought about a lot of things. When I got home, the
phone was ringing. It was Kelley.

I’m not going to give you a blow-by-blow of that talk with Kelley. It
was in that small front room of his place—an apartment he’d rented after
Hal got sick, and not the one Hal used to have—and we talked the night
away. All I’m withholding is Kelley’s expression of things you already
know: that he was deeply attached to his brother, that he had no hope
left for him, that he would find who or what was responsible and deal
with it his way. It is a strong man’s right to break down if he must,
with whom and where he chooses, and such an occasion is only an
expression of strength. But when it happens in a quiet sick place, where
he must keep the command of hope strongly in the air; when a chest
heaves and a throat must be held wide open to sob silently so that the
dying one shall not know; these things are not pleasant to describe in
detail. Whatever my ultimate feeling for Kelley, his emotions and the
expressions of them are for him to keep.

He did, however, know the name of the girl and where she was. He did not
hold her responsible. I thought he might have a suspicion, but it turned
out to be only a certainty that this was no disease, no subjective
internal disorder. If a great hate and a great determination could solve
the problem, Kelley would solve it. If research and logic could solve
it, Milton would do it. If I could do it, I would.

She was checking hats in a sleazy club out where Brooklyn and Queens, in
a remote meeting, agree to be known as Long Island. The contact was easy
to make. I gave her my spring coat with the label outward. It’s a good
label. When she turned away with it I called her back and drunkenly
asked her for the bill in the right-hand pocket. She found it and handed
it to me. It was a hundred. “Damn taxis never got change,” I mumbled and
took it before her astonishment turned to sleight-of-hand. I got out my
wallet, crowded the crumpled note into it clumsily enough to display the
two other C-notes there, shoved it into the front of my jacket so that
it missed the pocket and fell to the floor, and walked off. I walked
back before she could lift the hinged counter and skin out after it. I
picked it up and smiled foolishly at her. “Lose more business cards that
way,” I said. Then I brought her into focus. “Hey, you know, you’re
cute.”

I suppose “cute” is one of the four-letter words that describe her.
“What’s your name?”

“Charity,” she said. “But don’t get ideas.” She was wearing so much
pancake makeup that I couldn’t tell what her complexion was. She leaned
so far over the counter that I could see lipstick stains on her
brassiere.

“I don’t have a favorite charity yet,” I said. “You work here alla
time?”

“I go home once in a while,” she said.

“What time?”

“One o’clock.”

“Tell you what,” I confided, “let’s both be in front of this place at a
quarter after and see who stands who up, okay?” Without waiting for an
answer I stuck the wallet into my back pocket so that my jacket hung on
it. All the way into the dining room I could feel her eyes on it like
two hot, glistening, broiled mushrooms. I came within an ace of losing
it to the head waiter when he collided with me, too.

She was there all right, with a yellowish fur around her neck and heels
you could have driven into a pine plank. She was up to the elbows in
jangly brass and chrome, and when we got into a cab she threw herself on
me with her mouth open. I don’t know where I got the reflexes, but I
threw my head down and cracked her in the cheekbone with my forehead,
and when she squeaked indignantly I said I’d dropped the wallet again
and she went about helping me find it quietly as you please. We went to
a place and another place and an after-hours place, all her choice. They
served her sherry in her whiskey-ponies and doubled all my orders, and
tilted the checks something outrageous. Once I tipped a waiter eight
dollars and she palmed the five. Once she wormed my leather notebook out
of my breast pocket thinking it was the wallet, which by this time was
safely tucked away in my knit shorts. She did get one enamel cuff link
with a rhinestone in it, and my fountain pen. All in all it was quite a
duel. I was loaded to the eyeballs with thiamin hydrochloride and
caffeine citrate, but a most respectable amount of alcohol soaked
through them, and it was all I could do to play it through. I made it,
though, and blocked her at every turn until she had no further choice
but to take me home. She was furious and made only the barest attempts
to hide it.

We got each other up the dim dawn-lit stairs, shushing each other
drunkenly, both much soberer than we acted, each promising what we
expected not to deliver. She negotiated her lock successfully and waved
me inside.

I hadn’t expected it to be so neat. Or so cold. “I didn’t leave that
window open,” she said complainingly. She crossed the room and closed
it. She pulled her fur around her throat. “This is awful.”

It was a long low room with three windows. At one end, covered by a
venetian blind was a kitchenette. A door at one side of it was probably
a bathroom.

She went to the venetian blind and raised it. “Have it warmed up in a
jiffy,” she said.

I looked at the kitchenette. “Hey,” I said as she lit the little oven,
“coffee. How’s about coffee?”

“Oh, all right,” she said glumly. “But talk quiet, huh?”

“Sh-h-h-h.” I pushed my lips around with a forefinger. I circled the
room. Cheap phonograph and records. Small-screen TV. A big double studio
couch. A bookcase with no books in it, just china dogs. It occurred to
me that her unsubtle approach was probably not successful as often as
she might wish.

But where was the thing I was looking for?

“Hey, I wanna powder my nose,” I announced.

“In there,” she said. “Can’t you talk quiet?”

I went into the bathroom. It was tiny. There was a foreshortened tub
with a circular frame over it from which hung a horribly cheerful shower
curtain, with big red roses. I closed the door behind me and carefully
opened the medicine chest. Just the usual. I closed it carefully so it
wouldn’t click. A built-in shelf held towels.

Must be a closet in the main room, I thought. Hatbox, trunk, suitcase,
maybe. Where would I put a devil-doll if I were hexing someone?

I wouldn’t hide it away, I answered myself. I don’t know why, but I’d
sort of have it out in the open somehow …

I opened the shower curtain and let it close. Round curtain, square tub.

“Yup!”

I pushed the whole round curtain back, and there in the corner, just at
eye level, was a triangular shelf. Grouped on it were four figurines,
made apparently from kneaded wax. Three had wisps of hair fastened by
candle-droppings. The fourth was hairless, but had slivers of a horny
substance pressed into the ends of the arms. Fingernail parings.

I stood for a moment thinking. Then I picked up the hairless doll,
turned to the door. I checked myself, flushed the toilet, took a towel,
shook it out, dropped it over the edge of the tub. Then I reeled out.
“Hey honey, look what I got, ain’t it _cute_?”

“Shh!” she said. “Oh for crying out loud. Put that back, will you?”

“Well, what is it?”

“It’s none of your business, that’s what it is. Come on, put it back.”

I wagged my finger at her. “You’re not being nice to me,” I complained.

She pulled some shreds of patience together with an obvious effort.
“It’s just some sort of toys I have around. Here.”

I snatched it away. “All right, you don’t wanna be nice!” I whipped my
coat together and began to button it clumsily, still holding the
figurine.

She sighed, rolled her eyes, and came to me. “Come on, Dadsy. Have a
nice cup of coffee and let’s not fight.” She reached for the doll and I
snatched it away again.

“You got to tell me,” I pouted.

“It’s pers’nal.”

“I wanna be personal,” I pointed out.

“Oh all right,” she said. “I had a roommate one time, she used to make
these things. She said you make one, and s’pose I decide I don’t like
you, I got something of yours, hair or toenails or something. Say your
name is George. What is your name?”

“George,” I said.

“All right, I call the doll George. Then I stick pins in it. That’s all.
Give it to me.”

“Who’s this one?”

“That’s Al.”

“Hal?”

“Al. I got one called Hal. He’s in there. I hate him the most.”

“Yeah, huh. Well, what happens to Al and George and all when you stick
pins in ’em?”

“They’re s’posed to get sick. Even die.”

“Do they?”

“Nah,” she said with immediate and complete candor. “I told you, it’s
just a game, sort of. If it worked, believe me old Al would bleed to
death. He runs the delicatessen.” I handed her the doll, and she looked
at it pensively. “I wish it did work, sometimes. Sometimes I almost
believe in it. I stick ’em and they _just yell_.”

“Introduce me,” I demanded.

“What?”

“Introduce me,” I said. I pulled her toward the bathroom. She made a
small irritated “oh-h,” and came along.

“This is Fritz and this is Bruno and—where’s the other one?”

“What other one?”

“Maybe he fell behind the—down back of—” She knelt on the edge of the
tub and leaned over to the wall, to peer behind it. She regained her
feet, her face red from effort and anger. “What are you trying to pull?
You kidding around or something?”

I spread my arms. “What you mean?”

“Come on,” she said between her teeth. She felt my coat, my jacket. “You
hid it someplace.”

“No I didn’t. There was only four.” I pointed. “Al and Fritz and Bruno
and Hal. Which one’s Hal?”

“That’s Freddie. He give me twenny bucks and took twenny-three out of my
purse, the dirty—. But Hal’s gone. He was the best one of all. You
_sure_ you didn’t hide him?” Then she thumped her forehead.

“The window!” she said, and ran into the other room. I was on my four
bones peering under the tub when I understood what she meant. I took a
last good look around and then followed her. She was standing by the
window, shading her eyes and peering out. “What do you know. Imagine
somebody would swipe a thing like that!”

A sick sense of loss was born in my solar plexus.

“Aw, forget it. I’ll make another one for that Hal. But I’ll never make
another one that ugly,” she added wistfully. “Come on, the
coffee’s—what’s the matter? You sick?”

“Yeah,” I said, “I’m sick.”

“Of all the things to steal,” she said from the kitchenette. “Who do you
suppose would do such a thing?”

Suddenly I knew who would. I cracked my fist into my palm and laughed.

“What’s the matter, you crazy?”

“Yes,” I said. “You got a phone?”

“No. Where you going?”

“Out. Goodbye, Charity.”

“Hey, now wait, honey. Just when I got coffee for you.”

I snatched the door open. She caught my sleeve.

“You can’t go away like this! How’s about a little something for
Charity?”

“You’ll get yours when you make the rounds tomorrow, if you don’t have a
hangover from those sherry highballs,” I said cheerfully. “And don’t
forget the five you swiped from the tip plate. Better watch out for that
waiter, by the way. I think he saw you do it.”

“You’re not drunk’ ” she gasped.

“You’re not a witch,” I grinned. I blew her a kiss and ran out.

I shall always remember her like that, round-eyed, a little more
astonished than she was resentful, the beloved dollar signs fading from
her hot brown eyes, the pathetic, useless little twitch of her hips she
summoned up as a last plea.

Ever try to find a phone booth at five A.M.? I half-trotted nine blocks
before I found a cab, and I was on the Queens side of the Triboro Bridge
before I found a gas station open.

I dialed. The phone said, “Hello?”

“Kelley!” I roared happily. “Why didn’t you tell me? You’d ‘a saved
sixty bucks worth of the most dismal fun I ever—”

“This is Milton,” said the telephone. “Hal just died.”

My mouth was still open and I guess it just stayed that way. Anyway it
was cold inside when I closed it. “I’ll be right over.”

“Better not,” said Milton. His voice was shaking with incomplete
control. “Unless you really want to … there’s nothing you can do, and
I’m going to be … busy.”

“Where’s Kelley?” I whispered.

“I don’t know.”

“Well,” I said. “Call me.”

I got back into my taxi and went home. I don’t remember the trip.

Sometimes I think I dreamed I saw Kelley that morning.

A lot of alcohol and enough emotion to kill it, mixed with no sleep for
thirty hours, makes for blackout. I came up out of it reluctantly,
feeling that this was no kind of world to be aware of. Not today.

I lay looking at the bookcase. It was very quiet. I closed my eyes,
turned over, burrowed into the pillow, opened my eyes again and saw
Kelley sitting in the easy chair, poured out in his relaxed feline
fashion, legs too long, arms too long, eyes too long and only partly
open.

I didn’t ask him how he got in because he was already in, and welcome. I
didn’t say anything because I didn’t want to be the one to tell him
about Hal. And besides I wasn’t awake yet. I just lay there.

“Milton told me,” he said. “It’s all right.”

I nodded.

Kelley said, “I read your story. I found some more and read them too.
You got a lot of imagination.”

He hung a cigarette on his lower lip and lit it. “Milton, he’s got a lot
of knowledge. Now, both of you think real good up to a point. Then too
much knowledge presses him off to the no’theast. And too much
imagination squeezes you off to the no’thwest.”

He smoked a while.

“Me, I think straight through but it takes me a while.”

I palmed my eyeballs. “I don’t know what you’re talking about.”

“That’s okay,” he said quietly. “Look, I’m goin’ after what killed Hal.”

I closed my eyes and saw a vicious, pretty, empty little face. I said,
“I was most of the night with Charity.”

“Were you now.”

“Kelley,” I said, “if it’s her you’re after, forget it. She’s a sleazy
little tramp but she’s also a little kid who never had a chance. She
didn’t kill Hal.”

“I know she didn’t. I don’t feel about her one way or the other. I know
what killed Hal, though, and I’m goin’ after it the only way I know for
sure.”

“All right then,” I said. I let my head dig back into the pillow. “What
did kill him?”

“Milton told you about that doll Hal give her.”

“He told me. There’s nothing in that, Kelley. For a man to be a voodoo
victim, he’s got to believe that—”

“Yeah, yeah, yeah. Milton told me. For hours he told me.”

“Well all right.”

“You got imagination,” Kelley said sleepily. “Now just imagine along
with me a while. Milt tell you how some folks, if you point a gun at ’em
and go bang, they drop dead, even if there was only blanks in the gun?”

“He didn’t, but I read it somewhere. Same general idea.”

“Now imagine all the shootings you ever heard of was like that, with
blanks.”

“Go ahead.”

“You got a lot of evidence, a lot of experts, to prove about this
believing business, ever’ time anyone gets shot.”

“Got it.”

“Now imagine somebody shows up with live ammunition in his gun. Do you
think those bullets going to give a damn who believes what?”

I didn’t say anything.

“For a long time people been makin’ dolls and stickin’ pins in ’em.
Wherever somebody believes it can happen, they get it. Now suppose
somebody shows up with the doll all those dolls was copied from. The
real one.”

I lay still.

“You don’t have to know nothin’ about it,” said Kelley lazily. “You
don’t have to be anybody special. You don’t have to understand how it
works. Nobody has to believe nothing. All you do, you just point it
where you want it to work.”

“Point it how?” I whispered.

He shrugged. “Call the doll by a name. Hate it, maybe.”

“For God’s sake, Kelley, you’re crazy! Why, there can’t be anything like
that!”

“You eat a steak,” Kelley said. “How’s your gut know what to take and
what to pass? Do _you_ know?”

“Some people know.”

“You don’t. But your gut does. So there’s lots of natural laws that are
goin’ to work whether anyone understands ’em or not. Lots of sailors
take a trick at the wheel without knowin’ how a steering engine works.
Well, that’s me. I know where I’m goin’ and I know I’ll get there. What
do I care how does it work, or who believes what?”

“Fine, so what are you going to do?”

“Get what got Hal.” His tone was just as lazy but his voice was very
deep, and I knew when not to ask any more questions. Instead I said,
with a certain amount of annoyance, “Why tell me?”

“Want you to do something for me.”

“What?”

“Don’t tell no one what I just said for a while. And keep something for
me.”

“What? And for how long?”

“You’ll know.”

I’d have risen up and roared at him if he had not chosen just that
second to get up and drift out of the bedroom. “What gets me,” he said
quietly from the other room, “is I could have figured this out six
months ago.”

I fell asleep straining to hear him go out. He moves quieter than any
big man I ever saw.

It was afternoon when I awoke. The doll was sitting on the mantelpiece
glaring at me. Ugliest thing ever happened.

I saw Kelley at Hal’s funeral. He and Milt and I had a somber drink
afterward. We didn’t talk about dolls. Far as I know Kelley shipped out
right afterward. You assume that seamen do, when they drop out of sight.
Milton was as busy as a doctor, which is very. I left the doll where it
was for a week or two, wondering when Kelley was going to get around to
his project. He’d probably call for it when he was ready. Meanwhile I
respected his request and told no one about it. One day when some people
were coming over I shoved it in the top shelf of the closet, and somehow
it just got left there.

About a month afterward I began to notice the smell. I couldn’t identify
it right away; it was too faint; but whatever it was, I didn’t like it.
I traced it to the closet, and then to the doll. I took it down and
sniffed it. My breath exploded out. It was that same smell a lot of
people wish they could forget—what Milton called necrotic flesh. I came
within an inch of pitching the filthy thing down the incinerator, but a
promise is a promise. I put it down on the table, where it slumped
repulsively. One of the legs was broken above the knee. I mean, it
seemed to have two knee joints. And it was somehow puffy, sick-looking.

I had an old bell-jar somewhere, that once had a clock in it. I found it
and a piece of inlaid linoleum, and put the doll under the jar at least
so I could live with it.

I worked and saw people—dinner with Milton, once—and the days went by
the way they do, and then one night it occurred to me to look at the
doll again.

It was in pretty sorry shape. I’d tried to keep it fairly cool, but it
seemed to be melting and running all over. For a moment I worried about
what Kelley might say, and then I heartily damned Kelley and put the
whole mess down in the cellar.

And I guess it was altogether two months after Hal’s death that I
wondered why I’d assumed Kelley would have to call for the little horror
before he did what he had to do. He said he was going to get what got
Hal, and he intimated that the doll was that something.

Well, that doll was being got, but good. I brought it up and put it
under the light. It was still a figurine, but it was one unholy mess.
“Attaboy, Kelley,” I gloated. “Go get ’em, kid.”

Milton called me up and asked me to meet him at Rudy’s. He sounded
pretty bad. We had the shortest drink yet.

He was sitting in the back booth chewing on the insides of his cheeks.
His lips were gray and he slopped his drink when he lifted it.

“What in time happened to you?” I gasped.

He gave me a ghastly smile. “I’m famous,” he said. I heard his glass
chatter against his teeth. He said, “I called in so many consultants on
Hal Kelley that I’m supposed to be an expert on that—on
that … condition.” He forced his glass back to the table with both hands
and held it down. He tried to smile and I wished he wouldn’t. He stopped
trying and almost whimpered, “I can’t nurse one of ’em like that again,
I can’t.”

“You going to tell what happened?” I asked harshly. That works
sometimes.

“Oh, oh yes. Well they brought in a … another one. At General. They
called me in. Just like Hal. I mean _exactly_ like Hal. Only I won’t
have to nurse this one, no I won’t, I won’t have to. She died six hours
after she arrived.”

_“She?”_

“You know what you’d have to do to someone to make them look like that?”
he said shrilly. “You’d have to tie off parts so they mortified. You’d
have to use a wood rasp, maybe; a club; filth to rub into the wounds.
You’d have to break bones in a vise.”

“All right, all right, but nobody—”

“And you’d have to do that for about two months, every day, every
night.” He rubbed his eyes. He drove his knuckles in so hard that I
caught at his wrists. “I _know_ nobody did it; did I say anyone did it?”
he barked. “Nobody did anything to Hal, did they?”

“Drink up.”

He didn’t. He whispered, “She just said the same thing over and over
every time anyone talked to her. They’d say, ‘What happened?’ or ‘Who
did this to you?’ or ‘What’s your name?’ and she’d say. ‘He called me
Dolly.’ That’s all she’d say, just ‘He called me Dolly’.”

I got up. “Bye, Milt.”

He looked stricken. “Don’t go, will you, you just got—”

“I got to go,” I said. I didn’t look back. I had to get out and ask
myself some questions. Think.

Who’s guilty of murder, I asked myself, the one who pulls the trigger,
or the gun?

I thought of a poor damn pretty, empty little face with greedy hot brown
eyes, and what Kelley said, “I don’t care about her one way or the
other.”

I thought, when she was twisting and breaking and sticking, how did it
look to the doll? Bet she never even wondered about that.

I thought, action: A girl throws a fan at a man. Reaction: The man
throws the girl at the fan. Action: A wheel sticks on a shaft. Reaction:
Knock the shaft out of the wheel. Situation: We can’t get inside.
Resolution: Take the outside off it.

It’s a way of thinking.

How do you kill a person? Use a doll.

How do you kill a doll?

Who’s guilty, the one who pulls the trigger, or the gun?

_“He called me Dolly.”_

_“He called me Dolly.”_

_“He called me Dolly.”_

When I got home, the phone was ringing. “Hi,” said Kelley.

I said, “It’s all gone. The doll’s all gone. Kelley,” I said, “stay away
from me.”

“All right,” said Kelley.



THE SILKEN-SWIFT


THERE’S A VILLAGE BY THE BOGS, and in the village is a Great House. In
the Great House lived a squire who had land and treasures and, for a
daughter, Rita.

In the village lived Del, whose voice was a thunder in the inn when he
drank there; whose corded, cabled body was golden-skinned, and whose
hair flung challenges back to the sun.

Deep in the Bogs, which were brackish, there was a pool of purest water,
shaded by willows and wide-wondering aspen, cupped by banks of a moss
most marvelously blue. Here grew mandrake, and there were strange
pipings in midsummer. No one ever heard them but a quiet girl whose
beauty was so very contained that none of it showed. Her name was
Barbara.

There was a green evening, breathless with growth, when Del took his
usual way down the lane beside the manor and saw a white shadow adrift
inside the tall iron pickets. He stopped, and the shadow approached, and
became Rita. “Slip around to the gate,” she said, “and I’ll open it for
you.”

She wore a gown like a cloud and a silver circlet round her head. Night
was caught in her hair, moonlight in her face, and in her great eyes,
secrets swam.

Del said, “I have no business with the squire.”

“He’s gone,” she said. “I’ve sent the servants away. Come to the gate.”

“I need no gate.” He leaped and caught the top bar of the fence, and in
a continuous fluid motion went high and across and down beside her. She
looked at his arms, one, the other; then up at his hair. She pressed her
small hands tight together and made a little laugh, and then she was
gone through the tailored trees, lightly, swiftly, not looking back. He
followed, one step for three of hers, keeping pace with a new pounding
in the sides of his neck. They crossed a flowerbed and a wide marble
terrace. There was an open door, and when he passed through it he
stopped, for she was nowhere in sight. Then the door clicked shut behind
him and he whirled. She was there, her back to the panel, laughing up at
him in the dimness. He thought she would come to him then, but instead
she twisted by, close, her eyes on his. She smelt of violets and
sandalwood. He followed her into a great hall, quite dark but full of
the subdued lights of polished wood, cloisonné, tooled leather and
gold-threaded tapestry. She flung open another door, and they were in a
small room with a carpet made of rosy silences, and a candle-lit table.
Two places were set, each with five different crystal glasses and old
silver as prodigally used as the iron pickets outside. Six teakwood
steps rose to a great oval window. “The moon,” she said, “will rise for
us there.”

She motioned him to a chair and crossed to a sideboard, where there was
a rack of decanters—ruby wine and white; one with a strange brown bead;
pink, and amber. She took down the first and poured. Then she lifted the
silver domes from the salvers on the table, and a magic of fragrance
filled the air. There were smoking sweets and savories, rare seafood and
slivers of fowl, and morsels of strange meat wrapped in flower petals,
spitted with foreign fruits and tiny soft seashells. All about were
spices, each like a separate voice in the distant murmur of a crowd:
saffron and sesame, cumin and marjoram and mace.

And all the while Del watched her in wonder, seeing how the candles left
the moonlight in her face, and how completely she trusted her hands,
which did such deftness without supervision—so composed she was, for all
the silent secret laughter that tugged at her lips, for all the bright
dark mysteries that swirled and swam within her.

They ate, and the oval window yellowed and darkened while the
candlelight grew bright. She poured another wine, and another, and with
the courses of the meal they were as May to the crocus and as frost to
the apple.

Del knew it was alchemy and he yielded to it without question. That
which was purposely over-sweet would be piquantly cut; this induced
thirst would, with exquisite timing, be quenched. He knew she was
watching him; he knew she was aware of the heat in his cheeks and the
tingle at his fingertips. His wonder grew, but he was not afraid.

In all this time she spoke hardly a word; but at last the feast was over
and they rose. She touched a silken rope on the wall, and paneling slid
aside. The table rolled silently into some ingenious recess and the
panel returned. She waved him to an L-shaped couch in one corner, and as
he sat close to her, she turned and took down the lute which hung on the
wall behind her. He had his moment of confusion; his arms were ready for
her, but not for the instrument as well. Her eyes sparkled, but her
composure was unshaken.

Now she spoke, while her fingers strolled and danced on the lute, and
her words marched and wandered in and about the music. She had a
thousand voices, so that he wondered which of them was truly hers.
Sometimes she sang; sometimes it was a wordless crooning. She seemed at
times remote from him, puzzled at the turn the music was taking, and at
other times she seemed to hear the pulsing roar in his eardrums, and she
played laughing syncopations to it. She sang words which he almost
understood:

_Bee to blossom, honey dew,_

_Claw to mouse, and rain to tree,_

_Moon to midnight’ I to you;_

_Sun to starlight, you to me …_

and she sang something wordless:

_Ake ya rundefle, rundefle fye,_

_Ore! ya rundefie kown, En yea,_

_En yea, ya bunderbee bye_

_En sor, en see, en sown_.

which he also almost understood.

In still another voice she told him the story of a great hairy spider
and a little pink girl who found it between the leaves of a half-open
book; and at first he was all fright and pity for the girl, but then she
went on to tell of what the spider suffered, with his home disrupted by
this yawping giant, and so vividly did she tell of it that at the end he
was laughing at himself and all but crying for the poor spider.

So the hours slipped by, and suddenly, between songs, she was in his
arms; and in the instant she had twisted up and away from him, leaving
him gasping. She said, in still a new voice, sober and low, “No, Del. We
must wait for the moon.”

His thighs ached and he realized that he had half-risen, arms out, hands
clutching and feeling the extraordinary fabric of her gown though it was
gone from them; and he sank back to the couch with an odd, faint sound
that was wrong for the room. He flexed his fingers and, reluctantly, the
sensation of white gossamer left them. At last he looked across at her
and she laughed and leapt high lightly, and it was as if she stopped in
midair to stretch for a moment before she alighted beside him, bent and
kissed his mouth, and leapt away.

The roaring in his ears was greater, and at this it seemed to acquire a
tangible weight. His head bowed; he tucked his knuckles into the upper
curve of his eye sockets and rested his elbows on his knees. He could
hear the sweet sussurrus of Rita’s gown as she moved about the room; he
could sense the violets and sandalwood. She was dancing, immersed in the
joy of movement and of his nearness. She made her own music, humming,
sometimes whispering to the melodies in her mind.

And at length he became aware that she had stopped; he could hear
nothing, though he knew she was still near. Heavily he raised his head.
She was in the center of the room, balanced like a huge white moth, her
eyes quite dark now with their secrets quiet. She was staring at the
window, poised, waiting.

He followed her gaze. The big oval was black no longer, but dusted over
with silver light. Del rose slowly. The dust was a mist, a loom, and
then, at one edge, there was a shard of the moon itself creeping and
growing.

Because Del stopped breathing, he could hear her breath; it was rapid
and so deep it faintly strummed her versatile vocal cords.

“Rita …”

Without answering she ran to the sideboard and filled two small glasses.
She gave him one, then, “Wait,” she breathed, “oh, wait!”

Spellbound, he waited while the white stain crept across the window. He
understood suddenly that he must be still until the great oval was
completely filled with direct moonlight, and this helped him, because it
set a foreseeable limit to his waiting; and it hurt him, because nothing
in life, he thought, had ever moved so slowly. He had a moment of
rebellion, in which he damned himself for falling in with her complex
pacing; but with it he realized that now the darker silver was wasting
away, now it was a finger’s breadth, and now a thread, and now, and
_now_—.

She made a brittle feline cry and sprang up the dark steps to the
window. So bright was the light that her body was a jet cameo against
it. So delicately wrought was her gown that he could see the epaulettes
of silver light the moon gave her. She was so beautiful his eyes stung.

“Drink,” she whispered. “Drink with me, darling, darling …”

For an instant he did not understand her at all, and only gradually did
he become aware of the little glass he held. He raised it toward her and
drank. And of all the twists and titillations of taste he had had this
night, this was the most startling; for it had no taste at all, almost
no substance, and a temperature almost exactly that of blood. He looked
stupidly down at the glass and back up at the girl. He thought that she
had turned about and was watching him, though he could not be sure,
since her silhouette was the same.

And then he had his second of unbearable shock, for the light went out.

The moon was gone, the window, the room, Rita was gone.

For a stunned instant he stood tautly, stretching his eyes wide. He made
a sound that was not a word. He dropped the glass and pressed his palms
to his eyes, feeling them blink, feeling the stiff silk of his lashes
against them. Then he snatched the hands away, and it was still dark,
and more than dark; this was not a blackness. This was like trying to
see with an elbow or with a tongue; it was not black, it was
_Nothingness_.

He fell to his knees.

Rita laughed.

An odd, alert part of his mind seized on the laugh and understood it,
and horror and fury spread through his whole being; for this was the
laugh which had been tugging at her lips all evening, and it was a hard,
cruel, self-assured laugh. And at the same time, because of the anger or
in spite of it, desire exploded whitely within him. He moved toward the
sound, groping, mouthing. There was a quick, faint series of rustling
sounds from the steps, and then a light, strong web fell around him. He
struck out at it, and recognized it for the unforgettable thing it
was—her robe. He caught at it, ripped it, stamped upon it. He heard her
bare feet run lightly down and past him, and lunged, and caught nothing.
He stood, gasping painfully.

She laughed again.

“I’m blind,” he said hoarsely. “Rita, I’m blind!”

“I know,” she said coolly, close beside him. And again she laughed.

“What have you done to me?”

“I’ve watched you be a dirty animal of a man,” she said.

He grunted and lunged again. His knees struck something—a chair, a
cabinet—and he fell heavily. He thought he touched her foot.

“Here, lover, here!” she taunted.

He fumbled about for the thing which had tripped him, found it, used it
to help him upright again. He peered uselessly about.

“Here, lover!”

He leaped, and crashed into the doorjamb: cheekbone, collarbone, hip
bone, ankle were one straight blaze of pain. He clung to the polished
wood.

After a time he said, in agony, “Why?”

“No man has ever touched me and none ever will,” she sang. Her breath
was on his cheek. He reached and touched nothing, and then he heard her
leap from her perch on a statue’s pedestal by the door, where she had
stood high and leaned over to speak.

No pain, no blindness, not even the understanding that it was her
witch’s brew working in him could quell the wild desire he felt at her
nearness. Nothing could tame the fury that shook him as she laughed. He
staggered after her, bellowing.

She danced around him, laughing. Once she pushed him into a clattering
rack of fire irons. Once she caught his elbow from behind and spun him.
And once, incredibly, she sprang past him and, in midair, kissed him
again on the mouth.

He descended into Hell, surrounded by the small, sure patter of bare
feet and sweet cool laughter. He rushed and crashed, he crouched and
bled and whimpered like a hound. His roaring and blundering took an
echo, and that must have been the great hall. Then there were walls that
seemed more than unyielding; they struck back. And there were panels to
lean against, gasping, which became opening doors as he leaned. And
always the black nothingness, the writhing temptation of the pat-pat of
firm flesh on smooth stones, and the ravening fury.

It was cooler, and there was no echo. He became aware of the whisper of
the wind through trees. The balcony, he thought; and then, right in his
ear, so that he felt her warm breath, “Come, lover …” and he sprang. He
sprang and missed, and instead of sprawling on the terrace, there was
nothing, and nothing, and nothing, and then, when he least expected it,
a shower of cruel thumps as he rolled down the marble steps.

He must have had a shred of consciousness left, for he was vaguely aware
of the approach of her bare feet, and of the small, cautious hand that
touched his shoulder and moved to his mouth, and then his chest. Then it
was withdrawn, and either she laughed or the sound was still in his
mind.

Deep in the Bogs, which were brackish, there was a pool of purest water,
shaded by willows and wide-wondering aspens, cupped by banks of a moss
most marvelously blue. Here grew mandrake, and there were strange
pipings in mid-summer. No one ever heard them but a quiet girl whose
beauty was so very contained that none of it showed. Her name was
Barbara.

No one noticed Barbara, no one lived with her, no one cared. And
Barbara’s life was very full, for she was born to receive. Others are
born wishing to receive, so they wear bright masks and make attractive
sounds like cicadas and operettas, so others will be forced, one way or
another, to give to them. But Barbara’s receptors were wide open, and
always had been, so that she needed no substitute for sunlight through a
tulip petal, or the sound of morning-glories climbing, or the tangy
sweet smell of formic acid which is the only death cry possible to an
ant, or any other of the thousand things overlooked by folk who can only
wish to receive. Barbara had a garden and an orchard, and took things in
to market when she cared to, and the rest of the time she spent in
taking what was given. Weeds grew in her garden, but since they were
welcomed, they grew only where they could keep the watermelons from
being sunburned. The rabbits were welcome, so they kept to the two rows
of carrots, the one of lettuce, and the one of tomato vines which were
planted for them, and they left the rest alone. Goldenrod shot up beside
the bean hills to lend a hand upward, and the birds ate only the figs
and peaches from the waviest top branches, and in return patrolled the
lower ones for caterpillars and egg-laying flies. And if a fruit stayed
green for two weeks longer until Barbara had time to go to market, or if
a mole could channel moisture to the roots of the corn, why it was the
least they could do.

For a brace of years Barbara had wandered more and more, impelled by a
thing she could not name—if indeed she was aware of it at all. She knew
only that over-the-rise was a strange and friendly place, and that it
was a fine thing on arriving there to find another rise to go over. It
may very well be that she now needed someone to love, for loving is a
most receiving thing, as anyone can attest who has been loved without
returning it. It is the one who is loved who must give and give. And she
found her love, not in her wandering, but at the market. The shape of
her love, his colors and sounds, were so much with her that when she saw
him first it was without surprise; and thereafter, for a very long
while, it was quite enough that he lived. He gave to her by being alive,
by setting the air athrum with his mighty voice, by his stride, which
was, for a man afoot, the exact analog of what the horseman calls a
“perfect seat.”

After seeing him, of course, she received twice and twice again as much
as ever before. A tree was straight and tall for the magnificent sake of
being straight and tall, but wasn’t straightness a part of him, and
being tall? The oriole gave more now than song, and the hawk more than
walking the wind, for had they not hearts like his, warm blood and his
same striving to keep it so for tomorrow? And more and more,
over-the-rise was the place for her, for only there could there be more
and still more things like him.

But when she found the pure pool in the brackish Bogs, there was no more
over-the-rise for her. It was a place without hardness or hate, where
the aspens trembled only for wonder, and where all contentment was
rewarded. Every single rabbit there was _the_ champion nose-twinkler,
and every waterbird could stand on one leg the longest, and proud of it.
Shelf-fungi hung to the willow-trunks, making that certain, single
purple of which the sunset is incapable, and a tanager and a cardinal
gravely granted one another his definition of “red.”

Here Barbara brought a heart light with happiness, large with love, and
set it down on the blue moss. And since the loving heart can receive
more than anything else, so it is most needed, and Barbara took the best
bird songs, and the richest colors, and the deepest peace, and all the
other things which are most worth giving. The chipmunks brought her nuts
when she was hungry and the prettiest stones when she was not. A green
snake explained to her, in pantomime, how a river of jewels may flow
uphill, and three mad otters described how a bundle of joy may slip and
slide down and down and be all the more joyful for it. And there was the
magic moment when a midge hovered, and then a honeybee, and then a
bumblebee, and at last a hummingbird; and there they hung, playing a
chord in A sharp minor.

Then one day the pool fell silent, and Barbara learned why the water was
pure.

The aspens stopped trembling.

The rabbits all came out of the thicket and clustered on the blue bank,
backs straight, ears up, and all their noses as still as coral.

The waterbirds stepped backwards, like courtiers, and stopped on the
brink with their heads turned sidewise, one eye closed, the better to
see with the other.

The chipmunks respectfully emptied their cheek pouches, scrubbed their
paws together and tucked them out of sight; then stood still as tent
pegs.

The pressure of growth around the pool ceased: the very grass waited.

The last sound of all to be heard—and by then it was very quiet—was the
soft _whick!_ of an owl’s eyelids as it awoke to watch.

_He_ came like a cloud, the earth cupping itself to take each of his
golden hooves. He stopped on the bank and lowered his head, and for a
brief moment his eyes met Barbara’s, and she looked into a second
universe of wisdom and compassion. Then there was the arch of the
magnificent neck, the blinding flash of his golden horn.

And he drank, and he was gone. Everyone knows the water is pure, where
the unicorn drinks.

How long had he been there? How long gone? Did time wait too, like the
grass?

“And couldn’t he stay?” she wept. “Couldn’t he stay?”

To have seen the unicorn is a sad thing; one might never see him more.
But then—to have seen the unicorn!

She began to make a song

It was late when Barbara came in from the Bogs, so late the moon was
bleached with cold and fleeing to the horizon. She struck the high road
just below the Great House and turned to pass it and go out to her
garden house.

Near the locked main gate an animal was barking. A sick animal, a big
animal.…

Barbara could see in the dark better than most, and soon saw the
creature clinging to the gate, climbing, uttering that coughing moan as
it went. At the top it slipped, fell outward, dangled; then there was a
ripping sound, and it fell heavily to the ground and lay still and
quiet.

She ran to it, and it began to make the sound again. It was a man, and
he was weeping.

It was her love, her love who was tall and straight and so very
alive—her love, battered and bleeding, puffy, broken, his clothes torn,
crying.

Now of all times was the time for a lover to receive, to take from the
loved one his pain, his trouble, his fear. “Oh, hush, hush,” she
whispered, her hands touching his bruised face like swift feathers.
“It’s all over now. It’s all over.”

She turned him over on his back and knelt to bring him up sitting. She
lifted one of his thick arms around her shoulder. He was very heavy, but
she was very strong. When he was upright, gasping weakly, she looked up
and down the road in the waning moonlight. Nothing, no one. The Great
House was dark. Across the road, though, was a meadow with high
hedgerows which might break the wind a little.

“Come, my love, my dear love,” she whispered. He trembled violently.

All but carrying him, she got him across the road, over the shallow
ditch, and through a gap in the hedge. She almost fell with him there.
She gritted her teeth and set him down gently. She let him lean against
the hedge, and then ran and swept up great armfuls of sweet broom. She
made a tight springy bundle of it and set it on the ground beside him,
and put a corner of her cloak over it, and gently lowered his head until
it was pillowed. She folded the rest of the cloak about him. He was very
cold.

There was no water near, and she dared not leave him. With her kerchief
she cleaned some of the blood from his face. He was still very cold. He
said, “You devil. You rotten little devil.”

“Shh.” She crept in beside him and cradled his head. “You’ll be warm in
a minute.”

“Stand still,” he growled. “Keep running away.”

“I won’t run away,” she whispered. “Oh, my darling, you’ve been hurt, so
hurt. I won’t leave you. I promise I won’t leave you.”

He lay very still. He made the growling sound again.

“I’ll tell you a lovely thing,” she said softly. “Listen to me, think
about the lovely thing,” she crooned.

“There’s a place in the bog, a pool of pure water, where the trees live
beautifully, willow and aspen and birch, where everything is peaceful,
my darling, and the flowers grow without tearing their petals. The moss
is blue and the water is like diamonds.”

“You tell me stories in a thousand voices,” he muttered.

“Shh. Listen, my darling. This isn’t a story, it’s a real place. Four
miles north and a little west, and you can see the trees from the ridge
with the two dwarf oaks. And I know why the water is pure!” she cried
gladly. “I know why!”

He said nothing. He took a deep breath and it hurt him, for he shuddered
painfully.

“The unicorn drinks there,” she whispered. “I _saw_ him!”

Still he said nothing. She said, “I made a song about it. Listen, this
is the song I made:

_And He—suddenly gleamed! My dazzled eyes_

_Coming from outer sunshine to this green_

_And secret gloaming, met without surprise_

_The vision. Only after, when the sheen_

_And splendor of his going fled away_,

_I knew amazement, wonder and despair_,

_That he should come—and pass—and would not stay_,

_The Silken-swift—the gloriously Fair!_

_That he should come—and pass—and would not stay_,

_So that, forever after, I must go_,

_Take the long road that mounts against the day_,

_Travelling in the hope that I shall know_

_Again that lifted moment, high and sweet_,

_Somewhere—on purple moor or windy hill—_

_Remembering still his wild and delicate feet_,

_The magic and the dream—remembering still!_

His breathing was more regular. She said, “I truly saw him!”

“I’m blind,” he said. “Blind, I’m blind.”

“Oh, my dear …”

He fumbled for her hand, found it. For a long moment he held it. Then,
slowly, he brought up his other hand and with them both he felt her
hand, turned it about, squeezed it. Suddenly he grunted, half-sitting.
“You’re here!”

“Of course, darling. Of course I’m here.”

“Why?” he shouted. “Why? _Why?_ Why all of this? Why blind me?” He sat
up, mouthing, and put his great hand on her throat. “Why do all that
if …” The words ran together into an animal noise. Wine and witchery,
anger and agony boiled in his veins.

Once she cried out.

Once she sobbed.

“Now,” he said, “you’ll catch no unicorns. Get away from me.” He cuffed
her.

“You’re mad. You’re sick,” she cried.

“Get away,” he said ominously.

Terrified, she rose. He took the cloak and hurled it after her. It
almost toppled her as she ran away, crying silently.

After a long time, from behind the hedge, the sick, coughing sobs began
again.

Three weeks later Rita was in the market when a hard hand took her upper
arm and pressed her into the angle of a cottage wall. She did not start.
She flashed her eyes upward and recognized him, and then said
composedly, “Don’t touch me.”

“I need you to tell me something,” he said. “And tell me you _will_!”
His voice was as hard as his hand.

“I’ll tell you anything you like,” she said. “But don’t touch me.”

He hesitated, then released her. She turned to him casually. “What is
it?” Her gaze darted across his face and its almost healed scars. The
small smile tugged at one corner of her mouth.

His eyes were slits. “I have to know this: why did you make up all
that … prettiness, that food, that poison … just for me? You could have
had me for less.”

She smiled. “Just for you? It was your turn, that’s all.”

He was genuinely surprised. “It’s happened before?”

She nodded. “Whenever it’s the full of the moon—and the squire’s away.”

“You’re lying!”

“You forget yourself!” she said sharply. Then, smiling, “It is the
truth, though.”

“I’d’ve heard talk—”

“Would you now? And tell me—how many of your friends know about your
humiliating adventure?”

He hung his head.

She nodded. “You see? They go away until they’re healed, and they come
back and say nothing. And they always will.”

“You’re a devil … why do you do it? Why?”

“I told you,” she said openly. “I’m a woman and I act like a woman in my
own way. No man will ever touch me, though. I am virgin and shall remain
so.”

“You’re _what_?” he roared.

She held up a restraining, ladylike glove. “Please,” she said, pained.

“Listen,” he said, quietly now, but with such intensity that for once
she stepped back a pace. He closed his eyes, thinking hard. “You told
me—the pool, the pool of the unicorn, and a song, wait. ‘The
Silken-swift, the gloriously Fair …’ Remember? And then I—I saw to it
that _you’d_ never catch a unicorn!”

She shook her head, complete candor in her face. “I like that, ‘the
Silken-swift.’ Pretty. But believe me—no! That isn’t mine.”

He put his face close to hers, and though it was barely a whisper, it
came out like bullets. “Liar! Liar! I couldn’t forget. I was sick, I was
hurt, I was poisoned, but I know what I did!” He turned on his heel and
strode away.

She put the thumb of her glove against her upper teeth for a second,
then ran after him. “Del!”

He stopped but, rudely, would not turn. She rounded him, faced him.
“I’ll not have you believing that of me—it’s the one thing I have left,”
she said tremulously.

He made no attempt to conceal his surprise. She controlled her
expression with a visible effort, and said, “Please. Tell me a little
more—just about the pool, the song, whatever it was.”

“You don’t remember?”

“I don’t _know_!” she flashed. She was deeply agitated.

He said with mock patience, “You told me of a unicorn pool out on the
Bogs. You said you had seen _him_ drink there. You made a song about it.
And then I—”

“Where? Where was this?”

“You forget so soon?”

“Where? Where did it happen?”

“In the meadow, across the road from your gate, where you followed me,”
he said. “Where my sight came back to me, when the sun came up.”

She looked at him blankly, and slowly her face changed. First the
imprisoned smile struggling to be free, and then—she was herself again,
and she laughed. She laughed a great ringing peal of the laughter that
had plagued him so, and she did not stop until he put one hand behind
his back, then the other, and she saw his shoulders swell with the
effort to keep from striking her dead.

“You animal!” she said, good-humoredly. “Do you know what you’ve done?
Oh, you … you _animal!_” She glanced around to see that there were no
ears to hear her. “I left you at the foot of the terrace steps,” she
told him. Her eyes sparkled: “Inside the gates, you understand? And
you …”

“Don’t laugh,” he said quietly.

She did not laugh. “That was someone else out there. Who, I can’t
imagine. But it wasn’t I.”

He paled. “You followed me out.”

“On my soul I did not,” she said soberly. Then she quelled another
laugh.

“That can’t be,” he said. “I couldn’t have …”

“But you were blind, blind and crazy, Del-my-lover!”

“Squire’s daughter, take care,” he hissed. Then he pulled his big hand
through his hair. “It can’t be. It’s three weeks; I’d have been
accused …”

“There are those who wouldn’t,” she smiled. “Or—perhaps she will, in
time.”

“There has never been a woman so foul,” he said evenly, looking her
straight in the eye. “You’re lying—you know you’re lying.”

“What must I do to prove it—aside from that which I’ll have no man do?”

His lip curled. “Catch the unicorn,” he said.

“If I did, you’d believe I was virgin?”

“I must,” he admitted. He turned away, then said, over his shoulder,
“But—_you?_”

She watched him thoughtfully until he left the marketplace. Her eyes
sparkled; then she walked briskly to the goldsmith’s, where she ordered
a bridle of woven gold.

If the unicorn pool lay in the Bogs nearby, Rita reasoned, someone who
was familiar with that brackish wasteland must know of it. And when she
made a list in her mind of those few who travelled the Bogs, she knew
whom to ask. With that, the other deduction came readily. Her laughter
drew stares as she moved through the marketplace.

By the vegetable stall she stopped. The girl looked up patiently.

Rita stood swinging one expensive glove against the other wrist,
half-smiling. “So you’re the one.” She studied the plain,
inward-turning, peaceful face until Barbara had to turn her eyes away.
Rita said, without further preamble, “I want you to show me the unicorn
pool in two weeks.”

Barbara looked up again, and now it was Rita who dropped her eyes. Rita
said, “I can have someone else find it, of course. If you’d rather not.”
She spoke very clearly, and people turned to listen. They looked from
Barbara to Rita and back again, and they waited.

“I don’t mind,” said Barbara faintly. As soon as Rita had left, smiling,
she packed up her things and went silently back to her house.

The goldsmith, of course, made no secret of such an extraordinary
commission; and that, plus the gossips who had overheard Rita talking to
Barbara, made the expedition into a cavalcade. The whole village turned
out to see; the boys kept firmly in check so that Rita might lead the
way; the young bloods ranged behind her (some a little less carefree
than they might be) and others snickering behind their hands. Behind
them the girls, one or two a little pale, others eager as cats to see
the squire’s daughter fail, and perhaps even … but then, only she had
the golden bridle.

She carried it casually, but casualness could not hide it, for it was
not wrapped, and it swung and blazed in the sun. She wore a flowing
white robe, trimmed a little short so that she might negotiate the rough
bogland; she had on a golden girdle and little gold sandals, and a gold
chain bound her head and hair like a coronet.

Barbara walked quietly a little behind Rita, closed in with her own
thoughts. Not once did she look at Del, who strode somberly by himself.

Rita halted a moment and let Barbara catch up, then walked beside her.
“Tell me,” she said quietly, “why did you come? It needn’t have been
you.”

“I’m his friend,” Barbara said. She quickly touched the bridle with her
finger. “The unicorn.”

“Oh,” said Rita. “The unicorn.” She looked archly at the other girl.
“You wouldn’t betray all your friends, would you?”

Barbara looked at her thoughtfully, without anger. “If—when you catch
the unicorn,” she said carefully, “what will you do with him?”

“What an amazing question! I shall keep him, of course!”

“I thought I might persuade you to let him go.”

Rita smiled, and hung the bridle on her other arm. “You could never do
that.”

“I know,” said Barbara. “But I thought I might, so that’s why I came.”
And before Rita could answer, she dropped behind again.

The last ridge, the one which overlooked the unicorn pool, saw a series
of gasps as the ranks of villagers topped it, one after the other, and
saw what lay below; and it was indeed beautiful.

Surprisingly, it was Del who took it upon himself to call out, in his
great voice, “Everyone wait here!” And everyone did; the top of the
ridge filled slowly, from one side to the other, with craning, murmuring
people. And then Del bounded after Rita and Barbara.

Barbara said, “I’ll stop here.”

“Wait,” said Rita, imperiously. Of Del she demanded “What are you coming
for?”

“To see fair play,” he growled. “The little I know of witchcraft makes
me like none of it.”

“Very well,” she said calmly. Then she smiled her very own smile. “Since
you insist, I’d rather enjoy Barbara’s company too.”

Barbara hesitated. “Come, he won’t hurt you, girl,” said Rita. “He
doesn’t know you exist.”

“Oh,” said Barbara, wonderingly.

Del said gruffly, “I do so. She has the vegetable stall.”

Rita smiled at Barbara, the secrets bright in her eyes. Barbara said
nothing, but came with them.

“You should go back, you know,” Rita said silkily to Del, when she
could. “Haven’t you been humiliated enough yet?”

He did not answer.

She said, “Stubborn animal! Do you think I’d have come this far if I
weren’t sure?”

“Yes,” said Del, “I think perhaps you would.”

They reached the blue moss. Rita shuffled it about with her feet and
then sank gracefully down to it. Barbara stood alone in the shadows of
the willow grove. Del thumped gently at an aspen with his fist. Rita,
smiling, arranged the bridle to cast, and laid it across her lap.

The rabbits stayed hid. There was an uneasiness about the grove. Barbara
sank to her knees, and put out her hand. A chipmunk ran to nestle in it.

This time there was a difference. This time it was not the slow
silencing of living things that warned of his approach, but a sudden
babble from the people on the ridge.

Rita gathered her legs under her like a sprinter, and held the bridle
poised. Her eyes were round and bright, and the tip of her tongue showed
between her white teeth. Barbara was a statue. Del put his back against
his tree, and became as still as Barbara.

Then from the ridge came a single, simultaneous intake of breath, and
silence. One knew without looking that some stared speechless, that some
buried their faces or threw an arm over their eyes.

_He_ came.

He came slowly this time, his golden hooves choosing his paces like so
many embroidery needles. He held his splendid head high. He regarded the
three on the bank gravely, and then turned to look at the ridge for a
moment. At last he turned, and came round the pond by the willow grove.
Just on the blue moss, he stopped to look down into the pond. It seemed
that he drew one deep clear breath. He bent his head then, and drank,
and lifted his head to shake away the shining drops.

He turned toward the three spellbound humans and looked at them each in
turn. And it was not Rita he went to, at last, nor Barbara. He came to
Del, and he drank of Del’s eyes with his own just as he had partaken of
the pool deeply and at leisure. The beauty and wisdom were there, and
the compassion, and what looked like a bright white point of anger. Del
knew that the creature had read everything then, and that he knew all
three of them in ways unknown to human beings.

There was a majestic sadness in the way he turned then, and dropped his
shining head, and stepped daintily to Rita. She sighed, and rose up a
little, lifting the bridle. The unicorn lowered his horn to receive it—

—and tossed his head, tore the bridle out of her grasp, sent the golden
thing high in the air. It turned there in the sun, and fell into the
pond.

And the instant it touched the water, the pond was a bog and the birds
rose mourning from the trees. The unicorn looked up at them, and shook
himself. Then he trotted to Barbara and knelt, and put his smooth,
stainless head in her lap.

Barbara’s hands stayed on the ground by her sides. Her gaze roved over
the warm white beauty, up to the tip of the golden horn and back.

The scream was frightening. Rita’s hands were up like claws, and she had
bitten her tongue; there was blood on her mouth. She screamed again. She
threw herself off the now withered moss toward the unicorn and Barbara.
“She can’t be!” Rita shrieked. She collided with Del’s broad right hand.
“It’s wrong, I tell you, she, you, I.…”

“I’m satisfied,” said Del, low in his throat. “Keep away, squire’s
daughter.”

She recoiled from him, made as if to try to circle him. He stepped
forward. She ground her chin into one shoulder, then the other, in a
gesture of sheer frustration, turned suddenly and ran toward the ridge.
“It’s mine, it’s mine,” she screamed. “I tell you it can’t be hers,
don’t you understand? I never once, I never did, but she, but she—”

She slowed and stopped, then, and fell silent at the sound that rose
from the ridge. It began like the first patter of rain on oak leaves,
and it gathered voice until it was a rumble and then a roar. She stood
looking up, her face working, the sound washing over her. She shrank
from it.

It was laughter.

She turned once, a pleading just beginning to form on her face. Del
regarded her stonily. She faced the ridge then, and squared her
shoulders, and walked up the hill, to go into the laughter, to go
through it, to have it follow her all the way home and all the days of
her life.

Del turned to Barbara just as she bent over the beautiful head. She
said, “Silken-swift … go free.”

The unicorn raised its head and looked up at Del. Del’s mouth opened. He
took a clumsy step forward, stopped again. “_You_!”

Barbara’s face was wet. “You weren’t to know,” she choked. “You weren’t
ever to know … I was so glad you were blind, because I thought you’d
never know.”

He fell on his knees beside her. And when he did, the unicorn touched
her face with his satin nose, and all the girl’s pent-up beauty flooded
outward. The unicorn rose from his kneeling, and whickered softly. Del
looked at her, and only the unicorn was more beautiful. He put out his
hand to the shining neck, and for a moment felt the incredible silk of
the mane flowing across his fingers. The unicorn reared then, and
wheeled, and in a great leap was across the bog, and in two more was on
the crest of the farther ridge. He paused there briefly, with the sun on
him, and then was gone.

Barbara said, “For us, he lost his pool, his beautiful pool.”

And Del said, “He will get another. He must.” With difficulty he added,
“He couldn’t be … punished … for being so gloriously Fair.”



THE CLINIC


THE POLICEMEN AND THE DOCTORS MEN and most of the people outside, they
all helped me, they were very nice but nobody helped me as many-much as
Elena.

De la Torre liked me very nice I think, but number one because what I am
is his work. The Sergeant liked me very nice too but inside I think he
say not real, not real. He say in all his years he know two for-real
amnesiacs but only in police book. Unless me. Some day, he say, some day
he find out I not-real amnesiac trying to fool him. De la Torre say I
real. Classic case, he say. He say plenty men forget talk forget name
forget way to do life-work but _por Dios_ not forget buttons forget
eating forget every damn thing like me. The Sergeant say yes Doc you
would rather find a medical monstrosity than turn up a faker. De la
Torre say yes you would rather find out he is a fugitive than a
phenomenon, well this just shows you what expert opinion is worth when
you get two experts together. He say, one of us has to be wrong.

Is half right. Is both wrong.

If I am a fugitive I must be very intelligent. If I am an amnesiac I
could be even intelligenter as a fugitive. Anyway I be intelligent
better than any man in the world, as how could conversation as
articulo-fluent like this after only six days five hours fifty-three
minutes?

Is both wrong. I be Nemo.

But now comes Elena again, de la Torre is look happy-face, the Sergeant
is look watch-face, Elena smile so warm, and we go.

“How are you tonight, Nemo?”

“I am very intelligent.”

She laughs. “You can say that again,” and then she puts hand on my mouth
and more laughs. “No, don’t say it again. Another figure of speech.…
Remember any yet?”

“What state what school what name, all that? No.”

“All right.” Now de la Torre, he ask me like that and when I no him, he
try and try ask some other how. The Sergeant, he ask me like that and
when I no him, he try and try ask me the same asking, again again. Elena
ask and when I no her, she talk something else. Now she say, “What would
you like to do tonight?”

I say, “Go with you whatever.”

She say, “Well we’ll start with a short beer,” so we do.

The short beer is in a room with long twisty blue lights and red lights
and a noise-machine looks like two sunsets with bubbles and sounds
unhappy out loud. The short beer is wet, high as a hand, color like
Elena’s eyes, shampoo on top, little bubbles inside. Elena drink then I
drink all. Little bubbles make big bubble inside me, big bubble come
right back up so roaring that all people look to see, so it is bigger as
the noise-machine. I look at people and Elena laugh again. She say, “I
guess I shouldn’t laugh. Most people don’t do that in public, Nemo.”

“Was largely recalcitrant bubble and decontrolled,” I say. “So what
do—keep for intestinals?”

She laugh again and say, “Well, no. Just try to keep it quiet.” And now
come a man from high long table where so many stand, he has hair on
face, low lip flaccid, teeth brown black and gold, he smell as
waste-food, first taste of mouth-thermometer, and skin moisture after
drying in heavy weavings. He say, “You sound like a pig, Mac, where you
think you are, home?”

I look at Elena and I look at he, I say, “Good evening.” That what de la
Torre say in first speak to peoples after begin night. Elena quick touch
arm of mine, say, “Don’t pay any attention to him, Nemo.” Man bend over,
put hand forward and touches it to ear of me with velocity, to make a
large percussive effect. Same time bald man run around end of long high
table exhibiting wooden device, speaking the prognosis: “Don’t start
nothing in my place, Purky, or I’ll feed you this bung-starter.”

I rub at ear and look at man who smells. He say, “Yeah, but you hear
this little pig here? Where he think he’s at?”

The man with bung-starter device say, “Tell you where you’ll be at, you
don’t behave yourself, you’ll be out on the pavement with a knot on your
head,” and he walk at Purky until Purky move and walk again until Purky
is back to old place. I rub on ear and look at Elena and Elena has
lip-paint of much bigger red now. No it is not bigger red, it is face
skin of more white. Elena say, “Are you all right, Nemo? Did he hurt
you?”

I say, “He is destroyed no part. He is create algesia of the middle ear.
This is usual?”

“The dirty rat. No, Nemo, it isn’t usual. I’m sorry, I’m so sorry. I
shouldn’t’ve brought you in here.… Some day someone’ll do the world a
favor and knock his block off.”

“I have behavior?”

She say, “You what? Oh—did you act right.” She gives me diagnostic
regard from sides of eyes. “I guess so, Nemo. But … you can’t let people
push you around like that. Come on, let’s get out of here.”

“But then this is no more short beer, yes?”

“You like it? You want another?”

I touch my larynx. “It localizes a euphoria.”

“Does it now. Well, whatever that means, I guess you can have another.”
She high display two fingers and big bald man gives dispensing of short
beer more. I take all and large bubble forms and with concentration I
exude it through nostrils quietly and gain Elena’s approval and
laughter. I say my thanks about the kindlies, about de la Torre and the
Sergeant but it is Elena who helps with the large manymuchness.

“Forget it,” she say.

“Is figure of speech? Is command?”

She say low-intensity to shampoo on short beer, “I don’t know, Nemo. No,
I guess I wouldn’t want you to forget me.” She look up at me and I know
she will say again, “You’ll never forget your promise, Nemo?” and she
say it. And I say, “I not go away before I say, Elena, ‘I going away.’ ”

She say, “What’s the matter, Nemo? What is it?”

I say, “You think I go away, so I think about I go away too. I like you
think about I here. And that not all of it.”

“I’m sorry. It’s just that I—well, it’s important to me, that’s all. I
couldn’t bear it if you just disappeared some day.… What else, Nemo?”

I say, “Two more short beer.”

We drink the new short beer with no talk and with thinks. Then she say
she go powder she nose. She nose have powder but she also have behavior
so I no say why. When she go in door-place at back angle, I stand and
walk.

I walk to high long table where stand the smelly man Purky, I push on
him, he turn around.

He say, “Well look what crawled up! What you want, piggy?”

I say, “Where you block?”

He say, “Where’s _what_?” He speak down to me from very tall, but he
speak more noise than optimum.

I say, “You block. Block. You know, knock off block. Where you block? I
knock off.”

Big man who bring short beer, he roar. Purky, he roar. Mens jump back,
looking, looking. Purky lift high big bottle, approach it at me swiftly.
I move very close swiftlier, impact the neck of Purky by shoulder,
squeeze flesh of Purky in and down behind pelvis, sink right thumb in
left abdomen of Purky—one-two-three and go away again. Purky still swing
down bottle but I not there for desired encounter now. Bottle go down to
floor, Purky go down to floor, I walk back to chair, Purky lie
twitching, men look at he, men look at me, Purky say “Uh-uh-uh.” I sit
down.

Elena come out of door running, say “What happened? Nemo …” and she look
at Purky and all men looking.

I say, “Sorry. Sorry.”

“Did you do that, Nemo?”

I make the head-nod, yes.

“Well what are you sorry about?” she say, all pretty with surprise and
fierce.

I say, “I think you happy if I knock block off, but not know block.
Where is block? I knock off now.”

“No you don’t!” she say. “You come right along out of here! Nemo, you’re
dynamite!”

I puzzle. “Is good?”

“Just now, is good.”

We go out and big man call, “Hey, how about one on the house, Bomber?”

I puzzle again. EIena say, “He means he wants to give you a drink.”

“Short beer?”

Big man put out short beer, I drink all. Purky sit up on floor. I feel
big bubble come; I make it roar. I look at Purky. Purky not talk. Elena
pull me, we go.

We walk by lakeshore long time. People foot-slide slowly to pulse from
mens with air-vibrators, air-column wood, air-column metal, vibrating
strings single and sets. “Dancing,” Elena say and I say “Nice. Is goodly
nice.” We have a happy, watching. Pulse fast, pulse slow, mens cry with
pulse and vibrations, womens, two at once, cry together. “Singing,”
Elena say, and the lights move on the dancing, red and yellow-red and
big and little blue; clouds shift and change, pulse shift and change,
stars come, stars go and the wind, warm. Elena say, “Nemo, honey, do you
know what love is?”

I say no.

She look the lake, she look the lights, she wave the arm of her to show
all, with the wind and stars; she make her voice like whisper and like
singing too and she say, “It’s something like this, Nemo. I hope you
find out some day.”

I say yes, and I have sleepy too. So she take me back to the hospital.

It is the day and de la Torre is tired with me. He fall into chair, wipe
the face of he with a small white weaving.

He say, “_Por Dios_, Nemo, I don’t figure you at all. Can I be frank
with you?”

I say, “Yes,” but I know all he be is de la Torre.

He say, “I don’t think you’re trying. But you must be trying; you
couldn’t get along so fast without trying. You don’t seem to be
interested; I have to tell you some things fifty times before you
finally get them. Yet you ask questions as if you _were_ interested.
What are you? What do you want?”

I lift up the shoulders once, quickly, just like de la Torre when he not
know.

He say, “You grasp all the complicated things at sight, and ignore the
simple ones. You use terms out of _Materia Medica_ and use them right,
and all the time you refuse to talk anything but a highly individualized
pidgin-English. Do you know what I’m talking about?”

I say, “Yes.”

He say, “_Do_ you? Tell me: what is _Materia Medica?_ What is
‘Individualized’? What is ‘Pidgin-English’?”

I do the shoulders thing.

“So don’t tell me you know what I’m talking about.”

I turn the head little, raise the one finger like he do sometime, I say,
“I do. I do.”

“Tell me then. Tell it in your own words. Tell me why you won’t learn to
talk the way I do.”

“No use,” I say. Then I say, “No use for me.” Then I say, “Not interest
me.” And still he sit and puzzle at me.

So I try. I say, “De la Torre, I see peoples dancing in the night.”

“When? With Elena?”

“Elena, yes. And I see mens make pulse and cries for dancing.”

“An orchestra?” I puzzle. He say, “Men with instruments, making noises
together?” I make a yes. He say, “Music. That’s called music.”

I say, “What this?” and I move the arms.

He say, “Violin?”

I say, “Yes. Make one noise, a new noise, a new noise—one and one and
one. Now,” I say, “what this?” and I move again.

“Banjo,” he say. “Guitar, maybe.”

“Make many noise, in set. Make a new set. And a new set. Yes?”

“Yes,” he say. “It’s played in chords, mostly. What are you getting at?”

I bump on side of head. “You have think word and word and word and you
make set. I have think set and set and set.”

“You mean I think like a violin, one note at a time, and you think like
a guitar, a lot of related notes at a time?” He quiet, he puzzle. “Why
do you want to think like that?”

“Is my thinks.”

“You mean, that’s the way you think? Well, for Pete’s sake, Nemo, you’ll
make it a lot easier to convey your thinks—uh—thoughts if you’ll learn
to come out with them like other people.”

I make the no with the head. “No use for me.”

“Look,” he say. He blow hard through he nostrils, bang-bang on table,
eyes close. He say, “You’ve got to understand this. I’ll give you an
example. You know how an automobile engine works?”

I say no.

He grab white card and mark-stick and start to mark, start to
conversation swift, say all fast about they call this a four-cycle
engine because it acts in four different phases, the piston goes down,
this valve opens, that valve closes, the piston goes up, this makes a
fire … and a lot, all so swift. “This the intake cycle,” and many words.
“This is the crankshaft, spark plug, fuel line, compression stroke …”
Much and much.

And stops, whump. Points mark-stick. “Now, you and your thinking in
concepts. That’s how it works, basically. Don’t tell me you got any of
that, with any real understanding.”

“Don’t tell?”

“No, no,” he say. He tired, he smile. He say, “Name the four cycles of
this engine.”

I say, “Suck. Squeeze. Pop. Phooey.”

He drop he mark-stick. A long quiet. He say, “I can’t teach you
anything.”

I say, “I not intelligent?”

He say, “_I_ not intelligent.”

Is many peoples in eat-place but I by my own with my plate and my
thinks, I am alone. Is big roughness impacting on arm, big noise say,
“What’s your _name_?”

I bend to look up and there is the Sergeant. I say, “Nemo.” He sit down.
He look. He make me have think: he like me, he not believe me. He not
believe anybody. He say: “Nemo, Nemo.

That’s not your name.”

I do the thing with the shoulders.

He say, “You weren’t surprised when I jolted you then. Don’t you ever
get surprised? Don’t you ever get sore?”

I say, “Surprise, no. Sore?”

He say, “Sore, mad, angry.”

I have a think. I say, “No.”

He say, “Ought to be something that’ll shake you up. Hm.… They pamper
you too much around here, you walking around like Little Eva or Billy
Budd or somebody. Sweetness and light. Dr. de la Torre says you’re real
bright.”

“De la Torre real bright.”

“Maybe. Maybe.” He eyes have like coldness, like so cold nothing move.
He say, “That Elena. How you like Elena, Nemo?”

I say, “I like.” And I say, “High music, big color-gentle.”

He say, “Thought so.” He poke sharp into my chest. “Now I’m gonna tell
you the truth about your Elena. She’s crazy as a coot. She went bad
young. She was a mainliner, understand me? She was an addict. She did a
lot of things to get money for the stuff. She had to do more’n most of
’em, with a face like that, and it didn’t get any prettier. De la Torre
pulled her through a cure. He’s a good man. Three different times he
cured her.

“So one time she falls off again and what do you know, she picks up with
a looney just like you. A guy they called George. I figured from the
start he was a faker. Showed up wandering, just like you. And she goes
for him. She goes for him bigger’n she ever went for anything else, even
hash. And he went over the hill one fine day and was never seen again.

“So she’s off the stuff, sure. And you know what? The only thing she has
any use for is amnesiacs. Yeah, I mean it. You’re the sixth in a row.
They come in, she sticks with ’em until they get cured or fade. Between
times she just waits for the next one.

“And that’s your Elena. De la Torre strings along with her because she
does ’em good. So that’s your light o’ love, Nemo boy. A real twitch. If
it isn’t dope it’s dopes. You get cured up, she’ll want no part of you.
Wise up, fella.”

He look at me. He has a quiet time. He say, “God awmighty, you don’t
give a damn for her after all … or maybe you just don’t know how to get
mad … or you didn’t understand a word of what I said.”

I say, “Every people hurt Elena. Some day Elena be happy, always.
Sergeant hurt every people. Sergeant not be happy. Never.”

He look at me. Something move in the cold, like lobster on ice; too cold
to move much. I say, “Poor Sergeant.”

He jump up, he make a noise, not word, he raise a big hand. I look up at
him, I say, “Poor Sergeant.” He go away. He bump de la Torre who is
quiet behind us.

De la Torre say, “I heard that speech of yours, you skunk. I’d clobber
you myself if I didn’t think Nemo’d done it better already. You’d better
keep your big flat feet the hell out of this hospital.”

Sergeant run away. De la Torre stand a time, go away. I eat.

It is night by the lake, the moon is burst and leaking yellow to me over
the black alive water and Elena by me. I say, “I go soonly.”

She breathe, I hear.

I say, “Tree finish, tree die. Sickness finish, sickness gone. House
finish, workmens leave. Is right.”

“Don’t go. Don’t go yet, Nemo.”

“Seed sprout, child grow, bird fly. Something finish, something change.
I finish.”

She say, “Not so soon.”

“Bury plant? Tie boy to cradle? Nail wings to nest?”

She say, “All right.” We sit.

I say, “I promised.”

She say, “You kept your promise, Nemo. Thank you.” She cry. I watch
leaking moon float free, lost light flattening and flattening at the
black lake. Light tried, light tried, water would not mix.

Elena say, “What world do you live in, Nemo?”

I say, “My world.”

She say, “Yes … yes, that’s the right answer. You live in your world, I
live in my world, a hundred people, a hundred worlds. Nobody lives with
me, nobody. Nemo, you can travel from one world to another.”

I do the head, yes.

“But just one at a time. I’m talking crazy, but you don’t mind. I had a
world I don’t remember, soft and safe, and then a world that hurt me
because I was too stupid to duck when I saw hurt coming. And a world
that was better than real where I couldn’t stay, but I had to go
there … and I couldn’t stay … and I had to go … and then I had a world
where I thought, just for a little while—_such_ a little while—I thought
it was a world for me and …”

I say, “—and George.”

She say, _“You can read my mind_!”

“No!” I say, big; loud. Hurt. I say, “Truly no, not do that, I can’t do
that.”

She touch on my face, say, “It doesn’t matter. But George, then, about
George … I was going to be lost again, and this time forever, and I saw
George and spoke right up like a—a—” She shake. “You wouldn’t know what
I was like. And instead, George was gentle and sweet and he made me feel
as if I was … well and whole. In all my life nobody ever treated me
gently, Nemo, except Dr. de la Torre, and he did it because I was sick.
George treated me as if I was healthy and fine, and he … admired me for
it. Me. And he came to love me like those lights, those lights I showed
you, all the colors, slipping among the dancers under the sky. He came
to love me so much he wanted to stay with me for ever and ever, and then
he went away sometime between a morning and a snowstorm.”

The moon is gone up, finished and full, the light, left on the water
frightened and yearning to it, thinning, breaking and fusing, pointing
at the moon, the moon not caring, it finished now.

She say, “I was dead for a long time.”

She passes through a think and lets her face be dead until she say, “Dr.
de la Torre was so kind, he used to tell me I was a special princess,
and I could go anywhere. I went in all the places in the hospital, and I
found out a thing I had not known; that I had these hands, these legs,
eyes, this body, voice, brains. It isn’t much and nobody wants
it … now … but I had it all. And some of those people in there, without
all of it, they were happier than I was, brave and good. There’s a place
with people who have their voices taken out of their throats, Nemo, you
know that? And they learn to speak there. You know how they do it? I
tell some people this, they laugh, but you won’t laugh. You won’t laugh,
Nemo?”

I am not laugh.

She say, “You know that noise you made when you drank the beer so fast?
That’s what they do. On purpose. They do it and they practice and
practice and work hard, work together. And bit by bit they make a voice
that sounds like a voice. It’s rough and it’s all on one note, but it’s
a real voice. They talk together and laugh, and have a debating
society …

“There’s a place in there where a man goes in without legs, and comes
out dancing, yes twirling and swirling a girl around, her ballgown a
butterfly and he smiling and swift and sure. There’s a place for the
deaf people, and they must make voices out of nothing too, and ears.
They do it, Nemo! And together they understand each other. Outside,
people don’t understand the deaf. People don’t mean to be unkind, but
they are. But the deaf understand the deaf, and they understand the
hearing as well, better than the hearing understand themselves.

“So one day I met a soldier there, with the deaf. He was very sad at
first. Many of the people there are born deaf, but he had a world of
hearing behind him. And there was a girl there and they fell in love.
Everyone was happy, and one day he went away.

“She cried, she cried so, and when she stopped, it was even worse.

“And Dr. de la Torre went and found the soldier, and very gently and
carefully he dug out why he had run away. It was because he was
handicapped. It was because he had lost a precious thing. And he
wouldn’t marry the girl, though he loved her, because she was as she had
been born and he felt she was perfect. She was perfect and he was
damaged. She was perfect and he was unfit. And that is why he ran away.

“Dr. de la Torre brought him back and they were married right there in
the hospital with such fine banquet and dance; and they got jobs there
and went to school and now they are helping the others, together …

“So then I went into another world, and this is my world; and if I
should _know_ that it is not a real world I would die.

“My world is here, and somewhere else there are people like us but
different. One of the ways they are different is that they need not
speak; not words anyway. And something happens to them sometimes, just
as it does to us: through sickness, through accident, they lose forever
their way of communicating, like our total deaf. But they can learn to
speak, just as you and I can learn Braille, or make a voice without a
larynx, and then at least they may talk among themselves. And if you are
to learn Braille, you should go among the blind. If you are to learn
lip-reading you do it best among the deaf. If you have something better
than speech and lose it, you must go among a speaking people.

“And that is what I believe, because I must or die. I think George was
such a one, who came here to learn to speak so he could rejoin others
who also had to learn. And I think that anyone who has no memory of this
Earth or anything on it, and who must be taught to speak, might be
another. They pretend to be amnesiacs so that they will be taught _all_
of a language. I think that when they have learned, they understand
themselves and those like them, and also the normal ones of their sort,
better than anyone, just as the deaf can understand the hearing ones
better.

“I think George was such a one, and that he left me because he thought
of himself as crippled and of me as whole. He left me for love. He was
humble with it.

“This is what I believe and I can’t …”

She whisper.

“… I can’t believe it … very much … longer …”

She listen to grief altogether until it tired, and when she can listen
to me I say, “You want me to be George, and stay.”

She sit close, she put she wet face on my face and say, “Nemo, Nemo, I
wish you could, I do _so_ wish you could. But you can’t be my George,
because I love him, don’t you see? You can be my de la Torre, though,
who went out and found a man and explained why and brought him back. All
he has to know is that when love is too humble it can kill the lovers.…
Just tell him that, Nemo. When you … when you go back.”

She look past me at the moon, cold now, and down and out to the water
and sky, and she here altogether out of memory and hope-thinks. She say
with strong daytime voice, “I talk crazy sometimes, thanks, Nemo, you
didn’t laugh. Let’s have a beer some time.”

I wish almost the Sergeant knows where I keep anger. It would please him
I have so much. Here in the bare rocks, here in the night, I twist on
anger, curl and bite me like eel on spear.

It is night and with anger, I alone in cold hills, town and hospital a
far fog of light behind. I stand to watch it the ship and around it,
those silents who watch me, eight of them, nine, all silent.

This is my anger: that they are silent. They share all thinks in one
thinking instant, each with one other, each with all others. All I do
now is talk. But the silents, there stand by ship, share and share all
thinks, none talks. They wait, I come. They have pity.

They have manymuch pity, so I angry.

Then I see my angry is envy, and envy never teach to dance a one-legged
man. Envy never teach the lip-reading.

I see that and laugh at me, laugh but it sting my eyes.

_“Hello_!”

One comes to me, not silent, but have conversation! Surprise. I say,
“Good evening.”

He shake hand of me, say, “We thought you were not going to come.” His
speak slow, very strong, steadily.

I say, “I ready. I surprise you have talk.”

He say, “Oh, I spent some time here. I studied very carefully. I have
come back to live here.”

I say, “You conversation goodly. I have learn talk idea, good enough.
You have word and word and word, like Earth peoples. Good. Why you come
returning?”

He look my face, very near, say, “I did not like it at home. When you go
back there, everyone will be kind. But they will have their own lives to
live, and there is not much they can share with you any more. You will
be blind among the seeing, deaf among those who hear. But they will be
kind, oh yes: very kind.”

Then he look back at the silents, who stand watching. He say, “But here,
I speak among the speaking, and it is a better sharing than even a home
planet gone all silent.” He point at watchers. He laugh. He say, “We
speak together in a way they have never learned to speak, like two Earth
mutes gesticulating together in a crowd. It is as if we were the
telepaths and not they—see them stare and wonder!”

I laugh too. “Not need to telepath here!”

He say, “Yes, on Earth we can be blind with the blind, and we will never
miss our vision. While I was here I was happy to share myself by
speaking. When I went home I could share only with
other … damaged … people. I had to go home to find out that I did not
feel damaged when I was here, so I came back.”

I look to ship, to wondering silents. I say, “What name you have here?”

He say, “They called me George.”

I think, I have message for you: Elena dying for you. I say, “Elena
waiting for you.”

He make large shout and hug on me and run. I cry, “Wait! Wait!” He wait,
but not wanting. I say, “I learn talk like you, word and word, and one
day find Elena for me too.”

He hit on me gladly, say, “All right. I’ll help you.”

We go down hill togetherly, most muchly homelike. Behind, ship wait,
ship wait, silents watch and wonder. Then ship load up with all pity I
need no more, scream away up to stars.

I have a happy now that I get sick lose telepathy come here learn talk
find home, _por Dios_.



MR. COSTELLO, HERO


“COME IN, PURSER. AND SHUT THE DOOR.”

“I beg your pardon, sir?” The Skipper never invited anyone in—not to his
quarters. His office, yes, but not here.

He made an abrupt gesture, and I came in and closed the door. It was
about as luxurious as a compartment on a spaceship can get. I tried not
to goggle at it as if it was the first time I had ever seen it, just
because it was the first time I had ever seen it.

I sat down.

He opened his mouth, closed it, forced the tip of his tongue through his
thin lips. He licked them and glared at me. I’d never seen the Iron Man
like this. I decided that the best thing to say would be nothing, which
is what I said.

He pulled a deck of cards out of the top-middle drawer and slid them
across the desk. “Deal.”

I said, “I b—”

“And don’t say you beg my pardon!” he exploded.

Well, all right. If the skipper wanted a cozy game of gin rummy to while
away the parsecs, far be it from me to … I shuffled. Six years under
this cold-blooded, fish-eyed automatic computer with eyebrows, and this
was the first time that he—

“Deal,” he said. I looked up at him. “Draw, five-card draw. You do play
draw poker, don’t you, Purser?”

“Yes, sir.” I dealt and put down the pack. I had three threes and a
couple of court cards. The skipper scowled at his hand and threw down
two. He glared at me again.

I said, “I got three of a kind, sir.”

He let his cards go as if they no longer existed, slammed out of his
chair and turned his back to me. He tilted his head back and stared up
at the see-it-all, with its complex of speed, time, position and
distance-run coordinates. Borinquen, our destination planet, was at
spitting distance—only a day or so off—and Earth was a long, long way
behind. I heard a sound and dropped my eyes. The Skipper’s hands were
locked behind him, squeezed together so hard that they crackled.

“Why didn’t you draw?” he grated.

“I beg your—”

“When I played poker—and I used to play a hell of a lot of poker—as I
recall it, the dealer would find out how many cards each player wanted
after the deal and give him as many as he discarded. Did you ever hear
of that, Purser?”

“Yes, sir, I did.”

“You _did_.” He turned around. I imagine he had been scowling this same
way at the see-it-all, and I wondered why it was he hadn’t shattered the
cover glass.

“Why, then, Purser,” he demanded, “did you show your three of a kind
without discarding, without drawing—without, mister, asking me how many
cards I might want?”

I thought about it. “I—we—I mean, sir, we haven’t been playing poker
that way lately.”

“You’ve been playing draw poker without drawing!” He sat down again and
beamed that glare at me again. “And who changed the rules?”

“I don’t know, sir. We just—that’s the way we’ve been playing.”

He nodded thoughtfully. “Now tell me something, Purser. How much time
did you spend in the galley during the last watch?”

“About an hour, sir.”

“About an hour.”

“Well, sir,” I explained hurriedly, “it was my turn.”

He said nothing, and it suddenly occurred to me that these
galley-watches weren’t in the ship’s orders.

I said quickly, “It isn’t _against_ your orders to stand such a watch,
is it, sir?”

“No,” he said, “it isn’t.” His voice was so gentle, it was ugly. “Tell
me, Purser, doesn’t Cooky mind these galley-watches?”

“Oh, no, sir! He’s real pleased about it.” I knew he was thinking about
the size of the galley. It was true that two men made quite a crowd in a
place like that. I said, “That way, he knows everybody can trust him.”

“You mean that way you know he won’t poison you.”

“Well—yes, sir.”

“And tell me,” he said, his voice even gentler, “who suggested he might
poison you?”

“I really couldn’t say, Captain. It’s just sort of something that came
up. Cooky doesn’t mind,” I added. “If he’s watched all the time, he
knows nobody’s going to suspect him. It’s all right.”

Again he repeated my words.

“It’s all right.” I wished he wouldn’t. I wished he’d stop looking at me
like that. “How long,” he asked, “has it been customary for the deck
officer to bring a witness with him when he takes over the watch?”

“I really couldn’t say, sir. That’s out of my department.”

“You couldn’t say. Now think hard, Purser. Did you ever stand
galley-watches, or see deck-officers bring witnesses with them when they
relieve the bridge, or see draw poker played without drawing—before this
trip?”

“Well, no, sir. I don’t think I have. I suppose we just never thought of
it before.”

“We never had Mr. Costello as a passenger before, did we?”

“No, sir.”

I thought for a moment he was going to say something else, but he
didn’t, just: “Very well, Purser. That will be all.”

I went out and started back aft, feeling puzzled and sort of upset. The
Skipper didn’t have to hint things like that about Mr. Costello. Mr.
Costello was a very nice man. Once, the Skipper had picked a fight with
Mr. Costello. They’d shouted at each other in the dayroom. That is, the
Skipper had shouted—Mr. Costello never did. Mr. Costello was as
good-natured as they come. A good-natured soft-spoken man, with the kind
of face they call open. Open and honest. He’d once been a Triumver back
on Earth—the youngest ever appointed, they said.

You wouldn’t think such an easygoing man was as smart as that.

Triumvers are usually life-time appointees, but Mr. Costello wasn’t
satisfied. Had to keep moving, you know. Learning all the time, shaking
hands all around, staying close to the people. He loved people.

I don’t know why the Skipper couldn’t get along with him. Everybody else
did. And besides—Mr. Costello didn’t play poker; why should he care one
way or the other how we played it? He didn’t eat the galley food—he had
his own stock in his cabin—so what difference would it make to him if
the cook poisoned anyone? Except, of course, that he cared about _us_.
People—he _liked_ people.

Anyway, it’s better to play poker without the draw. Poker’s a good game
with a bad reputation. And where do you suppose it gets the bad
reputation? From cheaters. And how do people cheat at poker? Almost
never when they deal. It’s when they pass out cards after the discard.
That’s when a shady dealer knows what he holds, and he knows what to
give the others so he can win. All right, remove the discard and you
remove nine-tenths of the cheaters. Remove the cheaters and the honest
men can trust each other.

That’s what Mr. Costello used to say, anyhow. Not that he cared one way
or the other for himself. He wasn’t a gambling man.

I went into the dayroom and there was Mr. Costello with the Third
Officer. He gave me a big smile and a wave, so I went over.

“Come on, sit down, Purser,” he said. “I’m landing tomorrow. Won’t have
much more chance to talk to you.”

I sat down. The Third snapped shut a book he’d been holding open on the
table and sort of got it out of sight.

Mr. Costello laughed at him. “Go ahead, Third, show the Purser. You can
trust him—he’s a good man. I’d be proud to be shipmates with the
Purser.”

The Third hesitated and then raised the book from his lap. It was the
_Space Code_ and expanded _Rules of the Road_. Every licensed officer
has to bone up on it a lot, to get his license. But it’s not the kind of
book you ordinarily kill time with.

“The Third here was showing me all about what a captain can and can’t
do,” said Mr. Costello.

“Well, you asked me to,” the Third said.

“Now just a minute,” said Mr. Costello rapidly, “now just a minute.” He
had a way of doing that sometimes. It was part of him, like the thinning
hair on top of his head and the big smile and the way he had of cocking
his head to one side and asking you what it was you just said, as if he
didn’t hear so well. “Now just a minute, you _wanted_ to show me this
material, didn’t you?”

“Well, yes, Mr. Costello,” the Third said.

“You’re going over the limitations of a spacemaster’s power of your own
free will, aren’t you?”

“Well,” said the Third, “I guess so. Sure.”

“Sure,” Mr. Costello repeated happily. “Tell the Purser the part you
just read to me.”

“The one you found in the book?”

“You know the one. You read it out your own self, didn’t you?”

“Oh,” said the Third. He looked at me—sort of uneasily, I thought—and
reached for the book.

Mr. Costello put his hand on it. “Oh, don’t bother looking it up,” he
said. “You can remember it.”

“Yeah, I guess I do,” the Third admitted. “It’s a sort of safeguard
against letting a skipper’s power go to his head, in case it ever does.
Suppose a time comes when a captain begins to act up, and the crew gets
the idea that a lunatic has taken over the bridge. Well, something has
to be done about it. The crew has the power to appoint one officer and
send him up to the Captain for an accounting. If the Skipper refuses, or
if the crew doesn’t like his accounting, then they have the right to
confine him to his quarters and take over the ship.”

“I think I heard about that,” I said. “But the Skipper has rights, too.
I mean the crew has to report everything by space-radio the second it
happens, and then the Captain has a full hearing along with the crew at
the next port.”

Mr. Costello looked at us and shook his big head, full of admiration.
When Mr. Costello thought you were good, it made you feel good all over.

The Third looked at his watch and got up. “I got to relieve the bridge.
Want to come along, Purser?”

“I’d like to talk to him for a while,” Mr. Costello said. “Do you
suppose you could get somebody else for a witness?”

“Oh, sure, if you say so,” said the Third.

“But you’re going to get someone.”

“Absolutely,” said the Third.

“Safest ship I was ever on,” said Mr. Costello. “Gives a fellow a nice
feeling to know that the watch is never going to get the orders wrong.”

I thought so myself and wondered why we never used to do it before. I
watched the Third leave and stayed where I was, feeling good, feeling
safe, feeling glad that Mr. Costello wanted to talk to me. And me just a
Purser, him an ex-Triumver.

Mr. Costello gave me the big smile. He nodded toward the door. “That
young fellow’s going far. A good man. You’re all good men here.” He
stuck a sucker-cup in the heater and passed it over to me with his own
hands. “Coffee,” he said. “My own brand. All I ever use.”

I tasted it and it was fine. He was a very generous man. He sat back and
beamed at me while I drank it.

“What do you know about Borinquen?” he wanted to know.

I told him all I could. Borinquen’s a pretty nice place, what they call
“four-nines Earth Normal”—which means that the climate, gravity,
atmosphere and ecology come within .9999 of being the same as Earth’s.
There are only about six known planets like that. I told him about the
one city it had and the trapping that used to be the main industry.
Coats made out of _glunker_ fur last forever. They shine green in white
light and a real warm ember-red in blue light, and you can take a
full-sized coat and scrunch it up and hide it in your two hands, it’s
that light and fine. Being so light, the fur made ideal space cargo.

Of course, there was a lot more on Borinquen now—rare isotope ingots and
foodstuffs and seeds for the drug business and all, and I suppose the
_glunker_ trade could dry right up and Borinquen could still carry its
weight. But furs settled the planet, furs supported the city in the
early days, and half the population still lived out in the bush and
trapped.

Mr. Costello listened to everything I said in a way I can only call
respectful.

I remember I finished up by saying, “I’m sorry you have to get off
there, Mr. Costello. I’d like to see you some more. I’d like to come see
you at Borinquen, whenever we put in, though I don’t suppose a man like
you would have much spare time.”

He put his big hand on my arm. “Purser, if I don’t have time when you’re
in port, I’ll make time. Hear?” Oh, he had a wonderful way of making a
fellow feel good.

Next thing you know, he invited me right into his cabin. He sat me down
and handed me a sucker full of a mild red wine with a late flavor of
cinnamon, which was a new one on me, and he showed me some of his
things.

He was a great collector. He had one or two little bits of colored paper
that he said were stamps they used before the Space Age, to prepay
carrying charges on paper letters. He said no matter where he was, just
one of those things could get him a fortune. Then he had some jewels,
not rings or anything, just stones, and a fine story for every single
one of them.

“What you’re holding in your hand,” he said, “cost the life of a king
and the loss of an empire half again as big as United Earth.” And: “This
one was once so well guarded that most people didn’t know whether it
existed or not. There was a whole religion based on it—and now it’s
gone, and so is the religion.”

It gave you a queer feeling, being next to this man who had so much, and
him just as warm and friendly as your favorite uncle.

“If you can assure me these bulkheads are soundproof, I’ll show you
something else I collect,” he said.

I assured him they were, and they were, too. “If ship’s architects ever
learned anything,” I told him, “they learned that a man has just got to
be by himself once in a while.”

He cocked his head to one side in that way he had. “How’s that again?”

“A man’s just got to be by himself once in a while,” I said. “So, mass
or no, cost or no, a ship’s bulkheads are built to give a man his
privacy.”

“Good,” he said. “Now let me show you.” He unlocked a hand-case and
opened it, and from a little compartment inside he took out a thing
about the size of the box a watch comes in. He handled it very gently as
he put it down on his desk. It was square, and it had a fine grille on
the top and two little silver studs on the side. He pressed one of them
and turned to me, smiling. And let me tell you, I almost fell right off
the bunk where I was sitting, because here was the Captain’s voice as
loud and as clear and natural as if he was right there in the room with
us. And do you know what he said?

He said, “My crew questions my sanity—yet you can be sure that if a
single man aboard questions my authority, he will learn that I am master
here, even if he must learn it at the point of a gun.”

What surprised me so much wasn’t only the voice but the words—and what
surprised me especially about the words was that I had heard the Skipper
say them myself. It was the time he had had the argument with Mr.
Costello. I remembered it well because I had walked into the dayroom
just as the Captain started to yell.

“Mr. Costello,” he said in that big heavy voice of his, “in spite of
your conviction that my crew questions my sanity …” and all the rest of
it, just like on this recording Mr. Costello had. And I remember he
said, too, “even if he must learn it at the point of a gun. _That, sir,
applies to passengers—the crew has legal means of their own.”_

I was going to mention this to Mr. Costello, but before I could open my
mouth, he asked me, “Now tell me, Purser, is that the voice of the
Captain of your ship?”

And I said, “Well, if it isn’t, I’m not the Purser here. Why, I heard
him speak those words my very own self.”

Mr. Costello swatted me on the shoulder. “You have a good ear, Purser.
And how do you like my little toy?”

Then he showed it to me, a little mechanism on the jeweled pin he wore
on his tunic, a fine thread of wire to a pushbutton in his side pocket.

“One of my favorite collections,” he told me. “Voices. Anybody, anytime,
anywhere.” He took off the pin and slipped a tiny bead out of the
setting. He slipped this into a groove in the box and pressed the stud.

And I heard my own voice say, “I’m sorry you have to get off there, Mr.
Costello. I’d like to see you some more.” I laughed and laughed. That
was one of the cleverest things I ever saw. And just think of my voice
in his collection, along with the Captain and space only knows how many
great and famous people!

He even had the voice of the Third Officer, from just a few minutes
before, saying, “A lunatic has taken over the bridge. Well, something
has to be done about it.”

All in all, I had a wonderful visit with him, and then he asked me to do
whatever I had to do about his clearance papers. So I went back to my
office and got them out. They are kept in the Purser’s safe during a
voyage. And I went through them with the okays. There were a lot of
them—he had more than most people.

I found one from Earth Central that sort of made me mad. I guess it was
a mistake. It was a _Know All Ye_ that warned consular officials to
report every six months, Earth time, on the activities of Mr. Costello.

I took it to him, and it was a mistake, all right—he said so himself. I
tore it out of his passport book and adhesed an official note, reporting
the accidental destruction of a used page of fully stamped visas. He
gave me a beautiful blue gemstone for doing it.

When I said, “I better not; I don’t want you thinking I take bribes from
passengers,” he laughed and put one of those beads in his recorder, and
it came out, in my voice, “I take bribes from passengers.” He was a
great joker.

We lay at Borinquen for four days. Nothing much happened except I was
busy. That’s what’s tough about pursering. You got nothing to do for
weeks in space, and then, when you’re in spaceport, you have too much
work to do even to go ashore much, unless it’s a long layover.

I never really minded much. I’m one of those mathematical geniuses, you
know, even if I don’t have too much sense otherwise, and I take pride in
my work. Everybody has something he’s good at, I guess. I couldn’t tell
you how the gimmick works that makes the ship travel faster than light,
but I’d hate to trust the Chief Engineer with one of my interplanetary
cargo manifests, or a rate-of-exchange table, _glunker_ pelts to U.E.
dollars.

Some hard-jawed character with Space Navy Investigator credentials came
inboard with a portable voice recorder and made me and the Third Officer
recite a lot of nonsense for some sort of test, I don’t know what. The
SNI is always doing a lot of useless and mysterious things. I had an
argument with the Port Agent, and l went ashore with Cooky for a fast
drink. The usual thing. Then I had to work overtime signing on a new
Third—they transferred the old one to a corvette that was due in, they
told me.

Oh, yes, that was the trip the Skipper resigned. I guess it was high
time. He’d been acting very nervous. He gave me the damnedest look when
he went ashore that last time, like he didn’t know whether to kill me or
burst into tears. There was a rumor around that he’d gone beserk and
threatened the crew with a gun, but I don’t listen to rumors. And
anyway, the Port Captain signs on new skippers. It didn’t mean any extra
work for me, so it didn’t matter much.

We up-shipped again and made the rounds. Boötes Sigma and Nightingale
and Caranho and Earth—chemical glassware, black prints, _sho_ seed and
glitter crystals; perfume, music tape, _glizzard_ skins and Aldebar—all
the usual junk for all the usual months. And round we came again to
Borinquen.

Well, you wouldn’t believe a place could change so much in so short a
time. Borinquen used to be a pretty free-and-easy planet. There was just
the one good-sized city, see, and then trapper camps all through the
unsettled area. If you liked people, you settled in the city, and you
could go to work in the processing plants or maintenance or some such.
If you didn’t, you could trap _glunker_s. There was always something for
everybody on Borinquen.

But things were way different this trip. First of all, a man with a
Planetary Government badge came aboard, by God, to censor the music
tapes consigned for the city, and he had the credentials for it, too.
Next thing I find out, the municipal authorities have confiscated the
warehouses—_my_ warehouses—and they were being converted into barracks.

And where were the goods—the pelts and ingots for export? Where was the
space for our cargo? Why, in houses—in hundreds of houses, all spread
around every which way, all indexed up with a whole big new office full
of conscripts and volunteers to mix up and keep mixed up! For the first
time since I went to space, I had to request layover so I could get
things unwound.

Anyway it gave me a chance to wander around the town, which I don’t
often get.

You should have seen the place! Everybody seemed to be moving out of the
houses. All the big buildings were being made over into hollow shells,
filled with rows and rows of mattresses. There were banners strung
across the streets: ARE YOU A MAN OR ARE YOU ALONE? A SINGLE SHINGLE IS
A SORRY SHELTER! THE DEVIL HATES A CROWD!

All of which meant nothing to me. But it wasn’t until I noticed a sign
painted in whitewash on the glass front of a barroom, saying—TRAPPERS
STAY OUT!—that I was aware of one of the biggest changes of all.

There were no trappers on the streets—none at all. They used to be one
of the tourist attractions of Borinquen, dressed in _glunker_ fur, with
the long tail-wings afloat in the wind of their walking, and a kind of
distance in their eyes that not even spacemen had. As soon as I missed
them, I began to see the TRAPPERS STAY OUT! signs just about
everywhere—on the stores, the restaurants, the hotels and theaters.

I stood on a street comer, looking around me and wondering what in hell
was going on here, when a Borinquen cop yelled something at me from a
monowheel prowl car. I didn’t understand him, so I just shrugged. He
made a U-turn and coasted up to me.

“What’s the matter, country boy? Lose your traps?”

I said, “What?”

He said, “If you want to go it alone, _glunker_, we got solitary cells
over at the Hall that’ll suit you fine.”

I just gawked at him. And, to my surprise, another cop poked his head up
out of the prowler. A one-man prowler, mind. They were really jammed in
there.

This second one said, “Where’s your trapline, jerker?”

I said, “I don’t have a trapline.” I pointed to the mighty tower of my
ship, looming over the spaceport. “I’m the Purser off that ship.”

“Oh, for God’s sakes!” said the first cop. “I might have known. Look,
Spacer, you’d better double up or you’re liable to get yourself mobbed.
This is no spot for a soloist.”

“I don’t get you, Officer. I was just—”

“I’ll take him,” said someone. I looked around and saw a tall Borinqueña
standing just inside the open doorway of one of the hundreds of empty
houses. She said, “I came back here to pick up some of my things. When I
got done in here, there was nobody on the sidewalks. I’ve been here an
hour, waiting for somebody to go with.” She sounded a little hysterical.

“You know better than to go in there by yourself,” said one of the cops.

“I know—I know. It was just to get my things. I wasn’t going to stay.”
She hauled up a duffel bag and dangled it in front of her. “Just to get
my things,” she said again, frightened.

The cops looked at each other. “Well, all right. But watch yourself. You
go along with the Purser here. Better straighten him out—he don’t seem
to know what’s right.”

“I will,” she said thankfully.

But by then the prowler had moaned off, weaving a little under its
double load!

I looked at her. She wasn’t pretty. She was sort of heavy and stupid.

She said, “You’ll be all right now. Let’s go.”

“Where?”

“Well, Central Barracks, I guess. That’s where most everybody is.”

“I have to get back to the ship.”

“Oh, dear,” she said, all distressed again. “Right away?”

“No, not right away. I’ll go in town with you, if you want.” She picked
up her duffel bag, but I took it from her and heaved it up on my
shoulder. “Is everybody here crazy?” I asked her, scowling.

“Crazy?” She began walking, and I went along. “I don’t _think_ so.”

“All this,” I persisted. I pointed to a banner that said, NO LADDER HAS
A SINGLE RUNG. “What’s that mean?”

“Just what it says.”

“You have to put up a big thing like that just to tell me …”

“Oh,” she said. “You mean what does it _mean_!” She looked at me
strangely. “We’ve found out a new truth about humanity. Look, I’ll try
to tell it to you the way the Lucilles said it last night.”

“Who’s Lucille?”

“_The_ Lucilles,” she said, in a mildly shocked tone. “Actually, I
suppose there’s really only one—though, of course, there’ll be someone
else in the studio at the time,” she added quickly. “But on trideo it
looks like four Lucilles, all speaking at once, sort of in chorus.”

“You just go on talking,” I said when she paused. “I catch on slowly.”

“Well, here’s what they say. They say no one human being ever did
_anything_. They say it takes a hundred pairs of hands to build a house,
ten thousand pairs to build a ship. They say a single pair is not only
useless—it’s _evil_. All humanity is a thing made up of many parts. No
part is good by itself. Any part that wants to go off by itself hurts
the whole main thing—the thing that has become so great. So we’re seeing
to it that no part ever gets separated. What good would your hand be if
a finger suddenly decided to go off by itself?”

I said, “And you believe this—what’s your name?”

“Nola. _Believe_ it? Well, it’s true, isn’t it? Can’t you see it’s true?
Everybody _knows_ it’s true.”

“Well, _it could_ be true,” I said reluctantly. “What do you do with
people who want to be by themselves?”

“We help them.”

“Suppose they don’t want help?”

“Then they’re trappers,” she said immediately. “We push them back into
the bush, where the evil soloists come from.”

“Well, what about the fur?”

“_No_body uses furs any more!”

So that’s what happened to our fur consignments! And I was thinking
those amateur red-tapers had just lost ’em somewhere.

She said, as if to herself, “All sin starts in the lonesome dark,” and
when I looked up, I saw she’d read it approvingly off another banner.

We rounded a corner and I blinked at a blaze of light. It was one of the
warehouses.

“There’s the Central,” she said. “Would you like to see it?”

“I guess so.”

I followed her down the street to the entrance. There was a man sitting
at a table in the doorway. Nola gave him a card. He checked it against a
list and handed it back.

“A visitor,” she said. “From the ship.”

I showed him my Purser’s card and he said, “Okay. But if you want to
stay, you’ll have to register.”

“I won’t want to stay,” I told him. “I have to get back.”

I followed Nola inside.

The place had been scraped out to the absolute maximum. Take away one
splinter of vertical structure more and it wouldn’t have held a roof.
There wasn’t a concealed comer, a shelf, a drape, an overhang. There
must have been two thousand beds, cots and mattresses spread out, cheek
by jowl, over the entire floor, in blocks of four, with only a
hand’s-breadth between them.

The light was blinding—huge floods and spots bathed every square inch in
yellow-white fire.

Nola said, “You’ll get used to the light. After a few nights, you don’t
even notice it.”

“The lights never get turned off?”

“Oh, dear, no!”

Then I saw the plumbing—showers, tubs, sinks and everything else. It was
all lined up against one wall.

Nola followed my eyes. “You get used to that, too. Better to have
everything out in the open than to let the devil in for one secret
second. That’s what the Lucilles say.”

I dropped her duffel bag and sat down on it. The only thing I could
think of was, “Whose idea was all this? Where did it start?”

“The Lucilles,” she said vaguely. Then, “Before them, I don’t know.
People just started to realize. Somebody bought a warehouse—no, it was a
hangar—I don’t know,” she said again, apparently trying hard to
remember. She sat down next to me and said in a subdued voice,
“Actually, some people didn’t take to it so well at first.” She looked
around. “_I_ didn’t. I mean it, I really didn’t. But you believed, or
you had to act as if you believed, and one way or another everybody just
came to this.” She waved a hand.

“What happened to the ones who wouldn’t come to Centrals?”

“People made fun of them. They lost their jobs, the schools wouldn’t
take their children, the stores wouldn’t honor their ration cards. Then
the police started to pick up soloists—like they did you.” She looked
around again, a sort of contented familiarity in her gaze. “It didn’t
take long.”

I turned away from her, but found myself staring at all that plumbing
again. I jumped up. “I have to go, Nola. Thanks for your help. Hey—how
do I get back to the ship, if the cops are out to pick up any soloist
they see?”

“Oh, just tell the man at the gate. There’ll be people waiting to go
your way. There’s always somebody waiting to go everywhere.”

She came along with me. I spoke to the man at the gate, and she shook
hands with me. I stood by the little table and watched her hesitate,
then step up to a woman who was entering. They went in together. The
doorman nudged me over toward a group of what appeared to be loungers.

_“North_!” he bawled.

I drew a pudgy little man with bad teeth, who said not one single word.
We escorted each other two-thirds of the way to the spaceport, and he
disappeared into a factory. I scuttled the rest of the way alone,
feeling like a criminal, which I suppose I was. I swore I would never go
into that crazy city again.

And the next morning, who should come out for me in an armored car with
six two-man prowlers as escort, but Mr. Costello himself!

It was pretty grand seeing him again. He was just like always, big and
handsome and good-natured. He was not alone. All spread out in the back
corner of the car was the most beautiful blonde woman that ever struck
me speechless. She didn’t say very much. She would just look at me every
once in a while and sort of smile, and then she would look out of the
car window and bite on her lower lip a little, and then look at Mr.
Costello and not smile at all.

Mr. Costello hadn’t forgotten me. He had a bottle of that same red
cinnamon wine, and he talked over old times the same as ever, like he
was a special uncle. We got a sort of guided tour. I told him about last
night, about the visit to the Central, and he was pleased as could be.
He said he knew I’d like it. I didn’t stop to think whether I liked it
or not.

“Think of it!” he said. “All humankind, a single unit. You know the
principle of cooperation, Purser?”

When I took too long to think it out, he said, “You know. Two men
working together can produce more than two men working separately. Well,
what happens when a thousand—a million—work, sleep, eat, think, breathe
together?” The way he said it, it sounded fine.

He looked out past my shoulder and his eyes widened just a little. He
pressed a button and the chauffeur brought us to a sliding stop.

“Get that one,” Mr. Costello said into a microphone beside him.

Two of the prowlers hurtled down the street and flanked a man.

He dodged right, dodged left, and then a prowler hit him and knocked him
down.

“Poor chap,” said Mr. Costello, pushing the Go button. “Some of ’em just
won’t learn.”

I think he regretted it very much. I don’t know if the blonde woman did.
She didn’t even look.

“Are you the mayor?” I asked him.

“Oh, no,” he said. “I’m a sort of broker. A little of this, a little of
that. I’m able to help out a bit.”

“Help out?”

“Purser,” he said confidentially, “I’m a citizen of Borinquen now. This
is my adopted land and I love it. I mean to do everything in my power to
help it. I don’t care about the cost. This is a people that has found
the _truth_, Purser. It awes me. It makes me humble.”

“I …”

“Speak up, man. I’m your _friend_.”

“I appreciate that, Mr. Costello. Well, what I was going to say, I saw
that Central and all. I just haven’t made up my mind. I mean whether
it’s good or not.”

“Take your time, take your time,” he said in the big soft voice. “Nobody
has to _make_ a man see a truth, am I right? A real truth? A man just
sees it all by himself.”

“Yeah,” I agreed. “Yeah, I guess so.” Sometimes it was hard to find an
answer to give Mr. Costello.

The car pulled up beside a building. The blonde woman pulled herself
together. Mr. Costello opened the door for her with his own hands. She
got out. Mr. Costello rapped the trideo screen in front of him.

He said, “Make it a real good one, Lucille, real good. I’ll be
watching.”

She looked at him. She gave me a small smile. A man came down the steps
and she went with him up into the building.

We moved off.

I said, “She’s the prettiest woman I ever saw.”

He said, “She likes you fine, Purser.”

I thought about that. It was too much.

He asked, “How would you like to have her for your very own?”

“Oh,” I said, “she wouldn’t.”

“Purser, I owe you a big favor. I’d like to pay it back.”

“You don’t owe me a thing, Mr. Costello!”

We drank some of the wine. The big car slid silently along. It went
slowly now, headed back out to the spaceport.

“I need some help,” he said after a time. “I know you, Purser. You’re
just the kind of man I can use. They say you’re a mathematical genius.”

“Not mathematics exactly, Mr. Costello. Just
numbers—statistics—conversion tables and like that. I couldn’t do
astrogation or theoretical physics and such. I got the best job I could
have right now.

“No, you haven’t. I’ll be frank with you. I don’t want any more
responsibility on Borinquen than I’ve got, you understand, but the
people are forcing it on me. They want order, peace and order—tidiness.
They want to be as nice and tidy as one of your multiple manifests. Now
I could organize them, all right, but I need a tidy brain like yours to
keep them organized. I want full birth- and death-rate statistics, and
then I want them projected so we can get policy. I want calorie-counts
and rationing, so we can use the food supply the best way. I want, well,
you see what I mean. Once the devil is routed—”

“What devil?”

“The trappers,” he said grayly.

“Are the trappers really harming the city people?”

He looked at me, shocked. “They go out and spend weeks alone by
themselves, with their own evil thoughts. They are wandering cells, wild
cells in the body of humanity. They must be destroyed.”

I couldn’t help but think of my consignments. “What about the fur trade,
though?”

He looked at me as if I had made a pretty grubby little mistake. “My
dear Purser,” he said patiently, “would you set the price of a few pelts
above the immortal soul of a race?”

I hadn’t thought of it that way.

He said urgently, “This is just the beginning, Purser. Borinquen is only
a start. The unity of that great being, Humanity, will become known
throughout the Universe.” He closed his eyes. When he opened them, the
organ tone was gone. He said in his old, friendly voice, “And you and I,
we’ll show ’em how to do it, hey, boy?”

I leaned forward to look up to the top of the shining spire of the
spaceship. “I sort of like the job I’ve got. But—my contract’s up four
months from now …”

The car turned into the spaceport and hummed across the slag area.

“I think I can count on you,” he said vibrantly. He laughed. “Remember
this little joke, Purser?”

He clicked a switch, and suddenly my own voice filled the tonneau_. “I
take bribes from passengers_.”

“Oh, that,” I said, and let loose one _ha_ of a _ha-ha_ before I
understood what he was driving at. “Mr. Costello, you wouldn’t use that
against me.”

“What do you take me for?” he demanded, in wonderment.

Then we were at the ramp. He got out with me. He gave me his hand. It
was warm and hearty.

“If you change your mind about the Purser’s job when your contract’s up,
son, just buzz me through the field phone. They’ll connect me. Think it
over until you get back here. Take your time.” His hand clamped down on
my biceps so hard I winced. “But you’re not going to take any longer
than that, are you, my boy?”

“I guess not,” I said.

He got into the front, by the chauffeur, and zoomed away.

I stood looking after him and, when the car was just a dark spot on the
slag area, I sort of came to myself. I was standing alone on the foot of
the ramp. I felt very exposed.

I turned and ran up to the airlock, hurrying, hurrying to get near
people.

That was the trip we shipped the crazy man. His name was Hynes. He was
United Earth Consul at Borinquen and he was going back to report. He was
no trouble at first, because diplomatic passports are easy to process.
He knocked on my door the fifth watch out from Borinquen. I was glad to
see him. My room was making me uneasy and I appreciated his company.

Not that he was really company. He was crazy. That first time, he came
busting in and said, “I hope you don’t mind, Purser, but if I don’t talk
to somebody about this, I’ll go out of my mind.” Then he sat down on the
end of my bunk and put his head in his hands and rocked back and forth
for a long time, without saying anything. Next thing he said was,
“Sorry,” and out he went. Crazy, I tell you.

But he was back in again before long. And then you never heard such
ravings.

“Do you know what’s happened to Borinquen?” he’d demand. But he didn’t
want any answers. He had the answers. “I’ll tell you what’s wrong with
Borinquen—Borinquen’s gone mad!” he’d say.

I went on with my work, though there wasn’t much of it in space, but
that Hynes just couldn’t get Borinquen out of his mind.

He said, “You wouldn’t believe it if you hadn’t seen it done. First the
little wedge, driven in the one place it might exist—between the urbans
and the trappers. There was never any conflict between them—never! All
of a sudden, the trapper was a menace. How it happened, why, God only
knows. First, these laughable attempts to show that they were an
unhealthy influence. Yes, laughable—how could you take it seriously?

“And then the changes. You didn’t have to prove that a trapper had done
anything. You only had to prove he was a trapper. That was enough. And
the next thing—how could you _anticipate_ anything as mad as this?”—he
almost screamed—“the next thing was to take anyone who wanted to be
alone and lump him with the trappers. It all happened so fast—it
happened in our sleep. And all of a sudden you were afraid to be alone
in a room for a _second_. They left their homes. They built barracks.
Everyone afraid of everyone else, afraid, afraid …

“Do you know what they _did_?” he roared. “They burned the paintings,
every painting on Borinquen they could find that had been done by one
artist. And the few artists who survived as artists—I’ve seen them. By
twos and threes, they work together on the one canvas.”

He cried. He actually sat there and cried.

He said, “There’s food in the stores. The crops come in. Trucks run,
planes fly, the schools are in session. Bellies get full, cars get
washed, people get rich. I know a man called Costello, just in from
Earth a few months, maybe a year or so, and already owns half the city.”

“Oh, I know Mr. Costello,” I said.

“Do you now! How’s that?”

I told him about the trip out with Mr. Costello. He sort of backed off
from me. “_You’re_ the one!”

“The one what?” I asked in puzzlement.

“_You’re_ the man who testified against your Captain, broke him, made
him resign.”

“I did no such a thing.”

“I’m the Consul. It was my hearing, man! I was _there!_ A recording of
the Captain’s voice, admitting to insanity, declaring he’d take a gun to
his crew if they overrode him. Then your recorded testimony that it was
his voice, that you were present when he made the statement. And the
Third Officer’s recorded statement that all was not well on the bridge.
The man denied it, but it was his voice.”

“Wait, wait,” I said. “I don’t believe it. That would need a trial.
There was no trial. I wasn’t called to any trial.”

“There would have been a trial, you idiot! But the Captain started
raving about draw poker without a draw, about the crew fearing poisoning
from the cook, about the men wanting witnesses even to change the
bridge-watch. Maddest thing I ever heard. He realized it suddenly, the
Captain did. He was old, sick, tired, beaten. He blamed the whole thing
on Costello, and Costello said he got the recordings from you.”

“Mr. Costello wouldn’t do such a thing!” I guess I got mad at Mr. Hynes
then. I told him a whole lot about Mr. Costello, what a big man he was.
He started to tell me how Mr. Costello was forced off the Triumverate
for making trouble in the high court, but they were lies and I wouldn’t
listen. I told him about the poker, how Mr. Costello saved us from the
cheaters, how he saved us from poisoning, how he made the ship safe for
us all.

I remember how he looked at me then. He sort of whispered, “What has
happened to human beings? What have we done to ourselves with these
centuries of peace, with confidence and cooperation and no conflict?
Here’s distrust by man for man, waiting under a thin skin to be
punctured by just the right vampire, waiting to hate itself and kill
itself all over again …

“My _God_!” he suddenly screamed at me. “Do you know what I’ve been
hanging onto? The idea that, for all its error, for all its stupidity,
this One Humanity idea on Borinquen was a _principle?_ I hated it, but
because it was a principle, I could respect it. It’s Costello—Costello,
who doesn’t gamble, but who uses fear to change the poker
rules—Costello, who doesn’t eat your food, but makes you fear
poison—Costello, who can see three hundred years of safe interstellar
flight, but who through fear makes the watch officers doubt themselves
without a witness—Costello, who runs things without being seen!

“My God, Costello doesn’t _care!_ It isn’t a principle at all. It’s just
Costello spreading fear anywhere, everywhere, to make himself strong!”

He rushed out, crying with rage and hate. I have to admit I was sort of
jolted. I guess I might even have thought about the things he said, only
he killed himself before we reached Earth. He was crazy.

We made the rounds, same as ever, scheduled like an interurban line:
Load, discharge, blastoff, fly and planetfall. Refuel, clearance,
manifest. Eat, sleep, work. There was a hearing about Hynes. Mr.
Costello sent a spacegram with his regrets when he heard the news. I
didn’t say anything at the hearing, just that Mr. Hynes was upset,
that’s all, and it was about as true as anything could be. We shipped a
second engineer who played real good accordion. One of the inboard men
got left on Carànho. All the usual things, except I wrote up my
termination with no options, ready to file.

So in its turn we made Borinquen again, and what do you know, there was
the space fleet of United Earth. I never guessed they had that many
ships. They sheered us off, real Navy: all orders and no information.
Borinquen was buttoned up tight; there was some kind of fighting going
on down there. We couldn’t get or give a word of news through the
quarantine. It made the skipper mad and he had to use part of the cargo
for fuel, which messed up my records six ways from the middle. I stashed
my termination papers away for the time being.

And in its turn, Sigma, where we lay over a couple of days to get back
in the rut, and, same as always, Nightingale, right on schedule again.

And who should be waiting for me at Nightingale but Barney Roteel, who
was medic on my first ship, years back when I was fresh from the
Academy. He had a potbelly now and looked real successful. We got the
jollity out of the way and he settled down and looked me over, real
sober. I said it’s a small Universe—I’d known he had a big job on
Nightingale, but imagine him showing up at the spaceport just when I
blew in!

“I showed up _because_ you blew in, Purser,” he answered.

Then before I could take that apart, he started asking me questions.
Like how was I doing, what did I plan to do.

I said, “I’ve been a purser for years and years. What makes you think I
want to do anything different?”

“Just wondered.”

I wondered, too. “Well,” I said, “I haven’t exactly made up my mind, you
might say—and a couple of things have got in the way—but I did have a
kind of offer.” I told him just in a general way about how big a man Mr.
Costello was on Borinquen now, and how he wanted me to come in with him.
“It’ll have to wait, though. The whole damn Space Navy has a cordon
around Borinquen. They wouldn’t say why. But whatever it is, Mr.
Costello’ll come out on top. You’ll see.”

Barney gave me a sort of puckered-up look. I never saw a man look so
weird. Yes, I did, too. It was the old Iron Man, the day he got off the
ship and resigned.

“Barney, what’s the matter?” I asked.

He got up and pointed through the glass door-lights to a white monowheel
that stood poised in front of the receiving station. “Come on,” he said.

“Aw, I can’t. I got to—”

“Come _on_!”

I shrugged. Job or no, this was Barney’s bailiwick, not mine. He’d cover
me.

He held the door open and said, like a mind reader, “I’ll cover you.”

We went down the ramp and climbed in and skimmed off.

“Where are we going?”

But he wouldn’t say. He just drove.

Nightingale’s a beautiful place. The most beautiful of them all, I
think, even Sigma. It’s run by the UE, one hundred per cent; this is one
planet with no local options, but _none_. It’s a regular garden of a
world and they keep it that way.

We topped a rise and went down a curving road lined with honest-to-God
Lombardy poplars from Earth. There was a little lake down there and a
sandy beach. No people.

The road curved and there was a yellow line across it and then a red
one, and after it a shimmering curtain, almost transparent. It extended
from side to side as far as I could see.

“Force-fence,” Barney said and pressed a button on the dash.

The shimmer disappeared from the road ahead, though it stayed where it
was at each side. We drove through and it formed behind us, and we went
down the hill to the lake.

Just this side of the beach was the coziest little Sigma cabana I’ve
seen yet, built to hug the slope and open its arms to the sky. Maybe
when I get old they’ll turn me out to pasture in one half as good.

While I was goggling at it, Barney said, “Go on.”

I looked at him and he was pointing. There was a man down near the
water, big, very tanned, built like a space-tug. Barney waved me on and
I walked down there.

The man got up and turned to me. He had the same wide-spaced, warm deep
eyes, the same full, gentle voice. “Why, it’s the Purser! Hi, old
friend. So you came, after all!”

It was sort of rough for a moment. Then I got it out. “Hi, Mr.
Costello.”

He banged me on the shoulder. Then he wrapped one big hand around my
left biceps and pulled me a little closer. He looked uphill to where
Barney leaned against the monowheel, minding his own business. Then he
looked across the lake, and up in the sky.

He dropped his voice. “Purser, you’re just the man I need. But I told
you that before, didn’t I?” He looked around again. “We’ll do it yet,
Purser. You and me, we’ll hit the top. Come with me. I want to show you
something.”

He walked ahead of me toward the beach margin. He was wearing only a
breech-ribbon, but he moved and spoke as if he still had the armored car
and the six prowlers. I stumbled after him.

He put a hand behind him and checked me, and then knelt. He said, “To
look at them, you’d think they were all the same, wouldn’t you? Well,
son, you just let me show you something.”

I looked down. He had an anthill. They weren’t like Earth ants. These
were bigger, slower, blue, and they had eight legs. They built nests of
sand tied together with mucus, and tunneled under them so that the nests
stood up an inch or two like on little pillars.

“They look the same, they act the same, but you’ll see,” said Mr.
Costello.

He opened a synthine pouch that lay in the sand. He took out a dead bird
and the thorax of what looked like a Caranho roach, the one that grows
as long as your forearm. He put the bird down here and the roach down
yonder.

“Now,” he said, “watch.”

The ants swarmed to the bird, pulling and crawling. Busy. But one or two
went to the roach and tumbled it and burrowed around. Mr. Costello
picked an ant off the roach and dropped it on the bird. It weaved around
and shouldered through the others and scrabbled across the sand and went
back to the roach.

“You see, you _see_?” he said, enthusiastic. “Look.”

He picked an ant off the dead bird and dropped it by the roach. The ant
wasted no time or even curiosity on the piece of roach. It turned around
once to get its bearings, and then went straight back to the dead bird.

I looked at the bird with its clothing of crawling blue, and I looked at
the roach with its two or three voracious scavengers. I looked at Mr.
Costello.

He said raptly, “See what I mean? About one in thirty eats something
different. And that’s all we need. I tell you, Purser, wherever you
look, if you look long enough, you can find a way to make most of a
group turn on the rest.”

I watched the ants. “They’re not fighting.”

“Now wait a minute,” he said swiftly. “Wait a minute. All we have to do
is let these bird-eaters know that the roach-eaters are dangerous.”

“They’re not dangerous,” I said. “They’re just different.”

“What’s the difference, when you come right down to it? So we’ll get the
bird-eaters scared and they’ll kill all the roach-eaters.”

“Yes, but why, Mr. Costello?”

He laughed. “I like you, boy. I do the thinking, you do the work. I’ll
explain it to you. They all look alike. So once we’ve made ’em drive out
these—” he pointed to the minority around the roach—“they’ll never know
which among ’em might be a roach-eater. They’ll get so worried, they’ll
do anything to keep from being suspected of roach-eating. When they get
scared enough, we can make ’em do anything we want.”

He hunkered down to watch the ants. He picked up a roach-eater and put
it on the bird. I got up.

“Well, I only just dropped in, Mr. Costello,” I said.

“I’m not an ant,” said Mr. Costello. “As long as it makes no difference
to me what they eat, I can make ’em do anything in the world I want.”

“I’ll see you around,” I said.

He kept on talking quietly to himself as I walked away. He was watching
the ants, figuring, and paid no attention to me.

I went back to Barney. I asked, sort of choked, “What is he doing,
Barney?”

“He’s doing what he has to do,” Barney said.

We went back to the monowheel and up the hill and through the
force-gate. After a while, I asked, “How long will he be here?”

“As long as he wants to be.” Barney was kind of short about it.

“Nobody wants to be locked up.”

He had that odd look on his face again. “Nightingale’s not a jail.”

“He can’t get out.”

“Look, chum, we could start him over. We could even make a purser out of
him. But we stopped doing that kind of thing a long time ago. We let a
man do what he wants to do.”

“He never wanted to be boss over an anthill.”

“He didn’t?”

I guess I looked as if I didn’t understand that, so he said, “All his
life he’s pretended he’s a man and the rest of us are ants. Now it’s
come true for him. He won’t run human anthills any more because he will
never again get near one.”

I looked through the windshield at the shining finger that was my
distant ship. “What happened on Borinquen, Barney?”

“Some of his converts got loose around the System. That Humanity One
idea had to be stopped.” He drove a while, seeing badly out of a
thinking face. “You won’t take this hard, Purser, but you’re a
thick-witted ape. I can say that if no one else can.”

“All right,” I said. “Why?”

“We had to _smash_ into Borinquen, which used to be so free and easy. We
got into Costello’s place. It was a regular fort. We got him and his
files. We didn’t get his girl. He killed her, but the files were
enough.”

After a time I said, “He was always a good friend to me.”

“Was he?”

I didn’t say anything. He wheeled up to the receiving station and
stopped the machine.

He said, “He was all ready for you if you came to work for him. He had a
voice recording of you large as life, saying ‘Sometimes a man’s just
_got_ to be by himself.’ Once you went to work for him, all he needed to
do to keep you in line was to threaten to put that on the air.”

I opened the door. “What did you have to show him to me for?”

“Because we believe in letting a man do what he wants to do, as long as
he doesn’t hurt the rest of us. If you want to go back to the lake and
work for Costello, for instance, I’ll take you there.”

I closed the door carefully and went up the ramp to the ship.

I did my work and when the time came, we blasted off. I was mad. I don’t
think it was about anything Barney told me. I wasn’t especially mad
about Mr. Costello or what happened to him, because Barney’s the best
Navy psych doc there is and Nightingale’s the most beautiful hospital
planet in the Universe.

What made me mad was the thought that never again would a man as big as
Mr. Costello give that big, warm, soft, strong friendship to a lunkhead
like me.



THE EDUCATION OF DRUSILLA STRANGE


THE PRISON SHIP, UNDER FULL SHIELDS, slipped down toward the cove, and
made no shadow on the moonlit water, and no splash as it slid beneath
the surface. They put her out and she swam clear, and the ship nosed up
and silently fled. Two wavelets clapped hands softly, once, and that was
the total mark the ship made on the prison wall.

For killing the Preceptor, she had been sentenced to life imprisonment.

With torture.

She swam toward the beach until smooth fluid sand touched her knee. She
stood up, flung her long hair back with a single swift motion, and waded
up the steep shingle, one hand lightly touching the bulging shoulder of
the rocks which held the cove in their arms.

Ahead she heard the slightest indrawn breath, then a cough. She stopped,
tall in the moonlight. The man took a half-step forward, then turned his
head sidewise and a little upward away from her, into the moon.

“I’m—I beg your—sorry,” he floundered.

She sensed his turmoil, extracted its source, delved for alternative
acts, and chose the one about which he showed the most curious conflict.
She crouched back into the shadows by the rock.

_I didn’t see you there_.

“I didn’t see you until you … I’m sorry. Why am I standing here like
this when you … I’11 move on down the … I’m sorry.”

She took and fanned out his impressions, sorted them, chose one. _My
clothes_—

He started away from the rocks, looking about him, as if he might have
been leaning against something hot, or something holy. “Where are they?
Am I in the way? Shall I put them near the … I’ll just move on down.”

No … no clothes. Directly from him she took _Where are they_?

“I don’t see any. Somebody must’ve—are you sure you put them—where did
you put them?” He was floundering again.

She caught and used the phrase _Why, who would … what low-down trick!_

“Is your—do you have a car up there?” he asked, peering up at the grassy
rim of the beach. He added immediately, “But even if you got to the
car …”

_I have no car_.

“My God!” he said indignantly. “Anybody that would … here, what am I
standing here yapping for? You must be chilled to the bone.”

He was wearing a battered trench coat. He whipped it off and approached
her, three-quarters backward, the coat dangling from his blindly
extended arm like a torn jib on a bowsprit. She took it, shook it out,
turned it over curiously, then slipped into it so that it fell around
her the way it had covered him.

_Thank you_.

She stepped out of the shadows, and the huge relief he felt, and the
admixture of guilty regret that went with it made her smile.

“Well!” he said, rubbing his hands briskly. “That’s better, now, isn’t
it?” He looked up the lonely beach, and down. “Live around here
somewhere?”

_No_.

“Oh.” He said it again, then, “Friends bring you down?” he asked
diffidently.

She hesitated. _Yes_.

“Then they’ll be back for you!”

She shook her head. He scratched his. Suddenly he stepped away from her
and demanded, “Look, you don’t think I had anything to do with stealing
your clothes, do you?”

_Oh, no_!

“Well, all right, because I didn’t, I mean I couldn’t do a thing like
that, even in fun. What I was going to say, I mean, now I don’t want you
to think anyth …” He ground to a stop, took a breath and tried again.
“What I mean is, I have a little shack over the rise there. You’d be
perfectly safe. I have no phone, but there’s one a mile down the beach.
I could go and call your friends. I mean I’m not one of those … well,
look, you do just what you think is best.”

She searched. She felt it emerged correctly: _I really mustn’t put you
to that trouble. But you’re very kind_.

“I’m not kind. You’d do exactly the same thing for me, now wouldn’t …”

He stopped because she was laughing silently, her eyes turned deep into
the corners to look at him. She laughed because she had sensed his
startled laughter at what he was saying even before it had uncurled.

“I—can’t say you would at that,” he faltered, and then his laughter
surfaced. By the time it had run its course, she was striding lithely
beside him.

They walked for a while in silence, until he said, “I do the same thing
myself, go swimming in the—I mean without … at night. But generally not
this late in the year.”

She found this unremarkable and made no reply.

“Uh,” he began, and then faltered and fell silent again.

She wondered why he felt it so necessary to talk. She probed, and
discovered that it was because he was excited and frightened and guilty
and happy all at once, full of little half-finished plans concerning
cold odds and ends of food and the contents of a clothes closet, the
breathless flash of a mental picture of her emerging from the water with
certain details oddly highlighted, the quick blanking of the picture and
the stern frown that did it, the timid hope that she did not suspect
feelings that he could not control … Oh, yes, he must talk.

“You have a—do you mind if I say something personal?”

She looked up attentively.

“You have a funny sort of way of talking. I mean—” he leaned close—“you
hardly move your lips when you talk.”

She turned her head slightly and flexed her lips. She made the effort
and said aloud, “Oh?”

“Maybe it’s the moonlight,” he informed himself. Inwardly he pictured
her still face and said _Strange, strange, strange_. “What’s your name?”

“Dru. Drusilla,” she said carefully. It was not her name, but she had
probed and discovered that he liked it. “Drusilla Strange.”

“Beautiful,” he breathed. “Say, that’s a beautiful name, did you know
that? Drusilla Strange. That’s just … just exactly _right_.” He looked
about at the cool white blaze of the beach, at the black grass under the
moon. “Oh!” he said abruptly, “I’m Chan. Chandler Behringer. It’s a
clumsy sort of name, hard to say, not like—”

“Chandler Behringer,” she said. “It sounds like a little wind catching
its tail around a—” she dipped into him swiftly—“palm frond.”

“Huh!” he shouted. It was one syllable of a laugh, and it was sheer
delight. Then he found the rest of the laugh.

He put his hand on her arm just above the elbow and steered her off the
beach. The feel of her flesh under the flat close fabric caused a shock
that ran up his arm and straight through his defenses.

“Here’s my place,” he said, with all the wind and none of the cordal
vibration necessary to make a voice. He moved away from her and marched
up the slope, frowning, leading the way. He ducked into a lean- to porch
and fumbled too busily with a latch. “You’d better wait for a moment
while I light the lamp. It’s sort of cluttered.”

She waited. The doorway swallowed him, and there was a fumbling, and a
scratching, and suddenly the cabin had an interior. She moved inside.

“You needn’t be afraid to look around,” he said presently, watching her.

She did, immediately. She had been looking straight at him, following
his critical inventory of the entire place, and she now knew it every
bit as well as he. But, “Oh,” she said, “this is—” she hesitated—“cozy.”

“A small place,” he said, “but it’s dismal.” He laughed, and explained
apologetically, “I got that line from a movie.”

She sorted out the remark, wondered detachedly why he had made it,
half-heartedly probed for the reason, then dropped it as unessential
effort.

“A nice soft blanket,” he said, lifting it. Her hands went reflexively
to the top button of the trench coat and fell away at his next words.
“When I go out, you just wrap yourself up nice and snug. I won’t be
long. Now give me the number.”

His mental code for “number” was so brief and so puzzling—a disk with
holes in it superimposed on ruled paper—that she was quite at a loss.
“Number?”

“Your friends. I’ll phone them. They can bring you some clothes, take
you home.” He laughed self-consciously. “I’ll try to say it so that … I
mean, make it sound … Do you know, I haven’t the first idea of just what
I’ll tell them?”

“Oh,” she said. “My friends … have no phone.”

“No—oh. What, no phone?” He looked at her, around at the walls, and
inevitably at the bed. It was a very small bed. He gestured weakly at
the door. “A … telegram, maybe, but that would take a long time,
and … Oh, I know. I have clothes, dungarees and things. A lumberjack
shirt. Why didn’t I think of it? Girls wear all that kind of—but shoes,
I don’t know … And then I’ll get you a taxi!” he finished triumphantly,
and the chaos within him was, to misuse the term, deafening.

She considered very, very carefully and then said, “No taxi could take
me back. It’s much too far for a taxi to travel.”

“Isn’t there anyone that—”

“There isn’t anyone,” she said firmly.

After a long, complicated pause, he asked gently, “What happened?”

She averted her face.

“It was something sad,” he half-whispered, and although he was quite
still, she could feel the tendrils of his sympathy reaching out toward
her. “That’s all right, don’t worry. Don’t,” he said loudly, as if it
were the first word of a very important pronouncement; but it would not
form. He said at last, inanely, “I’ll make coffee.”

He crossed the room, raising his hand to pat her shoulder as he passed,
checking it, not touching her at all, while the echo of that first shock
bounded and rebounded within him. He bent over the stove, and in a
moment the evil smell of the lamp, which had been pressing closer and
closer upon her consciousness, was eclipsed completely by what was to
her a completely overpowering, classic, catastrophic and symphonic
stench. Her eyelids flickered and closed as she made a tremendous
nervous effort and at last succeeded in the necessary realignment of her
carbon-oxygen dynamic. And in a moment she could ignore the fumes and
open her eyes again.

Chan was looking at her.

“You’ll have to stay.”

“Yes,” she said. She looked at his eyes. “You don’t want me to.”

“I want you to,” he said hurriedly, “I want …” He thought _She’s in
trouble and she’s afraid I’m going to take advantage of it_.

“I’m in trouble,” she said, “but I’m not afraid you’ll take advantage of
it.”

He flashed a startling white grin. _She trusts me_. Then the grin faded
and the internal frown clamped down. But it could not hide the thought:
_She’s … she expects … she’s maybe the kind who …_

“I’m not the kind,” she said levelly, “who—”

“Oh, I know I know I know!” he interrupted rapidly, and with it he
thought _Why is she so damned sure of herself?_

“I just don’t know _what_ to do!” she said.

He smiled again. “You just leave everything to me. We’ll make out fine,
I mean you’re quite safe, you know. And in the morning everything will
look a lot brighter. Oh, that coat, that wet old coat. Here,” he
bustled, “here—here.”

From curtained clothes-pole and paper-lined orange crate came blue
denims, a spectral holocaust in woolen plaid, a pair of socks of a red
that did not belong within four miles of any color in the shirt. She
looked at the clothes and at him. He turned his back.

“I’ll go on with the … cook-cook-coffee and you know,” he said
nervously.

She took off the trench coat and while her fingers solved the logical
problem called buttons and the topological one whereby a foot enters a
sock, she pondered Chandler Behringer’s extraordinary sensitivities.
Either this species must overpopulate its planet in nine generations,
she thought whimsically, or it must die from nervous exhaustion in four.
The dungarees gouged and rasped her skin until she damped its
sensitivity, but the feel of the heavy, washed wool of the shirt was
delightful.

He set out plates and in a moment slid a handsome orange-and-white
edible onto them. She looked at it with interest, and then her eyes
traveled to the small table by the stove, and she saw the shells. _By
the Fountain Itself_, she said silently, _eggs! They eat EGGS!_

She forced her feelings into a desensitized compartment of her mind and
corked it. Then she sat opposite Chandler and ate heartily. The coffee
was bitter and, to her palate, gritty, but she drank her second cup with
composure. _He’s so very pleased that I eat with him_, she thought.
_They probably do everything gregariously, even where cooperation is not
involved_. She was conscious of no disgust, for that, too, was
insulated—and so it must stay for the rest of her imprisonment, which is
to say the rest of her life.

The food seemed to have relaxed him; a sphygmomanetic allocation, she
deduced. And involuntary. How very confining. His chatter had eased and
he was taking a silent pleasure in watching her. When she met his eyes
finally, he leaped up nervously and scraped and washed the plates
energetically. He thought_, I wonder if she liked it_. And: _She knows
how to be a guest, and how to keep herself from plunging into the
dish-washing, putting them back in the wrong place and all_. And_: I
like doing things for her. I wish I could do everything for_ … And then
the frown.

Suddenly in a rush of embarrassment and self-accusation, he spun around
and said, “I haven’t even asked you, I mean told you, if you, I mean,
well, this is just a shack and we haven’t all the fixtures.”

She looked at him blankly, then probed.

Oh. This is loaded, too. But not eating. Amazing.

She made it as easy for him as she could. She rose and gave him the
quick nervous smile that was correct.

“It’s outside,” he said. “To your left. That little path.”

She slipped outside, stalked directly down to the water’s edge and with
as little effort and even less distress than a polite cough might have
cost her, she vomited up the eggs and the coffee. She had eaten, after
all, only two days ago.

He had the bed made up when she came in, the pillow smooth, crisp sheets
flat and diagonally folded at the head end.

“I bet you’re as tired as I am,” he said. “And that’s a whole lot.”

“Oh,” she said, looking at the bed. For sleeping! What would she want
sleep for? Because of a phylic habit unbroken in these savages since
they were forced to spend the dark hours immobile in a rocky hole to
save themselves from nocturnal carnivores? But she said, “Oh, how neat.
But I can’t take your bed. I’ll sit up.”

“You’ll do no such thing,” he said severely, and her eyes widened. He
busied himself with a blanket roll and sleeping bag, which he put on the
floor just as far—four feet or so—as it could possibly go from the bed.
“I love this old bag. Look, nylon and down—the only expensive thing I
own. Except my guitar.”

She visualized “guitar” and immediately put it down as something to
investigate. The flash she got in his coding was brief, but sufficient
for her to recognize its size, shape and purpose, and to conclude that
although its resonant volumes were gross and its vents inaccurately
placed, it was closer to the engineering she knew and understood than
most things she had glimpsed here so far.

“You didn’t tell me you played the guitar,” she said politely.

“I get paid for it,” he said, yawning, and she knew that this yawn
belonged to this remark and not to the circumstance of somnolence.
“Ready for bed?”

Patiently she bowed to his formalities. “You’re very kind.”

He went to the lamp and turned it out. The low moon streamed in.

He hesitated, slid into his sleeping bag after removing only his shoes.
There ensued a considerable amount of floundering, ducking, and thumping
on the floor, and at last he brought his trousers out, folded as small
as possible. He wadded them between the corner of the sleeping bag and
the wall as if they were a secret. Then he sat up and took off his
shirt. He hung it on the corner of the window sill, lay down, zipped the
bag up to his neck, and ostentatiously turned on his side with his face
to the wall. “Good night.”

“Good night,” she said. Resignedly she got between the sheets, as
indicated by the folded-down corner, pulled up the blanket, porpoised
out of her trousers, folded them, brought them out and hid them; removed
her shirt, reached out a long arm and hung it on the other corner of the
window sill. Did he still have his socks on? He did. She wriggled her
toes and slightly desensitized her ankles where the weave pressed them.

“You’re perfectly safe. Don’t worry about a thing.”

“Thank you, Chan. I feel safe. I’m not worried. Good night.”

“Good night. _Dru_,” he said suddenly, lifting himself on one elbow.

“What is it?”

He lay down again. “Good night.”

She watched with deep interest the downward spiralings of his thoughts
into the uprising tides of sleep. It happened to him suddenly, and the
“noise” factor of his conscious presence slumped away out of the room.

And the torture began.

She had known it was there, but Chandler Behringer was a fine foil for
it. He alleviated nothing, but he set up a constant distraction purely
by the bumbling, burrowing busyness of his mind. Now it had faded to a
whisper, to an effective nothing, and her torture poured down on her.
From the warp-shielded, indetectible satellites which guarded the prison
planet and administered the punishment, agony poured down to her.

Thus it will be tonight, and the next and next nights, and every night
for all of my own forever. Hushed in the day and hungry and sweet at
night, it will rain down on me. And I can lie and relax, and I can
harbor my anger and anchor my anguish, but the tide will rise, the
currents will tug until they break me; if it takes two hundred years.
And when I’m broken by it, the torture will go on and on—and on.

Most of the torture was music.

Some of the torture was singing.

And a little of the torture was a thing hardly describable in Earthly
terms, which made pictures—not on a screen, not on the mind like
memories, however poignant—but pictures so clear and true that the
sudden whip of a pennant brought, a second later, spent wind to buffet
the eyelids, pictures wherein one walked barefoot on turf and knew a
mottling of heat and coolth in the arches, with the moisture of the
grass its broken green bleeding. These were pictures where to loose a
sling was to know the draw of the pectorals and the particled bite of
soil under the downdriven toenails, and to picture a leap was to kick
away a very planet, to have that priceless quarter-second of absolute
float, and to come back to a cushioning of one’s own litheness.

This was music of an ancient planet peopled by a race far older. This
was music with the softness and substance of weathered granite, and the
unwinding intricacies of a fern. It was ferocious music with a
thick-wristed control of its furies so sure that it could be used for
laughter. And altogether it was music that rose and cycled and bubbled
and built like the Fountain Itself.

This was the high singing of birds beauty-lost in altitude, and the
heavier, upward voices expressed by the reaching of trees. It was the
voice of the tendon burst for being less strong than the will, and the
heart of the sea, and its base was the bass of pulsations of growth (for
even a shouldering tree trunk has a note, if listened to for years
enough) and altogether these were the voices that made and were made by
the Fountain Itself.

And these were the pictures of the Fountain Itself …

And such were the tortures of those who were exiled, imprisoned and
damned.

She lay there and hated the moonlight; the moon she regarded as ugly and
vulgar and new. It seemed to her an added lash, as were all things
similar and all things contrasting to the world she had lost. She turned
eyes grown cold on the sleeping man, and curled her lip; the creature
was a clever counterpart, a subtle caricature, of the worst of the men
of her race, in no way perfect, in no way magnificent, but in no way so
crude an artifact as to permit her to forget what was surely its
original.

By comparison and by contrast, Earth, this muddy, uncouth ball of offal,
pinioned her soul to her home. Earth had everything that could be found
on her world—after a fashion—racecourses comparatively an armspan wide,
racing dun rats ridden by newts in sleazy silks … men whose eyes
sparkled in the sun not quite as much as her racial brother’s might when
he, with only his shaded hand to help him, sought and found a ghostly
nebula.

Cell by interlocking cell, ion by osmotic particle, she belonged
elsewhere. And Earth, which was her world falsified; and the endless
music, which was her world in truth—these would never let her forget it.

So she cursed the moonbeams and the music sliding down them, and swore
that she would not be broken. She could soak herself in this petty
planet, zip it up to her neck to conceal anything of her real self in
her pettiest acts; she could don the bearing and the thoughts themselves
of Earth’s too-fine, too-empty puppets and still inwardly she would be
herself, a citizen of her world, part of the Fountain Itself. As long as
she was that, in any fiber, she could not be completely an exile.
Excommunicated she might be; bodily removed, wingless and crawling,
trembling under the dear constant breath of her home; but until she
broke, her jailers had failed for all their might and righteousness.

The sun rose and turned her away from her bitterness, a little.

Chan’s sleeping consciousness came close and roared around her, fell
back into blacknesses. She rose and went to the door. The sea was
rose-gold and breathing and the sun was aloft, a shade too near, too
yellow, and too small. She damned it heartily with a swift thought that
spouted and spread and hung in the air like the mist from a fountain,
and went and dressed.

She glanced at the percolator, understood it, and deftly made coffee. At
its first whisper in the tube, Chan sighed and his consciousness came
upward with a rush. Drusilla slipped outside. Patience she had in full
measure, but she felt it unworthy to tap it for such unwieldy
formalities as she knew she must witness if she stayed in the room
during the cracking of his nylon chrysalis.

There was a hoarse shout from inside, a violent floundering, and then
Chandler Behringer appeared. He was tousled and frightened. His panic,
she noted, had been sufficient to drive him outdoors without his shirt,
but not without his trousers. He squeezed his eyelids so tight shut that
his cheekbones seemed to rise; then opened them and saw her standing by
the beach margin. The radiance that came from his face competed for a
moment with the early tilting sunlight.

“I thought you’d gone.”

She smiled. “No.”

She came to him. His eyes devoured her. He raised both hands together
and placed them, one on the other, on his left collarbone. She
understood that he was concealing the vestigial nipples (which were
absent in males of her race) with his wrists. She examined this reflex
with some curiosity, and filed away for future puzzlement the fact that
he did this because he wore trousers; had they been bathing trunks, the
reflex would not have appeared. He took a breath so deep that she
empathized his pain.

“You are the most beautiful woman I have ever seen,” he said.

She did not doubt it, and had no comment.

“The most beautiful woman who ever lived,” he murmured.

Abruptly she turned her back, and now it was her eyes which squeezed
shut. “I am _not_!” she said in a tone so saturated with hatred and
violence that he stepped back almost into the doorway.

Without another word she strode off, down the beach, her direction
chosen solely by the way she happened to be facing at the time. In a
moment she was conscious of his feet padding after her.

“Dru, Dru, don’t go!” he panted. “I’m sorry, I didn’t mean, _hah!_ to do
anything that _hah!_ oh, I was only”

She stopped and turned so abruptly that had he taken two more steps they
would have collided. Far from taking steps, however, he had all he could
do to stay upright.

She stood looking at him, unmoving. On her face was no particular
expression; but there was that in the high-held head, the slightly
distended nostrils, the splendid balance of her stance, and her
gracefully held, powerful hands that made approach impossible. His eyes
were quite round and his lips slightly parted. He extended one hand and
moved his mouth silently, then let the hand fall. His knees began to
tremble visibly.

She turned again and walked away. He stood there for a long time
watching her go. When she was simply a brilliant fleck on the
brightening dunes, the purposeless hand came forward again.

“Dru?” he said, in a voice softened to soprano inaudibility by all the
cautions of awe. And she was gone, and he turned slowly, as if he had a
tall and heavy weight on his rounded shoulders, and plodded back to the
cabin.

She found a road which paralleled the beach and climbed to it. Fools
cluster about the Universe, she thought, like bubbles about the fountain
pool, shifting and pulsing at random, without design, purpose or
function. She had left such a fool and she was such a fool. There was
far more culpability in her folly than in that of the man. He had little
control over what he might say, and less understanding, because of his
nature and his limitations. Neither his faculties nor his conditioning
could enable him to understand why she felt such fury.

She stabbed her heels into the sandy roadbed as she walked. She ground
her teeth. _The most beautiful woman who ever lived …_

Her beauty!

_Where, exile—where, criminal, has your beauty brought you?_

She strode on, her mood so black it all but eclipsed the torture music.

Perhaps fifteen minutes later, she became conscious of a shrill
ultrasonic, a rapidly pulsing, urgent, growing thing that would be a
silence to all but her. She slowed, stopped finally. The sound came from
behind her, but she would not confuse her analysis by looking back. She
listened as an intervening wind carried the vibrations away and then let
them come back again, nearer, stronger. She sensitized her bare feet;
she raised an arm and took the vibrations on the back of her hand. She
became conscious of synchronous sounds.

Something rotated at approximately thirty-eight hundred and forty rpm.
Something was chain-driven and the chain was not a metal. Something
pounded … no, paced—something rolled endless soft cleats on the earth.
She heard the straining of coil springs, the labored slide of heavy
transverse leaf-springs, the make-and-break in the meniscus of the oil
guarding busy pistons.

The utter stupidity of so complex a thing as an automobile was, to her,
more wondrous than a rainbow.

At last she turned to look, and in a moment she saw it climb a rise some
two miles away. The piercing ultrasonic was beyond bearing, and she
adjusted her hearing to eliminate everything between eighty-six and
eighty-eight thousand cycles.

More comfortable now, she waited patiently. The car slid down a straight
and gentle grade toward her, spitting sunlight through its chromium
teeth, palming aside the morning air and pressing it back and down its
sleek flanks, while underneath, where there was no hint of fairing, air
shocked and roiled and shuddered and troubled what dust it could find in
the sandy road. It was a very large and very new car. Drusilla watched
it, wide-eyed. She came to wonder what conclusions one would have
regarding these—these savages, if one knew nothing of them but such a
vehicle. What manner of man streamlines only where he can see?

The lovely thought, then: _It’s a world of clowns_.

She smiled; the driver saw it and his foot came down on the brake pedal.
The car threw down its glittering baroque nose, slid a hand’s breadth,
and lowered itself sitzwise into its warm bath of springs.

The driver’s eyes were long and flat and his nose and chin were sharp.
Drusilla watched what he was doing, which was watching himself watch
her.

Suddenly he said, “How far is it to—” and before the first word was
spoken, she knew he was completely familiar with these roads.

She said, “Your—” and raised her hand to point accurately at the hood,
while she searched him for the term. “Your rocker-arm’s not getting oil.
The third one from the front.” Even while the motor idled, the soundless
shriek of that dry friction would have been unbearable had she let it.

“Sounds all right to me,” he shrugged. He looked—he journeyed,
rather—down from her eyes, down until he saw that her feet were bare. He
left his gaze where it was and said, “Let me give you a lift.” He half
turned then, reached one thin spidery arm back and across without
looking, and the rear door swung open.

Drusilla took one step forward and only then saw that the man was not
alone in the car. She stopped, amazed—not at the woman who sat there,
but at the fact that perceptions such as hers had missed so much. She
glanced at the man, and realized that it was his feeling, or lack of it,
that had numbed and blinded her to everything about the woman who sat
beside him. She was companion reduced to presence, minified to fixture,
reduced to a very limbo of familiarity. Drusilla stared at her, and the
woman stared back.

She was a small woman, compact, so coiffed and clad that she was only a
blandness. What kept her from being featureless as an egg was a pair of
achingly blue eyes large enough for a being half again her size, and a
perfect mouth painted such a transcendental, pupil-shrinking red that
surely it would melt fuse-wire. Her wide eyes were blank.

To Drusilla’s horror, a growth like an iridescent liver sprang into
being between the flaming lips, grew to the size of a fist and collapsed
limply. The lips parted a pink tongue deftly caught, cleared, and drew
the limp matter back between an even flicker of paper-white teeth. And
again the face was molded and smooth and motionless.

“My wife,” said the man, “so you’re chaperoned. My God, Lu, you got
bubble gum again.” The woman took her gaze away from Drusilla and placed
it on the driver, but there was otherwise no change. “Get in.”

Drusilla’s mind played back a fleeting inner sensation she had taken
from him when he had said “My wife.” It was … pride? No. Admiration?
Hardly! _Compliment_; that was it. This woman was a compliment he paid
himself. He had no tiny fleck of doubt that he was admired for her
careful finish.

The big blue eyes swung to her again and she probed.

For a ghastly micro-second, she had all the sensations of walking into a
snakepit with chloroform on her scarf. She recoiled violently, moved far
back to the low bank; and she shuddered.

“Come on, uh, hey, what’s the matter?” the driver called.

Drusilla shook her head twice, not so much in refusal as in an attempt
to escape from something that was laying clammy strands of silk on her
face and hair. Without another word, she turned and walked away down the
road, behind the car.

“Hey!”

Drusilla did not look back.

He started the car and drove off slowly. In a moment, the woman leaned
forward and tugged hard on the wheel. The car heeled back on the road,
and at last he took his eyes from the rear view mirror.

“Now what’s with her?” he demanded of the windshield wiper.

Lu blew another bubble.

When the car was gone, Drusilla went slowly back and past the place she
had met it, and on toward the town. From her marrow she swore a mighty
oath that never again would she be trapped into sending her probes into
such a revolting mess. The driver hadn’t been like that; Chan Behringer
hadn’t. Yet she knew with a terrible certainty that there must be
thousands like that creature here on the prison planet.

So as she walked she devised something, a hair-triggered synaptic
structure, a reaction pattern that could, even without her conscious
knowledge, detect the faintest beginnings of a presence such as this;
and it would snap down her shields, isolate her, protect her, keep her
clean.

She was badly shaken. The presence of that woman had shaken her, but the
most devastating thing of all was the knowledge that she could be
shaken. It was a realization most difficult for her to absorb; it had
little precedent in her cosmos.

Walking, she shuddered again.

Drusilla came to the town and wandered until she found a restaurant
which needed a waitress. She borrowed the price of a pair of beach
sandals from the weary cashier and went to work. She found a little room
and at the end of the second day she had the price of a cotton dress.

In the second week she was a stenographer and, in the second month
secretary to the head of a firm which made boat-sails and awnings. She
invested quietly, sold some poems, a song, two articles and a short
story. In terms of her environment, she did very well indeed, very fast.
In her own estimate, she did nothing but force her attention randomly
away from her torture.

For the torture, of course, continued. She bore it with outward
composure, shucked it off as casually as, from time to time, she changed
her name, her job, her hair-styling and her accent. But like the lessons
she learned, like the knowledge of the people she met and worked with,
the torture accumulated. She could estimate her capacity for it. It was
large, but not infinite. She could get rid of none of it, any more than
she could get rid of knowledge. It could be compacted and stored. As
long as she could do this with the torture, she was undefeated. But she
was quite capable of calculating intake against capacity and she had not
much time. A year and a half, two …

She would stand at the window, absorbing her punishment, staring up into
the night sky with her bright wise eyes. She could not see the guardian
ships, of course, but she knew they were there. She knew of their
killer-boats which could, if necessary, slip down in moments and blast a
potential escapee, or one about to violate the few simple rules of a
prisoner’s conduct.

Sometimes, objectively, she marveled at the cruel skill of the torture.
Music alone, with its ineffable spectrum of sadness and longing and wild
nostalgic joy, could have been enough and more than enough for a
prisoner to bear; but the sensory pictures, the stimulative and
restimulative flow and change of taste and motion and all the subtleties
of the kinetic senses—these, mixed and mingled with music, charging in
where music lulled, marching in the footprints of the music’s rhythmic
stride—these were the things which laughed at her barriers, sparred with
her, giggling; met her fists with a breeze, her rapier with a gas, her
advances with a disappearance.

There was no fighting attacks like these. Ignorance would have been a
defense, but was of no use to her who was so nerve-alive to all the
torture’s sense and symbolism. All she could do was to absorb, compact,
and hope that she could find a defense before she broke.

So she lived and outwardly prospered. She met some humans who amused her
briefly, and others she avoided after one or two meetings because they
reminded her so painfully of her own people—a smile, a stride, a
matching of colors. If she met any others with the terrifying quality of
the woman in the car, she was not aware of it; that part of her defense,
at least, was secure.

But the torture still poured down upon her, and after half a year she
knew she must take some steps to counteract it. At base, the solution
was simple. If she did nothing, the torture would crush her, and there
was no surcease in that, for having broken, she would go on suffering
it. She could kill herself, but that in itself would fulfill the terms
of her sentence—“life imprisonment—with torture.” There was only one
way—to be killed, and to be killed by the guardians. She was not under a
death sentence. If she forced one, they would have; to violate their own
penalty, and she would be able to die unbroken, as befits a Citizen of
the Fountain Itself.

More and more she studied the sky, knowing of the undetectible presence
of the guardians and their killer-boats, knowing that if she could think
of it, there must be a way to bring one of them careening silently down
on her to snuff her out. She made sendings of many kinds—even of the
kind she had used to extinguish the life-force of the Preceptor—without
altering the quality or degree of torture in the slightest.

Perhaps the guardians sent, but did not receive; perhaps nothing could
touch them. Geared to the pattern of a Citizen’s mind and conditioning,
they patiently produced that which must, in time, destroy it. The
destruction would be because of the weakness of the attacked. Drusilla
wanted to be destroyed through the strength of the attacker. The
distinction was, to her, clear and vital.

There had to be a way, if only she could think of it.

There was, and she did.

He came onstage grinning like a boy, swinging his guitar carelessly. The
set was a living room. He plumped down on a one-armed easy-chair and
hooked a brown-and-white hassock toward him with his heel. There was
applause.

“Thank you, Mother,” said Chan Behringer. He slipped the plectrum from
under the first and second strings. Dru thought _Your low D is one
one-hundred-twenty-eighth tone sharp_.

Deftly, out of sight of the audience, he plugged in the pickup cable.
Dru watched attentively. She had never seen a twelve-string guitar
before.

He began to play. He played competently, with neither mistakes nor
imagination. There was a five-stage amplifier built into his chair and a
foot-pedal tone control and electronic vibrato in the hassock. A rough
cutoff at twenty-seven thousand cycles, she realized, and then
remembered that, to most humans, response flat to eight thousand is high
fidelity.

She was immensely pleased with the electrical pickups; she had not
noticed them at first, which was a compliment to him. One was magnetic,
sunk into the fingerboard at the fourteenth fret. The other was a
contact microphone, obviously inside the box, directly under the bridge.
The either-or-both switch was audible when he moved it, which she
thought disgraceful.

He finished his number, drawled a few lines of patter, asked for and
played a couple of requests and an encore, by which time Drusilla had
left the theater and was talking to the stage doorman. He took the paper
parcel she handed him and sent it to the dressing rooms via the callboy.

In a matter of seconds, there was a wild whoop from backstage and Chan
Behringer came bounding down the iron steps, clutching a wild flannel
shirt, a pair of blue dungarees, and some tatters of paper and string.

“Dru! Dru!” he gasped. He ran to her, his arms out. Then he stopped,
faltered, put his head very slightly to one side. “Dru,” he said again,
softly.

“Hello, Chan.”

“I never thought I’d see you again.”

“I had to return your things.”

“Too good to be true,” he murmured. “I—we—” Suddenly he turned to the
goggling doorman and tossed the clothes to him. “Hang on to these for
me, will you, George?” To Drusilla he said, “I should take ’em
backstage, but I’m afraid to let you out of my sight.”

“I won’t run away again.”

“Let’s get out of here,” he said. He took her arm, and again there was
the old echo of a shock he had once felt at the touch of her flesh
through fabric.

They went to a place, all soft lights and leather, and they talked about
the beach and the city and show business and guitar music, but not about
her strange fury with him the morning she had stalked out of his life.

“You’ve changed,” he said at length.

“Have I?”

“You were like—like a queen before. Now you’re like a princess.”

“That’s sweet.”

“More … human.”

She laughed. “I wasn’t exactly human when you first met me. I’d had a
bad time. I’m all right now, Chan. I—didn’t want to see you until I was
all right.”

They talked until it was time for his next act, and after that they had
dinner.

She saw him the next day, and the next.

The chubby man with a face like a cobbler and hands like a surgeon made
the most beautiful guitars in the world. He sprang to his feet when the
tall girl came in. It was the first time he had paid such a courtesy in
fourteen years.

“Can you cut an F-slot that looks like this?” she demanded.

He looked at the drawing she laid on the counter, grunted, then said,
“Sure, lady. But why?”

She launched into a discussion which, at first, he did not hear, for it
was in his field and in his language and he was too astonished to think.
But once into it, he very rapidly learned things about resonance,
harmonic reinforcement, woods, varnishes and reverse-cantilever designs
that were in no book he had ever heard about.

When she left a few minutes later, he hung gasping to the counter. In
front of him was a check for work ordered. In his hand was a
twenty-dollar bill for silence. In his mind was a flame and a great
wonderment.

She spilled a bottle of nail polish remover on Chan’s guitar. He was
kind and she was pathetically contrite. It was all right, he said; he
knew a place that could retouch it before evening. They went there
together. The little man with the cobbler’s face handed over the new
instrument, a guitar with startling slots, an ultra-precision bridge, a
fingerboard that crept into his hand as if it were alive and loved him.
He chorded it once, and at the tone he put it reverently down and
stared. His eyes were wet.

“It’s yours,” Drusilla twinkled. “Look—your name inlaid on the
neck-back.”

“I know your guitars,” said Chan to the chubby man, “but I never heard
of anything like this.”

“Tricks to every trade,” said the man, and winked.

Drusilla slipped him another twenty as they left.

The electronics engineer stared at the schematic diagram. “It won’t
work.”

“Yes, it will,” said Drusilla. “Can you build it?”

“Well, gosh, yes, but who ever heard of voltage control like this?
Where’s the juice supposed to go from …” He leaned closer. “Well, I’ll
be damned. Who designed this?”

“Build it,” she said.

He did. It worked. Drusilla wired it into the prop armchair and Chan
never knew anything had been changed. He attributed everything to the
new instrument as he became more familiar with it and began to exploit
its possibilities. Suddenly there were no more layoffs. No more road
trips, either. The clubs began to take important notice of the shy young
man with the tear-your-heart-out guitar.

She stole his vitamin pills and replaced them with something else. She
invited him to dinner at her apartment and he fainted in the middle of
the fish course.

He came to seven hours later on the couch, long after the strange
induction baker and the rack of impulse hypodermics had been hidden
away. He remembered absolutely nothing. He was lying on his left arm and
it ached.

Dru told him he had fallen asleep and she had just let him sleep it out.

“Poor dear, you’ve been working too hard.”

He told her somewhat harshly that she must _never_ let him sleep like
that, cutting off the circulation in his fingering arm.

The next day, the arm was worse and he had to cancel a date. On the
third day, it was back to normal, one hundred per cent, and on the
fourth, fifth, and sixth days it continued to improve. And what it could
do on the fingerboard was past description. Which was hardly surprising:
there was not another arm on Earth like it, with its heavier
nerve-fibers, the quadrupling of the relay-nodes on the medullary
sheaths, the low-resistance, super-reactive axones, and the isotopic
potassium and sodium which drenched them.

“I don’t play this damn thing any more,” he said. “I just think the
stuff and that left hand reads my mind.”

He made three records in three months, and the income from them
increased cubically each time. Then the record company decided to save
money and put him under a long-term contract at a higher rate than
anyone had ever been paid before.

Chan, without consulting Drusilla, bought one of a cluster of very
exclusive houses just over the city line. The neighbors on the left were
the Kerslers, whose grandfather had made their money in off-the-floor
sanitary fixtures. The neighbors on the right were the Mullings you
know, Osprey Mullings, the writer, two books a year, year in and year
out, three out of four of them making Hollywood.

Chan invited the Kerslers and the Mullings to his housewarming, and took
Drusilla out there to surprise her.

She was surprised, all right. Kersler had a huge model railroad in his
cellar and his mind likewise contained a great many precise minutiae,
only one of which was permitted to operate at a time. Grace Kersler’s
mind was like an empty barn solidly lined with pink frosting. Osprey
Mullings’ head contained a set of baby’s blocks of limited number, with
which he constructed his novels by a ritualistic process of
rearrangement. But Luellen Mullings was the bland-faced confection who
secretly chewed bubble gum and who had so jolted Drusilla that day on
the beach road.

It was a chatty and charming party, and it was the very first time that
humans had been capable of irritating Drusilla so much that she had to
absorb the annoyance rather than ignore it. She bore this attack on her
waning capacities with extreme graciousness, and at parting, the
Kerslers and the Mullings pressed Chan’s hand and wished him luck with
that _beautiful_ Drusilla Strange, you lucky fellow you.

And late at night, full to bursting with success and security and a fine
salting of ambition, Chan drove her back to town and at her apartment,
he proposed to her.

She held both his hands and cried a little, and promised to work with
him and to help him even more in the future—but, “Please, please, Chan,
never ask me that again.”

He was hurt and baffled, but he kept his promise.

Chan studied music seriously now—he never had before. He had to. He was
giving concerts rather than performances, and he played every showcase
piece ever composed by one virtuoso to madden and frustrate the others.
He played all of the famous violin cadenzi on his guitar as well. He
made arrangements of the arrangements. He did all this with the light
contempt of a Rubinstein examining a two-dollar lesson in chord-vamping.
So at length he had no recourse but to compose. Some of his stuff was
pretty advanced. All of it took you by the throat and held you.

One Sunday afternoon, “Try this,” said Drusilla. She hummed a tone or
two, then burst into a cascade of notes that brought Chan up standing.

_“God_, Dru!”

“Try it,” she said.

He got his guitar. His left hand ran over the fingerboard like a
perplexed little animal, and he struck a note or two.

“No,” she said, “this.” She sang.

“Oh,” he whispered. Watching her, he played. When she seemed not
pleased, he stopped.

“No,” she said. “Chan, I can only sing one note at a time. You have
twelve strings.” She paused, thoughtfully, _listening_. “Chan, if I
asked you to play that theme, and then to—to paint pictures on it with
your guitar, would that make sense?”

“You usually make sense.”

She smiled at him. “All right. Play that theme, and with it, play the
way a tree grows. Play the way the bud leads the twig and the twig cuts
up into space to make a hole for the branch. No,” she said quickly, as
his eyes brightened and his right thumb and forefinger tightened on the
plectrum, “not yet. There’s more.”

He waited.

She closed her eyes. Almost inaudibly, she hummed something. Then she
said, “At the same time, put in all the detail of a tree that has
already grown.” She opened her eyes and looked straight at him. “That
will consolidate,” she said factually, “because a tree is only the
graphic trajectory of its buds.”

He looked at her strangely. “You’re quite a girl.”

“Never mind that,” she said quickly. “Now put those three things
together with a fountain. And that’s all.”

“What kind of a fountain?”

She paled, but her voice was easy. “Silly. The only kind of fountain
that could _be_ with that theme, the tree growing, and the tree grown.”

He struck a chord. “I’ll try.”

She hummed for him, then brought one long forefinger down. He picked up
the theme from her voice. He closed his eyes. The guitar, of all
instruments the most intimately expressive, given a magic sostenuto by
its electronic graft, began to speak.

The theme, the tree growing, the tree grown.

Suddenly, the fountain, too.

What happened then left them both breathless. Music of this nature
should never be heard in a cubic volume smaller than its subject.

When the pressured stridency of the music was quite gone, Chan looked at
a cracked window pane and then turned to watch a talc-fine trickle of
plaster dust stream down from the lintel of the french window.

“Where,” he said, shaken, “did you get _that_ little jangle?”

“Thin air, darling,” said Drusilla blithely. “All the time, everywhere,
whenever you like. Listen.”

He cocked his head. There was an intense silence. His left hand crept up
to the frets and spattered over them. In spite of the fact that he had
not touched the strings with his right hand, a structure of sound hung
in the room, reinforcing itself, holding, holding … finally dying.

“That it?” he asked, awed.

She held up a thumb and forefinger very close together. “About so much
of it.”

“How come I never heard it before?”

“You weren’t ready.”

His eyes suddenly filled with tears. “Damn it, Drusilla … you’re—you’ve
done … Oh, hell, I don’t know, I love you so much.”

She touched his face. “Shh. Play for me, Chan.”

He breathed hard, thickly. “Not in here.”

He put down his guitar and went to get the portable amplifier. They set
it upon the rolling lawn and plugged in the guitar. Chan held the
instrument for a silent moment, sliding his hand over its polished
flank. He looked up suddenly and met Drusilla’s eyes. Chan’s face
twisted, for her ecstasy and gaiety and triumph added up to something
very like despair, and he did not understand.

He would have thrown down the guitar then, for his heart was full of
her, but she backed away, shaking her head lightly, and bent to the
amplifier to switch it on. Her fingers pulled at the rotary switch as
she turned it, and only she knew the nature of the mighty little
transmitter that began to warm up along with the audio. She moved back
still further; she did not want to be close to him when it—happened.

He watched her for a moment, then looked down at the guitar. He watched
his four enchanted left fingers hook and hover over the fingerboard; he
looked at them with a vast puzzlement that slowly turned to raptness. He
began to sway gently.

Drusilla stood tall and taut, looking past him to the trees, to the
scudding clouds and beyond. She dropped her shields and let the music
pour in. And from the guitar came a note, another, two together, a
strange chord. _For this I shall be killed_, she thought. To bring to
the mighty scorn her people had of Earth and all things Earthly, this
molded savage who could commune like a Citizen … this was the greatest
affront.

A foam of music fell and feathered and rushed inward to the Fountainhead
Itself, and every voice of it smashed and hurtled upward. The paired
sixth strings of the guitar flung up with them in a bullroar _glissando_
that broke and spread glistening all over the keyboard, falling and
falling away from a brittle high spatter of doubled first strings struck
just barely below the bridge, metallic and needly; and if those taut
strings were tied to a listener’s teeth, they could not be more intimate
and shocking.

The unique sound box found itself in sudden shrill resonance, and it
woke the dark strings, the deep and mighty ones. They thrummed and sang
without being touched; and Chan’s inhuman fingers found a figure in the
middle register, folded it in on itself, broke it in two, and the broken
pieces danced … and still the untouched strings hummed and droned, first
one loud and then another as the resonances altered and responded.

And all at once the air was filled with the sharp and dusty smell of
ozone.

With it all, the music, hers and Chan’s, settled itself down and down
like some dark giant, pressing and sweeping and gathering in its drapes
and folds as it descended to rest, to collect its roaring and crooning
and tittering belongings all together that they may be pieced and piled
and understood; until at last the monster was settled and neat, leaving
a looming bulk of silence and an undertone of pumping life and
multi-level quiet stripes of contemplation. The whole structure
breathed, slowly and more slowly, held its breath, let a tension
develop, rising, painful, agonizing, intolerable …

“Play Red River Valley, hey, Chan?”

Drusilla gasped, and the ozone rasped her throat. Chan’s fingers
faltered, stopped. He half-turned, with a small, interrogative whimper.

Standing on the other side of the far hedge, near her house, was Luellen
Mullings, her doll-figure foiled like a glass diamond in a negligible
playsuit, her golden hair free, her perfect jaw busy on her sticky cud.

There was born in Drusilla a fury more feral, more concentrated, than
any power of muscle or mind she had ever conceived of. Luellen Mullings,
essence of all the degradation Earth was known for, all the cheapness,
shallowness, ignorance and stupidity. She was the belch in the
cathedral; she would befoul the Fountain Itself.

“Hi, Dru, honey. Didn’t see you. Hey, I saw a feller at the Palace could
play guitar holding it behind his back.” She sniffed. “What’s that funny
smell? Like lightning or something.”

“Get back in your house, you cheap little slut,” Drusilla hissed.

“Hey, who you calling—” Luellen dipped down and picked up a smooth white
stone twice the size of her fist. She raised it. Even Drusilla’s
advanced reflexes were not fast enough to anticipate what she did. The
stone left her hand like a bullet. Drusilla braced herself—but the stone
did not come to her. It struck Chan just behind the ear. He pivoted on
his heel three-quarters of a revolution, and quietly collapsed on the
grass, the guitar nestling down against him like a loving cat.

“Now look at what you made me do!” Luellen cried shrilly.

Drusilla uttered a harpy’s scream and bounded across the lawn, her long
hands spread out like talons. Luellen watched her come, round-eyed.

There is a force in steady eyes by which a tiger may be made to turn
away. It can make a strong man turn and run. There is a way to gather
this force into a deadly nubbin and hurl it like a grenade. Drusilla
knew how to do this, for she had done it before; she had killed with it.
But the force she hurled at Luellen Mullings now was ten times what she
had dealt the Preceptor.

For a moment, the Universe went black, and then Drusilla became aware of
a pressure on her face. There was another sensation, systemic,
pervasive. Her legs, her arms, were weighted and tingly, and she seemed
to have no torso at all.

She gradually understood the sensation on her face. Moist earth and
grass. She was lying on her stomach on the lawn. She absorbed this
knowledge as if it were a complicated matrix of ideas which, if
comprehended, might lead to hitherto unheard-of information. At last she
realized what was wrong with her body. Oxygen starvation. She began to
breathe again, hard, painful gasps, inflations that threatened to burst
the pulmonary capillaries, exhalations that brought her diaphragm upward
until it crushed in panic against the pounding cardium.

She moved feebly, pulled a limp hand toward her, rested a moment with it
flat on the grass near her shoulder. She began to press herself upward
weakly, failed, rested a moment, and tried again. At last she raised
herself to a sitting position.

Chan lay where he had fallen, still as death, guitar nearby.

_Pop!_

Drusilla looked up. Over the hedge, like an artificial flower, nodded
Luellen’s bright head. The quick deft tongue was retrieving the detritus
of a broken bubble.

Drusilla snarled and formed another bolt, and as it left her something
like a huge soft mallet seemed to descend on her shoulder blades. Seated
as she was, it folded her down until her chest struck the ground. Her
hip joints crackled noisily. She writhed, straightened out, lay on her
side gasping.

_Pop!_

Drusilla did not look up.

Presently she heard Luellen’s light footsteps retreating down the gravel
path. She gave herself over to a wave of weakness, and relaxed
completely to let the strength flow back.

Shh … shh … approaching footsteps.

Drusilla rolled over and sat up again. Her head felt simultaneously
pressured and fragile, as if any sudden move would make it burst like a
faulty boiler. She turned pain-blinded eyes to the footsteps. When the
jagged ache receded, she saw Luellen sauntering toward her on this side
of the hedge, swinging her hips, humming tunelessly.

“Feeling better, honey?”

Drusilla glared at her. The killer-bolt began to form again. Luellen
sank gracefully to the grass, near but not too near, and chose a
grass-stem to pull up.

“I wouldn’t if I were you, hon,” she said pleasantly. “I can keep this
up all day. You’re just knocking yourself out.”

She regarded the grass stem thoughtfully from her wide vacant eyes,
poked out a membrane of gum, hesitated a moment, and drew it back in
without blowing a bubble. The gum clicked wetly twice as she worked it.

“_Damn_ you,” said Drusilla devoutly.

Luellen giggled. Drusilla struggled upward, leaned heavily on one arm,
and glared. Luellen said, without looking at her, “That’s far enough,
sweetie.”

“Who are you?” Drusilla whispered.

“Home makuh,” said Luellen, with a trace of Bronx accent. “Leisure class
type home makuh.”

“You know what I mean,” Drusilla growled.

“Whyn’t you look and see?”

Drusilla curled her lip.

“Don’t want to get your pretty probes dirty, huh? Know what you are?
You’re a snob.”

“A—a what?”

“Snob,” said Luellen. She stretched prettily. “Just too good for
_anybody_. Too good for him.”

She pointed to Chan with a gesture of her head. “Or me.” She shrugged.
“_Any_body.”

Drusilla glanced at Chan and probed anxiously.

“He’s all right,” said Luellen. “Just unplugged.”

Drusilla swung her attention back to the other girl. Reluctantly she
dropped her automatic shield and reached out with her mind. _What are
you?_

Luellen put her hands out, palms forward. “Not that way. I don’t do that
any more. Look if you want to, but if you want to talk to me, talk out
loud.”

Drusilla probed. “A criminal!” she said finally, in profound disgust.

“Sisters under the skin,” said Luellen. She popped her gum. Drusilla
shuddered. Luellen said, “Tell you what I did.”

“I’m not interested.”

“Tell you, anyway. Listen,” Luellen said suddenly, “you know if you try
to do anything to me, you’ll go flat on your bustle. Well, the same
thing applies if you don’t listen to me. Hear?”

Drusilla dropped her eyes and was furiously silent. Reluctantly she
realized that this creature could do exactly as she said.

“I’m not asking you to like it,” Luellen said more gently. “Just listen,
that’s all.”

She waited a moment, and when Drusilla offered nothing, she said, “What
I did, I climbed over the wall at school.”

Drusilla gasped. “You went outside?”

Luellen rolled over onto her stomach and propped herself on her elbows.
She pulled another blade of grass and broke it. “Something funny
happened to me. You know the feeling-picture about jumping?”

Drusilla recognized it instantly, the sweet, strong, breathless
sensation of being strong and leaping from soft grass, floating? landing
lithely.

“You do,” said Luellen, glancing at Drusilla’s face. “Well, I was having
that picture one fine morning when it—_stuck_. I mean like one of the
phonograph records here when it gets stuck. There I was feeling a jump.
Just off the ground, and it all froze.”

She laughed a little. “I was real scared. After a while, it started
again. I went and asked my tutor about it. She got all upset and went to
the Preceptor. He called me in and there was no end of hassle about it.”
Again she laughed. “I’d have forgotten the whole thing if he hadn’t made
such a fuss. He wanted me to forget it in the _worst_ way. Tried to make
me think it happened because there was something wrong with me.

“So I got to thinking about it. When you do that, you start looking
pretty carefully at _all_ the pictures. And you know, they’re full of
scratches and flaws, if you look.

“But all the time they were teaching us that this was the world over the
Wall—perfect green grass, beautiful men, the fountain and the falls and
all the rest of it, that we were supposed to graduate to when the time
came. I wondered so much that I wouldn’t wait any more. So I went over
the wall. They caught me and sent me here.”

“I don’t wonder,” said Drusilla primly.

Luellen put pink fingers to her lips, hauled the gum out almost to arm’s
length, and chewed it back in as she talked. “And all you did was knock
off the Preceptor!”

Drusilla winced and said nothing.

Luellen said, “You been here about two years, right? How many of us
prisoners have you run into?”

“None!” said Drusilla, with something like indignation. “I wouldn’t have
anything to do with—” She clamped her lips tight and snorted through her
nostrils. “Will you _stop_ that giggling?”

“I can’t help it,” said Luellen. “It’s part of the pattern for home
makuhs. All home makuhs giggle.”

“… And that voice!”

“That’s part of the pattern too, hon,” said Luellen. “How do you think
I’d go over at the canasta table if I weren’t a-flutter and a-twitter,
all coos and sighs and gentle breathings? My God, the girls’d be scared
right out of their home permanents!” She tittered violently.

“Again!” Drusilla winced.

“You might as well get used to it, hon. I had to. You’ll be doing
something equally atrocious yourself, pretty soon. It goes under the
head of camouflage … Look, I’ll stop fooling around. There’s a couple of
hard truths you have to get next to. I know what you did. You set up a
reflex to blank out any ex-Citizen you might meet. Right?”

“One must keep oneself decent,” insisted Drusilla.

Luellen shook her head wonderingly. “You’re just dumb, girl. I don’t
like you, but I have to be sorry for you.”

“I don’t need your pity!”

“Yes, you do. You’ve been asleep for a whole lot of years and you just
have to snap out of it.” Luellen knelt and sat back on her heels. “Tell
me—up to the time they shipped you here, where did you go?”

“You know perfectly well. The Great Hall. My garden. My dormitory.
That’s all.”

“Um-hmm. That’s all. And every minute since you were born, you’ve been
conditioned: a Citizen is the finest flower of creation. Be a good
obedient girl and you’ll gambol on the green for the rest of your life.
Meanwhile there are criminals who get sent to prison, and the prison is
the lowest cesspool in the Universe where you live out your life being
reminded of the glory of the world you lost.”

“Of course, but you make it sound—”

“Did you ever see any of those big muscular beautiful men the pictures
told you about? Did you ever see that old-granite and new-grass
landscape, or get warm under that nice big sun?”

“No, I was sent here before I had—”

Luellen demonstrated her ties to Earth by uttering a syllable which was,
above all else, Earthy. “You’re the dumbest blind kitten I ever saw. And
tell me, when they took you to the ship, did you get a chance to look
around?”

“I wasn’t … worthy,” said Drusilla miserably. “If a—a criminal was
privileged to see outside the Wall—”

“They blindfolded you. Yes, and you never got a chance to look out of
the ship when it left, either. Look, Citizen,” she said scornfully, “if
you hadn’t had the good sense to get yourself sent here, you never would
have gotten over the Wall!”

“I had only six more years before I—”

“Before you’d be quietly moved to another Walled Place with your age
group. And maybe you’d have been bred, and maybe not, and by the time
you realized there was no release for you, you’d be so old you wouldn’t
care any more. And they call that a world and this a prison!”

Drusilla suddenly put her hands over her ears. “I won’t listen to this!
I won’t!”

Luellen grasped her wrist in a remarkably powerful little hand. “Yes, by
God, you will,” she said between her perfect teeth. “Our race is old and
dying, rotten to the core. Know why you never saw any men? Because there
are only a few hundred of them left. They lie in their cubicles and get
fat and breed. And most of their children are girls, because that’s the
way it was arranged so long ago that we’ve forgotten how it was done or
how to change it. You know what’s over the Wall? Nothing! It’s an ice
world, with a dying sun and thinning air, and a little cluster of Walled
Places to breed women for the men to breed with, and a few old, old,
worn transmitters for music and pictures to condition the blindworms who
live and die there!”

Drusilla began to cry. Luellen sat back and watched her, a great
softness coming into her eyes.

“Cry, that’s good, sweetie,” she said huskily. “Ah, you poor brat. You
could’ve gotten straightened out the day you arrived. But no. Criminals
were the lowest of the low, and you wouldn’t associate with them. Earth
and humans were insects and savages, because that’s what you were
taught. To be a Citizen was to be a god among gods, and to hear the
music was your torture, for what you’d lost.”

“What about the torture?”

“Transmitters in the guardian ships. You know about that.”

“But the Citizens on board them—”

“What? Oh, for Pete’s sake, hon! They’re machines, that’s all.”

“They’re not! The killer-boats are—”

“The killer-boats home on any human mind that begins to operate near the
music bands. You had a close call, kitten.”

“I wish one had come,” Drusilla said miserably. “That’s what I wanted.”

“One did come, silly. But I don’t get you. What did you want?”

“I wanted it to kill me. That’s why I taught Chan to—”

Luellen clapped her hands to her face. “I thought that, but I couldn’t
really believe it! Sweetie, I got news for you. That boat wouldn’t have
killed you. It was after your boy-friend there.”

Drusilla’s face went almost as white as her teeth. She put her fist to
her mouth and bit it, her eyes round, full of horror.

“It’s all right,” Luellen murmured. “It’s gone. It was homing on him,
and when he stopped radiating, it stopped coming. It’s just a machine.”

“You stopped it,” Drusilla breathed. Slowly she sat up straight, staring
at the little blonde as if she had never seen her before.

“Pity if one of us couldn’t out-think a machine,” said Luellen
deprecatingly. Then, “What is it, Dru? What’s the matter?”

“He might have been … killed.”

“You only just thought of that. Really thought of it.”

Drusilla nodded.

“I’ll bet this is the first time you ever thought of someone else. See
what snobbery can do?”

“I feel awful.”

Luellen laughed at her. “You feel fine. Or you will. What you’ve got is
an attack of something called humility. It rushes in to fill the hole
when the snobbery is snatched out. You’ll be all right now.”

“Will I?” She licked her lips. She tried to speak and could not. She
pointed a wavering finger at the unconscious man.

“Him?” Luellen answered the unspoken question. “Just you keep him asleep
for a while. Give him more music, but keep him away from that.” She
pointed to the sky. “He won’t know the difference.”

“Humility,” said Drusilla, thoughtfully. “That’s when you feel … not
good enough. Is that it?”

“Something like that.”

“Then I don’t … I don’t think I understand. Lu, do you know why I killed
the Preceptor?”

Luellen shook her head. “It was a good idea, whatever.”

Drusilla said with difficulty, “My group went to be chosen for breeding.
There’s a—custom that the … ugliest girl must be sent back to her
garden. He pointed me out. I was the ugliest one there. He said I was
the ugliest woman in the world. I went … kind of … crazy, I guess. I
killed him.”

Suddenly she was in Luellen’s strong small arms. “Oh, for God’s sake,”
said Luellen with a roughness that made Drusilla cry again. “You’re the
sorriest most mixed-up little chicken ever. Don’t you know that a
perfect necklace has to have an ugliest diamond in it somewhere?” She
thumped Drusilla’s heaving shoulder. “We’ve been bred for beauty for
more generations than this Earth has years, Dru. On Earth you’re one of
the most beautiful women alive.”

“He told me that once, and I could have … killed him,” Drusilla
squeaked. She swallowed hard, moved back to peer piteously into
Luellen’s face. “Is that humility? To feel you’re not good enough?”

“That’s humiliation,” said Luellen. She paused thoughtfully. “And here’s
the difference: Humility is knowing something is finer and better than
you can ever be, so it’s worth putting everything you have behind that
something. Everything! Like …”

She laughed. “Like me and that ham novelist of mine. Bit by bit, year by
year, he gets better. I give him exactly what he needs, in his own time.
Right now what he wants is an irresponsible little piece of candy he can
pick up or put down, and meantime get envied all over the neighborhood
for. He’s got it in him to do some really important work some day, and
when he does he’ll need something else from me, and I’ll be here to give
it to him. If, fifty years from now, he comes doddering up to me and
tells me I’ve grown with him through the years, I’ll know I did the
thing right.”

Drusilla worried at the statement, turning it over, shaking it. She
parted her lips, closed them again.

Luellen said, “Go ahead. Ask me.”

Drusilla looked to her timidly, dropped her eyes. “Is he really finer
and better?”

“Snob!” said Luellen, and this time it was all kindliness. “Of course!
He’s an Earthman, Dru. Earth is young and crude and raw, but it’s strong
and it’s good. Do you call an infant stupid because it can’t talk, or is
a child bad because it hasn’t learned reason? We have nothing but
decadence to bring to Earth. So instead we help Earth with the best it
has. You keep your eyes open from now on, Dru. Nine women out of ten who
truly help their men to realize themselves are what you’ve been calling
criminals.

“You’ll find them all over, up and down the social scale, through and
through the history of this culture. Put up your shields again—for
fun—and watch the women you meet. See how some seem to understand one
another on sight—how they pass a glance that seems to be full of
secrets. They’re the hope of the world, Dru darling, and this world is
the hope of the Galaxy.” She followed Drusilla’s gaze and smiled. “Now
that you come to think of it, you love him, don’t you?”

“Now that I come to think of it …”

She raised her head and looked at the sky. Gradually a smile was born on
her trembling lips. She shook herself and took a deep breath of the warm
evening air.

“Listen,” she said. She laughed unevenly. “It _is_ sort of scratchy,
isn’t it?”



STORY NOTES



BY PAUL WILLIAMS


“A SAUCER OF LONELINESS”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_,
February 1953. Probably written early autumn 1952.

“A Saucer of Loneliness” was adapted as a radio drama for the “X Minus
One” program (aired Sept. 1, 1957). It was adapted as a television drama
in France in 1982, under the title “La Soucoupe de Solitude.” An
American TV adaptation (starring Shelley Duvall, Richard Libertini and
Nan Martin) was aired Sept. 27, 1986 in the (revived) Twilight Zone
series. In 1975, Sturgeon wrote to the French production company that
had purchased “Saucer”: _I would be most pleased if the film carried the
following dedication, to precede my own credits: THIS FILM IS DEDICATED
TO THE MEMORY OF “MAMA” CASS ELLIOTT, WHO LOVED THE STORY, AND WHO WAS
VERY MUCH LOVED BY ALL THE WORLD. It happens that I received the first
word of your interest in this story on the very day of Cass’s tragic
death_ [July 29, 1974]. _Had I not heard the sad news, I would have
called her immediately and asked her to get in touch with you. Indeed
she loved SAUCER; it had special meanings for her. As an actress of
increasing accomplishment, she had desired for years to play the heroine
of SAUCER, and for years I have been trying to make it possible. She was
a warm and lovely person and a dear friend, and much beloved around the
world as she was by all who knew her, and it would please me beyond
measure to have this dedication made in this way_.

A note from TS to _Galaxy_ editor H. L. Gold after this story was
accepted indicates that Gold wanted to delete the “A” in the title and
requested a new closing paragraph. Sturgeon replied: _Title: I still
like A Saucer of Loneliness, because of its connotation of quantity,
which is lost by dropping the article. What it means to me is “measure”
or “portion.” Closing: This is squeezed out of me like toothpaste out of
a tube with the cap on tight: because of too much pressure, emerging
unexpectedly from the wrong place, and rather damaging to the source;
but for all that, containing precisely the right material:_ [This is
followed by the story’s present closing paragraph. The original
manuscript ended, “You’re beautiful.”]

In one of Sturgeon’s 1955 or ’56 “maunderings” (in which he talked to
himself on paper in an effort to come up with story ideas or further
develop an idea that hasn’t jelled), he speaks longingly of the ease
(and speed) with which certain powerful stories flowed out of him:
_BIANCA’S HANDS and SAUCER OF LONELINESS were so easy … and IT, though I
recall a certain amount of trouble doing the most inferior part of it,
the crap about the will … WORLD WELL LOST was good but really took
forever to set itself up … it’s all very well to say all right, just
write, but dammit you need just something to go on, a setting,
something …_ On another “maundering” page from the same era, TS
reinforces this by saying: _I’m still haunted by SAUCER OF LONELINESS_,
_and somehow am sure I’m right in sticking to this chore until I can
bust loose with such a thing_.

On July 13, 1953, Sturgeon wrote a letter to J. Donald Adams at _The New
York Times Book Review_ in response to a column Adams had written the
day before about “science fiction and its implications for our time.”
Sturgeon approved of Adams’s comments and added, in his letter:

_Probably the most widespread idea about the nature of science fiction
is that it is cold-blooded, mechanistic, gadget-happy … Evolved and
refined, science fiction is today even more preoccupied with human
beings than with machines and technologies. After some fifteen years of
arduous filtering, one of S-F’s more widely-read practitioners has come
up with a definition of science fiction designed to include all that is
worthy in the field, and exclude the cowboy story which occurs on Mars
instead of in Arizona. “A good story is good science fiction,” he says,
“when it deals with human beings with a human problem which is resolved
in terms of their humanity, cast in a narrative which could not occur
without the science element.”_

_(To show you that this definition is not merely wishful, I’m committing
the enormity of sending you two examples of S-F which follow it. They
are both very short. One is Judith Merril’s “… That Only a Mother …” and
the other is my “A Saucer of Loneliness.”_

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance
[where the story was titled “Saucer of Loneliness”; Sturgeon restored
his preferrred title “A Saucer of Loneliness” in his collection _E
Pluribus Unicorn_, published in November 1953]: THERE ARE SECRETS THAT
CAN BE REPEATED ENDLESSLY AND REMAIN WHOLLY AND ABSOLUTELY SECRET!

“His story ‘A Saucer of Loneliness’ kept me from suiciding when I was
16.”—science fiction writer Spider Robinson, in _Locus_ magazine after
Sturgeon’s death. In the same tribute issue, A.C. Crispin told of
meeting Sturgeon at a convention: “ ‘Hello,’ he said. ‘Why haven’t you
come over to talk to me?’ I managed to mumble that it was because I was
shy. ‘No,’ he said. ‘That won’t do. Shy is noplace, you know. You have
things inside you must communicate, and you’ll never manage it if you’re
shy. I wrote a story once called “A Saucer of Loneliness,” and that’s
what it was all about: communication. There must be communication, or
there can never be love.’ ”

“THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_,
September 1953. Written in October 1952. A handwritten note on the
author’s carbon copy of the manuscript indicates that he finished
writing it, or submitted it to an editor, on November 3, 1952.

In a biographical profile of Theodore Sturgeon I wrote for _Rolling
Stone_ magazine in 1976 (they never published it; it appeared in a 1981
paperback called _The Berkeley Showcase, Vol. 3_, Schochet and
Silbersack, editors) I said, “Sturgeon’s vision in “The Touch of Your
Hand” of a limited telepathic linkage that allows each person’s skills
to become everyman’s is at least as important an idea as the notion of
going to the moon, which originated in science fiction (thousands of
years ago) and has been repeated over the years until somebody finally
went ahead and acted it out. It is _the idea_, not the technology, that
is the force behind human progress.”

TS built another story around this same idea: “The Skills of Xanadu”
(1956). In a 1957 letter to a book editor describing stories available
for a new collection, Sturgeon wrote: _THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND and THE
SKILLS OF XANADU will be seen by the discerning eye to be the same
story. A third, now in preparation for_ Astounding [and apparently never
completed]_, says the same thing again. This results from a deep
conviction that the basic statement of these stories needs to be made_.

Sturgeon’s introduction to “The Touch of Your Hand” in his 1984
collection _Alien Cargo_: _This is from the fertile postwar period, when
I was writing the likes of_ More Than Human. _It’s about love and
authoritarianism, as is so much of my work since_.

Editor’s blurb from the first page of the original magazine appearance:
OSSER KNEW EXACTLY WHAT HE WANTED, WHY HE WANTED IT, AND HOW TO GET
IT—EXCEPT THAT EACH ONE OF HIS REASONS WAS TOTALLY WRONG!

“THE WORLD WELL LOST”: first published in _Universe Science Fiction_,
June 1953. Written late 1952 or early 1953.

In an unpublished note in 1980 TS pointed out the similarity between
Grunty in “The World Well Lost” and characters in his 1949 story
“Minority Report” and his 1960 story “Need” (_This guy is very real to
me—more so than many I have met in the flesh_). The full quote can be
found on p. 381 of Volume V of The Complete Stories of Theodore
Sturgeon.

“The World Well Lost” is included in an anthology of “Gay Stories from
Alice Munro to Yukio Mishima,” _Meanwhile, in Another Part of the
Forest_, edited by Alberto Manguel and Craig Stephenson. In the editors’
introduction to Sturgeon’s story, they write: “Theodore Sturgeon was a
science fiction writer who revolutionized the genre.… One subject that
Sturgeon legitimized for science fiction was sex, in all its astounding
diversity. ‘The World Well Lost’ was ground-breaking when it was
published in 1953—the first science fiction story to sympathetically
portray homosexuality. According to the ‘Prime Directive’ which Sturgeon
later created for the Star Trek television series, the overriding law of
the United Federation of Planets ‘prohibits Federation interference with
the normal development of alien life and societies.’ In his fiction,
Sturgeon gleefully challenges our reading of this directive again and
again by asking: in any society, what does the notion of ‘normal
development’ signify? And under whose social code—in ‘The World Well
Lost’ there is more than one—is any of us allowed the fulfilment of
personal freedom?”

James Gunn in _Alternate Worlds, The Illustrated History of Science
Fiction_ says, in regard to “Sturgeon’s explorations in personal
statement, such as those that turn upon physical abnormality or human
taboos”: “Because of Sturgeon other writers have been freer to write
what they wished to write and able to find a market for it.”

In his 1953 essay “Why So Much Syzygy?” Sturgeon said, _“Bianca’s Hands”
and “The World Well Lost” cause the violently extreme reactions they do
because of the simple fact that the protagonist was happy with the
situation_.

In a “Postscript” included in his 1960 novel _Venus Plus X_, Sturgeon
says:

_I once wrote a fairly vivid story about a man being unfaithful to his
wife and no one made any scandalous remarks about me. I then wrote a
specific kind of narrative about a woman being unfaithful to her husband
and nobody had anything scandalous to say about my wife_. But _I wrote
an empathetic sort of tale about some homosexuals and my mailbox filled
up with cards drenched with scent and letters written in purple ink with
green capitals. As good Philos says herein:_ you _cannot be objective
about sex, especially when it’s outside certain parameters. Hence this
disclaimer, friend: keep your troubles to yourself. I wear no silken
sporran_ (The latter is the clothing of the bisexual beings in _Venus
Plus X_; the “empathetic sort of tale” referred to is “The World Well
Lost.”

“… AND MY FEAR IS GREAT …”: first published in _Beyond Fantasy Fiction_,
July 1953 (first issue of a short-lived fantasy magazine edited by H. L.
Gold). A handwritten notation on the carbon copy of the manuscript of
this story indicates that it was sent to _Galaxy_ (i.e., to Gold,
possibly because he’d requested a fantasy for his new magazine) on Jan.
17, 1953. Given Sturgeon’s writing-and-marketing habits, we can be
fairly sure it was written in the first two weeks of January, 1953.

Introducing this story in his 1979 collection _The Golden Helix_,
Sturgeon wrote:

_This is one of my favorite stories. It appeared a long time ago in a
hardcover collection, which (like most such) disappeared fairly soon,
and when the collection went into paperback, this story was dropped. It
was a convention at the time to fill up tables of contents with as many
titles as possible, and the longer stories filled up the book with fewer
titles. A great many went to limbo because of that, and it is gratifying
to have this one back in the light_.

_I’ve been a “wordaholic” all my life, reveling in the texture and feel
and shape and music of words; and outside of Whitman’s “I Sing the Body
Electric,” I know of no more exquisite and moving passage than “The
Irish Girl’s Lament,” included in this story, and also the title-giver.
I found it in an essay by W. B. Yeats called “What Modern Poetry?” in
which he decried artifice and artificiality in poetry, and said that the
best poetry, the real poetry, came from the lips and hearts of the
people, speaking in their own idiom. He quoted this lament as an
example, affirming that he did not write it; it is not his. Therefore I
cannot acknowledge it as his, but can only express my gratitude to him
for leading me to such a treasure_.

As Sturgeon notes above, the prose poem Joyce recites to the tattered
man, the source for this story’s title, can be found in a 1901 essay by
William Butler Yeats (titled “What Is ‘Popular Poetry’?” in his volume
_Essays and Introductions_). Yeats does not indicate that he heard this
lament and wrote it down. He introduces it (without clarifying the
source) into his argument by saying, “If men did not remember nor half
remember impossible things, and, it may be, if the worship of sun and
moon had not left a faint reverence behind it, what Aran fisher-girl
would sing:—‘It is late last night the dog was speaking of you …’ ” The
entire lament quoted by Sturgeon’s heroine follows. As the Aran Islands
are off the west coast of Ireland and Yeats in 1901 was already spending
much time with one Lady Gregory, a collector of the lore of the west of
Ireland, perhaps Lady Gregory acquainted Yeats with this extraordinary
fisher-girl’s lament.

Among Sturgeon’s papers is a letter from Richard Lovelace at Yale
University, dated May 2, 1953, which begins: “Thank you for writing the
novella in the first issue of _Beyond_. It is the finest work of
literature that I’ve seen in any popular magazine. I don’t just say that
because I like Yeats and have come very recently to accept the beliefs
behind the story, either, although of course that’s a large part of it.
I think it is better writing than Bradbury’s ever done, in both
expression and construction. You have the power to do a great service by
writing fiction like this.”

The source for the all-night cafe Don went to night after night, where
he first saw Joyce, is Sturgeon’s life as an impecunious young writer in
New York City in 1940. In a 1972 interview, TS told David Hartwell:

_I used to hang out in a place called Martin’s 57th Street Cafeteria. It
was an all-night cafeteria, where all kinds of bums and weirdos used to
hang out and talk all night, and they’d drink the ketchup and eat the
sugar, nobody had any money whatsoever. You could nurse one cup of
coffee all night long and pay a nickel and go out, y’know. And there
were all kinds of very interesting conversations that developed in
Martin’s_.

It seems likely that some aspects of this story, for example Don’s rat
story and his revelation about the wasps, are partly a reflection of
TS’s experiences as a Dianetics suditor and auditee.

On the first page of this story’s appearance in _Beyond Fantasy
Fiction_, the title is followed by an editor’s blurb which reads: AS
WHOSE WOULDN’T BE, WHEN THE DEMON WITHIN MEETS AN EVEN MORE FRIGHTFUL
MONSTER WITHOUT!

There are some slight textual differences between this story as it
appears here and previously published versions, because we have made use
of Sturgeon’s original ms. instead of the published text, which had been
edited, sometime clumsily, by Gold. The differences are minor except for
the restoration of six important sentences in the paragraph near the end
of the story that begins: _Right. We’re goin’ to make mistakes_. With
this restoration, one can see here the seeds of the final page of the
last section of _More Than Human_, which was written soon after this
story and which shares some other thematic links with “… And My Fear Is
Great …”

“THE WAGES OF SYNERGY”: first published in _Startling Stories_, August
1953. Probably written early in 1953 and submitted to Gold and rejected,
before it was ultimately purchased by Samuel Mines, editor of _Startling
Stories_.

“THE DARK ROOM”: first published in _Fantastic_, July-August 1953.
Written in late winter or early spring 1953.

Sturgeon’s 1979 introduction to this story:

_I would like to state here and now that the above was not my title;
there is a room in the story but at no time is it dark, nor is darkness
of any particular significance to the story. I called it “Alien Bee,”
which is probably not the best possible title for it either, but a
better one, I think, than the one the editor chose. Anyway, I am keeping
his title for bibliographical purposes_.

_Written in 1953, this story is one of my first efforts to develop
different styles. Anyone with any verbal facility can develop a style,
polish and perfect it until it becomes that writer’s special trademark,
and you can come a long way in the writing business by doing that.
However, like any specialization, it can inhibit and even imprison you,
so that all the characters speak like each other and like the author.
The writers I admire most—Samuel R. Delany, to name a single one—are
masters of many styles, not just one, and no one will ever write
one-paragraph pastiches or lampoons of his work_.

_So here is a hard-heeling, fast-paced, brawling, macho Sturgeon story.
And if it turns out that you don’t like this kind of person—well,
neither do I_.

When the parasite entity in this story tells Tom, “we are free to pass
and repass in front of their silly eyes,” Sturgeon may be consciously
alluding to a similar phrase in the poem “Brahma” by his distant
relative Ralph Waldo Emerson.

“TALENT”: first published in _Beyond Fantasy Fiction_, September 1953.
Written in spring 1953.

Magazine blurb: EXTERMINATING PESTS WAS JOKEY’S SPECIALTY—AND HE WAS
100% EFFICIENT AT IT!

“A WAY OF THINKING”: first published in _Amazing Stories_,
October-November 1953. Written in spring 1953.

In 1981 Sturgeon wrote the following introduction to “A Way of Thinking”
when it was reprinted by _Amazing Stories_ as part of a “Hall of Fame”
series:

_Before I was a writer I was a sailor in the U.S. Merchant Marine. I
went to some strange places and met some strange people. One of the most
memorable of all was the man you’re about to meet (if you haven’t met
him before). My description of him, and the episodes of the deck winch,
the tarpaper cat-house, and the flying fan, are not fiction, but
reportage. Tall, feline, soft-voiced, always laid-back and relaxed, with
those long green eyes, Kelley is unforgettable, even though I’ve not see
him for many years. I’m quite sure I have more to say about him; one of
these days he will slide gently into my typewriter and amaze me_.

_It says in this story that “he’s in Atlanta now.” That’s Atlanta
Penitentiary, I’m sorry to say. I quite forget who told me that, and I
never did learn why that was so, and I’ve always wondered. I am sure,
however, that what got him there was the result of his unique way of
thinking. I am also sure that his stay could not have been long; as he
once took the outside off a building to get in, he was quite capable of
taking the inside out of a jail to get out. Don’t ask me how. Ask
Kelley_.

The line “he’s in Atlanta now” is not actually in this story; TS may
have been thinking of other times he’d written about Kelley: for example
in the 1950 essay “Author, Author,” included as an appendix in Volume VI
of The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon.

In an interview on Dec. 6, 1975 Sturgeon told me: _my father died of
Parkinson’s Disease, which is a horrible thing. Every day you know
you’re going to be worse than the day before. And he finally turned into
just a mush. His brother took care of him. He had to be fed, and he had
to be taken to the bathroom. It was sad_.

“THE SILKEN-SWIFT”: first published simultaneously in _The Magazine of
Fantasy and Science Fiction_, November 1953 and in _E Pluribus Unicorn_
by Theodore Sturgeon, a collection of stories published by Abelard Press
in November 1953. Written in spring 1953.

The song Barbara shares with Del is credited on the copyright page of _E
Pluribus Unicorn_, where TS writes: _I should like to express my
profound gratitude to Christine Hamilton, who, as a poet, authored the
poem “Unicorn” and permitted its use here, and, as a mother, authored
the undersigned_. Christine Hamilton Sturgeon was an ambitious (but
mostly unpublished) novelist and short story writer as well as a poet.

On the Science Fiction Radio Show in 1983, Sturgeon was asked, “What
works of your own do you think are particularly good? Which ones are you
proudest of?” He replied: _“The Silken-Swift,” the unicorn story, for
example, I’m very proud of. I love that story_. He then mentions a story
he’s just written, “Seasoning,” and then goes on: _Let’s see, looking
for others of what I would call my favorite stories … I do like that
unicorn story. I like the way it’s written; it’s a very passionate story
and it has something I consider very important to say. There again I was
combating the assumption that a woman who is not a virgin is not as good
a woman as she might be. That was the basic statement of the story. It’s
a wonder that it came out intact that way_.

On one of his sheets of “maundering” notes from the mid-1950s, TS wrote:
_BIANCA’S HANDS and THE SILKEN-SWIFT were, in my own personal category,
fables for grown-up people. They had this in common: a legendary, but
not fabulous scene: some time in the past, somewhere (probably England,
but not for sure). I almost found the same “country” in that_ Weird
Tales _thing about the skull and the hoof—one foot in the grave, or some
such title_.

Lucy Menger in her 1981 book _Theodore Sturgeon_ says, “In ‘The
Silken-Swift,’ as in few of his prose works, the poet in Sturgeon
dominates the prosaist. This story is a mosaic of poetic devices and
sensory appeals riding atop a fluctuating tide of subtle rhythms.”

“THE CLINIC”: first published in a book (an anthology of
“original”—previously unpublished, written especially for the
anthology—stories) entitled _Star Science Fiction Stories No. 2_, edited
by Frederik Pohl. Written in spring or summer 1953.

Sturgeon’s 1979 introduction to this story:

_Standing on a street corner waiting for the light to change, I noticed
the man next to me gesticulating rapidly and with swift precision while_
_he stared intently across the street. Following his gaze, I saw a woman
watching him with great attention. When he stopped his gestures, her
hands flickered swiftly in response, and they both laughed. They were
deaf-mutes, and it came to me then that in this situation they were not
handicapped. I was, and so were the dozens of hearing people around us,
who could not possibly accomplish such a feat_.

_So I turned the coin over—as you will see_.

In his August 13, 1957 letter to Walter Bradbury at Doubleday describing
stories available for a new Sturgeon collection, TS said “The Clinic”
_is one of the few really successful efforts to tell a tale from the
point of view of an extra-terrestrial_.

“MR. COSTELLO, HERO”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_,
December 1953. Written in summer 1953. Adapted as a radio drama for the
“X Minus One” program (aired March 7, 1956).

The story behind the writing of “Mr. Costello, Hero,” was told by its
author in a 1977 interview with Darrell Schweitzer:

_I had a deadline for a novelette of twenty thousand words or so, and
Horace Gold called me up and said, “Hey, where’s the novelette?” And I
began to cry a lot over the telephone. This was the time of the McCarthy
hearings. The whole country was in a grip of terror that, not having
been through it you just would never understand how awful that was. It
was a_ frightening _thing. It crept into all the corners of the houses
and everybody’s speech and language. Everybody started to get
super-careful about what they said, what they wrote and what they
broadcast. The whole country was in a strange type of fear, some great
intangible something that nobody could get hold of. A very frightening
thing_.

_I became aware by that time that I had a fairly high-caliber
typewriter, and I became alarmed by the fact that I wasn’t using it for
anything but what I call “literature of entertainment.” I don’t want to
knock entertainment at all, but I felt I had the tool to do something
but I didn’t know what to do with it_.

_Horace listened to me with great care, and he said, “I’ll tell you what
you do, Sturgeon. You write me a story about a guy whose wife has gone
away for the weekend, and he goes down to the bus station to meet her,
and the bus arrives and the whole place is full of people. He looks
across the crowd and he sees his wife emerge from the exit talking to a
young man who is talking earnestly back to her. And he is carrying her
suitcase_. _She looks across the crowd, sees her husband, speaks a word
to the young man and the young man hands her her suitcase, tips his hat,
and disappears into the crowd, and she comes across to him and kisses
him. Now then, Sturgeon, write me that story, and by the time you’re
finished the whole world will know how you feel about Joseph McCarthy.”_

_For the moment I didn’t know what the hell he was talking about, and it
comes right back to what I said earlier. If a writer really and truly
believes in something, if he is totally convinced, if he has a
conviction, it really doesn’t matter what he writes about. That
conviction is going to come through. At that point I sat down and wrote
a story called “Mr. Costello, Hero” which was as specific and as
sharply-edged a portrait of Joe McCarthy as anyone has ever written. Not
only the man himself and his voice and his actions and his speech, but
his motivations, where he was coming from, what made him do what he did,
which I had never analyzed before_.

In my book _The 20th Century’s Greatest Hits_ (by Paul Williams, Tor
Books, 2000) I quote Sturgeon as above, and go on to say: “Actually the
story does more than that. It is one of the most valuable (_and_
entertaining) pieces of political fiction ever written, because it gives
us a diagram, it demonstrates in much detail precisely how an Adolf
Hitler or Joe McCarthy or Jim Jones or Charles Manson or Slobodan
Milosevic can charm and seduce a handful of people who become his
lieutenants so that they and soon whole nations start jumping to his
tune and even believe they wrote it themselves. The more insight we gain
into how this is done, the more opportunity we have to protect ourselves
and others from this human peril. ‘Mr. Costello, Hero’ is a great story
as a story, as a narrative and a work of language, but more than that it
offers direct insight into the methodology by which psychopathic and
power-hungry personalities manipulate other persons by engaging their
fears and hatreds, even of people or things they never thought of
fearing or hating until the manipulator caught them in his web.”

On August 13, 1953, Sturgeon wrote to Horace Gold: _Here’s the rewrite
of the ending of the work-in-progress tentatively titled “Never Alone.”_

_Now let me get something off my chest. Everything that follows
necessarily bears the prefix “in my opinion,” so don’t take any of it
too much to heart. It’s only me, and who the hell am I?_

_First, the title. THE EVIL SOLOIST or THE EVIL SOLOISTS are okay as far
as they might look on a table of contents. But in terms of the_ _story
they won’t do. In the first place the title implies that the soloists
(i.e. “trappers” or people who were so accused) were evil, or that I the
author so imply. One of the two important (to me) purposes of this story
is to show that they were not evil; or, to put it more generally, that
to be accused and to be guilty are two very different things. ’Though
the title might conceivably state only Costello’s warped teaching, this
aspect is not treated strongly enough to make a switch out of it (i.e.,
the reader is not likely to review the story in his mind and recognize
such a title as Costello’s view rather than as the story’s basic
theme.)_

_Besides, the story is not about the evils of being alone, in anyone’s
view. That “never alone” thesis on Borinquen was simply a tactic, as the
suspicion of poison and of cheating were on the ship. I think it is
quite clear that the elimination of privacy is no principle of
Costello’s; it’s simply a means he uses to his megalomaniacal end_.

_NEVER ALONE_ [Sturgeon’s original title] _is therefore wrong as a
title, and I freely kick it out. My two suggestions are based on the
fact that this story, more than anything I ever wrote, requires the
participation of its readers. Therefore, the less the title says, the
better. My first choice: MR. COSTELLO. My second: HERO. Don’t forget
that after reading a story, the story makes the title, not the other way
around. THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA is clumsy and arhythmic, AS YOU LIKE IT
is meaningless in terms of plot, FROM HERE TO ETERNITY has nothing to
say at the outset and in retrospect seems inept. Yet each of these is
now touched with magic. So: leave me be tacit. MR COSTELLO or HERO_.

_Now, as to the ending—specifically, Costello’s treatment on
Nightingale. You have absolutely no right to assume a different
conclusion from my extrapolations. Pleading logic is beside the point.
Human progress, mike-or-macrocosmically, frequently departs from a
logical chain; if it didn’t, we word-merchants would be hard put to it
to create characters. The isolation treatment Costello got is consistent
in terms of the story. Inventing a machine to make him like ants instead
violates the story’s main message. He has got to be seen, in essence,
“doing what he has to do.” The fact that he will do it with ants if he
can’t do it with men is the strongest single statement about his
character_.

Your editor wishes to point out that much of the power of this story
results from Sturgeon’s decision to tell the story from the viewpoint of
a good-natured fool, the sucker/victim who is still under the influence
of the psychopath’s charm in the brilliantly insightful and chilling
last sentence of the story (which could almost be the epitaph for our
era).

“THE EDUCATION OF DRUSILLA STRANGE”: first published in _Galaxy Science
Fiction_, March 1954. Written in autumn 1953.

Sturgeon’s 1979 introduction to this story:

_This is one of my very favorite stories, for a number of reasons_.

_Novelettes were for a long time “lost”; once they had appeared in a
magazine, book publishers were chary of using them because of a
conviction that the moron reader couldn’t sustain his attention span for
more than five thousand words, and that he would feel cheated if he
didn’t get a dozen or fourteen items in the Table of Contents. This is
the chief reason that Drusilla has gotten so little exposure_.

_My dream for Drusilla is to see her education as a major motion
picture, and then to spin off as a television series dealing with the_
educated _Drusilla Strange. It isn’t the glory (of which my readers have
given me fulsomely) or the money (because I have found out that the line
between owning money and being honestly broke is the line between owning
money and being owned by it) but because it’s a prime opportunity for a
strong dramatic role to be given to a woman. I discount imitation bionic
men and imitation male police officers, and of course sitcom
pie-in-the-face, perennial teases, and Daddy-is-an-oaf so-called
comedies. Drusilla is a super-woman, with super-empathy,
super-compassion, super-libido (if you like), but also
super-responsibility, so that, because she knows she will live for a
thousand years, she knows that with ethical responsibility, she must
always move on. The_ educated _Drusilla Strange has a prime drive: her
deeply convinced and passionate love for humanity, and her desire, with
all her powers, to solve human problems_.

_Oh, well … when Hollywood is through with 1927 to 1935 science fiction,
and is ready to look at inner space instead of outer space, perhaps it
will do right by our Drusilla_.

The biographical note included in the back of some of Sturgeon’s books
starting in 1956 says, “He lives with his wife, son and daughter,
twelve-string guitar and hot-rod panel truck in Rockland County …” His
1950 autobiographical essay “Author, Author” mentions that _I played
guitar with a square-dance orchestra once, in the Poconos_.

Original magazine blurb: THE GRASS INVARIABLY IS GREENER ON YOUR OWN
PLANET—EVEN IF THERE IS NO GRASS THERE AND IT WOULD NOT BE THAT COLOR IF
THERE WERE ANY!

In a 1972 interview published in the French language edition of
_Galaxy_, Sturgeon told Patrice Duvic about a letter he once received
from an architecture student who said that one line in one of Sturgeon’s
stories had totally changed the course of his life and of his studies,
and his whole attitude towards his work. The line was Drusilla Strange’s
thought upon first seeing an automobile: _What manner of man_ [or race]
_streamlines only where he can see?_

[]
