[cover]


PRAISE FOR THE WRITING OF THEODORE STURGEON

“One of the greatest … I can’t recommend his work too highly!”—Stephen
King

“I look upon Sturgeon with a secret and growing jealousy.”—Ray Bradbury

“A master storyteller certain to fascinate.”—Kurt Vonnegut Jr.

“One of the masters of modern science fiction.”—_The Washington Post
Book World_

“The Sturgeon magic does not diminish with the years. His stories have a
timeless quality and a universality which is beyond fantasy and science
fiction.”—Madeleine L’Engle

“The corpus of science fiction produced by Theodore Sturgeon is the
single most important body of science fiction by an American.”—Samuel R.
Delany

_More Than Human_

“A quantum leap in the development of science fiction as an art.”—_The
Washington Post_

“One of the best science fiction novels of the year.”—_The New York
Times_

_Godbody_

“Embodies the very best of Theodore Sturgeon … a master.”—_San Francisco
Chronicle_

“The capstone of Sturgeon’s art … Read it, enjoy it, reread it, give it
to somebody you love.”—Robert A. Heinlein

“You will do more than enjoy; you will be increased.”—Stephen King

_To Marry Medusa_

“Dazzling … Sturgeon swerves around cliché and dull language like a
maniac. At times, it seems like he’s working in his own personal version
of the English language. It’s like taking a road trip with an incredibly
eccentric dude: You may know the most logical or efficient route, but
the offbeat guy will know the way past the most stunning vistas. Read a
little of _Medusa_, and you’ll see what I mean.”—SF Site

“A fine example of what science fiction is supposed to be:
simultaneously plot- and character-driven and completely devoid of
fluff… . A fantastic classic.”—SF Signal

_The Dreaming Jewels_

“An intensely written and very moving novel of love and retribution.”
_—Washington Star_

_Venus Plus X_

“It’s interesting to read _Venus_’ sexual commentary in the wake of a
second wave of feminism, the gay liberation, and the sexual revolution
of the ’60s. Obviously, in 1960 the novel was way ahead of its time. It
has lost some of that power, but its critique of American prudence still
holds.”—_City Paper_ (Baltimore)



I, LIBERTINE


Theodore Sturgeon writing as
Frederick R. Ewing

[logo]



CONTENTS


Introduction: First American Publication of a Modern Classic …

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

Afterward

Afterword

A Biography of Theodore Sturgeon



FIRST AMERICAN PUBLICATION OF A MODERN CLASSIC …


England in the late 18th Century—a lusty, brawling isle, vital,
colorful, conspicuously sceptered, a hallowed plot in fullest flower,
vigorously burgeoning, teeming, seething in ferment as the British
spirit sought dominion over half the world. It was an adventurous era of
plenty, and of cruel want: Appalling poverty and fabulous riches lived
side by side. It was an age at cross-purposes with itself: Moral laxity
and high achievement were accepted companions. It was an age of
brilliant enlightenment, and of spectacular abandonment to unworthy
pursuits and seamy pleasures. It was a beginning—and an end.

This is the England of _I, Libertine._ In bringing to life the temper of
these tempestuous years, Frederick R. Ewing has created an unforgettable
hero, Lance Courtenay, who strove to overcome his clouded origin by
ruthlessly exploiting the men who befriended him and the women who loved
him. Already a resounding success in England and on the Continent, this
controversial novel is now available, for the first time, to the
American public which has so eagerly anticipated its publication in this
country.



1.


IT HAD BEEN A bright forgathering, bright people with their bright talk
suffusing him with the warm radiance of his own bright future. Captain
Lance Courtenay was proud of himself; he had watched his own words, all
evening, falling as ordered and as startling as the brocade on his
fashionable waistcoat; he felt his presence in such company was as
timely and as casual as the stylish solitaire about his neck. Ay, bright
was the word, and the next (or the one after) would be brilliant.
Captain Courtenay was on his way.

“Not on your way so soon?” asked Lady Blanton as he bent over her
wrinkled hand; and again he was pleased, for his ear was quick and he
knew the overtones of sincerity when they appeared in a common phrase.

“I leave part of myself with you, milady,” he said. He knew a way to
produce his words with a breath like sighing and a firm rumble deep in
his chest, a whisper with a contrabass. “You know I remain here in
spirit, and a decent bit of my heart is yours alone.”

“Along with you, rascal,” she said, but she fluttered, she twinkled; she
had been reached. “You’d eyes only for Miss Axelrood the whole evening.”

This was true, but he shook his head and smiled. His teeth were
excellent, especially the right upper incisor, which was extraordinary.
“As we say in Devon, who studies a sheep to steal had better know the
shepherdess.”

The old lady laughed heartily, then drew him a step into the foyer. “I
think to this day I’ve heard Libby Chudleigh called everything but a
shepherdess.” Sobering, she leaned close and said, almost anxiously,
“Tell me, Captain, as a young man correct in all things; do you think it
quite—ah—_proper_ of me to entertain her, even when she brings such an
ornament as her little Miss Axelrood?”

He contemplated her question and her earrings. Her earrings were diamond
clusters, probably Italian, and glorified Mammon more than the Muses; he
was delighted with them, and with their owner, who prompted him, “Have I
embarrassed you, young man?”

“You have gratified me, milady. … As to your question, I feel that your
house is the heart of Holborn, Holborn the heart of London, and London
the heart of the world. If then all things are in the world, do not all
things have a place here?”

“You have not answered my question, and you have been charming,” said
Lady Blanton approvingly. “Tell me this too: do you always call for your
carriage at the very peak of an evening?”

“My carriage called for me,” he rejoined. At the same time he managed to
raise and hold his hat in a way which might have had significance; at
any rate, she glanced at it. It was a wide-brimmed hat of the usual
mode, drawn up and pinned three-corner style. “Ah,” she said, “you
military men, with your mysterious comings and goings! … Where may I
reach you, Captain?”

Behind the warmth and sincerity of his smile, a small explosion of
exasperation threatened. That again—always that! What gleaming boots and
good broadcloth could accomplish, the lack of an address could sweep
away. With England weighted to sinking with town houses and granges,
castles and manors, he had none to claim, even as resident, even as
visitor. He said, “I cannot say, milady. I await orders; they come
tomorrow at the latest. If one might have the privilege of writing …”

“You may call it a duty. Good night, young man.”

“Milady.” He kissed her hand again, and strode quickly through the door,
which stood open to the warm spring night—too quickly for a sight of the
servant’s outstretched palm. Down the steps he sprang, and into his
carriage, which stood all agleam in a fair yellow paint and dull red
trim, a match to the small crest of the Courtenays on the quarter-panel.

The coachman gathered his lines and grumbled in a resounding basso: “Eh,
my peacock, another instant o’ that chitty-chatty and ye’d a’ ridden
’ome astride yer own arse.”

“Hush, you old fool,” snapped the Captain, and then, “Hold—_halt!”_ as
the wet gray entrance brought forth a vision. Down the steps came the
fair Miss Axelrood, little feet atwinkle and her hoops held high. She
leaped to the carriage step, alighting like a bird, her eyes and teeth
sparkling in the glow from Blanton House. Lance Courtenay impulsively
caught at her bare shoulder to steady her, and she turned it under his
hand and away, laughing. He had to control the impulse to look down into
his hand, such warmth and smoothness seemed to cling there. “You have at
last been ungallant, Captain Courtenay, and all evening I had been sure
you could not.”

“I assure you, Miss Axel—”

“A gentleman,” she chided, “is never inadvertently impolite.” Before he
could rephrase this toward understanding, she gave him that small
dazzling laugh again and explained, “You left and bade me no adieux.”

“A thousand pardons,” he whispered, the hiss with the viol. “I leave
against my will. A sudden and most urgent—”

“I don’t want your apologies, Captain Courtenay, and I’ll allow all your
explanations. I have flown out here, bold as can be, only for your
farewell.”

“Au revoir … ?” he hazarded.

“Ah,” she said, “just that, I know we shall meet again.”

“It could not be too soon.”

“It could. It shall be!” and she sprang away to the steps and up them,
turning to laugh again just as she disappeared.

“Now there’s a saucy bit,” rumbled the coachman, “and one to ’ware of,
Lanky.”

“Drive, dash it all, Piggott.”

“_H_igger-Piggott,” said the man good-naturedly, leaning heavily on the
aspirant. “Don’t take away my respeckable ’yphen.” He flicked his lines
and the coach rumbled into Gray’s Inn Road.

Lance Courtenay waited until they were safely out of earshot of Blanton
House and the traffic around it, and then flared, “Damme, I’ll take away
more than your blasted hyphen if you don’t stop making a fool of me in
front of your betters.”

“Eh,” shrugged the coachman, “ye come by it honest, Lanky. We’re all
fools. …’Oo _is_ that pretty baggage, any’ow?”

Fuming, Lance ignored the question. Through Oxford Street he ignored it,
and through the river corner of Cheapside; but at the bridge he
surprised himself by answering: “She’s a Miss Axelrood.”

The coachman said nothing. Lolloping down between the bridge shops, the
coach was half across the river before Lance amended: “She was brought
by Miss Chudleigh.”

This got a response; Piggott hummed with interest. _“Was_ she then! How
long has the old hoor been back in England?”

“I don’t know. Not long.” He was always reluctant, somehow, to discuss
anything with the foul-mouthed old man; yet Piggott was in a position to
pick up an encyclopedic amount of gossip. He said, challengingly, “She’s
a splendid-looking woman, though I had only a glimpse of her. She’s not
old, Piggott.”

“She’s seen ’er two-score, and ’alf another one by now. Why, she was
your age when she went naked to the Venetian Ambassador’s ball, and that
was five-and-twenty year ago, at the least.”

“Not naked, Piggott!”

“Ay, naked, and d’ye think they pitched her into the Serpentine for
that? Na, ’is admirin’ Majesty the Second George gave ’er a fifty-guinea
watch. Greedy bitch! D’ye know she’s wed to the Earl of Bristol’s
brother?”

“I don’t know that. I had heard it,” said Lance primly.

“She is, for all that. Could’ve ’ad the Earl of Bath, and struck the
Duke of Hamilton ’twixt wind and water, takin’ a piece along like a
cannonball off a oaken frigate. Maid of Honour at Court she was. Eh! I
could tell you what she was made of … but ’twas Bristol’s brother she
wanted and Bristol’s brother she got one midnight, then off ’e goes to
sea. Whelped one for ’im too, or so they say.”

“Whatever became of the child?”

Piggott shrugged wide old shoulders. “Dead by now, or given away.
Growin’ up somewhere like the rest of us, believin’ what ’e’s told
whether it’s true or not. ’E might’ve been the first the bitch dropped
by the wayside, and ’e might not. I can tell you ’e weren’t the last,
and mayhap the last ’asn’t passed those portals e’en now; old Lib’s
still at it.”

“Piggott, you’ve a filthy mouth.”

“Ay. It’s a filthy time.”

Lance looked out over the black water and denied this with all his
being. Long association with Piggott made this denial a silent one, but
none the less fervent for that. There was right and there was wrong;
though these may not immediately present themselves to a man, he need
only dig a little deeper, wait a little longer, to find them out. The
dirty grey world in which Piggott lived filled him with horror, drove
him constantly toward the white purities of a gentleman’s existence. Yet
the fact remained that grey was made up of particles of white in the
blackness, and Piggott presented him with many of these. “What do you
mean she’s still at it?”

“What d’ye _talk_ about in yon cold-frame of a ’ouse, you and t’other
winter blooms?” Piggott blazed.

“Whatever it is, it isn’t hostlers’ gossip.”

“And a pity.” Piggott aimed his whip handle at the young man’s
broadcloth. “England and Prussia rule the ruddy world this Anno ruddy
Domino seventeen ’undred an’ sixty nine,” he orated, “and those that
rule the world take the orders of their ’ostlers, ay, their valets and
their Maids of ruddy Honour. They do what they’re told, they do, because
their servants always know what’s ’appening, and they can’t know ’till
they’re told, like a ruddy great general wantin’ to know what’s
’appening over the ’ill. ’E _could_ ask ’is batman an’ likely ’e does;
otherwise it’s someone else’s batman ’oo finds out, or it ’as to go all
the way down the line to a weary-arse grenadier ’oo finally sticks ’is
’ead over and eats grapeshot for ’is breakfast … and ’oo’s more of a
servant than anybody’s ruddy foot soldier, I’d like to know? While
you’re about learnin’ your airs and graces, m’lad, never forget to leave
an ear in the scullery, and be grateful to whoever keeps the wax out of
it for ye. What were we talkin’ about?”

“You were making some libelous remarks about Miss Chudleigh.”

“Na, lad, ’twas slander,” the old man corrected. In the darkness, Lance
Courtenay blushed; there were reasons why the distinction should have
been his to make. Piggott went on, “Milord Augustus Hervey, the Duke of
Bristol’s brother ’as so many ’orns on ’im from our Lib ’tis said
without ’is wig ’e looks like a ruddy ’all-tree. When she ’asn’t been
’awkin ’er wares to foreigners on their ’ome grounds, she’s been the
hoor o’ the Duke o’ Kingston, ol’ Evey Pierrepont.”

“Look,” said Lance, too enthralled at this point to affect disdain, “if
she really is Hervey’s wife, why has she kept it a secret all these
years?”

“ ’Ad to. When ’e slipped the ring on ’er ’and, ’e wasn’t of age. Afraid
’e wouldn’t inherit if it got about, and so was she. By the time ’e did
come in for ’is small slice, she was already abed with Kingston and
wanted no mite nor morsel of ’er ’usband. ’E’s a queer duck, any’ow,
Bristol is, ’appy with ’is ships an ’is grouse, and with ’er too, long
as she keeps ’er ’ooks out o’ the Bristol treasury. And that she does,
with Kingston there to cover ’er nakedness when ’e ain’t using it, and
giving ’er bits of town ’ouses to keep the rain off.”

“That can’t last long.”

“Ay. We all get older.”

“What do you mean by that?”

“It’s been going on these four-and-twenty year, lad—since before you
were born.”

“I can’t believe it! Why doesn’t he divorce her?”

Piggott’s burst of laughter startled the off horse. When he had her
reined in, he said, “Scandal, lad.”

“Isn’t all _this_ scandal?”

“Na. It’s what you call ’ostlers’ gossip. Fine folk can stand any amount
o’ that. But bring in your courts, an’ your swear-in’s and defaults, an’
it’s scandal, an’ that hurts ’em. Bristol’s not like England an’
Frederick the ruddy Great these days; fight a war for seven year and
settle it with everybody ’ome where they come from, what they call
status quo ante only the poorer for it. Kingston’s getting what ’e’s
paying for, or thinks ’e is or ’e wouldn’t be paying it; and Libby
Chudleigh’s got enough o’ the Kingston entrails wrapped around ’er
finger to make a duchess of ’er, weren’t it for Hervey. She’ll not drop
’im while ’e stands to inherit, and she’ll not drop Kingston either.
They all take their pleasures, lad, and the only real cost is—’ostlers’
gossip.”

“I’m glad such people have your approval,” said Lance, regaining his
loftiness.

“Ye’re a smarmy little prig,” said Piggott reflectively.

“We’re coming into Southwark.” said Lance. “We’d better—”

“Ay,” said the coachman, pulling left to the curb. He lashed up the
reins and plunged his arms down into the boot. From it he drew a folded
cloak, which he handed down to Lance, receiving the Captain’s good
woolen for it. Lance threw on the second cloak, removed his tricorne,
unpinned the ribbons and let the brim drop. Piggott swung down and
stepped to the right quarter-panel, where after a moment he emerged with
the crest of the Courtenays, three red roundels on a golden field. This
he placed on the seat beside Lance. He went around to the left side and
turned the air blue with his imprecations. “Some pile-ridden catamite’s
been at me coach!” he roared. “Four shillin’ six an’ three farthin’s up
the spout, or ’alf of it, and God blind you if you say get another,
Lanky.”

Lance leaned out and looked. Piggott was pounding the dangling straps
from which the second Courtenay crest had been unbuckled. “What happened
to it?”

“What ’appened to the ’oly Grail? _I_ don’t know, damn blast the
pox-puckered mother of the fatherless colonial ’oo did this.”

“You’re losing your sight with your wits in your old age,” said Lance.
“Next they’ll have the wheels while you sit on the box a-gossip with
some other old swine.”

“By God we’ve crossed the river and it’s your turn to keep a civil
tongue in yer ’ead, ye little wart.”

“This bargain is beginning to be over-costly to me,” said the young man
icily.

“Then strike a bargain with some other ’ackney. There’s upwards o’ five
’undred on the streets today, a good third cast-off privates like
this’n. Among so many, surely to God ye can find a fool like me, but by
my dangling breek, it must be a greater one.”

“The more fool I,” returned Lance. “Ye’d be back in the stables standing
in muck whilst the other hostlers curried your face, taking it for the
hind end of a spavined mare, weren’t it for me. Who found ye this trap?
Who paid to dress and paint it? Who flogged ye into a decent livery and
taught ye to blow your nose on your sleeve instead of snapping it in
your lap? Who but me?”

“Ye found the coach, I’ll grant; but ’oo paid for it? Ye bought paint;
’oo laid it on? Ye prettied me up along of the trap, and I’ll grant a
quality fare say twice a fortnight for that, but ’oo gives up ’is
’ackney money masquerading as a popinjay’s pimp, ay, and stands for yer
’igh an’ mighty insults the while?”

Reverting to the cadences of a Courtenay, and with an imperious gesture,
Lance said. “We have arrived at the dissolution of our partnership,
Higger-Piggott. You may drive me to my inn, and thereafter you may find
your own perdition.”

Even in the dark, Lance could see the black furious flush crossing the
old man’s face. His voice was thick with anger as he snapped his whip
out of the brace and set foot on the step. The carriage leaned and
creaked with his weight, he loomed over the young man like a breaking
sea, he sprayed and spat as he growled. “Ay, sir, ay, sir, that I will,
sir; drive ye to yer inn, and on the instant; but I faithfully promise
ye, God rot me, that I shall tie up these ruddy ’orses ’ere and now and
do my driving with this cat,” and he whistled his lash close to the
crown of Lance’s newly slouched hat.

Now it has been recorded that all of this young man’s teeth were
beautiful, but that one of them was extraordinary. It was the right
upper incisor, and its uniqueness lay in a subtle concavity, from gum to
bite and from edge to edge, so finely wrought by nature’s lapidary that
its difference from the other teeth was invisible on the closest
inspection. And like most other wonders created by man or God, this one
was meaningless out of its context. Its context was, of course, the man
himself, specifically the musculature of his upper lip, and generally,
his emotional makeup. The latter reacted, in all its complexities, most
extremely under the impact of terror. The numbness in the back of the
knees, the palpitation which struck at the base of the throat like a
heavy fist, the aching hollowness in the solar plexus need not concern
us here. The drying of the mouth, occurring instantly and completely,
does. For this resulted in an adhesion of the concave tooth to the
inside of the upper lip—an utterly unbearable sensation. Simultaneously
the lips expanded as the cheeks contracted, increasing the hardness of
the vacuum which married flesh to enamel.

The net result was a spastic smile, tight over the teeth and very wide,
a narrowing of the eyes so sudden that (though they held only squeezed
tears) they glittered like polished steel, and, directly over _the_
tooth, just to the right of the median line, a slight, unceasing
movement, as the imprisoned lip fought to free itself from the vise of
vacuum. It was not a twitch, but rather a writhe, a ripple. Such a
movement may be seen on the lips of the great cats just as they are
about to attack. Such a shift of the lip might result in a sneer, if
allowed to complete one; this, however, did not; the combined forces of
smile and suction contained it too well for that.

Men who sneer at their potential attackers may cow a few but are more
often attacked. Men who smile in the face of danger are more rare, and
are less often attacked. Men whose sneer is there to be seen, and all
but eclipsed in a smile, send a message of such confidence that the
enemy must turn into himself, find himself face to face with the fear of
inferiority which lurks, to some degree, in every man; and with shocked
eyes filled with this, will ask himself in frightened wonderment, “How
did _he_ know?” A more intimate question cannot be framed, a more vital
one may not be imagined. In that instant the urge to attack is replaced
by something greater—the desire to have that question answered; and
whatever his urgency, whatever his reasons, whomever else he might ever
attack, this one man is safe from him, especially because he will never
answer.

So it was that the great grizzled coachman hung over the youth who
smiled up at him; and when Lance, in purest terror, began to rise, and
because of the confines of the carriage, brought this towering enigma of
an expression closer and closer to his enemy of the moment, Piggott’s
rage dissolved into another thing which ran saltily down his cheek. He
stepped back to the curb.

“Eh,” he grunted, his features all a-pucker and his hands fumbling with
the forgotten whip, “we ’ave no quarrel, thee and me, lad. I’ll not deny
I need thee more than thou needest me and one day thee’ll fly up and
away and leave me forgotten in this mud I dwell in.” He swallowed hard,
and from the way his features wrung, one might think it burst something
in his throat.

Then in a rumble more normal for him, he said, “I curse ye, Lanky,
myself, and sometimes God that this should be so, but …” He raised his
heavy hands and let them fall … “It is so.”

He climbed up on the box while Lance sank weakly back, shaken to the
marrow as he always was by this sequence. It had happened many times
before, and always it looked like the end of the world, and then like a
swirling faint, and then like a miracle, wherein he emerged from his
shameful paralysis to be hailed as victor. He was well loved for it,
too; always unbelieving, utterly incognizant of the forces he had
displayed (even in facsimile) he would wear his laurels gently, treating
his defeated enemy with a residual fear which looked exactly like
humility and compassion.

“Perhaps you’re right,” he said as the coach drummed on the cobbles of
the Borough High Street, “At times I do go on like a smarmy little
prig.”

“Na,” said the old man, “and I’ll thank ye not to talk so about yerself.
_I_ might; ay, I might again, too, but I’ve a right to be ill-mannered,
being what I am.”

“I shall always be myself, this side of the river,” said Lance
contritely.

“This’ll not be your side very long,” growled the coachman, scowling at
the filth and squalor, the clutter and clabber of these late silent
streets; even deserted, they seemed to ring with the press which had
abandoned them and which would tumble out in the morning, stinking of
its sweat and pots and poverty. “Look ye, fold yer cloak over yer mouth,
lad; I swear this city’s not fit for a gentleman to breathe in; ye can
get the bloody pox from a gulp o’t. … ’Ere’s Long Lane now, and we’ll
’ave Bermondsey and ’ome directly.”

“I’ll get us a new crest, Piggott.”

“Na. Y’eve a look about ye that can’t be covered by a slouch ’at and a
journeyman’s cape, Lanky, and ever’ groat’s worth will cost ye a thr’pny
bit. Leave it to me; I’ll get old ’Omber to cut us a ’scutcheon for
summat less than a bishop’s tithe.”

“Very well, but I’ll pay it.”

“Na, na, lad. ’Twas not your doing. …What did you say was the name of
that brazen bit who chased ye out of Blanton ’Ouse?”

“Miss Axelrood.”

“Ah. I knew it minded me of summat.”

“You know anything about her?”

Piggott chuckled. “Na, Lanky. The name made me think I need some tallow
on these journals or we’ll be a-shriekin’ like a oxcart and I’ll be
loadin’ thatch instead o’ quality folk.”

“Now, Piggott. I know you. What else?”

“What else could there be?”

“What about Miss Axelrood?”

The old man scratched his head. “A mere thought, like. About ’er and,
you know, ’er Ladyship the Countess-Duchess of Almost.”

“Miss Chudleigh?”

“Ay. Now there’s a woman ’as a natural gift for hoorin’. She was a great
beauty at the start—but so were those poor silly Gunning sisters, them
that married Hamilton an’ Coventry. D’ye know seven ’undred people
waited up all one night to see those two come out of an inn in the
morning? Yet there was nothin’ hoorish about them. Then mayhap it ain’t
beauty, but gall, what you call brazenness. Well, that poor mad Hannah
Snell what joined the army and was wounded at Pondicherry, and dug out
’er own bullet lest the surgeon find ’er out—she ’ad more gall than
anybody but ye can’t rightly call ’er a hoor. Or ye might say the talent
lies in ways and means, like.

“Na, bein’ that kind of a hoor takes more gifts than Dr. Johnson, Dame
Jezebel and a gypsy juggler could trot out together. Like the way Lib
magicked King Fred of Prussia, ’im they call the Great. Did she do it
with ’er sparklin’ wit? She did not. Did she do it even by waggin’ ’er
bottom? Not ’er. All she did was drink ’is ’ealth in fine strong
Rhenish—a full English quart of it at a gulp; ay, and another like it to
wash it down, one-two, less than half a minute, so they say. One of ’er
gifts—part of the ’ole gift of hoorin’.” He wagged his head reverently.

“Piggott, what the devil are you talking about? Miss Axelrood?”

“At the moment,” said Piggott with considerable dignity, “hoorin’. And
the gift. The gift.” He drove in thoughtful silence for a time. “I ’ad a
dog, a splendid spaniel bitch, ’oo—”

“Good God!”

“Ye’re not ’earing me out, Lanky. She ‘ad a gift—rats. She could whip
out rats where no rats were, snip-snap-snorem, an’ fill the air with
flyin’ dead rats. Bring ’em ’ome, she would, and stack ’em up like
faggots in the ruddy dooryard. An’ proud? I ’ad a tanner make me a
hanger belt so wide, all o’ braided rats’ tails, two ’undred an’ three
of ’em approximate. I never wore it but the first time; she come at me
like a fiend wi’ th’ fistula.”

“Piggott, what has this to do with—”

“Hush, laddy-buck. As I was sayin’, it was a gift. The thing to remember
about ’er an’ ’er rats, as with ’er Ladyship, is that with both the
pretty bitches the gift come natural in all its parts. An’ it used to
come to me often as I sat admirin’ ’er grace—it’s the spaniel I’m
speakin’ about now—’er grace an’ skill, that if she’d ’ad the company of
some older rat-hunter since she was weaned, why ’er talents might’ve
been cultivated instead of growin’ wild as they did. Wild, they were
splendid; what might they’ve been with a bit o’ tutorin’?”

“Ridiculous, Piggott! She caught more rats than you knew what to do with
as it was!”

“So she did, and ye’ve put yer finger on the point about ratters; good
enough is good enough. But what must a hoor be that she couldn’t be
better? What could she get that she was stopped from more? Ye see, if ye
consider it careful there’s a difference after all, between bitches and
hoors. Now take Lib Chudleigh for one; she ’as a enviable freedom far as
it goes, but when ye use yer longest-handled muckrake, ye’ll understand
she’s boxed. She’s got to a pretty spot indeed, but it’s one she can’t
move from. She can’t marry Kingston for being wed to Hervey; she can’t
divorce Hervey for fear o’ losing her share of ’im, in case ’e gets to
be the Earl o’ Bristol. What she should do is marry Kingston first and
then despatch ’er Augie, but that might smack o’ bigamy. _Henny_way,
that’s Chudleigh, and it’s not ’er I’m discussin’.”

“It isn’t?”

“Ain’t ye been listening, Lanky? Tsk, tsk. All I said was she’s boxed,
an’ that shows she ’as a limit an’ she’s reached it. It occurs to me as
I’m sure it ’as to ’er, that if she’d ’ad the proper ’ands to guide ’er
in ’er youth she might ’ave done more and come farther.”

“A little late for sore regret,” said Lance in his prim voice.

“Ay, it is, for ’er; but a woman like ’er ’as a pride in ’er
accomplishments, as a fine barrister might ’ave, or a horse trainer or
one of them chaps paints pitchers. What might they do in the autumn o’
their life,” he orated with a showy gesture, “with their lives be’ind
them and all their great skills still at a peak, leastways for knowin’
’ow, even if they couldn’t do it? Why, they do what yer friend an’
mentor Simon Barrowbridge did; they indent an apprentice, that’s what,
an’ convey to the young all the wisdom of their ruddy mucking years,
that’s what they do.”

Lulled by the rich rough voice and its ready cadences, Lance was perhaps
slow to absorb exactly what simple, single thing the old man was saying
in these thousands of words. When it came to him he sat up, he stood up,
he shouted, _“Piggott!”_

Immediately a third-storey casement banged open and twice the voice of a
crow screamed down, _“Stop thy bloody squealin’, ye shited swine, an’
give a decent lidy a wink o’ sleep!” The_ decent lady followed her
suggestion with a more substantial stream of hints from her slops-pot
which Piggott avoided by an adroit gigging of the horses, and they
proceeded at a spine-shaking trot. “Savin’ that up for a week,” growled
Piggott of their would-be donor, “the old miser.” He drew the horses in
and gentled them, until at last Lance could be heard as he said, “What
you’re saying is that Miss Axel—”

“What I’m saying is this alone, Lanky: if Lib Chudleigh ’as apprenticed
a gel, and if that apprentice ’as anything like the natural talent of
’er ruddy governess, an’ _if_ that talented apprentice is yer Miss
Axelrood—”

“That’s three ‘ifs’ ” said Lance good-humoredly.

“And if,” Piggott rolled on, ceaselessly as surf, “—you may ’ave a
fourth, Lanky—if this pretty little poiniard of a gel has pointed
’erself your way, ye may call yerself but the bottom tread on a long
flight o’ steps, to be tossed aside as someone else wins the palm.”

Lance threaded his way through the mangled metaphor and then laughed
uneasily. “All this, Piggott, because a lass ran out for a forgotten
farewell?”

“Ay, all that, and also to take yer tender thoughts away from the
cobbles an’ stinks.”

“I’d rather the cobbles an’ stinks,” Lance mimicked. “Piggot, I do think
you’re mad.”

“Ay, and so do I, lad, for not wantin’ ye out of yer depth. … ’Ere’s yer
ruddy manor ’ouse, milord.”

“Take care my cloak doesn’t go the way of the ’scutcheon,” said Lance as
he stepped down, knowing that the old ruffian rightly read the annoyed
affection in his tone. He could be quite sure of it as Piggott swept off
his varnished hat and bowed from the box. “If the marster ’as need of me
’e need only ring; I await ’is pleasure.”

“If the marster ’as need of you he’ll ruddy well walk down to the Purple
Hart hoping you’re not to drunk to speak.”

“Take care, laddy,” rumbled Piggott, and whipped up his horses.

Lance stood at the curb watching him go, wanting to laugh, wanting to
spit, wanting to make a gesture of some kind he wouldn’t make if he
could think of it. Then he took the old man’s parting words at their
explicit value, standing well back from the arch of the courtyard,
looking for shadows any blacker than they should be, any slight movement
which did not belong. Over him the sign of the Dirty Beast creaked,
once, but that was only a breath of wind. (It had been the Doughty Lion
before the Lord Protector changed the fashion.)

He stepped cautiously through the arch, sidled to the right and got his
back to the wall. Footpads usually operated out of their home districts,
but sometimes the need was great, and in the dark … but tonight no one
was about. Lance crossed the courtyard and tiredly mounted the outside
staircase to the second storey. At the top he paused again, but still
heard nothing but the impatient thump of a dreaming horse in the stables
below. Sighing with weariness, he went back to his room, taking from his
waistcoat the great iron key. He unlocked the door, kneed it open,
kicked it closed behind him, and with the practiced motion of long
habitation, knocked down the bar.

The pop and sputter of a stinking sulphur match caught him between
breaths, and in the magnitude of his astonishment, the small sound
deafened him. The flame, when it came, gave him only itself and
blindness; he saw it half-die as it passed to a taper, and then the
candle was lit.

Seated at his table, with his polished-copper mirror propped against the
wall, clad in a shift of fine sheer lawn, sat Miss Axelrood. She smiled
into the mirror, a second flame in a copper world, and her eyes held
his.

She began to comb her heavy hair.



2.


THE DRUMMING IN HIS ears began to have a visible accompaniment—spots and
blotches of black intruding between himself and the night-lit spectre
before him. But the spectre said, “You may breathe now, Captain,” in
Miss Axelrood’s wicked half-whisper and gave him her half-wicked smile,
so he breathed again.

“Miss _Ax—_”

“Shh!” she said quickly, silencing him. “This is not the time for names.
They told me down below that this was the room of Master Lancaster
Higger-Piggott, a barrister’s apprentice. How little that matters, since
my business is with _you,_ Captain.”

“Y-yes,” he stammered, “H-he has gone to—uh—and will not return until,
uh—”

“Until after I leave,” she finished for him. She turned about to look
directly at him; he felt himself blink as at a flare of light, she was
so beautiful. He felt trapped, shocked, clumsy and guilty in guilt’s
most humiliating hue; it was like being caught cheating at cards, on a
Sunday, in a vestry, with one’s nose running. He became acutely aware of
his shabby cloak and the drooping brim of his let-down hat, which he now
snatched away. He fumbled at the edge of his cloak and abruptly sat on
the edge of his bed, very probably because he could no longer stand up.
She had put the candle on the tabouret, between them to one side. He
could see her body clearly through the shift, yet she moved, she
gestured, she held herself as if gowned and brocaded and presentable in
a crowded drawing-room. She conducted herself, as it were, outside the
obvious, in some made-up world of her own, furnished and populated only
by what she chose to have in it. And she had the power to share this
universe, wherein everything was as it should be according to her
dictates; for she said, “How wise of you, Captain, to change your fine
cloak for one like that, when duty calls you into such surroundings!”

Almost in spite of himself, he smiled at that, and her answering smile
was immediate and ingenuous. He rose and threw off the cloak, casting
open his coat as well, so that the fine brocade of his waistcoat might
radiate _Courtenay_ instead of _Piggott._ With the gesture he found his
tongue. “I am, as you see, overwhelmed, Miss Axelrood. Had I known you
were coming, I—”

“Had you known, Captain, then I shouldn’t have come at all. I meant it
to be a surprise.”

“It is a surprise,” he acknowledged, knowing this to be the most
inadequate sentence he had ever spoken. She laughed happily and took
three or four strokes with the comb. Lance heard the drums beating
again. Eardrums. He had an irresistible urge to explain himself. “This
horrible place,” he began, “it’s this Piggott chap’s room, as you have—”

“Yes, of course,” she said warmly, “and you’ve arranged to stop here
during his absence while you investigate certain unpleasant matters in
Bermondsey. I do not question your conduct, Captain, and I shall not.
You, in turn, need not question mine … we are both here. It is strange,
it is unexpected, it is undoubtedly scandalous; but it’s true.”

With a shade of his practiced courtliness he said, “To make it true I
shall have to understand one thing—how did you arrange to be here before
me? For I came directly across London Bridge, and you did not overtake
me. … Or shall we make this a dream after all?”

“By no means,” she twinkled. “I came by Westminster and the Kent road,
right across Southwark.”

“So far,” he breathed, “… so quickly.”

“So eagerly,” she whispered.

He found his gaze locked with hers, and suddenly he could not break it
away; yet her saw her, all of her, as she rose and crossed to him. “So
it’s quite real, quite, quite real and true,” she murmured. From the bed
she took his cloak. “Where do you hang this?”

“Just so,” he choked, pressing it from her hands and letting it fall.

She had unusual ears. The lobes were not free, yet one could not know
this without touching them, and then they presented a warm smooth
channel from jaw to nape-side. Along this his ring-finger found a
half-inch of ecstasy to travel and travel. He buried his face in the
hollow of her shoulder and traced the channel, seeing it with the pad of
his fingertip, seeing is misted and phantasmagoric with the lightest of
contact, seeing it sharply with firmness, seeing it as through crooked
glass with just a little cruelty in his finger.

He was troubled, in a way life had familiarized him with. For advantages
are hard to come by, and the best of them are those which one makes for
oneself, and they are best because they are advantages one can
understand. When the skies open and pour down golden sovereigns, one may
pick some up and own them, and spend some and profit thereby; but if one
is Lance Courtenay, one does this anxiously: _I did not earn this or
make it; I do not understand what it means and doubtless I shall have to
pay a greater price than any I’d have agreed to had I been asked first._
Which made him, in this magic moment, feel lucky indeed, but not happy.

At length he asked, “Why?”

She laughed softly. “Because I wanted to talk to you. Haha! You will
forget that answer to that question, and then you will remember it, and
then you will come to me and ask me what I meant, and all I shall say
is—‘I wanted to talk to you.’ And then you will understand, and be
angry.”

“Not angry at you!”

“Ah no. At you.”

He raised his head and looked into her eyes. He saw in them two candle
flames; the twin vertical beams made her excessively feline. He liked
it. He dropped his head and fell to stroking her ear again. “Talk to me,
then.”

“You know ever so much about the law.” It was not a question, and he did
not deny it. “And,” she said, “you know Miss Chudleigh.”

“I had not thought of them in the same breath.” She giggled. “You’ll
come to know her quite well one day, I think. Would you like that?”

He thought of Elizabeth, Countess of Bristol (if she ever was) and of
Elizabeth, Duchess of Kingston (if she should ever be) and then of
Elizabeth Chudleigh, who had charmed Bath and Hamilton and even
Frederick the Second, King of Prussia, whom they called the Great; who
had done enough, heaven knows, to be scourged out of any village, and
yet who was accepted still in the highest circles of society—even at
court. Yes, he would like to know her quite well. But he would like to
be very cautious too. The mighty fall; the high fall farthest; woe
betide what they fall on. And too, there was the matter of common
decency.

“I’d like to know more of her, before knowing her well.”

“Then ask me.”

Ask? Ask what? He thought of the coachman’s rollicking account, and all
but mimicked it then and there; instead, he laughed. “Is it true she
attended the Venetian Ambassador’s Ball stark-naked?”

“It is not. She wore a … costume.”

“Ah? I heard that, and that his Majesty gave her a fifty-guinea
watch—something one might call a public tribute,” he added, having found
the gentry responsive always to quips about taxes.

“That too is a lie,” said the girl. “It was thirty-five.”

“She is a much maligned lady, then.”

“She is. Now I suppose you are going to ask me about the Duke.”

“Many people do.”

“They are dear friends. Why should there be talk? It seems so ungenerous
… they would, if they could, still it forever by marrying; it is their
dearest wish. Why must they be termed indecent, when their aim is
decency?”

“But they have not married.”

“Ay,” she said sadly, “and therefore the scullery crucifies them.”

“The scullery which says she is wed to Augustus Hervey—the future Earl
of Bristol.”

“Even so.”

“Well,” he demanded, “is she?”

“If she were, or even if it … seemed so … would there be a remedy?”

“Making it quite possible for her to marry Kingston? Ay, but for that
you’d seek a footpad’s counsel, not mine.”

“You distress me,” she said faintly, turning her head away like a
schoolgirl seeing blood.

“If she divorced … na, Bristol would never stand the noise. Eh? I
thought so. … And if Augustus Hervey divorced her, no littlest curate
nor biggest bishop would wed her to Kingston. Unless … She couldn’t
manage a dispensation, or some …”

“She has too many enemies,” said Miss Axelrood sadly, “like all great
beauties.”

“Then there’s no hope for it; she’ll have to wait it out. And Kingston
by far the older man. Too bad.”

“Oh dear. I thought … I thought you might …”

He sat up on the edge of the bed and took her strongly by the shoulders,
though he did not move her “Why me? Why did you come to me for this?”

She glanced quickly about the shabby room. “We—I thought perhaps your
friend, Master Higger-Piggott, might quietly discover a way. Isn’t he
apprenticed to Mr. Barrowbridge? And isn’t Mr. Barrowbridge quite the
cleverest and most learned man of law of his time?”

“He—I’m told he is,” said Lance. An unpleasant confusion curled within
him, like the first smoke before sudden flame. “If Mr. Barrowbridge
could help, surely Miss Chudleigh need only—”

But she was slowly shaking her head as he spoke; and his voice trailed
off. She said, “Years ago they had an unhappy meeting. I know of it, but
then, I don’t gossip. A very tragic story, poor man … and it were unwise
even to mention Miss Chudleigh’s name to him. I had hoped that your
friend might, without mentioning …” In a sudden change of voice she
asked, “What of this young Higger-Piggott? What do you know of him? Who
is he? Where does he come from?”

He dropped his eyes. “You … seem to know so very much already,” he said
unsteadily.

“But tell me, _Captain Courtenay._ I would rather hear this from you
than from anyone I know.”

“You’re playing with me!”

She put her long hand against his cheek. It felt very cool and strong.
“Have I played with you?”

“I’ll … ask Higger-Piggott when I see him.” He sounded almost surly.

“Tell me now. I’m very interested in Master Lancaster Higger-Piggott and
his father the coachman.”

_“That’s a lie!”_

“My dear, my _dear,”_ she soothed. He looked at her, but her face was
only solicitous. If she had smiled, or gloated—if he had even suspected
anything of the sort, he might have … might have … but surely there was
nothing of the sort there. And her questions guarded him, always, in
their strange way.

“He’s … he was brought up by a coachman, yes. Actually he’s of … gentle
birth. Perhaps noble. There’s a great mystery there. He is in law
because he means to find out, one day, just who he is. No one knows of
this, of course—not even old Barrowbridge. A very studious chap. He’ll
be a gentleman one day.” He smiled suddenly.

“I’m sure he will. Do you like him?”

“Eh? Why—yes, I rather do.”

“I could come to like him too, I think,” she said.

They had a silent moment. He had never felt such perfect understanding
with anyone in his life before. But then, he had been close to very few
people before.

“Now,” she said, “tell me about Captain Courtenay.”

He flushed, and laughed. “Oh, there’s very little to Captain Courtenay.
He’s—what you see, no more.”

“It’s a good thing to be, a Courtenay.”

“Yes, it is; but why do you say that?”

“Well, there are so many of you. England’s full of Courtenays, and in
Devon they outnumber the hedgerows.” She tilted her head. “Safety in
numbers.”

“In a way. I … don’t commune very much with my … kin, though.”

“And then,” she said thoughtfully, “there’s the old story of the exiled
Earl who died in Rome …”

“Padua,” he said immediately, “Edward Courtenay, Earl of Devon. That was
1556. His ancient patent as earl omitted the words _de corpore suo,_
which means that a male not heir _of his body_ could inherit. William, a
sixth cousin once removed, never claimed. There’ve been Earls of Devon
since who were not Courtenays, and Courtenays who were baronets and
viscounts without protest. There’s an earldom waiting for the right
Courtenay, should he be able to prove his line, and should he, first, be
a man the Lords would notice. Meanwhile, the story is known, and knowing
people do not offend any Courtenay, lest one day that Courtenay be
admitted to the House. And then for the old estates in Ireland, and
sweet Powderham in Devon … and mayhap a fine marriage; the Courtenays
were famous for the great marriages they made.”

Again she touched his flushed cheek with her long cool hand, and again
said, “It’s a good thing to be, a Courtenay.” She kissed him sweetly. “I
think if a man had all the families in England to choose from, he could
not have picked more wisely.”

He laughed uncertainly. “Such a man would have no name at all to begin
with.”

“Then he’d not be cursed with a low one. To choose a finer name and
title for oneself is, I think, a worthy enterprise. After all,” she
said, laughing, “we women have been doing it for some time.”

He laughed. “Yet, to be born with—”

“A great name is a proud thing to be born with. But ’twould be a pity to
be able to look only downward, even if all the rest of the world looked
up at you. I’d rather be an Axelrood with a future than a Hanover with a
past.”

“You’re an … amazing child.”

“Child is it! How old are you, Lance Courtenay, Earl of Devon to be and
Lord of Powderham to come?”

“Three and twenty.”

“Then we’re a year and a bit apart, and you call me child!”

“You’re not angry!” He really didn’t know.

“Does an officer—does a gentleman play with children?”

“Yes!” he cried in irritation.

“Like this?” And then she looked into his face and laughed so hard that
his shocked puzzlement disappeared and he lay and laughed with her.
‘Tell me,” she said when she could, “what is it you want? I mean, your
most secret secret.”

“Why, to be—to have—”

“Na! Those are ambitions. I met a viscountess once who told me that of
all the things in the wide world what she wanted most was to dance naked
in the sun. She never had and she knew she never would, but it was her
dream. Have you no such dreams?”

“No!”

“Everyone has.”

“You?”

“Even I. I’ll tell you; but I’ve asked you first.”

He thought for a moment and then chuckled. “I’ll not tell you that.”

“Why?”

“You wouldn’t understand me. And if you did you—you’d never believe I’m
not that sort of chap.”

“You are not and you never shall be. I _do_ understand; have I not told
you about the dancing viscountess?”

It was warm and quiet and comforting to be there. He was unaccustomed to
searching within himself for any values save right and wrong; in a way
he regarded other concentrations as indulgences, very nearly sins. For a
man had his way to make in the world, and the world was not, by and
large, a friendly place, and it was impatient with idlers who sat by the
way and told themselves their own dreams.

On the other hand there was little pleasure in his life. His daily tasks
certainly could not be so described, and his occasional forays into
elevated society across the river were not pleasure-jaunts. There were
times, then, when he gave himself five minutes of _fugue,_ and rested
from the very act of living. From these he always started up guiltily,
and wished that he had not done it, and searched angrily for that which
he should have been doing instead, and thereafter tried to expunge the
vice from his conscience.

This was the very first time anyone had ever asked to share such a thing
of his; this removed some of its viciousness. It was yet another example
of the elusiveness of the good and evil which a man must understand to
orient himself in the world. Anything sole, solitary, unshared, hoarded
and secret can hardly be good. Its evil is ameliorated the instant it is
approved by another; those things which are accepted of all men are what
all men term good, now or later. In the light of ambition, one sees
oneself an intimate of some growing good, one which will spread and be
acceptable to all mankind, or at very least to the masters thereof; and
lo! one finds oneself accepted too, as its exponent. So much for the
light of ambition; it is seldom that indulgence casts the same glow. In
the light of indulgence he saw himself—

“I … I see myself sometimes as one who holds all laws of man and morals
at defiance,” he whispered, while she leaned close to hear. “I can find
a moment, from time to time, briefly and a long while apart, when my
mirror shows me such a one. He is no revolutionary, and he asks no help,
wants no cohorts. The laws he breaks are not to be broken for
themselves, as a mob might tear down walls, purely because they stand.
No; he does what he does without regard to laws, with them or against
them as the special case might dictate to him. He takes, he uses, he
appropriates, he destroys as the whim suits him, without conscience and
with no direction save that of his appetites. These are many, and he
treasures them all.

“He takes never too much, no one thing ever too often, but lives with
his appetites, keeping them all alive, never destroying the flavor of
any one of them, never permitting one to command the others or him. His
search is for more of them—more appetites to isolate and keep alive,
pruned and orderly as a formal garden. He has escaped what plagues me,
and everyone I know—the elevation of self to higher regard of mankind.
He is free because he needs to be no more than he is. I say, ‘I must be
more …” and ‘I must have more …’ but he is free; he says only, ‘I am I.’
He is the compleat libertine. And in those rare moments I see him in the
mirror, making some gracious gesture for the pleasure of its
graciousness, and he says, ‘I, libertine…’ ”

He glanced quickly at her face, and for the second time that night the
air was thick with the violence she could trigger with a single syllable
of laughter. As before he met only a great tenderness; and wherever in
it there was no understanding, there was the clear wish to understand.

Yet he defended his folly in telling her: “I’m _not_ that way, you must
understand that, I’m _not!_ Perhaps I see the libertine as the very
shadow of the things I am not, limned and delineated by the very things
I am. For I may not flout laws, written or unwritten; I need them! For
me to do what the libertine does would be to cut away each round of my
ladder as I met it, climbing.

“Disaster,” he whispered, all but frightened, “disaster … you see, I am
not free, as he is. He is free of morals, of decency, of obedience and
respect and loyalty. I may not be free; these things must be solid and
permanent as I move amongst them, lest they fall and crush me; and where
I can shore them up I must, and where I can rescue them, I must. Above
all, men must point to me and say: There goes a decent man. I need that;
the libertine does not. He needs only awareness of self, his appetites,
and a certain … circumspection. … I’ve never talked like this in my
life.”

“You speak beautifully,” she said, and, “I like your libertine.”

He smiled. “And my Higger-Piggott.”

“Ay. Even better. His aims are so similar to yours, and the libertine’s
so counter.”

“You do understand. You do understand _me,”_ he half-sang.

“I do, or I certainly shouldn’t be here.”

“I’m so happy you’re here … now, you have a secret for me.”

“Must I?”

He nodded. It made her hair move in the candlelight.

“Ah,” she said, “I could not paint such a picture as yours; my poor
tongue hasn’t the skill. What I want … what I want is only to see … how
… high … ” She closed her eyes. He watched her fine face on his pillow
and was content; if she would speak, he would watch and listen; if she
would sleep, he would watch.

But she continued, suddenly and strongly, as if there had been no pause,
“… to see how high one might fly. Just that.” She sighed, long and
longingly. “Especially to see how high—_I_ might fly. … D’ye know the
dowry the Gunning sisters brought from Ireland with them, Lance? Beauty.
Just beauty. Yet one was a duchess, one is now a duchess twice over and
will mother dukes, I’ll warrant. To have a lot, or even a little, and to
reach the heights—how wonderful. To have nothing, and reach the heights,
and then on the heights, to build a tall something … ah!”

She smiled into herself, with her eyes closed, and said: “If I’ve a
secret at all, it isn’t counter to ambition, like yours, and it isn’t a
place or a state of being, like yours; it’s only a great happy question:
how high is high?”

Suddenly she sat up, leaned over him, and framed his face with her two
strong hands. “Lance, wouldst help us?”

She meant, he realized, none of the wishes and dreams they had traded.
He harked back to what they had been speaking of earlier, and a slow
frown appeared on his forehead. What she read in it he could not know,
but she said immediately, “Miss Chudleigh desires only to marry her
Duke. She would be grateful to whoever helped her.”

“Grateful?” It was said in a way which meant “How grateful?”

She cast a significant glance around his shabby dwelling. “Have you
thought where you might live after your … duties here in Bermondsey are
discharged? There’s a little house, a holding of the Duke of Kingston,
right on the edge of Holborn, which needs someone to keep it warm. It is
convenient to every brilliant gathering in London—most pleasant for one
who might have entry to all of them, ay, and the Court as well.”

His eyes glowed. “There is great merit in Miss Chudleigh’s case.”

She smiled. “Decency and justice.”

“The very things which mean most to me. …Very well, I shall discuss this
matter carefully with my good friend the barrister’s boy, and we shall
see what can be done to right the wrongs done your kind patroness.”

“Ah. Lance, I knew you would!”

“Of course, my limitations just now … certain military duties which I
may not discuss …”

“I quite understand. What Miss Chudleigh requires is simply—knowledge.
Only to know how to proceed.”

“And perhaps some assistance in the process.”

“If you would be so generous.” Again they smiled at one another. And
with a single lithe motion she was away and across the room, to where
her garments were neatly folded on a chair. She put them on quickly and
without self-consciousness as she spoke, while he watched enchanted.

“Miss Chudleigh and I are with Lady Blanton for the time being,” she
said briskly. “Lady Blanton likes you, and you may be sure of a welcome
there. I think Miss Chudleigh would prefer not to discuss these painful
matters with anyone, the poor dear, so you shall simply have to deal
through me.”

“Tsk.”

“Miss Chudleigh will be so pleased, Captain!”

“I shall do my best to please her. Who told you where to find me?”

She was taken aback by the suddenness of the question and the hard flat
tone in which it was thrust at her. “Lance!”

“No one knew I was here. No one!”

“No one ever need know.”

“You won’t tell me?”

“Ah, does it matter?”

“Yes,” he said, “I think it does.”

“Well,” she said, “I’ll not tell you.” She came to him and put her hands
on his shoulders. “Your secrets are quite safe with me, and I’ve given
you secrets in exchange. Mayn’t we trust one another?”

He saw that this was true. Certain things about himself might do him no
service if circulated in the drawing rooms of the Old City; she, on the
other hand, was equally at his mercy.

“As you wish, then.”

“Lance, you’re angry!”

“Perhaps. But then, it matters little; I can serve you just as well
angry. … Wait. I’ll slip down and fetch a carriage.”

“My carriage is waiting.”

“I saw none.”

“No.”

“I’ll go down with you, then.”

She glanced at a gold watch pinned to her bodice. “As you like.” She
looked once around the room, once half-anxiously at him, and then
preceded him through the door. He handed her down the dark staircase and
across the court. Just by the archway outside stood a two-wheeled spring
trap of the new style so admired by the hansom-drivers, cursed as they
were by carriages swung from leather. Its driver sat silent with his
cloak up and his brim down, only a lump of darkness.

“Good-by …” she whispered. She stepped up to the trap, but he held her
back.

“I don’t know your given name, Miss Axelrood!”

She laughed softly. “So you don’t. But then, we hardly know one another
yet, and it would be unseemly for you to use it.” She bent very close
and whispered in his ear, “Go back and contemplate thy couch, friend,
and think of what the future may bring.” And she sprang into the trap,
and was gone.

Thoughtfully, he listened to the light swift pounding until it faded
into the sleeping sounds of the city, and the sounds of his own
breathing, and the creak above him of the Dirty Beast. Then he shook his
bewildered head and climbed the stairs to his chamber.

He closed the door behind him and stood musing, contemplating the couch
as instructed. And there in the light of the stub of his candle lay the
stolen escutcheon, the crest of the Courtenays. He crossed to it and
picked it up. Suddenly he laughed. He thought of how, at Blanton House,
she had balanced like a bird on the step of his carriage. What had her
deft busy hands been at while she spoke to him there in the dark? Yes,
she could have reached the ’scutcheon and unbuckled it … and was it to
prove something to him? Was it to give substance to that last strange
remark of hers, and had she planned the clever theft after planning the
remark? Did all things follow her plans, even to the arrival of her
spring trap exactly on time to take her away? Could she plan, to the
minute, the length of time it would take her to subjugate a man and set
him to her bidding?

She could and she had, and with this carven gift she had proved it to
him. And this, he thought, with _very_ mixed feelings, must be what old
Piggott meant when he warned him against involvement with a … a natural
aptitude at a high degree of training.

But for all its mysteries, the situation contained one great comfort for
him: this was no shower of sovereigns from a smiling sky. Miss
Axelrood’s favors were a _pro quo_ which demanded, in its own coin, a
_quid_ from him. He would pay it, then; and should he shake the tree
while picking the promised fruit, let it be their worry and not his;
they had let him into their orchard, and they knew where he was.

Lance Courtenay (or Lancaster Higger-Piggott) laughed and went to bed.



3.


THE NIGHT HAD NOT been cool, and the morning was most unseasonable;
Lance woke to an unwonted drone of flies and an almost visible reek from
the stables directly below. His nostrils twitched and he cursed, and
opened his eyes. He closed them again immediately. Daylight, even the
dimmest and earliest, is no friend to such cramped, corroded, noisome
closets as this one. A single candle had been enough and more than
enough for it.

At the thought of the candle he looked at it, spent and spilled in its
leaden holder, and then his gaze slid to the tip-crazy chair,
half-turned from the littered table, just as she had left it, coming to
him. He rolled out of bed and approached it, hearing the drums again
faintly. He turned up the mirror, for a mad moment thinking he might see
her face in it again, the coppered shadows in the hollows of her
shoulders. He laughed then, perhaps at himself, yet a little fondly …
well, he laughed fondly at himself, and began to dress.

He dressed carefully in dun-colored hose and heavy dull shoes with one
small pewter buckle each. His linen was clean and very white, but
decently frayed; his tuck-waisted coat not too snug and slightly
wrinkled. He folded his linen of the night before and the gorgeous
waistcoat, and with the burnished silver-buckled shoes, the rich hose
and coat, put them in the chest. It was camphorwood, carefully laid in a
shell of battered oak; like himself, it looked like a thousand others
outside, and concealed its virtues. He locked its two heavy locks with
two separate keys from his ring, and then glanced around the room a
disgusted once. It could now be opened to chambermaid and prying
innkeeper, and be damned to them; they might keep anything they could
move.

He took up the Courtenay coach escutcheon, wagged his head admiringly,
and set it carefully in the large inside pocket of his coat. He put on
the slouched hat, taking care to knock out the last signs of its ever
having been tricorned and cockaded, took up his rough thornwood stick,
and descended the stairs.

Grove, the innkeeper, stood in the court, by his very presence drawing
the flies from the stable. “Eh, good morrow, Master Lanky!”

Lance gave him the briefest of nods, but Grove was not dismissed. “A
word, sir …”

The “sir” was not lost on Lance, who was quite used to—and satisfied
with—Grove’s usual form of address, which was no form at all. “Be quick,
then,” he said coldly, sensing an advantage.

“I’ve little to say, sir, though ’tis with all my ’eart. … It might be
I’ve been a mite ’ard on ye, sir, one time or another, for yer reckoning
an’ that. … I wanted ye to know I meant nowt; a ninn’s a pesty thing to
deal with an keeps a body ’alf barmy, ye might say. So for anythin’ I
might’ve said in times past, I beg yer ’umble pardon.”

“How much did she give you, Grove, a gold sovereign?” Lance snapped.

Grove cringed, which was a sizable feat for a man of his girth. “I
didn’t want ye angry, sir, an’ I ’ad to be sure. I’d not let a stranger
into yer rooms, not for—”

“Not for less than a shilling,” said Lance acidly. He raised the ferrule
of his stick and tapped Grove on the bristly point of his chin. “It’s
all right this time, but see to it that whatever she bribed you with has
purchased your deafness—” _rap!_—“blindness—” _rap!_—“and a total loss
of memory.”

“Oh, ay, sir, that she did. That she ’as. The very thing I was about to
say, sir.” He stumbled back from the stick and went blinking and
wheezing, ogling and giggling, into the shadows of the stable.

Old swine, Lance thought. I wonder just how much she _did_ give him.

He strode smartly down to Abbey Street and along it not quite to the
Jamaica Road, keeping close to the center kennel all the way; for though
the unusual weather was raising a proper summer flavor from this
waterway, it was safer there than by the house fronts and their
overhanging first storeys. He came at last to the dangling, legless,
tailless horse which marked the sadlery, and turned into the alehouse
next to it.

“Ah there, Mister ’igger-Piggott!”

“Good morrow, Mother Starch.” He did not, as did most people, respond to
her wide warm smile and ardent little voice; he had learned years ago
that her features relaxed into this delighted expression and her diction
followed suit, regardless of her feelings. “And ’ow,” she beamed, “is
poor dear Mr. Barrowbridge today?”

“I haven’t been up yet,” Lance said. “Do you have a loaf for us this
morning?”

“That I ’ave, and my sister’s ’usband rode up from Hither Green last
night and brought me plover’s eggs, if you’d like some.”

“I would that. Four, if you have them.”

“You can ’ave six. They’re right soothing for poor dear Mr.
Barrowbridge’s aff-flick-shun. Fair rottin’ aw’y ’e is. My uncle Neddy
’ad the sime complaint. When their voices go like that they’re done for,
you may depend,” she said happily. “Next thing to look for is a ’orrid
great ’ole openin’ up on side of the neck ’ere,” she went on, touching
her throat. “After that ’e might drag on for a year or more but it’s all
over with ’im.” She gave him a luminous smile. “You ’ave tea?”

“Thank you, yes,” said Lance, taking some comfort in the fact that Uncle
Neddy had not been carried off by leprosy, “but I’ll have some fresh
water from your cistern. … Is Scuttle about?”

“Scut-_tle_!” she yodeled, the two syllables an octave apart. From the
shadows of the alehouse came a frightened scrabbling as of startled
rodents, and an undersized eight-year-old boy appeared. “ ’Ere’s that
nice Mister ’igger-Piggott wantin’ a word wi’ ye.”

The boy looked at the nice Mister Higger-Piggott without enthusiasm.
Lance sat down on a heel and crossed his forearms on the other extended
knee, attempting to look friendly. The boy backed away. Lance said,
“Have you been up to the offices yet, Scuttle?”

“No, sir, but I’ll ’urry an’—”

“Did you know there was a new gypsy caravan in Southwark Park?”

“Please, sir, yus, but I shan’t—”

“Would you run down and see them if you could?”

“Ah, sir I’d never—”

“With a silver threepence you wouldn’t?”

Scuttle stared at him and the threepenny bit, dumbfounded. The young
barrister’s clerk had not the reputation of extending money, not even to
tease. Lance smiled glassily. “We’ll not be needing you at all today. We
have to be very quiet and work hard and not see anyone. Here, take this,
lad, and push off.”

“Coo,” breathed the child.

“Na,” said Mother Starch chidingly. “A clout i’ the ear’d be better. Gi’
us the thr’p’nce to keep for ye, boy.”

“Fat chance,” said Scuttle courteously, and disappeared into Abbey
Street.

“Ah well,” said Mother Starch cheerfully, “Mayhap the gypsies’ll steal
him.” She hummed as she took up the eggs carefully in an end of rough
sacking and handed him the twisted end. “I’ll step up and empty your
slops, later on.”

“Thank you no,” said Lance. “What I can’t do, can wait. Just put these
things on Mr. Barrowbridge’s chit.”

“Very well. Take care,” she admonished gaily, “You’re lookin’ very
unslept this morning. You’ll be needin’ a nice physic. My dead niece
Julia, she ’ad that look about ’er.”

Lance took the loaf and the wine bottle full of water, his eggs and his
stick, and navigated the doorway. You’re physic enough, he said, but not
aloud. He edged his way up the dark creaking stairway next to the saddle
shop and set his burdens down while he manipulated the key.

The establishment of Simon Barrowbridge, Barrister, consisted primarily
of a large room with a half-partition. On the entrance side of this were
a stool, a settle, and two wooden chairs, with a small writing shelf
built to the partition. On the far side was a monstrous desk, a clerk’s
table and high stool, and one straight chair “for defendants,”
Barrowbridge used to say, the assumption being that plaintiffs would be
strong enough to stand. One large window pierced the wall directly
behind the desk, and it had been literally years before Lance had
realized its function in keeping Barrowbridge’s leonine, pockmarked head
in mighty silhouette while light flooded the faces of his interlocutors.

Books covered the walls from floor to ceiling behind the partition,
except for one narrow doorway at the rear, which was framed by them.
From the other side of this doorway, as Lance entered and turned back
for his supplies, came a series of animal chokes, wheezes, gasps,
whistles, grunts and sneezes, all of which he ignored.

He closed the door and quietly stepped to the writing shelf, where he
took a sheet of foolscap and a heavy marking lead, and lettered busily
for a moment: NO CONSULTATIONS TODAY and under it, in flowing script,
_Simon Barrowbridge._ This he took outside and pinned at the stair
landing where the dim glow from an airhole would fall on it, and
returned to the office. He locked the door as silently as the clumsy
iron would permit, and started the fire which had been laid, courtesy
milord Scuttle, the evening before. He filled the kettle and put it on,
looked with distaste at the grey drippings in the iron skillet, shrugged
and put it on too, to receive the eggs. All the while the gurglings,
sniffings, and half-aspirated whistlings continued from the rear door.

At last he went to it and flung it open. “Good morning, Mr.
Barrowbridge, sir.”

The room was small, the bed huge. The man who lay on it, curled and
dangerous like a wounded bear, glowered at him. “Damn it, Piggy, didn’t
you hear me? Or are you trying not to? Slide me yon chamber like a good
chap.”

The convenience in question stood in a closed cabinet in an ancient
sideboard by the door. Lance did not even glance in its direction.
“Another warm day, sir,” he said obsequiously.

The great hulk shifted ominously. “I made a rather simple request,
Higger-Piggott.” Barrowbridge’s voice was not a voice; it was a rasping
whisper, edgy, painful to hear and doubtless painful to produce.

Lance said, “Mother Starch had some plover’s eggs. I’ll have them for
you directly, sir.”

Barrowbridge thrashed and heaved until he was sitting up. “By gad, sir,
I’ll get it myself, then,” and reached for his chair. His chair was a
heavy and richly carved structure, probably one of the few really fine
things the old barrister now owned. When placed behind his enormous desk
in the other room, it appeared to be an ordinary chair. It was not. It
was equipped with four-inch oaken wheels, the two rear ones skilfully
mounted on casters. With these and a heavy walking-stick to scull with,
the old man could get around these two rooms with surprising deftness.
When he reached for the chair this time, however, it darted away from
his grasp and fled to Lance, who had hooked the rung between the front
legs with his toe. With an urbane smile he pulled the chair through the
door and put it neatly in place behind the desk.

The kettle had begun to sing. Lance ignored the whispered roars from the
other room as if they were so much distant surf, and went to find the
teapot. As he bent to knock out the old leaves he glanced back and saw
the old man taking his heavy cudgel from its resting place by the small
window, and laying it along the outside edge of the bed, just covered by
the edge of his greasy old comforter.

Lance rinsed out the pot from the water bottle and then filled it with
boiling water from the kettle. He put on the lid and covered it with a
cosy. “Last night was a great success, sir,” he called conversationally.
“I think Lady Blanton was pleased with me; she’s asked me back.
Beauclerk was there, but left early for that dashed club of his; what a
man of that finish sees in a grubby lot of hacks and actors, Garrick and
Goldsmith and that lot, I can’t imagine.” He lifted the edge of the
tea-cosy and touched the pot briefly with his fingertips. “How can I
ever repay you for all you’ve done?” he asked warmly. “All night long I
lay and thought of you, sir, and my great debt to you. You took me from
the muck and grime of the stables; you taught me to speak; you taught me
law. You have wangled invitations and introductions for me that I never
could have had—that I never would have thought you could manage; yet
you’ve done it. How can I repay you—how could I even begin?”

The choked whisper had a suggestion about a piece of furniture, but he
ignored it, concentrating on the outside temperature of the teapot. At
last it seemed to satisfy him, and he emptied its hot water carefully
into the bottle, threw in the tea, filled it from the kettle, replaced
cover and cosy, and set it aside to steep. The skillet was all a-crackle
now. He broke two eggs into it and contemplated them. “Lady Blanton
asked me, just as I was leaving, if I thought it quite proper for her to
have a rather notorious guest in her house. I answered her as you would
have, sir, speaking a great deal and committing myself not at all. I
must say I was proud of myself; but prouder still of you. It was like
having you invisible, there at my elbow, whispering to me from the
weight of your years and experience.” This spate of words carried him to
the door, where he leaned gracefully, smiling.

Barrowbridge had, for the moment, given up trying to speak. Only because
he was watching for it did Lance see the slight motion at the edge of
the bed as the barrister’s hand tightened on the concealed stick, the
bulge of the monstrous shoulder. Barrowbridge’s legs were useless with
scrofula and gout, but those shoulders and heavy arms were to be treated
with respect.

Lance smiled his respectful smile and turned away, just out of range. He
crossed to the teapot, took down a clean cup, poured a few drops of tea,
looked at its color, nodded, poured it full. He sprinkled in a few
granules of sugar, lifted the cup and carried it carefully to the back
room. He stepped inside so swiftly and smoothly, swung the cup and
saucer with his own momentum so carefully, that not a drop spilled as he
presented the cup an inch before the old man’s startled face. Years of
intimate association had taught him how very much Barrowbridge
appreciated the first draught of that first cup of tea in the mornings.

As the pocked nostrils dilated over the steaming cup, Lance bent
slightly and twitched the stick away; it clattered to the floor far
behind him, in the outer office, like a spent arrow. Barrowbridge’s jaw
dropped as he followed it longingly with his eyes. “My goodness,” said
Lance, half to himself, gazing into the depths of the cup, “not strong
enough after all …” and, cup and all, retreated to the office.

The sound Barrowbridge made, had he had his own old great bugle of a
voice, would have been a wordless scream. It issued, ludicrously, as a
sort of yawn. Lance busied himself with the eggs, dipping them out of
the skillet on to an earthen plate. He cut bread and arranged it around
the eggs and stood a moment to admire the effect. When he reached the
door with the plate, Barrowbridge seemed about to weep. Lance stopped,
startled. He had never seen this before. “My _dear_ sir!” he exclaimed.

“What in the name of God’s got into you, Lanky? What are you doing to
me?”

“I? Why—sir … you are my benefactor, my—Mr. Barrowbridge, I would never
…” He laughed deprecatingly and made a slight gesture with the plate of
food. “Doing to you, sir? Preparing a small something to break your
fast. Perhaps you don’t care for plover’s eggs?” he added worriedly.

“Get me the night-mug,” said the old man brokenly, pointing at the
sideboard, “give me a bite to eat, and then for the love of heaven sit
down and tell me what’s got into you.”

“Oh, I’ve been thoughtless, I’ve …” and Lance hurried to the sideboard.
He opened the cabinet briskly, took out the chamber, averted his head,
lifted the lid, and let the contents of the plate—bread, eggs, and
all—slip into it.

He met the barrister’s horror-struck eyes. “Thoughtless,” murmured Lance
contritely, “and now careless. How can you forgive me?” He then replaced
the cover, lifted the object back into the sideboard—_“Lanky!”_ wailed
the old man as it disappeared—and firmly closed its door.

“I beg you, an instant’s patience, and I’ll have more eggs for you,”
said Lance earnestly, and fairly ran to prepare them. While the eggs
were cooking, he went back to lean in the doorway. Barrowbridge was
lying back again, with his eyes closed now.

“Interesting matter at law came to my attention last night,” Lance said,
apparently looking at his fingernails, but actually watching the closed
eyes on the bed. They opened, red and agonized. “And it came to me that
if anyone might be able to solve it, you could.”

“D’ye think I can talk law at a time like this?”

“I think you could talk law at anytime, anywhere,” said Lance in tones
of pure idolatry.

“Think again,” said Barrowbridge, and closed his eyes.

“It is the matter,” said Lance precisely, “of Elizabeth Chudleigh, and
her desired marriage to the second Duke of Kingston.”

All that was puffy, fluid, soft, malleable and subject to change in that
massive old face seemed in that instant to disappear, and in its place
was a rock carving. The head even sank a little deeper into the pillow,
as if it had acquired a new dead weight. For a long breathless moment
nothing happened, nothing moved. It was a stasis following which
anything—literally anything—might happen, provided only that it was
explosive. And the explosion came, in the simple and unbelievable fact
that there was none. Barrowbridge opened his eyes and looked at his
young protégé, and sighed—softly, gently, barely a breath. Then he
whispered, “So … that’s it.”

Weakly, he tried and failed to wet his lips with the tip of a greyish
tongue. “I might have known … I could have seen … this is the kind of
thing she does so well. What did she do, Lanky, draw you out until she
had all my weaknesses before her, and then rehearse you?”

“You do me little credit, sir.”

“Ah, do I, though! … Well, friend bastard—and I speak precisely—you may
be sure I shall not help her, now or at any time. You may faithfully
believe this yourself, and you may convey the conviction to your … new …
owner.”

“But look,” said Lance disgustedly, “I’ve let the yolks cook hard. Ah,
Mr. Barrowbridge, there’s a haunting on your breakfast! Ah well, never
mind, sir. I’ve still two more eggs. But I’d best eat these myself; you
taught me yourself to waste nothing. I’ll be quick, sir; bear with me.”
He put the eggs on the plate where the new bread awaited it, drew up the
clerk’s high stool to the corner of the big desk that could be seen from
the bedroom, fetched the cooling cup of tea he had poured earlier, and
composed himself to eat.

There was no sound from the other room. He sipped the tea thoughtfully.
He was considerate and did not smack his lips. With the staccato entry
of voice-upon-swallow he said, “I saw your notice on the landing, sir.
Why did you want no consultations today? Why, anyone who comes will turn
away without even reaching the door.”

No answer. Lance cut away egg with his knife and carefully laid the
ivory and gold sliver upon a piece of bread. He brought it carefully to
his lips and filled his mouth. He ruminated for long enough, swallowed,
sipped tea, and said informatively, “Nice little beggar, that Scuttle.
Since we’re seeing no clients today I sent him off to see the gypsies,
with a silver threepenny. He’ll not be in until tomorrow.”

Still nothing. Lance wagged his head admiringly. The old chap was tough.
Or unconscious. He glanced quickly at that red glare, and nodded. Tough
was the word. “Mr. Barrowbridge,” he said gently, “I am here in your
service, and prepared to discuss the law with you. If you would prefer
to be alone, I will as always oblige you.” He hurriedly ate up the rest
of the egg and bread, and drank the tea down. Then he turned to the open
doorway and made an inquisitive sound, raising his eyebrows a great deal
and his shoulders a little in the manner attributed to Lord
Chesterfield.

Barrowbridge, deep in his pillow, nodded. “Get out, then.”

Lance sighed and rose. Crossing and recrossing the office, he got his
hat and his coat and his stick. He tidily lifted the kettle from the
fireplace and set it on the hearth, poked up the fire and added a stick
or two. He covered the bread against the flies, sighed again and went to
the door. The door could not be seen from the bedroom. He unlocked it
and swung it wide.

“Good-by, sir.”

No answer.

Lance stepped over the sill and down on the creaking board which for
eleven years had loudly marked every passage in and out of this room. He
then stepped back inside again, soft as a cat, and slammed the door.
Noisily, he locked it. He then employed two artifices he had been taught
by a thief whom Barrowbridge had once defended; one was to bend swiftly
and pound the floor with the hardest part of the heels of his hands, in
imitation of departing footsteps. _(Th’ smallest sound from a foot
sounds like a foot; but ’ands, now, they can sound like anything—even a
rat, even yerself, out-o-doors and runnin’ off. An’ ye’ll know ye done
it right when off they run after ye.)_

The other device was a method of breathing silently in concealment.
_(Tip back yer ’ead to give yer neck room, open yer throat like you’ve
just run a league, and go all soft inside. Yer ’eart ’ll pump yer
bellows for ye. The scareder ye are the better ye’ll pump. It’s a trick
keeps many o’ us poltroons alive.)_

So there he crouched, head back, mouth open like an idiot watching the
moon, his fingertips on the floor for balance, his very soul in his
ears.

He waited until his left foot was an agony of pins and needles and his
right foot was cold. Nothing, and nothing, and …

A faint sequence of sounds, hushed bleats.

A sudden mighty thrashing, and a series of labored syllables, _uh! uh!
uh!_

A muffled crash that set the floorboards jumping, and over and over, the
sound of a mulling iron plunged into cool ale.

With a single motion Lance shucked out of hat and coat and bounded to
the inner doorway, to be leaning against it, his sleek head on one side,
watching with cool curiosity the great broken mound of man on the
bedroom floor, one useless leg still across the bed, the other on the
floor, the stub-clawed hands spraddling and crab-creeping across toward
the sideboard, cheeks aquiver inflating, ashiver collapsing, while lips
and nostrils in unison gave forth that great reiterated hiss. Caught up
in his own misery, Barrowbridge had obviously let it fill his cosmos,
and crept and groveled and slobbered for many seconds before he was
aware of the spectator, and then only as a boot in the doorway. He
stopped breathing abruptly, for a heartbeat, and then actually reached
out and touched Lance’s foot with wondering wet fingers. Then, unable to
raise himself high enough to look upward, he made a single great
convulsion and turned over, presenting his big head to Lance’s
fascinated gaze upside down, contorted. The brute log of a leg slipped
off the bed then, and Lance knew somehow that its bolt of pain broke
what had been brought to the breaking point.

“Ah, then, ah-h,” he soothed, like a nurse with a babe, “did he fall
then, did he. Ah, na, ye’re all right now, just let me make ye better,
poor thing.” His words ceased to be words, just a gentling, as he
settled the head to the floor and straightened the legs, got a purchase
on the sideboard and heaved the shuddering trunk erect so that
Barrowbridge sat on the floor, as uncertain and all-in-parts as a
ten-week infant. Barrowbridge complied like one, helpless in the young
man’s hands, passive beyond distrust. It was a long while and a mighty
job of work before the barrister was comforted and restored to his
couch, combed and cleaned, the bed remade, and at last the cup of tea
steaming at hand; by then it was Lance who looked the part of the beaten
one, that is, until one saw his face.

Barrowbridge had ceased his gasping, or sobbing if that’s what it was,
for some time now, and lay dully watching Lance work. The first thing he
said was all but inaudible, and he had to repeat it twice before Lance
understood: “I must sleep now.”

“Surely, surely,” said Lance, “but you’ll answer my question first?”

Barrowbridge moved his head from side to side. It was not a negation,
but an expression of weakness, of incapability.

“Come now,” Lance urged in his most penetrating _sotto,_ accompanied by
his most thrumming bass. “I want you to rest, and rest you shall, and
I’ll watch over you and take care of you. I want no explanations; those
I can find for myself. Ah, dear friend, how many times I’ve seen you sum
up a thumb-thick brief with a word of advice: remember Richards, with
the ship-lading action? ‘Plead guilty,’ you said. And Uxham, a shout
away from the gallows, two wives, and an unfilled indenture; ‘Emigrate,’
you said. Give me such a word for Miss Chudleigh, sir, and then sleep.”

Barrowbridge flapped his lips weakly, and said a word. It needed saying
a number of times; even a familiar one becomes meaningless if repeated
often enough, but this one would have been meaningless to him if it had
been clearly tattooed on his kneecap.

“Jactitation?” he said at last.

The barrister nodded, and astonishingly, smiled. There was an odd
anticipation in the smile, and when Lance began to rise, to plunge into
the book-racks in the office, the old man caught his sleeve. With what
seemed to be his last atom of energy he nodded to the right of the door,
smiled again, and before Lance’s eyes, he slept.

Slowly Lance rose and went to the book racks—turning in amazement to his
right instead of left, where the old man’s great library of law had most
of its body. Surely in those thousands of pages lay his answer; but no,
the glance to the right, and that old smile of triumph in his skill,
indicated that it was to be found in the esoterica, the little-used
collection of what Barrowbridge called, jocosely, ‘uncommon law.’

He began to read.



4.


HE HAD LONG SINCE completed the last copy of the latest draught of his
final excerpt of the laws and procedures of jactitation; it lay under
his hand, reduced to two neat sheets. He touched it lightly as he sat
watching the sleeper … or watching the world and all life, with his eyes
ready to watch the sleeper when it was time.

What a strange old man, ugly and gruff, gentle, repulsive, brilliant,
mad. He wondered if he had ever stopped before to take the measure of
Simon Barrowbridge; he thought not. He had set foot on that creaking
board by the door for the first time when he was still in his eleventh
year. He had reached for the coachman’s hand numbly and held to it as if
he were dangling from a tree limb forty feet up. Mr. Barrowbridge had
seemed wide as a summer cloud, distant as majesty. Old Piggott had
doffed his hat and scuffed his boot and said, “ ’Ere ’e is, sir,” as if
he had spoken of him to the barrister before—and indeed he must have
done.

“Arghh!” the monster had snorted, looking him up and down. “What’s he
got to smile about, the little basilisk?” Lanky had not remembered
smiling; only the terror, and a black future forever. He would see
Piggott again in two hours, but the coachman’s parting was almost more
than he could bear. He’d have run, but he was rooted; he could not even
turn away once he was alone with Barrowbridge. All he could recall now
was that endless paralysis while the man stared at him, the great pocked
chin a-pucker with derision, the slight contraction about the eyes that
might have grown to scornful merriment if he had been significant
enough.

And afterwards—

“Sweep, sweat and swot,” he murmured now, wagging his head in amazement.
What a wringing out, what a starching he had had, those years! If
Barrowbridge had not torn off an arm and a leg and tacked them back in
their wrong places, it was only because he had not thought of it; heaven
knows he altered everything else. Every move, every thought, every
syllable he produced were regarded as Barrowbridge property to be
moulded by the Barrowbridge hand. The boy had lived in terror of his
ubiquitous cudgel; even then it was becoming difficult for him to move
about, and he was marvelously dexterous with the stick, flicking down a
book from the shelves, hooking a dish of cold tea across the desk,
deftly scratching this or that otherwise inaccessible part of his
immense person. Time and again he heard it whistling down on him, only
to tug at the hem of his smock as it passed close by. Now he knew what
he could not then; Simon Barrowbridge struck no blows with his weapon,
save for the single time Lanky had been set upon by street toughs just
outside, four against one, and the old chap had come lumbering and
wincing down to the street. That was the time to make up for all others!
with his baited-bull roaring, thunder on thunder like a king’s
cannonade, and for each bellow a thwack and a yell from the enemy, until
the noise was fit to move the shops back and widen the road; and the
erstwhile attackers milling about, smarting so in their backs and
shoulders that they did not know which way to run and howled around
bumping into one another until the giant tired of the sport and showed
them the way with a last hearty flurry. He had said a strange thing just
then, panting and watching the street-boys fly away bawling. “A heady
thing, to know you’re right; it comes seldom.”

He crammed his slave with Greek and Latin as he crammed himself with the
suety pastys which had now brought him down; and his gospel was the
_Oraculo_ of Balthazar Gracian. Five thousand times he must have said
“Live by Gracian but as you live, quote him not; for these four things
will damn him in the modern world”—and the four fat fingers would count
them down: “Gracian’s a Jesuit and papist … Gracian’s a Spaniard …
Gracian’s barely a hundred years dead … and Gracian’s something you know
and the other chap doesn’t, for which you’d never be forgiven.”

So while his contemporaries were learning homiletics, lofty,
inapplicable, unattainable, Lancaster Higger-Piggott was marinated in
Gracian, who said: _There is always time to add a word, never to
withdraw one. Talk as if you were making your will: the fewer words the
less litigation._ And who said: _Never, from sympathy with an
unfortunate, involve yourself in his fate._ And: _The wise do at once
what the fool does at last. To command is merely to force men to do what
they might do of their own accord._ And most often from the lips of
Simon Barrowbridge: _You must learn to put up with fools._

Surly, sloppy Barrowbridge instilled in his pupil a macaroni’s urge for
display and a Gregorian’s austerity, and kept him in tight balance
between. “Take half the ribands off that hat and make the others dark.”
He taught him one brandy from another and not to ask for either at the
ale-drinkers’ table. “The woman was never born who hasn’t a beauty about
her; you must find it in an instant and tell her. But stay within
reason; if she’s as tall as your collar don’t stand there admiring
upward.”

“You may act like a fool,” he told the boy one day, “any time you know
you’re acting.”

Barrowbridge’s practice was a rich one, but in variety only. A barrister
needs to know the law; abiding by it is quite another specialty. He
could not afford the luxuries of defending only the innocent and
supporting only the weak. As the years passed and he became less and
less able to travel, his work became more and more advisory and his
purse thinner; the best of advice in the hands of the ignorant and the
slipshod is worth nothing, and nothing was what he frequently got
through the mistakes of others. But in the eyes of the apprentice, much
of this was priceless. He would crouch over his tall table and sponge up
the sounds of what crossed the master’s desk, hearing the probes of
legalistics penetrating the fabric of law, hearing how courts common
could be brought counter to courts Christian, how cases could be made to
fail in the certainty they would be reversed on appeal. He saw many a
groat gained through mad demands for a sixpence, and many a fleeced lamb
gamboling with such joy that it did not realize it had lost something.
He listened amazed to friends here who were enemies in the legal arena,
and their strivings to prolong where the fees were high and to bring
justice swiftly where they were low.

“You’re not to be a barrister,” Barrowbridge told Lance when he was
eighteen. It was not a prophecy; it was a command. “You’re to be a
gentleman. The law’s for oxonian sort of chaps who’ve studied a third as
well for twice as long as you have. They’ve all the chits and certs and
thank-you-Dean sort of recommendations, and whether they stand for
Parliament or whether they take up landholdings, it doesn’t matter to
you. You’d never compete with their kind. You couldn’t. They have a
curl-o’-the-lip way of chatting with people like you, who frighten ’em.
‘I say, old man,’ he mimicked, ‘where did you go to school?’ A gentleman
does not ask such a thing of you, nor does he inquire of your fortune
and family; if you are a gentleman he accepts you. But to be so accepted
you must be more perfectly a gentleman than an advocate at the bar must
perfectly be an advocate, d’ye follow me?”

The matter of a Courtenay, Earl of Devon, was the product and discovery
of Barrowbridge’s capacious mind and references. “Given that your
ancestry is at present unknown,” he said once, “you have taken the first
great step toward finding one. To make a Courtenay out of a Smythe one
would first have to erase his Smythe-ness. You do not present that
difficulty.”

So Lance swept and sweated and swotted; in manor houses in Surrey,
Hampshire and Berks he watched the gentry secretly from pantry and
stable; he shot black-cock and greyhen with gamekeepers whose masters
were in the City, and played billiards with City footmen whose masters
were shooting grouse. Where the coachman Piggott had not acquaintance
and entree into the world of backstairs, Barrowbridge could obtain it at
the front door from some young blood, say, whose angry tailor had been
placated or counter-threatened, or from some lady whose carelessness had
produced results which Barrowbridge had healed. Another youth lounging
about was never remarkable; village folk would think he belonged to the
manor and the manor staff thought he might be from the village; as to
his wide familiarity with houses in town, the gentry never knew. The
times were right for such a machination, and the place. It was the wake
of the Seven Years’ War, a boiling, uncertain, exhilarated,
impoverished, expanding time, wherein England was acquiring its empire,
merchant-baronets were beginning to appear in the House, great estates
were growing greater or smaller or changing hands. It was a time of
comings and goings, of new faces at milady’s soirée and strange faces at
the London hostels. Boulogne and Calais were handier to the City than
Wiltshire and Berks, and young Lance Courtenay was by no means the only
person in England who was substituting courtliness and fine linen for a
pedigree.

Barrowbridge stirred, and Lance rose instantly to put the kettle on. It
was growing dark; he lit a candle and carried it into the bedroom. In
the silent way of the sick and the old, Barrowbridge was altogether
awake on the instant, and watching him. “How are you, sir?”

“I’m a dead man.” He raised his head weakly to look into the other room,
and let it fall again. Lance correctly read his wistful hunger: “I’ve
put the kettle on.” He straightened the pillow. “You’re no more dead
than I am.”

“Ah, I am. I died there on the floor when ye watched me groveling.” He
looked up at Lance’s contemplative face. “Would you be going ahead with
this amusement now, lad? If you plan to, change your plans. Mutilating a
corpse is not conduct becoming to a gentleman below the rank of
viscount.”

“I’ll not harm you, sir,” Lance said gently.

Barrowbridge grunted and closed his eyes. Though his hands did not move,
Lance had the impression he was feeling over his aching body like a man
after a bad fall, taking tender inventory. “I’God,” he said in his harsh
whisper, “I might’ve laughed at anything from a hot poker to the Iron
Maiden, and even borne the bursting of my bowel from that ordeal of the
pot you devised. But you had me groveling, ay, and that without laying a
hand on me, without speaking any but respectful words.” He was not
angry. He was examining the events of the morning with an almost
admiring detachment.

“God and the wrong parents made me look like a Barbary ape, Lanky, but
’tis I alone who’ve made a beast of myself; only two people on earth
have made a fool of Simon Barrowbridge, and you’re the second. Working,
I gather,” he added, eyes abruptly open and blazing, “for the first.”

“Ah, sir! you said that before, and I remarked that you did me little
credit. I was instructed by no one.”

“All your own idea? Eh! You’ll pardon the curiosity of a disembodied
spirit—because I insist I’m dead; ’tis the only way I can live with
myself now—but if ’twas information you wanted, even to succor mine
enemies, why need the request take the form of torture? Or have you been
concealing the appetites of that villainous Marquis they’re gossiping
about these days?”

“May I return your question with a question, sir?”

“Why, that would be in the best tradition of a barrister.”

“Thank you. Well then, sir, is it true that you had vowed never to
assist Elizabeth Chudleigh in any circumstances?”

“While I lived,” the old man nodded. “Further proof of my passing, if
any were needed. But go on.”

“Then can you think of any way I might have secured this information
from you but by doing what I did? Might I have simply asked you and
given my simple reason? Or threatened you with that hot poker you have
only now derided? Or reasoned with you, or argued?”

“I concede your points, especially the last,” said Barrowbridge with the
shade of a smile. “And what put that especial method into your
surprising young mind?”

Lance smiled in his turn. “Our old comrade in worldliness Balthazar
Gracian, where he counsels: _Find out each man’s thumbscrew. ’Tis the
art of setting their wills in action.”_

“What a viper have I raised in my nest,” cried Barrowbridge, and now
there was no concealing his rueful admiration. “And have you found your
precious information?”

In answer Lance went for his summary of the procedure of jactitation,
brought it to the bed, put a second pillow under the barrister’s
shoulders, adjusted the candle, and then left him to brew the tea.

“Well drawn,” said Barrowbridge when he returned a moment later with
teapot, sugar and cup. He waved the papers. “And to what end are you
giving away this rare gem?”

“To right the injustice of Miss Chudleigh’s situation,” said Lance
pompously, and enjoyed the amazement which grew on the other’s face, and
enjoyed even more the glee which replaced it when he added, “And I’m too
much your disciple to be giving anything away.”

The tea was poured by now; he took it and sipped with noisy
gratification. “Now then—” he murmured as he sipped and pondered, and
again, “N-n-ow—” sure outward signs of his mighty mind at work. Lance
stood by silently, waiting.

“In my shriven state,” hissed the old man at length, “as I lie here dead
and released from the pettiness and paucity of man’s lot on earth, it
comes to me that my long bitterness toward that lady is … unworthy.
Notice, lad, I don’t say ‘unjustified.’ Never that; but the depth of my
rancor, and its long tenure—those are unworthy. True to the code of a
gentleman, you have not asked me the cause of this—ah—disaffection of
mine in regard to the lady. True to the instincts of a soul in
purgatory, I shall tell you. It is a sad tale and reflects little credit
on anyone concerned; but then, it’s a confession, and well due you, my
executioner. In addition, you have set yourself a perilous course
through the very heart of a jungle of which you have as yet traversed
only the margins.”

“But, sir, I—”

_“Hush!_ and listen,” the barrister snapped. “I am writhing in
embarrassment and chagrin at the very contemplation of an episode I have
concealed, even from myself, for twenty years. You have reduced me to a
prideless fraction of my former self, and I very much doubt I shall ever
have the fortitude to begin this tale again.”

Lance ostentatiously placed both hands tight over his mouth and sat down
to listen.

I said twenty years [he began] and I couldn’t be more precise. It was
1749, just this early in the year and, now that I think on’t, as
unseasonably warm. I’d wintered well, in Majorca—this was before Admiral
Byng gave it away to the French, and it was pleasant and peaceful, and
the task I had there pleased me and was successful; I’ll not add it to
my story just now because it was skullduggery; because it does not
concern the matter in hand; and because I won’t spoil the telling of it
one day when it is germane. You should know only that the law was but a
piece of my career in the early days; I performed what one might call
confidential repair work on broken things—vows, hearts, contracts and
consciences. I returned to England pleased with myself, settled with my
tailor for the first time in twelve years, and took a little house in
Jermyn Street.

I shall not say I had a reputation for efficiency, because a reputation
implies wide public knowledge, and an element in my efficiency was the
very absence of renown. For the handling of matters such as the return
of embarrassing letters, or the gathering of evidence to transform
‘potential’ to ‘putative’ paternity, one does not insert a public notice
in the _Monthly Review._ (Don’t raise your eyebrows at me, lad! My
standards were high; I never undertook an assignment not in the
interests of justice, though I’ll confess to the use of my clients’
definition of the word.)

Ah—where were we? High standards? Ah yes! I had a bit of capital, you
see, my health, and a bit of leisure, so I could pick and choose. I
accepted only those assignments which I could positively fulfill.
Clients who were turned away went elsewhere and forgot me; clients whom
I served were satisfied and sent me others. As a result I actually was
known, for a certain period, as a man who made no errors. My promise was
as good as anyone’s oath, and because I succeeded in everything I
undertook, many believed I would succeed in _anything_ I undertook. And
perhaps I had begun to believe that too, else I should have excused
myself from my drawing room the instant Elizabeth Chudleigh entered it.
But I did not, and I was undone.

Na! I am shriving myself. Prosperity was my undoing quite as much, or I
might have demanded a … a more negotiable fee than the one I exacted.
Complacency was my undoing, for I had ample warning that Miss Chudleigh
was not to be dealt with as just another client. And perhaps the old
Adam undid me most of all.

I wish you could have seen her then! They tell me she is still a
splendid-looking woman, but in those days, those days … imagine first
her clothing, a bottle-green gown with a little cape, a strange hat
close to the brow and flaring out behind to frame her face with a green
darker than the dress—almost black. Now in my time I’ve observed many an
artifice for the entrapment of the unwary, and have devised not a few; I
yield the palm to few men, but with all my heart, to any woman, I do.
They come by it untaught and reach excellence by instinct; and like a
green shoot, they’ll break rocks to accomplish it, however tender they
be.

A long time had passed since the scandalous episode of the costume ball
at the Venetian Embassy—five years at least, and she had used them as
well as they had her. Then, she made such an extreme of forwardness that
it looked like innocence. Here in my drawing room she was so modest in
appearance, so decorous in mien, so foiled in gentility, that the whore
in her flamed out like a diamond.

She had a flawlessness about her—skin that mud wouldn’t stick to (as
she’s often enough proven, the many times it’s been thrown at her) and a
child’s mouth, and arches to her brows barely turned, like the flat
steady wings of birds that soar. But I don’t want to tell you she was a
beautiful woman. … or perhaps she was; but if she was, no beautiful
woman had ever looked like her before. Her lips said what she wished
them to say; her eyes demanded openly to know what a man had, and how
soon he intended to use it. Ah … and I was a shade under forty and I had
my health, I had my health.

She paid me the compliment of taking no precautions, exacting no
confidence, and telling no lies. She made it clear by these omissions
that she knew who I was, I knew who she was, and that, being what we
both were, we could work together or we could not once the facts were
out.

She told me as soon as I had seated her that she was married to young
Augustus John Hervey, brother of the second Earl of Bristol; that the
marriage had been secret and was unsatisfactory, and that they had been
living apart for nearly five years. Nevertheless, recent news from
Ickworth in Suffolk had given her to think.

It seemed that George William Hervey, the Earl, lay even now in Ickworth
aflame with fever and his life was feared for; should he be taken, her
husband would inherit the title and the estates. Married, she would be a
countess, and either remain one or draw off a reasonable weight of
Bristol treasure as the price of a divorce or annulment. But of her
marriage to this young gentleman there was no record; the curate who had
done the thing had taken a large contribution for his little church in
exchange for a lapse of memory in this matter. He was now dead, as was
the village idiot who witnessed the midnight ceremony. Probably a
thousand people knew of this wedding; fifty thousand had guessed; no
living soul except the principals could swear they saw it done, and one
of them might not.

Could this marriage, valid in the sight of God, Church, and common law,
be entered quietly in the parish records?

I asked her where, and exactly when the marriage had taken place, and
then I thought a bit while she waited with her face asleep and her eyes
alive. Presently I asked her what she would do if the Earl recovered—he
was, after all, only three years older than his brother—and thereafter
outlived Methuselah? You see, I had known for some time that this
remarkable creature was the mistress of the Duke of Kingston. The future
cannot be foretold, I said to her, but in a measure it can be
controlled. One may eliminate things from it as one can never do with
the past. Might it not be possible that one day she would regret the
existence of the written record?

I think that troubled her, but only for a moment, for she smiled at me.
It must have been then that I decided to make a fool of myself; say
rather, to permit her to do so. She smiled and said, “I understand you
can repair anything, any time, if the price is right. If one day I
needed to rid myself of this evidence again, might you manage it? For
the only circumstance I can imagine which would make that desirable
would entail a … sizable advancement.” And I knew she was thinking, even
then, of one day being the Duchess of Kingston, though her hopes were
not great.

I said no; the evidence must stand, once in; getting it out again would
be a mutilation too difficult to conceal. On the other hand, I said, I
had run across some surprising information which would apply to that
circumstance. Now, that’s all I said about it and it was true. She
believed me and she believes to this day that I know a way to erase that
irritating union with Augustus Hervey who, by the way, has still not
inherited, and is still an officer in his Majesty’s Navy as he was the
day she met him, though rather higher up.

In any case, she totted up the risks in an instant, and then laughed.
She has a shrewdness which surpasses intelligence and an intuition which
is wiser than wisdom. “I _must_ have the Hervey marriage just now,” she
said, and, “I _might like_ another later. Let us be dutiful then and do
what we must. Later, when the circumstance arises, we can consider the
other.”

“Very well,” I said, “I’ll rush off to your little lost village and see
that your little lost marriage is recorded. There’s only one more thing
to discuss, and I’m off, praying the good Earl lives the week out. I
shouldn’t like him to predecease our plans.”

“One more thing?” says she, and, “Oh, of course; the fee.”

“The fee.” I looked at her until she—even she!—must drop her eye.

“Will it be much?” she asked me; and for reasons I can’t clearly
explain, that was the most hilarious thing I had ever heard; I came out
with a big inexcusable boom of a laugh. I told her that I could not
possibly answer such a question; and then like a fool I laughed again. I
do not think women enjoy being laughed at. When I could, I said, “You
have the payment with you this minute, Miss Chudleigh.”

She stood up. She understood immediately and completely. She said
without hesitation, “Very well, then. Have you a … preference as to the
time of … payment, and the place?”

“I have,” says I, “but I will gladly accept yours.”

She inclined her head politely, and I know she hated me with all her
heart. But smooth as butter, she promised, “Within a week after the task
is done, on grounds I shall choose. Without witnesses, of course.”

There seemed to be nothing to say to that. I opened the door to show her
out. She glided through and, in the foyer, with her back to me and her
body unmoving, she said softly, “Just once.”

I said, “Why, of course, milady. Just once.”

She bowed her head and left my house.



5.


“WHAT IS IT, SIR?” said Lance, bending over the bed solicitously.

Barrowbridge kept his eyes closed, but some of the pain left his face.
“Nothing. My tea’s cold.”

Lance looked at him for a long moment and said, “Why are you telling me
this unhappy tale?”

“What? What?” Barrowbridge blinked up at him. “Why—I’ve told you. For my
sake, because ultimately a man must confess to himself the stature of
his follies. For your sake, because you must be warned. I smell it in
the breeze, in the tack you’ve taken. … You _have_ set a course, eh? I’d
not be able to dissuade you from it?”

Respectfully but firmly, Lance agreed.

Barrowbridge shrugged. “There you are, then. If you will not avoid the
enemy you must know him.”

“Or join him,” Lance amended, and smiled.

“Ah, well, well,” huffed the old man, “yes, there’s that. But then you
must know him even better, eh?”

“I’ll put the kettle on,” said Lance. “And I think I’ll nip down while
it’s boiling and send the boy ’round to fetch Piggott and the carriage.
Have I your leave?”

Barrowbridge looked at him with amusement. “You please me, boy; you do
indeed. …You need my permission about as urgently as you need my
scrofula, and well you know it. And you know I know it. Na, what you’re
saying is that if I’ve a yarn to spin, I’d best get on with it and be
done, because you want to be on your way to Lady Blanton’s. I read you
well, lad, I read you well. Mind that you never let another human being
read you as I do.”

“I’ll put the kettle on,” said Lance again, and went out

“And did you do the task?” asked Lance, when they were settled again.

“That I did. The church was at Lainston in Hampshire, and if you’ve
never heard of Lainston you’re no different from me twenty years ago. I
rode to Aldershot the very day Miss Chudleigh visited me, slept at an
inn, and was off for Lainston early in the morning. I recall it like a
bad dream; I needn’t tell you that my life’s works have mostly been
accomplished at the other end of my spine, and riding a mazurka-gaited
hirehorse at a canter for most of two days did little for my good humor.
I remember missing the track a number of times, once to find myself face
to face with a fingerboard directing me to Nether Wallop, I give you my
word! I wheeled and walloped away from there.

“Lainston’s not far from Winchester, and close by the River Itchen; yet
once there you’d believe yourself on another planet, or at least in
another age. The church is one of those English indestructibles, where
the New Chancel was put in _Anno Domini_ 943 and the rest of the
building was flung up by the mound-builders. The living must bring the
curate all of four pounds per annum.

“I found him in the churchyard on his four bones, pulling weeds. He was
a saint-faced youngster with eyes all watery from years of staring at
irregular Hebrew verbs. I came up at a gallop and wheeled my mount and
slid off all dusty and grim. I identified myself briskly as Lascombe,
Exemplification Officer of the Prothonotary’s Office, Cantab., jingled
my fobs in his face, and demanded to know if his parish register had
been monished.”

Lance straightened up. “ ‘Monished?’ ”

“A word I’d invented on the way down. It smacks of correction and
punishment, and it seemed to me to sound like a word one ought to know.”

“So it does.”

“It did to him, poor chap. ‘Oh dear,’ says he in that dove-coo which so
often results from the mixture of goat-cheese with scholarship. ‘Why,’
says he, ‘I don’t—I can’t—oh dear.’ So I marched him to his little
sacristy and had him take down the registers for the past fifty years,
telling him sternly, ‘A third of the registers in England remain
unmonished, and the Bishop is not pleased.’ ‘Oh dear,’ he coos, and off
I send him to his weeds with the faithful promise I’ll have every book
monished good as new by noon. So off he went, grateful as can be. The
rest was simple; I’d four phials of ink with me, all different and ready
to be used or blended, and a dozen quills sharpened a dozen ways. Luck
gave me a blank half-page just where I wanted it, and there in what I
flatter myself is the old vicar’s hand, with what is indistinguishably
his own quill, I put the entry of August 12, 1744, Augustus John Hervey
and Elizabeth Chudleigh; and there it stands, I’m sure, to this very
day.

“I sent my compliments and the news over to Miss Chudleigh as soon as I
returned, and spent most of the next four days plucking the hairs out of
my nostrils and reblocking my wig, and kindred activities. At length a
boy came with the message: ‘I’m to say the word “Lainston,” and you’re
to come with me,’ and I had my horse brought and followed the boy on his
ancient white mare. The boy spoke never a word until we reached the edge
of Kensal Green, where in those days an old livery stood. It was
deserted but not abandoned, a tight old structure which has since burned
down, doubtless from the burning shame I carried at the thought of it.

“The boy then said, ‘You’re to wait here,’ and rode off down Harrow
Road, and that was the last I saw of him. I dismounted and stood in the
gloom—it was after teatime and growing dark—feeling that I must be the
only illuminated thing in the dark landscape, ay, and with all my
intentions lit up for the world to read as well; and then I began to
feel as if I’d been made the butt of a joke, and would be left standing
here until St. Swithin’s Eve. But I heard a tapping, and stood off from
the building to look up at it, and there in a bit of a round window in
the upper storey I saw a fluttering of white handkerchief. I led my
horse around the building and tied him in an ell away from the road, and
tried doors until I found one which yielded. I stood blinking inside
until I became aware of a horn lanthorn standing on the floor making a
little ring of dim light on the boards at the foot of a ladder.

“Lance, Lance, I’d not be recalling all these details, or relating them,
if it were easy to think of what followed!

“So up I went to milady’s boudoir, and it was a dusty feed-store; and
there was milady, barely to be discerned, and her peignoir was a
riding-habit, stiff and high-necked with a great covering skirt, and her
scented couch a mass of straw with a clean horse-blanket thrown across
it. Her act of welcome was a single billow of the habit, which readied
her; her word of love was, “Go on, then,” in a flat, cold voice.

“No gentleman could have proceeded from that point. No gentleman, for
that matter, would have found himself in such a circumstance. I,
however, was not and am not a gentleman; and proceed I did, shambling
and self-aware like a schoolboy taking a dare.

“It was a chilling experience. I had not, of course, expected ardency …
_wait,_ lad, I am lying to both of us. I _had_ expected ardency;
everything I am, everything I came from, quivers in awareness of its low
station, and this very lowliness demanded a response. Failing ardency, I
suppose distaste would have been a response. Fear would have been a
response. Disgust, nausea, terror … anything; but there was _no_
response.

“It ended because I could bear that no longer and for no other reason,
d’ye follow me? I knelt there a-nostriling out my temper like a
foundered horse while she calmly rose, a simple act which, unassisted,
dressed her decently for the street. I saw her moving toward the ladder,
and gasped out that she must wait.

“She stopped and waited. ‘Certainly, Barrowbridge,’ says she. It had
been “Mr.” Barrowbridge at our first meeting.

“I pulled myself together and got straightened up and went to her. ‘We
made a bargain,’ I told her. I fear I let myself be angry; what is it
Balthazar says about anger?”

_“It is most difficult to halt while running at the double,”_ Lance
quoted.

‘True enough; but I was thinking of _Every onset of passion is a
digression from rational conduct. That’s_ the one I proved that day, ay,
and like a student with a theorem, gave proof of my proof. So like a
farmer haggling over a cracked pot at the Haymarket, ‘We made a
bargain,’ says I.

“ ‘We kept it,’ says she.

“ ‘What—_that?’_ says I, in a rage.

“ ‘Just so,’ says she, and the first I know I’m advancing on her is when
she sets the lash of her riding-crop against my breastbone. Did you know
you can hold back a man three times your weight that way? ‘Listen to me,
Barrowbridge,’ she says in a voice like hailstones melting in the back
of your collar, ‘I’ll deign to explain myself to you once, but once
only. ’Twas yourself who made this act a matter of commerce, not I. You
named the price, and you collected. What else you expected I neither
know nor care; I am morally certain, however,’ she says, ‘that when you
spend a sixpence for a purchase you pay out the money itself and do not
wrap the coin in cloth o’ gold. You’d no right to ask anything more than
the price you set. You’d little right to ask even that of a desperate
client who could get help nowhere else and wouldn’t have the time to if
there were another place. As to the—transaction itself, any simpleton
knows that if I buy Mary’s radishes, I want her radishes more than I do
my money, else I shouldn’t buy; she in turn wants my money more than she
wants her radishes. In any trade I want to get a bit more than I give;
in this—’She nods towards the horse-blanket—‘I could get nothing from
you. I had then no choice but to give—less than nothing.”

“Then you confess you had me to Lainston and back for nothing!” I
bellowed at her.

“ ‘I so confess,’ she says, with a glint in her eye. ‘I did it because I
thought of a way, even as you would happily take anything I have without
paying anything important for it. But you can’t think how to do it. Take
care,’ she says suddenly; she must have seen something in my face, for
by then I was fair livid, ‘I warn you, Barrowbridge, take care. We have
had one interchange; I call us even-up, and you’re bellowing in pain. Do
anything else to me and we’ll be even again on the instant, with you
bellowing louder. That will happen and happen until you agree with me on
what even-up means.’ ”

“Lance, did ye ever see a great hulking ox of a fellow going about all
day knocking littler men about, just to prove he’s a great hulking ox?
So it is with the behavior of fools, who can be depended upon for a
greater folly each time someone proves them foolish.

“I patted aside her riding crop and went for her; I confess it, I lifted
this hand to a woman. Lift it? I made a cannon of myself and fired the
fist at her like an iron ball.”

Barrowbridge lay breathing hard; then, “And she wasn’t there,” he
whispered, his face echoing the exact amazement of that long-gone day.
“She melted away into the shadows at the side—and head-first, down the
ladderhole I went. My hand clawed a moment at the nigh edge, but she
must have been waiting for just that, for she fetched me such a lick
with the crop on the back of that hand that she took out a piece the
size of a Dutch dollar.

“Next I knew I was opening my eyes on her as she bent near me and took
up the lanthorn. We were on the ground floor, she composed as a cantata
and I a-sprawl and broken on the boards. ‘It’s even-up again,
Barrowbridge,’ she tells me sweetly, ‘and you’ve nothing to fear.
But—make no other gesture, or you’ll have the like of this again. And
again after that, if you’re fool enough, world without end.” And she
blew out the light; I heard the split-door open and close quietly, and
then I do believe I fainted.”

Lance made a soft noise that was not a word. “Small wonder you wanted to
warn me.”

“I’ve told ye only the first part, the smallest!” croaked the old man.
“Ah, lad—never fear; I’ll not keep you all night with the rest of it.
The rest took longer, but takes less telling.

“When I was up and about with a chip out of my pelvis (and who’s to know
how much that contributed to my present state as the years got to it?)
and had a dislocated wrist in order again, I was not a well man, and
vowed I would not be until I taught Elizabeth Chudleigh what _I_ took
‘even-up’ to mean.

“I had one thing with which to belabor her, and that was the task I’d
fulfilled at Lainston. I’d not dare to mention that, of course, and
involve myself; but the facts behind it—the marriage itself—that could
trouble her a great deal, especially now that the sick earl was well.
You go about waving proofs of things held secret, and you’ll cause
trouble; this truism applies as well to open secrets.

“I made a short list of influential folk—clerks to M.P.’s, nameless folk
who had the ear of the Church, and the like, and made the rounds with my
authenticated rumor: Elizabeth Chudleigh was indeed wed to Augustus John
Hervey. It would spread and widen, and at length some enemy she had
would take the trouble to go to Lainston and see the records, and the
rumor would be truth, and the whole structure she had built would
totter.

“Or so I deluded myself.

“On the first day of this campaign I passed the word to four people. On
the second day I went to a chap called St. George, who’s a printer in
the firm which does the _Monthly Review,_ and gave him my item, being
quite sure he’d pass it along to someone in The Club. ‘Ah yes,’ says he,
‘not an hour ago another chap was in here with proof positive she wed
young Pulteney, Earl of Bath, four years ago,’ and laughs in my face.
Not a little taken aback, I trotted around to the Fish and Staff on
Fleet Street, where so many great of the time dined, and had a word with
the innkeeper. Yes, he’d heard my tale of Bristol’s brother; he’d heard
it, matter of fact, four times since last midnight; two people had told
him the same about Bath, and there was a powerful rumor about that the
Duke of Hamilton, who had been a great admirer of Elizabeth Chudleigh in
the early days, had married her as well.

“I ran about London like a zealot with an end-of-the-world revelation,
wild-eyed and laughed-at. It came to me far too late that Elizabeth
Chudleigh, with twenty times the resources I could command, ten times
the vindictiveness, and (I now confess it) twice the intelligence, was
spreading my story for me, thirteen to the dozen, until it became an old
joke, an absurdity; and for good measure she was spreading yarns about
others as well, so no one would know what to believe.

“The following day I received a letter from her. It was unsigned, but it
was unquestionably hers. It said only, _En garde!_ in cheerful script;
and while I stood there turning it over in my hands and wondering what
it was I must be on guard against, a great hairy bailiff came whacking
at my door with the news that my lease had been held invalid and I must
vacate. Even the extent of my knowledge of the technicalities of rental
could not save the situation, and out I went. I settled again soon
elsewhere—four ruddy times I settled again, but there was no escaping
the implacable pursuit. There was nothing to connect her with any of it,
and nothing was ever done past the bounds of profound nuisance. But so
many things, so many different things! I’ll swear she was responsible
for a basket of rotten eggs delivered to me one day, and another
delivery—would you believe it—a pack of hunting dogs, howling and
hungry, ordered by someone who had forged my signature; ay, and the
statement with them, sixty-eight pounds twelve and six, payable on the
spot.

“Removing so abruptly made it nigh impossible for clients to find me;
those who did began to slip away, usually for reasons not divulged to
me. They simply did not return. I collared one on the street one day, a
chap who was attempting an action to keep his brother out of debtor’s
prison for eighteen pounds. Someone had given him eighteen pounds—a
simple device.

“So came I to Bermondsey, in this muck and mud; and not long afterwards
I received another of the short cheerful missives: _Even-up again,_ it
said, and thereafter she let me be.”

“A witch.”

“A cheerful witch,” Barrowbridge agreed. “A joyous, cheerful,
resourceful and unforgiving witch. This I’ll say of her: she gives
warning and she announces surcease, and sticks by both. I think it’s a
matter of principle.

“Now then, I’ve said my say; I’ve bared my soul and, I trust, warned you
sufficiently. I wish I could say I’ve warned you away altogether, but I
can see I have not.”

“As usual,” said Lance reverently, “you are quite right, sir.”

Barrowbridge laughed at him, “Damn you,” he said affectionately. “Now
tell me, Lanky, what you’ve planned for her. Mayhap I can be of some
assistance.”

“Would you, sir? Would you really? Even if it helped her?”

The old man looked up at him gravely. “ ’Twas more than a quip, Lanky,
when I told you of my death. I’m a hulk now, helpless in this bed and on
that chair; I’ve known these past twelve months or more that I’ve
overstayed my tenure at the head of this organization of ours. I’d never
ask you for a pension and you’d be a fool to give it to me. I’ve made
you earn your porridge twice over; you’ve every right to expect the same
of me. I can no longer do anything for myself by commanding you; you
can, I think, do a great deal for yourself by commanding me.”

“Ah, _sir!”_ cried Lance, quite overcome.

“Before you make that fine straight spine of yours all soggy with an
excess of emotion,” said the old man acidly, “let me add that with the
death of my dignity, a number of other qualities are now deceased, most
notably my foolishness. At long last freed from that lifelong curse, I
may say here and now that I am no longer a fool, and I know clearly that
the instant I become a hindrance to you, you’ll drop me like a hot
brick.”

“Never!”

“Nonsense, boy! ’Tis the way I raised ye, and the way I want ye to be.
Now, to work. Tell me your plans.”

At the top of the High Street, Southwark, Piggott wheeled to the side
and stopped. He opened the boot, found the folded cloak and tossed it to
his pensive passenger, “ ’ere’s the bridge, Lanky, and ’igh time the bug
become a butterfly.”

Silently Lance shucked out of his drab covering and took the fine cloak.
He handed up the old one, rather obviously leaving it for Piggott to
fold. Piggott did, and put it away. “Want the ’scutcheon? Or is one
alone worse’n none?”

Lance seemed not to hear him, but sat looking out across the dark
Thames. He felt exceeding strange, and had been silent and troubled
since he had put the old barrister to sleep and gone to his inn to
change. The day had been an eventful one, full of victories for itself
and possibilities for the morrow, but in this hiatus he was plagued by
doubts. The doubts did not go too deep; his inner confidence was that he
would command the situation he was coming to as he had the one he had
left.

What manner of woman yielded up her supposed utmost with such cold
casualness as this—this witch? There was a moralistic response to such a
question, of course, but it would derive from a code, and a code is a
cipher, a set, fixed attitude to be manipulated without thought.
Detachedly he set aside prejudice and looked simply at sequences of
action.

The classical conduct of women was to withhold the ultimate as a reward;
romance and respectability aside, that was the sum and substance of the
interaction between men and women. The theory seemed to be, at its
baldest, that the woman who yields is thenceforward without resources,
and that therefore it is to her advantage to promise and withhold as
long as the revenue continues. Elizabeth Chudleigh’s vivid history might
be a demonstration of this principle at work, unless one had
Barrowbridge’s extraordinary tale to measure it against; with that, one
could wonder if she had used that erstwhile ultimate again as punishment
instead of reward, as … how many ways might she have used it?

_“Blarst_ thee, lad! If ye don’t want to talk to me at all, ye could say
so an’ I’ll stop makin’ a fool o’ meself.”

“Wh—what’s that?” Lance had a long way to come out of his thoughts, and
did it slowly.

“I’m asking d’ye want the ruddy ’scutcheon on the one side. If ye don’t
want to gab wi’ me ye could nod yer bleedin’ ’ead.”

Slowly Lance reached into his great-pocket and drew out the missing
escutcheon. Wall-eyed, Piggott took it. “Ye’ve ’ad a new … coo, it’s the
same one. Lanky, where—”

“Buckle ’em on,” said Lance testily. The feel of the carved wood in his
hand had brought back his conjectures with a rush, and he needed to be
with them. The escutcheon meant Miss Axelrood, and the thought of Miss
Axelrood proved to him that in fumbling through the moral wilderness of
Miss Chudleigh’s acts, it had not been Miss Chudleigh he had been
thinking about at all.

He had been quite ready to accept the fact that Miss Axelrood’s visit
had not been prompted _only_ by his personal magnetism; he found now,
rather to his surprise, that he had been clinging to the idea that some
of her conduct at least had been the result of some such feeling.

He gave her the same test he had made Barrowbridge apply: could she have
secured the desired results in any other way?

He rebuilt the situation in his mind accordingly, seeing her make her
plea on Miss Chudleigh’s behalf without the accompanying intimacies, and
he dourly confessed to himself that she would have failed.

And this is the route through which he reached a real understanding of
his good fortune in having Barrowbridge as his personal tactician. Ay,
and here was Miss Axelrood with just such a mentor. He visualized, in a
mad vivid flash, Miss Chudleigh, dressed scandalously as at the
legendary ball, and Mr. Barrowbridge, dressed mythically in whatever
might denote an Exemplification Officer of the Prothonotary’s Office,
Cantab., saluting one another with foils, prepared to fence. And one
foil was a nameless bastard who wished only to climb and climb until he
came to the level from which he had been so cruelly dropped, and the
other foil was an incalculable damsel whose dream it was merely to climb
and climb.

He shook himself violently; he was unsuited and unaccustomed to having
visions. He found himself face to face with the coachman, who, having
attached the insignes, was leaning over the step and staring into his
face like one trying to identify a sleeping stranger. “Dash it all,
Piggott,” snapped Lance, “you’ve been eating raw onions.”

“Shallots,” corrected Piggott. “You _are_ in a ’appy frame, I must say.”

Lance glared at him, and the coachman glared right back. There was no
quailing this time, as the chemical of terror was lacking in the younger
man, and his mien was only irritated and irritating. But with the
contact he came at last to the here and now; to Piggott, the shape of
Piggott and Piggott’s function in his life and in this particular
episode in it.

He recalled the coachman’s discursive warning, all the way through
Southwark and Bermondsey, last night, against Miss Axelrood, and how
timely his estimates of Miss Chudleigh had been. Coincidence? Possibly;
Piggott’s interests were catholic and his monologues could treat with
anything—why not this? Then in the same instant in which this facile
excuse came to him, he rejected it. There comes a time in the affairs of
a man when complications overwhelm him, and he can abide no more
mysteries. In the past twenty-four hours he had been through enough,
accomplished enough, to drain anyone of psychic energy—and he had at
least as exhausting an occasion before him. He had no resources to waste
on tact or reasoning in the matter of minor mysteries. All this overload
came out in a steel-edged tone, and the words he flung in the coachman’s
face: “So you don’t know who stole the ’scutcheon?”

“I don’t know ’oo stole the ’scutcheon?” snarled the coachman, giving an
accurate, though cockneyed, mimicry. “Now don’t be tellin’ me yer
’ighness is raisin’ ’is ruddy gall-bladder over a rotten little piece o’
wood. Besides ye got it back, so what’s the muckin’ loss? ’oo ’ad it,
any’ow?”

“Miss Axelrood had it. She unbuckled it standing right there on the step
last night, right under our noses.”

“Now there’s a sly little package! I never guessed.”

“I believe that, Piggott. I also believe it to be your only innocence in
the matter.”

“ _’Ow’s_ that?” demanded Piggott, cocking his head as if to hear
better.

“I’ll not fence with you at all,” said Lance sharply. “I charge you with
having disclosed my address to a stranger, and with it all my affairs. I
charge you with risking my safety and my future for less than Judas got,
without the Iscariot excuse of not fully knowing what he was about.”

“I don’t know what ye’re maunderin’ about and I doubt ye do yourself.”

“Then I’ll make it clear,” said Lance, angry and weary. “Miss Axelrood
was at the inn, inside my room, waiting for me when I got there last
night. The only other person who could conceivably have told her where I
was is Simon Barrowbridge, and I have excellent reasons for believing
him innocent. How much did she give you, Piggott? It must have been a
good bit. Grove had two gold sovereigns for his part in it.”

“She was _there?_ Afore us?”

“Ah, come off it!” said Lance disgustedly. “Yes, she came by Westminster
Bridge in a spring trap with a fine black gelding while you crept
through Southwark talking filth and not minding your business. Now if
you’re willing, drive me to Lady Blanton’s. If you’re not I’ll take a
hackney. Which is it?”

Piggott stepped back to the curb. Surprisingly, his anger seemed to have
evaporated in favor of a wonderful amaze. “Lanky, ye’ve an evil way of
jokin’ a man.”

_“Will_ you do one thing or the other?” Lance spat out. “I’ve found you
out and I will not talk about it—not a word!” and with that he plumped
back in his seat and folded his arms.

Piggott opened his mouth to speak and closed it again. He still, Lance
noticed out of the corner of his eye, affected this posture of
astonishment. He was not impressed. He had frequently seen Barrowbridge
rehearsing a client in something of the sort.

Piggott turned to scan the black river and then the bridge. A hackney
was clopping toward them out of London Town; the sight of it seemed to
stir Piggott into decision, for he snorted and sprang up, whipped the
horses so that the near one reared, hitting the traces a frightful jolt.
Then they were rumbling across the bridge. Lance braced his legs and set
his jaw against the jolting, and let his anger bubble in his blood. He
found himself enjoying it. He wondered if this enjoyment was what old
Barrowbridge had meant, so long ago, when he said, “A heady thing, to
know you’re right; it comes seldom.”

Not a word was said between them until they reached a point a few yards
from Clerkenwell Road in Holborn, and perhaps a quarter-mile from
Blanton House. And there the carriage stopped.

“Well?” cried Lance, testy as a dowager.

Piggott leaned close. “Now you listen ’ere to me, laddy-buck. I’m goin’
to speak the entire bloody truth, an’ if ye don’t believe it I got no
more to say, now—or—_ever.”_

“Very well. If it’s the truth. If not, don’t bother.”

“It’s the truth. And that is, I never told nobody nothing about you. I
never saw a farthin’ from a livin’ soul for informin’, especially not
for informin’ on you; I ’aven’t and I wouldn’t. What’s goin’ to ’appen
to the pair of us now I ’aven’t thought out yet but I will; but ye
bloody better well know what’s the truth when ye ’ear it, and that’s my
last word.”

“Take me to Blanton House,” said Lance disgustedly.

Piggott did, sitting very straight, a far more decent figure furious
than he ever had been before.

At Blanton House, Lance waited for the final rumble of his wheels to
cease and then stood abruptly. In a soft, intense voice, designed to be
inaudible to the Blanton footmen, he said to Piggott: “You’ve this much
latitude, old man. Sit and think over the whole childish story while I’m
inside. If by the time I come out—an hour, perhaps—you are prepared to
tell me that you did what I’ve charged you with; _why_ you did it; and
what you expect to do to make amends—well then, I can decide what to do
with you. But if you persist in flying in the face of reason and
evidence, then simply don’t _be_ here when I come out. I shall never
want to see your face again.”

Piggott neither moved nor spoke. Lance alighted and ran up the steps.
When he was admitted and the doors closed behind him, Piggott bowed his
head. He sat without moving for a very long time.



6.


“MISS AXELROOD, PENDLETON.”

“Yes, Captain. I’ll see if she’s at home.”

“Come here.”

“Yes, sir?”

“If Miss Axelrood is not at home, I shall wait. If Miss Axelrood _says_
she is not at home, she shall not see me again.”

“Yes, sir. Will you wait in the library?”

Lance strode across the great foyer to the double doors of the famous
Blanton library. Walking from the hall was like coming in from outdoors;
the open space there, with its great double staircase and arched
skylights, made one totally unprepared for the library. It was a wide
room, but the ceiling was so low that tall men habitually leaned with
their hands easily on the beams overhead. Its décor was a luminous dark
green and cream—and books, books from floor to ceiling save for doors,
windows and fireplace; books in a star-shaped rack free of the wall,
books in racks angling out and back from the wall; there were coves,
caves, nooks of books. Lance walked softly among them, occasionally
touching morocco, calfskin, ivory inlay on the backs of books. He
quickly learned their arrangement—they were beautifully organized—and
with the greatest pleasure, stopped before as complete a little library
of law as the most exacting barrister might wish.

One title in it made him laugh. He put out his hand for it, then checked
himself. Time enough for that later.

“He sends me fierce messages by the butler,” said Miss Axelrood from the
door, “and I find him in the shadows laughing like a wicked imp. You
quite frighten me, Captain.”

In her blush-pink velvet she looked anything but frightened. He caught
her hand and kissed the wrist, then, holding it, he put out his other
hand to touch the lobe of her strange ear. She stood quite still at
this, her welcoming smile still on her face, neither responding nor
repulsing. This reminded him of something which he chased from his mind
before it could be identified. Faced with control of that high order, he
suddenly understood the passion of some men for the unmarked,
inscrutable; to see such a mask was to want it contorted, sweat-sheened
and mobile. But these were the thoughts of the libertine, and there was
no room here for him. (Never a time for him, never a place …) He sighed.

“_I sigh for love, I die for love …”_ she sang softly, a coquettish
rendition of one of the more shallow ballads of the moment. But he cut
it right off when he said, unsmiling, “I sigh for satisfaction, my dear;
I have found you out.”

“Whatever do you mean?”

“I shall never tell you.” He looked her in the face and then paced off,
so that he might smile unseen at the sudden distraction in her eyes.
_(Suggest to your enemy that his secret is yours, and whether it is
yours or is not, whether or not he has a secret, he will fear you for
it._ Thank you, Sr. Gracian!) He turned back and said in businesslike
tones, “Miss Axelrood, I have come to report to you on the matter we
discussed.”

“To report progress, Captain Courtenay?”

“Completion, Miss Axelrood.”

“I think we had better be seated, and discuss this thing.”

“I should like Miss Chudleigh to be present at any such discussion.”

“Why,” she smiled, “we needn’t trouble her.”

“We shouldn’t burden you—you alone—with it.”

“You do not fully understand my relationship to Miss Chudleigh,” she
said with a certain amount of warmth.

“On the contrary, Miss Axelrood, I understand it all too well. If you
will permit me an analogy, I could, in fairness, compare you ladies to a
government rather like that of our ally the great Frederick of Prussia.
There is a head of state whose function is to set policy. Then there is
a body to carry it out. I would liken you, Miss Axelrood, to the
latter.”

Two bright spots appeared on her cheeks, though her half-smile was still
as soft, her eyes as clear. “A body, Captain, to—”

“And what I have to propose,” he said quickly and loudly, “will, I am
quite, quite certain call for a policy decision. Do you follow me?”

“Surely that would be for me to judge, if anyone, Captain!” she said
sharply; then, between breaths, she was standing close to him with her
hands on his elbows. “Lance,” she said very softly, “Lance, we’re going
to quarrel.”

He moved back. “We need not, Miss Axelrood.” He smiled tightly. “You
gratify me, by using my given name. Do you feel you know me well
enough?”

“At the moment,” she said candidly, “I feel I do not know you at all.”

“I can’t quite say why,” he said off-handedly, “but I suddenly recall a
piece of news. My old acquaintance Lancaster Higger-Piggott, the
lawyer’s lad, is no more.”

“Ah,” she said.

“And at almost the same time, Mr. Barrowbridge also passed away.”

“Barrowbridge—dead?”

Sepulchrally, yet smiling, he said, “He will practice no longer in
Bermondsey … but of course, these are my personal concerns, and I should
not trouble you with them. But perhaps their passing has made a change
in me.”

“You mourn them?” she enquired, a quiet sparkle in her eyes.

“I cannot. I am so deeply convinced they are going on to better things.”

Her laughter finally escaped her; it had apparently been a-building for
some moments. And he laughed with her, their eyes meeting. This was a
dangerous playmate for sure, but it was a pleasure to joust with her on
any field.

“Tell me,” she said, “about that conviction.”

“Ah, these are the matters I felt should be discussed with Miss
Chudleigh.”

“Miss Chudleigh has gone to visit a friend.”

“May we expect her back presently?”

“I think not.”

He pondered that, and then shrugged. “A pity. It only means that this
interchange must be accomplished twice, and will therefore take longer.
Not that it matters to me; the urgency, as I understand it, is Miss
Chudleigh’s.”

She inclined her head. “The matter _is_ urgent. Will you tell me what
you mean? Have you really found a course of action for her, in the
matter of Mr. Hervey?”

“I have. There is only one thing I must be sure of; perhaps I should not
ask, and perhaps you cannot tell me.”

“Please ask anything.”

“Thank you. Mr. Hervey, the Earl of Bristol’s brother: would he oppose
or favor an action which would eliminate this—ah—reputed marriage to
Miss Chudleigh?”

“Favor it, with all his heart, more so with every passing minute,” she
said positively. “He will not, however, accept such a remedy as an
action for divorce; nor would his brother the Earl.”

“Very good then; with his agreement, we can make a positive
solution—absolute.”

“You are most elusive,” she remarked, “in the matter of describing this
solution.”

“I quite agree,” he said, and smiled. “You shall have it in time. At the
moment, however, I would far rather discuss certain other things. You
mentioned, I seem to recall, something about a little town-house in
Holborn, and a number of activities this would make possible.”

She moved to an ottoman and sank down upon it, indicating by a graceful
nod that she wished him to take the chair by it. He sat down, watching
her carefully; and just as carefully, she said, “I should very much
dislike it, Captain, if this conversation should reach an impasse. The
matter you have brought up is rather completely dependent upon the
solution you say you have found. You give me to understand you will not
divulge it. In all fairness, isn’t it … previous to discuss matters
which can only follow that solution?”

_Just exactly the tack Barrowbridge said they’d take,_ he thought with
satisfaction. He smiled. “I had no intention of discussing the house in
Holborn, Miss Axelrood. Actually, no one has offered me such a thing,
and should anyone do so, I would unquestionably decline it.”

“Decline it?” For a moment her containment fell away, and her mouth
opened prettily. “Then what _do_ you want?”

He placed an expression of horror upon his face and threw up his hands.
“Why, Miss _Axel_rood!” But at the same time he winked. She made an
amused _moué_ at having been so badly caught blurting out a straight
question in this curled conversation; and again they had that moment of
locked glances, of complete understanding and mutual, admiring
disapproval.

He said, “You have quite captivated me, you and Miss Chudleigh. You have
suggested that I might help you, and that I am prepared and empowered to
do, but I should feel a cad indeed if I limited my assistance to the
triviality we have discussed. I can be of _much_ more help to you. As a
matter of fact, unless I give you the ell, I think you’ll find the inch
quite useless.”

Miss Axelrood put her cheek in her palm and looked up through her
lashes. “You do go on,” she murmured, “but—do go on.”

“Thank you. Now, stated simply, the situation is this: Miss Chudleigh
wishes a clear-cut annulment of her … of these rumors. She wishes this
because she and the Duke of Kingston would like the freedom to wed.
Surely no one would oppose such a splendid union.”

“Surely not.”

His eyes widened and he stabbed a forefinger down at her. “You’re
_wrong!”_

She was puzzled. “I don’t follow you, Lance. The Duke is the last of his
line; he has no legitimate issue and the title will die with him unless
of course—but I hardly think there would be any issue of this marriage.”

“Quite probably not, but that’s beside the point. Yes, the title’s
finished, but what about his estates?”

“What about his estates?”

“Come now, Miss Axelrood! With all the thinking you have done about this
situation, you surely have not overlooked that!” When she kept looking
at him blankly, he said, speaking slowly as to a child, “If, God forbid,
the Duke should die tomorrow, who’d inherit?”

“Why, I … I’m not sure. Someone in the collateral lines, I imagine,
but—”

“But suppose yourself in the shoes of that ‘someone in a collateral
line.’ D’ye think the Duke’s death would find that ‘someone’ unaware of
his rights? Don’t you think he is at this very moment aware of what’s
coming to him when that time arrives?”

“I suppose so. But you keep talking about what happens when the Duke
passes on, and the matter in hand is not that, but his marriage. _Oh!”_
she squeaked, and put a hand to her mouth.

“And so it comes to you.” He nodded approvingly, deeply enjoying his
moment of patronization. “There is indeed someone who would, at the very
hint of a rumor that Elizabeth Chudleigh was free to take his place as
next heir, cause much embarrassment. So much, that even though her
current situation was cleared up, the marriage might be made impossible.
… Poor Miss Chudleigh, to have come so far, to be so near her greatest
desire!”

“Oh dear. … I suppose, Captain Machiavelli, that you will prudently
conceal the name of this potential heir and stoat-in-the-chicken-run.”

“By no means. His name is Meadows.”

“Oh good heavens!—the nephew. Hideous little stick-in-the-mud, all godly
and duty-bound. I met him once. Charles.”

“It is not. Charles is abroad just now. It is Evelyn, the other nephew,
named after his uncle the Duke, and, I assure you, as fully aware of
Miss Chudleigh’s movements, intentions and desires as you are. He is a
mournful young man of some thirty summers who has done little for the
past ten years but write bad poetry and hunger for the Kingston lands
and holdings.”

“Oh dear,” said Miss Axelrood again, _“that_ one! He—but surely you know
about _him.”_

“Actually,” said Lance, “I don’t. And it doesn’t matter—I should say, it
is far better that way. Because I am about to meet that young man. To
know him. To become fast friends and whisk him away with me to my
country place, and to keep him interested there until Miss Chudleigh is
free to marry—and marries.”

She turned upon him quite the strangest gaze he had yet seen in her. “To
keep him interested … how?”

“The resources of human invention are unlimited. My dear departed mentor
Mr. Barrowbridge used to say, there’s always a way, and always an
explanation. All one has to do is think of it. …Whatever Meadows enjoys
I shall enjoy. Whatever he is seeking I shall seek. Whatever his need,
there shall be more of it with me at my country place than anywhere else
he knows. … Why do you laugh?” he demanded, for she had virtually
exploded.

“I’m sorry,” she said when she could. She slipped a scrap of lace
handkerchief from her bodice and dabbed at her eyes. Inadequately she
explained, “It’s your approach, dear Lance, your attack, and your
confidence. They quite take my breath away. Do proceed.”

“That is quite all. What are you thinking?”

“I am thinking of what Miss Chudleigh’s feeling will be about this
extraordinary plan of campaign.”

“And what, in your draughts, is Miss Chudleigh saying?”

“She is saying that the whole thing is most ingenious, but that it would
be more direct for her to make arrangements about Mr. Meadows without
your intervention, once the other matter was in hand. We could not, in
all conscience, trouble you quite so much.”

“But I would insist. My conscience is equally involved. One must not
begin a thing and not finish it; one must not finish a thing any way but
properly. I _am_ involved, Miss Axelrood, and, as you pointed out, am
also quite confident. So much so that I could not countenance having
this affair handled in any other way than that I propose. I would rather
have it not handled at all. I would, actually, _insist_ that neither
Miss Chudleigh’s freedom nor her marriage to the Duke of Kingston occur.
Let me put it this way: if Mr. Meadows is present in London at the time
of these actions, they cannot succeed. If _I_ am in London at that time,
they cannot succeed. How simple, then, how efficient it would be, if
while I was keeping Mr. Meadows out of London, Mr. Meadows was keeping
me out of London!”

“I have never heard of such outright audacity!” she breathed.

“Surely you have. And now, Miss Axelrood, you have the sum of my
suggestions.”

“Suggestions? What, Captain, is your word for a demand?”

“A suggestion,” he said smilingly.

She put her hands on her knees with an abrupt soft slap and looked him
in the eye, wagging her head in amazement. “Then it is now my task to
tell Miss Chudleigh that you have found an answer to the matter of her
dealings with Mr. Hervey; that you can thereby free her to marry the
Duke; that Mr. Meadows has it in his power to obstruct these matters;
that you volunteer to remove Mr. Meadows from the scene and present him
later with a _fait accompli;_ and that you are doing this because of
your interest in justice and the right, even to the extent of refusing
the house in Holborn.”

“I could not have summed it up better myself.”

“There seems to be something lacking in the picture.”

“I think not,” he said.

She sat quiet for a moment, then, “Oh,” she said. “The country place.
Captain Courtenay, tell me about your country place.”

“Why,” he said off-handedly, “it’s a sort of shootin’-box, you know,
nothing elaborate. Large enough for a party of … oh, say six, with a
hovel for the servants and a bit of a stable and carriage house; but
small enough to be almost lost in a map of England. And as I say, not
elaborate. Comfortable, that’s the word, as might suit any young
gentleman of reasonable means, excellent background, and favorable
prospects.”

“Are you suggesting that the Duke might even now have such a holding,
and would permit—”

“My dear Miss Axelrood, have I not yet made myself clear? I am not
interested in placing myself in anyone’s town house or country place, to
live on expectations of my benefactor’s continued generosity. Nor would
I, in the circumstances, endanger this enterprise of ours by leaving
myself—us—all of us open to such an accusation: ‘Courtenay? Ah yes, the
chap who held young Meadows prisoner while his uncle married Miss
Chudleigh. Held him, mind you, at one of the Duke’s own properties.’ …
Ah no, Miss Axelrood; the less connection between the parties of this
action, and me, the better. If all goes well—and it shall—even Meadows
will never be aware that we know one another.”

She rose, and paced, watching him as she turned and turned again. Then
she settled again on the ottoman. “Up to now,” she confessed, “I have
been willing to hear you out as one listens to a child’s story of a
dream—only to see how fantastic it can be. But at last I am beginning to
feel the substance of your plan. This does not delude me, however, from
the fact that you are asking a great deal in return for … well, for your
ingenuity, on the grounds that it is ingenious. You ask me to take your
word for it that the action you have in mind for freeing Miss Chudleigh
will be effective, and also to believe that you can and shall do this
and that … to the end that you shall have your own country place,
purchased, no doubt, with hard gold sovereigns in your name.”

“I would not insist on anything so magnificent!” he assured her. “A
letter of credit from a commercial bank here would be ample.” He laughed
into her amazement until she had to join him. “As to your accepting my
word for all this, of course I expect nothing of the kind. Has Miss
Chudleigh a solicitor whom she can trust, who has a wide knowledge of
law, and who could be here a week from today to conclude this matter?”

“Yes; I rather think Mr. Beasley would serve.” She chuckled. “I think
you will astonish Mr. Beasley. What would he be expected to do?”

“First, to inspect my plan for the court action. If—and only if—he
agrees that it will succeed, and that the only possible objection to it
could be raised by Mr. Meadows, then we may discuss the matter of the
shootin’ box, the details of which I shall have with me. It would be
best if Mr. Beasley could draw up the letter of credit then and there.
After that—why, Mr. Beasley may proceed with the case at his earliest
convenience, and my good friend Mr. Evelyn Meadows and I shall meanwhile
repair to my little place in the Surrey Downs. I think it’s the Surrey
Downs,” he added blandly. “Is there anything more to discuss?”

“If there is,” she said ruefully, “my poor woolly head will burst its
seams.”

“It has been a pleasure to discuss things with your poor woolly head,”
he said in his rumbling whisper. “I do believe you think as well as a
man.”

“All women think as well as men. If you had said I think _like_ a man,
however, I should have denied it. … Where may I reach you, in order to
give you Miss Chudleigh’s decision?”

“I may not be reached. Tomorrow morning I am off to look at some
holdings, and also to see what can be done immediately in the matter of
Mr. Meadows, his joys and preoccupations. I cannot say at this moment
where I shall be, except that I shall return here in a week, at the same
hour, ready to talk to your solicitor.”

“And supposing your lofty confidence is misplaced, Captain, and Miss
Chudleigh refuses to pursue your plan?”

“I do not even consider it,” he said immediately. “I shall be back here
in a week, and should the affair not be concluded at that meeting, I
shall not return. The misfortune would be Miss Chudleigh’s, not mine.
What is your name?”

“Lilith,” she said immediately.

“Thank you … aha! Adam’s first love, as I remember.”

“And, some say, the devil’s sister.”

“You would not tell me before.”

“No,” she said, “but I am coming to like you.”

“Then I shall take advantage of that fact, and salute it properly.” And
he quickly slid his arms about her.

She put her hands on his shoulders and averted her face, laughing. “No,
please—no!”

“But why not?”

“I have told you; I am coming to like you.”

He held her lightly and thought this out, in view of what had passed
between them … was it only last night? She no longer had her face turned
away, but faced him, reading his eyes alertly and with great attention.

“But only last—” and he could not finish, for she put her hand on his
lips. “I told you you would ask me that again,” she whispered. “And I
said, too, that the answer was: Because I wanted to talk to you.”

“Ah yes. And after understanding that, I was supposed to be angry.”

“With yourself.”

“I remember.” He put her by and stood up. “I am to understand that it is
not possible for you to talk to me without—”

“It is not possible for a woman to talk to a man (unless it is herself
she wishes to talk about) without first bringing about a condition one
might call ‘afterwards’ … otherwise the very air is befogged with
pressures and conjectures and _doubles entendres,_ in which the point of
any separate discussion may well be lost. So … I wanted to talk to you.”

“And yet, tonight, you—”

“Tonight,” said Lilith, “It was you who wanted to talk, and not about
me.”

“You are very frank.”

“You are very angry.”

He turned to her hotly, and was met with an expression of such cool
amusement, mixed with such genuine liking and admiration, that he was
stopped short. “I suppose I am,” he floundered. “It’s just that I’m
unused to … that is, I naturally felt that … what I mean to say is that
it isn’t you I’m angry at, but … damme, girl, you’re right,” and he
began to laugh.

“That’s better.” She gave him her long cool hand. “I shall miss you,
Lance. And though I am, in a way, ranged against you, still, I wish you
luck. I hope that this whole complicated matter turns out to Miss
Chudleigh’s advantage; there are a number of people who have attempted
to best her and who bitterly regret it.”

“My dearest hopes are synonymous with her success,” he intoned.

“Get along with you,” she smiled. He kissed her hand and left the
library.

“Pendleton.”

“Yes, Captain.”

“My cloak. … is my carriage outside?”

“No, sir. Your coachman asked me to hand you this.”

It was the hardy threadbare cloak, the Bermondsey cloak, made up into a
tight neat package. Inside one might feel the flat carven plaques of the
Courtenay escutcheons.

Behind him, Lilith Axelrood made a slight sound—Lance thought, an amused
sound. He turned. She stood at the foot of the great staircase, ready to
mount, one long hand on the newel post. “So the coachman has passed on
too, Captain?”

He had nothing to say. He felt his ears redly burning.

“Pendleton,” said the girl, “ask Haines to come round with the trap and
take the Captain where he wants to go. I think he will remember the way.
Good night, Captain.”

The butler went away, and Lance Courtenay stood in the door, watching
the pink flame of her dress rising up the cold white sweep of the stair.



7.


HE FOUND HIM IN an alehouse, in a corner away from the light, hunched
over the boards, both hands on a great brown stone mug. His eyes and his
shoulders were set too close together, his jaw was too long and oddly
edged straight up the front of his nether lip, as if, like a ram-bowed
warship, a keel had been shaped upward to form a prow. He wore his hair
tied back in a tight club, but it grew double-crowned and defied such
discipline. His clothes were good, but he sat, he moved, he held himself
in ways which held neatness in perpetual abeyance.

“Mr. Meadows? Mr. Evelyn Meadows?”

Meadows slowly withdrew his gaze from the bubbles in his mug and looked
up and sidewise without moving his head. His whole aspect was one of
uncertainty and suspicion; any true student of Balthazar Gracian could
see them clearly, like two great handles thrust out and forward. Lance
grasped them eagerly. “I know you,” he murmured. He slid onto the bench
opposite, fixed Meadows with a bright gaze, and waited.

“I don’t know you,” said Meadows in a high breathy voice.

“Ah. But I know you,” reiterated Lance. He waited again.

Meadows dropped his eyes from Lance’s to his brown ale. He raised the
mug to his lips, seemed to study some puzzling conformation of bubbles
within, and then put it down again without drinking. He flicked his eyes
up and away as if to see if he was still being impaled; he was. “Well
then.” When Lance still would not speak, he wet his lips and said, “Well
then, I mean, how? Y’know, dash it all,” he added for reasons of his
own, and urgently, as if he must.

Slowly Lance brought up his gloved hand; slowly he removed the glove. It
was a theatrical gesture which would have justified the introduction of
a solid gold hand, or a mangled hand, or no hand at all, and Meadows
watched it, fascinated. Lance swung his index finger in a short swift
semicircle and aimed it between Meadows’ eyes, which converged slightly
to contain it. “You,” said Lance, “are the author of _A Defence of
Albertus Magnus.”_

“Why, I say, yes,” said Meadows, and tittered. “I say. Y’know, dash it
all. However did you know?”

Lance knew, the way he knew where and how Meadows lived, what books he
bought, where he had been to school and how he had fared there, how well
he paid his bills and roughly their extent. Tradesmen, booksellers,
landlords—anyone who would gossip, and virtually anyone does. As to the
_Albertus Magnus_ piece, Lance had heard of that from an amused old
scoundrel who read proof for _The Monthly Review_ and who was sometimes
called in to filter the leas from the huge masses of submissions that
lively journal received unsolicited. “Dammit, nobody’s _attacked_
Albertus Magnus, not since 1280 anyhow. This idiot Meadows read
somewhere that Albertus had been called the Ape of Aristotle and got
frightfully ruffled about it. God, Lanky, I wish the government would
supply people like that with a bright purple stamp to affix to their
work, so one would know in advance it should be sent back unread. Come
to think of it they ought to have the stamp on their foreheads as well.
Ever _talk_ to the fool?”

“A splendid work,” said Lance sincerely. “Far too good for the times.
Too early or too late. Too early, probably. One has hope.”

“I say. I mean, hang it. What did you say your name is?”

Lance told him, ordered a pint of bitter, and had the girl freshen
Meadows’ stone mug. Lance, who had had old Barrowbridge in an orgy of
research for the past three days, simply tossed out names the way one
would throw cubes of beef to a terrier, this way, that way: Roger Bacon,
Paracelsus, Arnoldus Villanovanus, Vincent of Beauvais; and Meadows
scurried about and snapped them up and begged for more. Phlogiston,
_prima materia, aquae fortis et regis,_ and the Philosopher’s Stone. For
Meadows, heaven help him, wanted to be an alchemist.

“Hang it, I mean. Chaps just don’t think about important things. I mean,
y’know, dash it, they don’t,” Meadows said after an hour.

“There’s no one to teach one, if one’s interested. … Would you teach
me?” asked Lance.

From the depths of his goathood, Meadows looked up at this dawn-drenched
cockerel in stupefaction. “I … I _couldn’t!_ I call myself only a dashed
student, y’know, neophyte, what? Teach? Teach _you?”_

“I am but recently come into the light,” said Lance sonorously. He
hitched his coat back a bit from his bewildering brocaded waistcoat.
“The hunt for pleasure, the waste,” he said sadly, letting his voice
trail away; then, “But you, you must have had a vision, like seeing the
Grail; and here you are, searching, searching …” And so the bait, the
strike, the hook. “Have you somewhere where we can work, study,
experiment?” begged Lance, all awe and excitement. He knew perfectly
well the answer to that:

“Oh, I say, no. No, not now. I had a jolly little lodging in Hampstead,
don’t y’know, and I had a bit of an accident. You know Basil Valentine’s
three constituents, yes? Yes. Sulphur, mercury and salt as the basis of
all metals. I think him wrong, y’know, but I wanted to repeat his
experiments, what? Starting batching mixtures, basis twelve, y’know: one
part salt, twelve parts quicksilver, twelve sulphur. Next batch, _two_
parts salt, twelve and twelve, d’ye see?”

“Most systematic. Beautiful. What happened?”

“Smoke,” said Meadows sadly. “Not the batch. That was melting nicely,
though the sulphur smelt a bit, y’know, I mean, smelt. No, the deuced
fire. Mixed saltpetre and tallow-fat, make it hotter, you know. Well, it
smoked a bit, as I say. Landlord … well, old Stokes is a greedy beggar,
you can always put his jolly old lid on with a florin or so, but the
others … I mean, eight houses roundabout, you know, all the silly asses
running out into the snow at midnight calling fire, everyone frightfully
upset. And really, nothing was burning. Just smoke, you know, and I did
get a bit muddled and wasn’t using salt in the batch, it was sal
ammoniac. It really wasn’t so bad; one could get quite near it by noon
the next day. I’d a sort of delegation call on me, y’know. Angry.”

“Didn’t you tell them it was in the interest of knowledge?”

“Well, naturally, my dear chap, but it seemed to make them all angrier.
I’d rather not talk about it,” said Meadows. He shuddered and drank some
ale and shuddered again. “Long and short of it, I can’t study there any
longer. I’ve asked here and there about other lodgings, but I do believe
the householders must have a guild, what? sort of thing.” He laughed
ruefully. “Used to think it would be fine to be known, recognized
wherever I went, what? Well I wish I weren’t.”

Lance suddenly clutched Meadows’ biceps, half-frightening him out of his
crouch. “I _say!_ I’ve been casting about for a little place, house in
Holborn, one or two possibilities across the river, perhaps a digs away
from London. Couldn’t make up my mind. This makes it up for me, though,
by heaven! Suppose I took a place miles away from anywhere, no
landlords, no neighbors—would you help me with a library and a
laboratory, I mean, to arrange it all; I’ll supply it; and get me
started? Could you, d’ye suppose?”

Meadows glowed like a coal. “Well, I … I mean, I oughtn’t … I did
promise Charles, you know …”

“Charles? What Charles?”

“Oh, my stuffy cousin. He’s all mercantile and family duty sort of
thing. Gone to Madrid, something about cork-bark and olive oil. Made me
promise to stay and keep an eye on the family scandals. Oh, dash it all,
nothing’s happened about that in donkey’s years and I don’t see why
anything should. Yes, I’ll come, and willing. What can happen in four
weeks, six?”

“What indeed?” murmured Lance, shook hands warmly and made arrangements
to meet again on the morrow.

“Good evening, Captain.”

“Evening, Pendleton. Are they in the library?”

“Yes, sir. Mr. Beasley and Miss Axelrood.”

“Miss Chudleigh?”

“Miss Chudleigh has not returned, sir.”

Lance raised his eyebrows, shrugged, and went into the library.

“Here he is now. Good evening, Captain Courtenay.” Lilith Axelrood was
in green tonight—very like the bottle-green which old Barrowbridge had
once vividly described to him. It suited her blindingly, and he said so.

“And this is Mr. Beasley. Captain Courtenay.”

“I am most honoured, sir.”

Beasley, who had two deep vertical lines above his nose and two more,
one on each side of his mouth, looked like a schoolmaster on the very
verge of a caning session. He towered nearly to the height of Lance’s
collarbone; but he so carried himself that to that height he did tower.
His expression at the moment denoted clearly that even if the Captain
expressed himself as honoured, he, Beasley, was not. “Huddydew,” he said
rapidly, not offering his hand.

“Will Miss Chudleigh be joining us?”

“I fear not,” said the girl.

“I think she’s trying to avoid me,” said Lance jocosely.

“I think she is,” said Lilith Axelrood soberly. Lance shot her a quick
glance; she made a slight shrug which indicated that it was nothing
which could be pursued in the presence of Beasley.

Lance said, “I trust her disappointing absence will not keep us from
making our little arrangement.”

“I hold her power of attorney in the matter,” said Beasley in a chilly
voice.

“Then, to horse!” cried Lance, and from his breast pocket drew a sheaf
of papers. He spread them on the table. “Here are a copy of the deed of
the place I have in mind; a description of boundaries, properties,
structures and accesses, along with all the freeholds, fiefs, torts and
whereases that anyone needs to take title. Nice little place, really,
modest and modestly priced. Belongs to an odd little baronet who lives
nearby—Eustace, Gregory Eustace. Good little chap.”

Beasley regarded the papers coldly, as if they were made of matter which
a decent man would not mention, let alone touch. “I think,” he said in
his flat dry little voice, “that the first order of business, ought to
be the suit-in-law you have allegedly discovered.”

“By no means!” said Lance cheerfully. “I should very much dislike going
into that, even to the point of convincing you and making it possible
for you to proceed, only to discover that you might have some objection
to covering this—” He slapped the papers—“for me. Surely it is not
unreasonable of me to wish to make sure of my _quo_ for your _quid.”_

“Very well, very well, let me see,” snapped the lawyer. “Hm. Hmp.
Featherfront, Titsey-in-Down. Strawdnry name.”

“Where do you come from?” demanded Lance, knowing (from Barrowbridge)
the answer.

Beasley peered over the papers at him. “Much Hadham, Herts,” he barked.
“Why, sir?”

“Just wondered, Mr. Beasley,” grinned Lance. Over the lawyer’s shoulder
he saw Miss Axelrood bite her lip and turn away, covering her mouth with
a handkerchief. Beasley returned to the papers, moving his lips as he
read. “Hmp. Hmp. Barbarous country, Surrey Downs, Kent, all that. Hmp.
Twelve … _hundred …_ POUNDS!”

Lance regarded his fingernails. “Actually, two thousand, sir. One
doesn’t simply move in with nothing for maintenance.”

Beasley exchanged a startled glance with Miss Axelrood. “You expect an
outright gift of eight hundred over and above the exorbitant cost of
this … this pleasure palace?”

“It isn’t exorbitant,” said Lance flatly, “all those acres, the brook,
the wood, and the buildings. And I wouldn’t think of asking for eight
hundred like that, sir; you do me an injustice.”

“What, then?”

“Four hundred now; I wouldn’t expect the other four hundred until the
case was concluded to your satisfaction.”

Beasley banged down the papers. “You, sir, are the most—”

“Mr. Beasley!” Miss Axelrood cautioned. Lance gathered up the papers. “I
really didn’t have to bring these at all,” he said in wounded tones. “I
thought you might like a documentation of the reasonableness of my
requests. I don’t feel you _want_ to conclude this matter, Mr. Beasley.”

“Of course he does,” said Miss Axelrood quickly. “Please,
gentlemen—surely we can discuss this without asperities.”

“I’m willing,” said Lance sulkily.

“Mr. Beasley?”

“I wish to see your outline of that suit,” said Beasley, with matching
sullenness. “I will say that at the outset I doubted you had discovered
such a thing in English law. My doubts have not diminished. I shall now
go so far as to say that I will without objection accede to your
monstrous proposal if you can prove that there is such a procedure and
convince me that it will succeed. I say this because of a new and, I
suspect, unshakable conviction that you are about to be unmasked as a—”

“Mr. Beasley!”

The lawyer, now all pink about his frozen gills, subsided and glared at
Lance.

“You agree, Miss Axelrood?” Lance said. “Not the scurrilities; I
understand and sympathize with the plight of a usual barrister faced
with unusual matters; but the part about his agreement to my proposal,
if the matter of the suit satisfies him?”

“I agree of course,” she said placatingly.

Lance glanced at the clock on the mantel, smiled, and stepped swiftly to
the bookcase which held the law library. “It’s here, sir,” he said,
still smiling, and handed the barrister a book.

“What? What? _Procedures in Jurisprudence, Courts Christian._ What the
dev—I beg your pardon, ma’am—what’s this? The ecclesiastical courts do
not cover a case of this kind.”

“Don’t they?”

“You see?” said Beasley, turning to Miss Axelrood. “This young … uh …
man’s bewildering performance is beginning to show a seam, as I knew it
would. The ecclesiastical courts nowadays confine themselves almost
exclusively to matters of Church holdings and physical properties,
hierarchical successions, tithes and the like.” He tossed the book to
the table.

“Almost,” said Lance equably. He glanced at the clock again.

“By the way, are you prepared to make out the letter of credit here and
now, sir?”

“Of course, of course,” said Beasley testily, “but I shan’t be doing
it.”

Lance opened the book, selected a page, and handed it back. “Here you
are, sir.”

“What’s this? What’s—good heavens.” He read rapidly. “Good heavens,” he
said again, in quite a different tone, and looked up at Lance as if his
opponent of a moment ago had quite disappeared and had been replaced by
a Lord Chief Justice. “Whoever would have thought of looking here for
something which properly belongs to the common law, or at least to
peerage action in the House of Lords?”

“What is it?” asked Miss Axelrood.

“Why—why …” Beasley referred to the book again. _“Jactitation of
Marriage._ It hasn’t been called twice in four hundred years. Good
_Heavens!”_

Lance stood by the table, admiring his fingernails again. The girl
tugged the rapt lawyer’s elbow. “Please tell me what it is, what it
does, Mr. Beasley. After all, I’m not an expert, like you and the
Captain.”

“I’m sorry, m’dear; I’m a bit overwhelmed. This,” he said, waving the
book, “is a perfectly acceptable suit at law, hearable in the
ecclesiastical court—a very quiet thing, mind you, merely a consistory
of three—in which the plaintiff, in this case Miss Chudleigh, asks the
court to issue an order against the defendant—Mr. Hervey—to cause him to
cease and desist forever from claiming a marriage to the plaintiff. It
is designed apparently to keep various ruffians from claiming marriage
to people of higher station, thereby gaining public recognition and
credit which is undeserved. You are right, sir: I see no reason why this
is not applicable and adequate.”

“Thank you, Mr. Beasley,” said Lance modestly.

“I’m afraid I’m stupid,” said the girl, “but—”

“Understandable, quite,” said Beasley expansively. He was acting like a
man who, asked to sip vinegar, tastes a rare old wine. “You see, when
the court issues the order to Mr. Hervey commanding him to desist from
boasting of this marriage, it is ordering him to desist from boasting of
a _non-existent_ marriage. By passing the order itself, it is at the
same time accepting the nullity of the marriage. Its order is a _de
facto_ certificate, not that the marriage is hereby ended, but that it
never existed. Am I correct sir?” he asked respectfully.

“Quite sir,” responded Lance with a mimicry that passed right over the
other’s head and struck Miss Axelrood dead center in the risibilities.
“May I call your attention to—” He took the book and turned two
pages—“this, Mr. Beasley?”

“Ah yes, yes. Oh dear.” He turned to Miss Axelrood, who had recovered.
“Is there anyone cognizant of any—ah—act of Miss Chudleigh’s who might
raise objections at the hearing? Say, one who might testify that in the
past she has publicly acknowledged this—ah—alleged marriage?”

“Who might want to do a thing like that?” asked Lance blandly.

“Mr. Meadows,” said Lilith Axelrood, “would be delighted to do a thing
like that.”

“Oh,” said Beasley, “he might not even know if such a thing has ever
occurred.”

“Yes, Pendleton,” said Miss Axelrood to the doorway.

“Beg pardon, Miss. A Mr. Meadows here for Captain Courtenay.”

There was a stunned silence. Lance said quietly to his fingernails, “We
could ask him.” He looked pleasantly at the shocked barrister, the
amazed girl, and said to the butler, “Tell him I’ll be out directly,
Pendleton.”

“Yes sir.”

“Why in heaven’s name did you ask him _here?”_ hissed Miss Axelrood.

“I anticipated some delay in concluding matters,” said Lance, “and I
thought this might hurry things up.”

“Mr. Beasley, hurry; make out that paper he wants before that fool
Meadows starts chatting with the servants.”

“Oh dear yes.” Beasley sat down at the table and took a cut quill. “That
was twelve—uh—”

“Sixteen,” said Lance, “and your promissory for the other four on
conclusion of this business. Ah, don’t fret so, Miss Axelrood. Meadows
doesn’t know Miss Chudleigh is in London, let alone here. I ascertained
that.”

“You do take chances.”

“I have all along,” he smiled.

“Your full name?” asked Beasley, scribbling away.

“Lance Captain Courtenay.”

“Captain? Why, I thought …”

“I try and try to explain that to people,” said Lance tiredly, “but they
all credit me with an army rank. I do wish I could change that.”

“No doubt,” said Beasley, biting his thin lips. What is the difference
in that face? thought Lance; it hasn’t changed, but now, by God, the old
sly-bird approves of me. “Here you are.”

Lance took the letter and note and glanced through them. “Thank you very
much, sir. And you, Miss.”

“And you, Captain. Lance.” She laughed, then sobered. “What will I do,”
she asked, “if you or Mr. Meadows are seen in or near London until the
conclusion of this affair?”

“Why, I’d imagine you’d ask exhumation of my poor dead friend
Higger-Piggott,” he said.

“Just so,” she said lightly. “I clearly recall where he’s buried.”

_“Requiescat in pace,”_ he said somberly.

“Go, go!” she cried.

“Not until I’ve invited you to my place in Surrey. Write me, will you?
Have you the address?”

“F-featherfront, Titsey-in-Down,” she choked. “Go now!”

“Good night, Mr. Beasley.”

“Good night, young man. Perhaps we’ll meet again one day. Who knows,
there might be a desk in my office for a bright young chap.”

“Thank you, sir, but I’ve other ambitions.”

_“Will_ you go out to Mr. Meadows?”

“My most cordial regards to Miss Chudleigh.”

“Yes, thank you.”

“And to Lady Blanton.”

“Oh you—_idiot!”_ and she fairly pushed him from the room.

Meadows stood near the door, a brown hat squashed between his hands, and
blinked at the altitude of the Blanton entry. He seemed to shrink
timidly as Lance strode across, laughing, then expanded again as he
recognized him. “Jolly people here, what?”

“Jolly,” said Lance, and laughed again. “Thank you, Pendleton. Come
along, Meadows old chap. We’ll have a tot of brandy in defense of
Albertus Magnus. I think I’ve found the philosopher’s stone.”

“Oh, I _say!”_

They went out into the welcoming night.



8.


FEATHERFRONT WAS A WOOD, a brook, a house, a byre rebuilt into a
carriage house, the foundations of a burned barn, a stable with
servants’ quarters in a second storey, and a state of mind.

The state of mind may have been a product of the spring that year, which
was remarkable even for England, even for the North Downs. It may have
been a magic, such as they say lies over houses built too close to
running water and old woods where the Little Folk have not yet been
driven away. Or the new population of the house may have been sufficient
to account for it; it was mad, mysterious, hilarious, indecent, joyful,
and studious.

In an ell very nearly as tall as the main part of the house, Evelyn
Meadows established his laboratory. The peaked roof bore a particularly
silly cupola, and this they had stilted up and had knocked out a smoke
hole under it, affording an escape for the fumes and vapors without
which alchemy seemed such a sham. There were bookracks and lecterns and
inkhorns ranged on two sides of the room; on the third, racks and
shelves of chemicals, ores, metal specimens, rhinoceros and narwhal
horns, toad skins and the other raw materials of the Paraceltic art; the
fourth wall was devoted to the tools of the trade: an alembic, rows of
flasks, beakers, retorts and graduates, scales and, of all things, an
astrolabe. This wall was divided by a monstrous fireplace, not quite
high enough to walk in upright, but wide enough to spit an ox. Despite
Lance’s offer to put up the equipment and supplies, Meadows’ collection
had been almost completely sufficient for the purpose; indeed, his
lodging had not sufficed for all of it; he had had a second flat in
London from which his hobby had crowded him and which he had been using
for some time exclusively as storage. In so haphazard a fashion had this
clutter been accumulated that Meadows himself was astonished and
delighted at its richness and variety; he had things there he not only
had forgotten, but things he would say he had wished for all his life.
Owl-droppings he had, cantharides and sword-fish teeth; flakes of rust
from one of the Holy Nails, a brace of otherwise empty flagons each
containing the dying breath of a hanged man; picklings of a blue rat, a
whale’s eye, an Arctic mouse, a child’s hand, an unborn stoat, and an
unidentified object with abcesses.

The main part of the house formed a shell around what was almost a
single room, a great hall with a fireplace at each end and a row of
rooms along the north wall so designed that their ceilings formed a
balcony for the hall. One end of this balcony was closed to form yet
another room, with its separate staircase leading by a covered way to
the kitchens at the rear. After swearing Meadows to fealty and silence,
Lance confessed to him that there dwelt in that upstairs room a part of
his past too shameful to describe and too painful to discuss; Meadows
took the revelation as a weighty compliment and respected the confidence
devoutly, his sole reference to it a worshipful expression when Lance
would sigh and, grim-faced, mount the covered stairs and closet himself
with the mystery. “Brave chap, that Courtenay,” he would mutter over his
fuming sulphurs.

The shameful, painful secret was, of course, Barrowbridge, at long last
separated from his noisome Bermondsey and ensconced here like a spectre
in a castle. He was served and cared for by a mute, an ox-shouldered
young woman acquired with the property. She could hear well enough and
understand tolerably; Barrowbridge was on splendid terms with her
because she was obedient and because she listened to him.

The days fell into a shambling order. If Lance missed skimming like a
bat at eventide into the margins of high society, he did not show it.
Meadows was in seventh heaven. He produced elixirs and effluvia,
precipitates, ash, conglomerates and stinks—and theories. He hummed and
droned with theories: phlogiston and the soul of mercury, the
Aristotelian quadrate and its dissimilarities to the tetranomy of
Vincent of Beauvais, and on, and on, and on. It was pleasant, after a
time; in the long evenings when he did not feel like chatting with
Barrowbridge, nor walking on the Downs, he could nod by the fire and
listen to the excited drone of Meadows’ voice, repeating a name or a
Latin phrase every twelve or so minutes—just enough to keep Meadows
primed and pumping.

Meadows was happy. Meadows was more than happy. Lance had never seen a
man more capable of creating a world for himself as he wanted it, and
living in it wholly. Any evidence to the contrary could be forgotten as
soon as seen. He was no longer a student; he was an alchemist. He did
not pretend to be a master, but he felt he would be, as soon as he made
his great discovery. Great discoveries care not who makes them; Meadows
was in tune with this, being a great discoverer who cared not what
discoveries he made. He mixed messes and heated them, made infusions and
rubbed them on a cat. With long forceps he lifted smoking lumps from his
fires and held them hopefully against silver, then against lead, and
tested the lead with his heart beating wildly; always was he
disappointed, never dashed.

With all this happiness, it was obvious—painfully so—that his greatest
happiness lay in Lance; Lance’s ear, Lance’s presence, Lance’s opinions.
Lance required little, but short of leaving one of his experiments at
the explosion point, Meadows did his utmost to anticipate anything Lance
might want Lance would return from a stroll on the Downs, to find the
fire laid in the living room, his pipe filled and waiting, and more
often than not some tome on transmutation or the noble airs awaited him
beside it; this would surely be the subject of today’s efforts. At the
first sound of his step at the door, Meadows, bearing a flaming coal
from one of his cauldrons, would come bounding like a meteor across the
great hall to start Lance’s fire, trailing sparks and smoke and
observations: “Who cares about phlogiston? _I’ve_ found a heavy air that
won’t burn; if phlogiston is life then this is death.” Or, “It burns, it
burns!” which would mean that Lance had to sprint into the laboratory to
help him save the building from the flames, or run to the goods-chest
for salve for his blisters, or rush to the pantry for milk for him to
drink and quench the interior fire; for Meadows was scientist enough to
insist upon trying out his elixirs in the most direct way.

Lance quickly became aware that he was not another happiness for
Meadows; he was _the_ happiness. Meadows neither hugged him nor fell at
his feet; he had no need to. When a man has a preoccupation as profound
as Meadows and his alchemy, and yet will permit any interruption, any
change of subject from someone, he obviously values the someone above
the preoccupation. Meadows shared his alchemy not so much because of
Lance’s stated conviction that he too was interested, but because Lance
was key to it, part of the pattern of his absorption.

Lance spoke of it to Barrowbridge. “Not that I mind terribly; I pictured
myself wracking my brains for ways and means to keep the idiot content.
I thought I might even have to drug him, or lock him in. I never dreamed
I’d simply have to loose him like a ruddy falcon, and have him eating
out of my hand.”

“You might have known,” Barrowbridge chuckled. Within a week he had
settled in at Featherfront—Lance’s second great surprise, for at the
outset he had fumed and wept and cursed most bitterly. Getting him down
by coach and up those stairs had been a mountainous undertaking, and for
two days after he had glowered out the window and complained that a body
couldn’t get a wink of sleep without so much as a mussel-monger crying
outside the window; the fresh air made him cough, the fresh food sat ill
on his jaded stomach, and there wasn’t anything to do. These, it
appeared, were protests which he felt duty-bound to release, and once
catharsized, he was done with them. His flesh seemed firmer, and part of
his voice had returned. He slept a sinful amount—ten to twelve hours out
of the twenty-four—and spent the rest of the time jollying Johnson, the
heavy-shouldered mute girl, and reading. His room was three times as
large as the one in Bermondsey; he had all his books and more besides,
Lance having been fully aware that some new ones would help him lick
into the new place, as one puts butter on the paws of a cat in a new
environment, that it may lie and contemplate while removing it. He had
insisted upon paying his own way and a bit over, and with a minimum of
grumbling, though as ever he hoarded the secret of his total resources,
whatever they might be. And so he acclimated and throve. He had his bed
and his great chair, his stick and his thoughts and enough conversation
to suit him; and as a bonus, a gimlet-hole in the wall which faced the
great hall, whereby he could keep track of events below; this delighted
him more than a window might have done. He was thoroughly conversant
with the worshipful capers of Evelyn Meadows, and, “You should have
known,” he told Lance.

“Known what? How?”

“Did you not spend the better part of three days haunting his haunts and
gossiping with his gossips?”

“Ay, but it was his alchemical pursuits I was interested in, once I
found out about them, and I found them first.”

“You learned nothing else?”

“Only what I already knew.”

Barrowbridge wagged his big old head. “Ah, lad, lad, I taught ye when
reading for law and the use of a law, never to stop with the law which
concerns you then, but to read all around it, before and behind it,
everything like it and all that echoes to it. And I think, in law, you
learned that. But you’ve forgotten to apply it elsewhere.”

“What did I miss, then?”

“Why, that young specimen was sent down from Christ’s Hospital.”

“I didn’t know he went to school there … Why?”

“Eh. He got a passion for a house master, that’s why, and couldn’t
conceal it. ’Course, what he was sent down for was not concealing it;
but that’s the way the world wags.”

“Mr. Barrowbridge! I never dreamed he was one of those. I mean, I’ve
seen dozens of them mincing about, of course, but—Meadows? He doesn’t
look the least—”

“Ye’ve seen pimps and panders, lechers, wife-beaters and catamites, time
without number. If you haven’t recognized some of ’em as such, it’s
because you’re purblind and wishful. As a lawyer you should know better;
as a gentleman, you should be aware of what to avoid publicly.” Again he
committed that harrowing laugh. “Don’t look so stricken, Lanky! He’s a
nice enough lad, our Meadows. Balmy, of course, but only because his
hobbies are unfashionable. The one would have made him valuable at the
time of Roger Bacon, the other, popular at the time of Plato.”

“What on earth am I going to _do_?” Lance demanded, in a voice
approaching a bleat of panic.

“Na, na then,” soothed the barrister. “Don’t let it trouble you, not a
bit. He’ll make no excursions on you and your little white body, I’ll
wager. Can’t you see that what he’s doing is searching for his special
Grail instead? He doesn’t want his great discovery just for himself. He
wants to honor you with it. There’s an old saying I’d appreciate your
committing to memory, Lanky. (’Tisn’t Gracian this time, it’s Chinese):
and that is, ‘A cat that’s once stepped on a hot stove will never step
on a cold one.’ Meadows never has lived down the public humiliation his
openness and honesty got for him at Christ’s College; he’ll never make
the same mistake again.”

“Damn it,” said Lance irritably, “all this while you haven’t understood
a thing about how I feel. I’m not afraid of anything he might do, for
heaven’s sake! I’m thinking about what they’ll be saying in town.”

“Eh?”

“You haven’t heard those young bloods chat after dinner; I have. They
gossip worse than seamstresses. If one of the chaps is larking about
with a woman, it’s—it’s like a ruddy game. One point for each level of
society higher than you; an extra point if she’s pure or married; if
she’s beneath you, you forfeit points accordingly. If you’re caught you
lose all your accumulated reputation and forfeit about ten; you’d have
to seduce a countess or better to make up for it.”

“Points? Good heavens, not really!”

“No, of course not; I’m just trying to explain to you what it’s like.
Now a thing like this Meadows business … why, it can cling to a man all
his life! I’ve seen it happen. And the worst is, once a thing like that
gets about, the poor victim never hears about it himself. I’ve seen
chaps lose appointments, fail in betrothal arrangements, lose elections
because of a buzz-buzz like that, and all behind a man’s back. Mr.
Barrowbridge, I can’t afford anything like that!” He struck his forehead
suddenly. “My God,—Lilith Axelrood’s laughing already—laughed right in
my face about it!”

“Eh. Now you see before you a penalty of understanding, which breeds
tolerance, which overlooks danger. You’re right, lad. You’re quite
right. Has Meadows told anyone where he is? … eh! No matter, he will,
poor tilted innocent, he will, never thinking he might harm his
benefactor.”

The benefactor got up and took a turn around the room. “I can’t go back
to town yet, nor send him. If I went somewhere else … no, I don’t think
Mr. Beasley would care for that very much; it would be pointless unless
I were seen, talked to people, and I don’t want to disturb matters just
now … dash it all, sir, what can I _do?”_

Not for the first, nor the hundredth time, Barrowbridge said, “There’s a
way out, lad, a way out. All we have to do is think of it.”

So they thought, and they thought. And suddenly Barrowbridge brought his
hand down on his meaty thigh: “Got it!”

“What, sir, what?”

“You’ve got to get involved in a scandal.”

“A scandal?”

“We must most judiciously choose this scandal,” said Barrowbridge
pensively. “Now lad: Identify, delineate.”

“I don’t see how a scan—”

“Don’t you, though? Some escapade, designed to get back to London before
any silly story about Meadows’ being here? Some adventure vivid enough
to be talked about, natural enough to underline your acceptable
appetites, yet harmless enough to do you no discredit in future.”

“But that second black won’t make a white, sir.”

“Ah, it will here. You’ll find that one of the outstanding
characteristics of vice is its specialization. Your sot who drinks
himself into the ground does it generally with a single liquor, the
winehead eschewing brandy and the brandy-bucko scorning wine. Let you be
known as a party to some scandal involving a woman, and your gossips
will have a choice of narratives about you—but a choice, Lanky; one, not
both.”

“But how can we know which they’ll tell?” Lance virtually wailed.

Barrowbridge pulled his nether lip. “It is that element which calls for
the judiciousness of our choice. We must present you as rake, not
defiler; libertine rather than lecher.”

“Libertine—I?”

“Men have made greater sacrifices for king, country and career,” said
the old man dryly.

“And how on earth am I to find just the proper scandal?”

“Manufacture it, lad. I do think that with the careful application of
the _reductio_ we might deduce an ideal, and then devise a path to it
between the high walls of our limitations.”

“You treat it like a—an exercise upon the chessboard!”

“Ay, and therein lies our greatest chance of success. When the sage of
Tarragona said, _Every onset of passion is a di_g_ression from rational
conduct,_ he was speaking of anger; but taking passion at its word, we
find ourselves with a prime coloration for our problem: let it be,
throughout, a course of rational—that is, reasoned—conduct. It will be,
to the public eye, an act of passion; in passion, as in wine, there is
truth. In his cups and on his couch a man reveals himself more than in
the confessional, which is by no means as conducive to revelation.
Whatever you reveal in this act, then, will be publicly regarded as the
truth about you; see to it that reason does not desert you during the
performance. For the time being treat your animal aptitudes, not as
allies, but as enemies, remembering that a wise man gets more use from
his enemies than a fool from his friends.”

Lance bowed his head and opened his very pores to the old man’s counsel.
Many times before he had seen Barrowbridge at work on a problem in just
this fashion—discursive, preparatory, dripping aphorisms and homiletics,
and, while circling his problem, even while passing and re-passing
openings to it which, later, he might use, spiraling relentlessly
nearer. The arrival at the heart of the problem, while delayed, was
inevitable; the problem by then would be far more familiar than
formidable.

“I knew an old sinner in Somerset who had a single genius; he carved
little bears out of wood. I asked him how he did it,” said Barrowbridge,
“and he said ‘Ah lewk an’ lewk at woo-ood until Ah zee Bruin. Then Ah
oon-coover awa’ t’chips off’n.’ This should be our approach. Let us
uncover away all that is superfluous, and we shall be left with what we
can use.

“Let us then eliminate all that might discredit you—the degrading, the
disgusting, the perverse and the ludicrous. I amend that. An element of
the ludicrous might be a desideratum, provided that it is not yourself
who suffers from it. We want, after all, a story worth telling, and a
touch of the ridiculous is like woodruff in sweet wine.

“Let us also eliminate that which might offend the majority, and any
powerful minority. The partner in your venture must be unconnected with
royalty, the Church or the higher nobility. She must not be excessively
tender in her years because that’s felonious, nor excessively aged, for
that would discredit you. She must not be beneath you, for the narrative
would then be of no moment. Should she be your peer, there is nothing to
be gained from that circumstance alone, and the other factors in the
interchange must supply the unusual. It would seem, then, that she must
be someone of good but not powerful family, of high but not exalted
station, of an age in no way unsuited to such activities, and above all,
in no position to prolong matters one moment longer than it takes to
create the scandal.”

“Incredible,” murmured Lance devoutly.

“Don’t interrupt, boy,” said Barrowbridge, who was never happier than at
such moments as this. “So much for the heroine. Now, the occasion. It
should not be too forceful, lest you find yourself vying for honors with
a mere blooded bull. It should not be too abrupt, lest in the telling
you race with the rabbit. It must seem that she, not you, created the
opportunity, and that you, not she, commanded its consummation. It is
the function of a man to yield to his desires, and the duty of a
gentleman to yield to his lady’s; the art of seduction, then, lies in
turning these currents into the same channel and making them confluent
and synonymous. From this we derive that on this occasion you must
clearly perform both function and duty, this being the entire purpose of
our enterprise, the very _coda_ of the legend we are creating.

“Now we can see the goal and the limitations, and that the latter are,
as I have said, walls flanking the course and not obstacles across it.
Your route should be all the more direct for that; which brings up the
last requisite and completes the picture:

“Speed.

_“Quod erat demonstrandum,_ Lanky, and I’d suggest you proceed with
dispatch and without procrastination.”

“What would I do without you?” Lance cried.

“Do without, I imagine. I’m glad you can do with, though; I’ll confess
it. Who was it termed the human brain a ‘wrinkled jelly’? Skeffington?
Richardson? No matter; but it’s a splendid description of what your
friend Barrowbridge has become. Let me lie here shivering totally with
all subtle movements, shielded by the carapace of your house and
nourished by the sanguinary fluxions of our good mute Johnson up and
down the artery of my covered stair; let me he here, I say, white matter
and grey, supplying the total organization pulselessly with mysteries,
conjectures, solutions and escapes. … Let me know what happens, Lanky.”

“That I will, sir, and thank you.”

Beside Lance’s brook at Featherfront ran a bridle path. A mile or so
downstream it met the little road between Titsey and Tatsfield; the
other way, three miles or so, would bring a rider to Sir Gregory
Eustace’s holding.

It might be called a manse, considering the land he owned, which, though
fit only for goats and bark-browsing deer, was considerable in extent;
indeed, it began at the margin of the Featherfront property, which had
been a part of Sir Gregory’s land. Sir Gregory called his estate Minden,
after the battle, which perpetuated itself in his memory because it was
there he had by mistake achieved his baronetcy, having become hopelessly
lost with a contingent of light horse, and emerging suddenly from a
defile, had inadvertently pierced and broken the French lines and
started that famous rout. He was a widower, a very owl of a little man,
with sharp ears, huge eyes and a little hooked beak, and he lived with a
sizable staff of servants, three daughters, their governess (a genteel
spinster named Callow), a small hunting stable and some dogs. His
library was admirable and his chief occupation was a prodigious combing
of it and the making of endless notes, it being his ambition to write
the biography of the City of the Seven Hills from the whelping of the
Wolf of Romulus to the death of the thirteenth Clement. Since the
purchase of Featherfront, Lance had made it a point to ride or walk up
to Minden from time to time; it was a pleasant walk with a glass of good
sack at the end of it; it was a source of London news and talk, for Sir
Gregory went up for a day or so each fortnight; and it was … now—

Dutifully precepted by Barrowbridge, Lance left no possibility
unexamined. What might have been an embarrassment of riches in his
search for a partner in scandal became a most methodical matter after
his talk with the old man. There was an upstairs maid, for example, a
veritable queen among females, a creature of light, who could be
summarily dismissed, because of the elimination of the lower orders. He
was saved cogitation upon Barbara and Bella Eustace, their likes,
dislikes, and potential weaknesses, because of the dictum about ages:
they were eight and ten years old respectively. He did not know how old
Elaine, the elder daughter, was, and he would not ask; she was past
thirteen, which was what was important. The only other female of high
enough station, who also fell within the ‘natural activity’ statute, was
Hepzibah Callow, the governess. Miss Callow had a classical education,
extraordinarily perfect diction, and skin trouble; her father, he heard,
had been an Irish army officer, which seemed on the face of it to
present little altitude until one recalled that the Gunning sisters and
Miss Chudleigh herself came from similar sources. It would seem that the
daughters of Irish officers floated free in the social structure, rather
like literary men and educators; one might never solidly place them as
not gentry, just as merchant baronets and musicians could never quite be
called gentlefolk.

Miss Callow, then, and Elaine Eustace.

Elaine Eustace was totally subject to her father’s control in speech and
movement, but the silent net of his discipline could not contain her
vibrancy, which escaped in little vivid flashes of teeth, of eyes, of
wit and wistfulness. Her hair was gold (and red) in the sun, red (and
gold) by the fire. She seldom looked up at anything which interested
her, really interested her; it was as if she were afraid she could not
contain herself if she opened her eyes; so she would peep between
lowered lashes like some bright bird turning and turning its head behind
bars. On the other hand … there was the warning about involvements
during, and involvements after.

So then … Miss Callow?

Oh dear, he thought. Miss Callow.

He bade his farewells at the conclusion of this most casual of calls,
and walked home in deep thought. He wanted to go straight to
Barrowbridge, and found his patience not broken but badly bent at having
to negotiate a particularly ardent attack of Meadows. This time it was
not as he entered, but before, while crossing the footbridge to his
land. Meadows burst out of the house, half-mad with exhaustion and
enthusiasm; he had for three days and nights been gobbling the dim
contents of old books and slaving over his bubbling messes.
“Paracelsus!” he piped from a hundred feet, capering and galloping
across the bowling green. “My _dear_ chap, I can’t tell you. I can. I
shall.” Almost as an afterthought, he resumed breathing for a time,
clutching both fists together tight under his heart, the while fixing
Lance with eyes so deep-set and far away that they seemed part of some
other-place, like animals peering from a distant wood. “Paracelsus, I’ve
discovered Paracelsus. I’ve read him and read him; read of him, I mean
to say and all that.” He breathed again painfully and shrilly, and then
took Lance’s left biceps in both hands, kneading as he towed the young
man along. “And I never knew what he _meant.”_

“What did he mean?” asked Lance laboriously.

“Nonsense!” cried Meadows, so abruptly that Lance shied like a colt, and
Meadows almost left the ground. “I mean, it’s nonsense about the
philosopher’s stone, transmutation and all that. No, not that, I mean I
believe it can be done, but what’s nonsense is that transmutation is
what alchemy is _for._ It jolly well isn’t I mean to say,” he blethered,
and paused to wipe spittle from the corner of his lip with his shoulder,
“Alchemy is what Paracelsus said, for making medicines. Alchemy,” he
orated, loosing one of his hands to help him, “is chemistry and
chemistry is medicine. Alchemy is medicine, d’you see, what? What? My
dear, dear chap,” he said, replacing the elocutionary hand a
split-second before Lance could free himself, and beginning to knead
again, “it’s a revelation. Bring me the sick, bring me the maimed!”

“My dear, dear chap,” said Lance, unable to keep himself from vicious
mimicry, “don’t you think you ought to get some sleep?”

“Sleep? Sleep? at a time like this? I’ll never sleep again. Yes, thank
you, thank you, that’s what I shall do first. An elixir to banish sleep.
You know what you’ve _done?”_ he squeaked, incredibly adding another
wave of excitement to his hysteria. “You’ve given me a score of years,
just by a wave of your hand. For if we sleep a third of each day, we
sleep a third of a life, and if a life’s threescore years, we’re dead
and useless a third of it, sleeping. I owe you twenty years for your
inspiration, Lance, and I shall pay it, I shall pay it …” and at last he
loosed his host and went toward the laboratory wing at a dead run.

Lance stood watching the thin, ungainly, flapping figure, crossing the
green, crossing the _paille maille_ court, catching his foot in a
wicket, which pulled out but which also tilted the flying alchemist
forward at forty-five degrees. He increased his pace and maintained a
dynamic equilibrium at that angle for fully thirty yards, running faster
and faster until his outstretched hands slammed into the side of the
building, and his head immediately afterward, though not nearly so hard.
Lance saw it rebound, and then Meadows pressed the building away from
him like the good Lord setting aside Satan, turned and weaved through
the door.

Lance rubbed a while at his compressed biceps, and suddenly shuddered
briefly, but quite as violently as a wet dog. He entered the great hall
and quietly crossed to the inside door to the lab and peered through.
Evelyn Meadows was crumpled on a wooden bench, his right hand extended
toward a stirring rod, and an expression of ineffable peace on his dirty
face. He was fast asleep.

Lance sighed and went to the storage for a light blanket, which he
brought back and spread over the slumberer. Softly, softly, like a nurse
soothing the troubled slumber of a sick child, Lance whispered,
“Wretched unnatural swine … why didn’t you _tell_ me?”

He plodded up the covered stair to Barrowbridge.

“Mr. Barrowbridge,” he asked wearily, “would a governess do?”



9.


MISS CALLOW WAS FLATTERED.

Miss Callow had been flattered every day for a week now, what with the
new obedience she got from the girls, the respectful astonishment
granted her by Sir Gregory, and most of all the daily presence of the
grave young godling from Featherfront. Of the latter flattery Lance was
of course aware, since he had planned it. She familiarized him with the
others, gushing out her impressions with all the irresistibility of the
newly open-hearted.

“They peep through the curtains when you come, the little dears. Barby
jumps up and down and says ‘He’s walking! He’s walking!’ or ‘He’s
riding!’ and Bella pushes her away from the window and she cries. Haha!
The dears. Bella asked her father if when he was knighted he was given a
suit of armor. She wanted him to lend you the suit of armor as a sort of
game, so she could see you come riding up in the sunlight, the silly
thing, imagine, armor in these times, and borrowed from a man _his_
size!” She looked up at him and showed her teeth and the edges of her
eyes, neither of which were quite white; her incisors looked like
molars. “And since we’ve been walking every day, they watch me and watch
me, wondering what I do, what I say, that makes you notice me; they obey
so nicely and pay attention every _minute._ And then there’s poor dear
Sir Gregory; I dare say he never noticed me in his life before except as
an item ‘governess’ in his accounts and at his table. Since our little
walks began, I can never so much as pass him in the hall but he stops
and turns and watches me by, as much as to say, how do you do it,
Callow! There’s a pipit”

Lance gravely inspected the flight of a small brown bird which flew
like, and looked like, most other small brown birds his city-bred eyes
had encountered. He made an interested sound, however. Even as alchemy
had been Meadows’ bait, “natural philosophy” had been hers. “Natural
philosophy,” in Hepzibah Callow’s lexicon, was very nearly what would
one day be called “biology.” All living things were within its compass.
The “philosophy” part of it was an untiring effort to link all things
into one great shapely analogy; as the flowers do, so do the bees, and
as the bees, cattle, camels and cormorants; as these do, so should man.
It was a shockingly long time before Lance saw the pitfall in this.
Having little interest in the specifics to begin with, it was only
surprising that he caught up with the generalities when he did.

“Dragonfly,” she would croon, holding the four-winged horror four inches
from his mouth, while, since he would not, his chin retreated and
retreated until he was only neck, with a white frightened gash of a
mouth, from nostrils to collarbone. He was morally certain that the
monster would escape and _zipzip!_ sew up his lips. “You see this
little, ah, probe? It’s a _daddy_ dragonfly. They mate on the wing,
swoo-ooping and climbing,” she would beam. Or a swarm of bees big enough
to pull down a grape-arbor: “The queen’s in there, calling and calling,
and oh! they all want her.” He learned about vixen and she-bears, and
the latter’s proclivity for licking their shapeless young into final
form with their strong wet warm tongues (and heard the words used
strongly, wetly, warmly, by a tongue that shot out and oozed back like a
hermit-crab); he learned about _chad, meati,_ the _fundus_ and the
_sphygnum,_ and a great many other answers to questions he wouldn’t
dream of phrasing.

It was all scholarly, impersonal; she made no direct analogies. She
discussed all things unblushingly because she never touched upon a
single thing upon which contemporary usage demanded a blush. The
analogies were there, however, pervasively, atmospherically there. There
were times when in spite of himself Lance was carried away by the
ubiquity of her intimations, and saw flashes of her world, through which
crawled, climbed, flew, scurried, struggled and strove organ paired with
organ. His mien was calm and his discourse was polite, but underneath he
felt a rising tide of horror as he learned and learned things and
things. _My God,_ he would cry inwardly, _date-palms too?_

He went to Barrowbridge about it. “I can’t catch her up,” he said
ruefully; “The faster I run, the faster she goes, but she’s behind me.
Surely this isn’t what you had in mind.”

“Seize the initiative, boy. Push a little sooner, a little harder than
she bargains for.”

“Push a capful of wind over a precipice,” Lance grumbled. “You haven’t
seen her.”

“No.”

So he brought her. It meant only a few minutes’ longer walk, time enough
to apologize for the primitive state of the residence of a scholar and a
scientist. Mindful of the old man’s counsel, he put an arm about her
shoulders as he explained. As soon as he had finished his statement she
made this speech: “I have never done this before. However, if you feel
as I do that there are currents in nature which should not be denied,
and if you will be ordinarily civil to me in my ignorance, I should be
glad to learn the mortal version of the dragonflies’ coupled flight.”
That is what she said, “coupled flight.” Lance took his arm off her
shoulder and walked holding it slightly away from his side, not trusting
its effect on people it touched.

Meadows broke out of the house as they came into view, turned right
about and broke in again. Lance led Miss Callow to the laboratory door
and they entered just in time to see Meadows’ left heel flip out of
sight. Miss Callow marched to the center of the tall cluttered room and
moved her two tense hands together and upward as if they were full of
sand which she was letting trickle out between the quivering fingers.
“Ah, science,” she intoned. “Science …” and then turned to Lance, baring
her front fangs in a worshipful smile. Over her shoulder Lance saw
Meadows’ head appear in the doorway, its hollow eyes fixed on Miss
Callow’s three-quarter rear profile.

“Come,” said Lance, and went toward the doorway. By the time they
reached it, Meadows was disappearing out the front. He seated her on the
settle before the fireplace and excused himself, and went round through
the kitchen to the covered stair. At its foot he paused, his nostrils
aquiver. The air was spoonable-thick with the combined odors of rotten
celery and rancid butter. He looked about and saw the mute girl,
Johnson, perched on a high stool by a window, which she had closed as
far as possible on her arm, leaving a bandaged portion outside in the
fresh air. He called a question to her, but she merely turned dumb brute
eyes to him and away. He shrugged and mounted.

He found Barrowbridge lying in bed next the wall with his eye fixed to
his gimlet-hole. “I say,” said the barrister, “these are barefaced
times, enough so that the _Monthly Review_ hints it sinful that our poor
mad George III should be left unshaven. Yet look at yon paramour of
yours, Lanky. Methinks if a body must wear a mustache it ought to be
kept trimmed.”

“Ay, she’s a beauty,” said Lance, and explained what had happened for a
mere touch upon the shoulder.

“Jolly good thing you didn’t touch her knee,” said the old man in high
amusement. “She’d bring you a litter of twelve.”

With some heat Lance snapped, “I’d count myself fortunate could I lie
abed and be a sage while you cast your innocence at yon hairy limbo.”

“Advice,” said Barrowbridge, leveling his eyebrows, “is worth generally
what you pay for it. I was in error to give it to you gratis, Lanky; you
have it devalued. There is also a saying, I think Portugee, to the end
that one should never give advice, lest one be blamed for the
consequences to fools who follow it.”

“Mr. Barrowbridge,” said Lance piteously, “what am I going to do?”

The old man applied his eye to the gimlet-hole again, and turned away
shaking his head. Then he was still for a while. His eyes snapped open.
“There’s a—”

“—way out, if only you can think of it,” finished Lance for him.

Unsmiling, but with his eyes a-twinkle, Barrowbridge said, “Thank you,
lad. Now, do you escort the lady home, and we’ll apply ourselves to the
matter.”

“Very well … I know you will, sir, and thank you. … What’ve you done to
Johnson? She smells like an exhumation.”

“Not I! ’Twas your associate there. She burned herself on a faggot in
the stove and he’s treating it. He has a theory, I think, that evil has
a magnetism for evil, and he’s applied yon serpent-spit to her to draw
the poison.”

“Heaven preserve her!” Lance bolted down the stairs and ran to the
servant. He knocked open the casement and drew her away from it; the
odor from the dressing fairly knocked him down. He held a handkerchief
to his mouth and with his free hand tore off the dressing. The forearm
was flayed and shiny in a patch six inches long, and covered with a
yellow-green tallowy substance which was obviously the author of the
stench. He plunged the arm into a deep firkin of wash-water where at
least it was sealed off from the air, took two great handsful of soft
soap, and working under water, scrubbed away the medicament, while the
mute made screaming faces. When he drew the arm out it still smelled
worse than a living thing should but at least one might stay within a
township of it. He picked up the bandage from the floor with a stick and
consigned it to the flames, and found a fair white cloth to bind the arm
with.

“Now do you scrub yon greasy spot where the bandage lay, and get that
firkin downstream of here. Don’t bring it back, either. And after this
conceal thy wounds from Mr. Meadows; come to me or to Mr. Barrowbridge.
See you don’t go near the laboratory until you get that bandage as dirty
as the one I burned.”

Tears came silently; the heavy creature pressed his hand shyly and
turned away. Well hang it, he thought, where would we get another mute
if she took a poisoning?

He went round to the great hall, and stopped dead at the sight which
confronted him. Miss Callow was on the settle where he had left her, but
now she sat bolt upright and even a little back-leaning. She had a
forced and uncertain smile on her face and was saying, “How do you
_do?”_ in the tones of one who has made the same observation at least
three times with no response. And advancing on her wordlessly, a step at
a time with stops between, was Meadows. As a child Lance had learned
that if one street urchin wishes to disconcert another he need only
stare fixedly at the other’s forehead, close over the eyes. The victim
will try to meet the other’s gaze and cannot; nothing makes a man appear
more mad than a fixed and unreachable stare like that. He saw here that
one need not be an urchin to be disconcerted. Miss Callow was more than
disconcerted; if she didn’t bolt she would faint, and now. “Meadows!”

Meadows glanced at him and the spell was broken. “Mr. Meadows, Miss
Callow.”

Meadows said, “That face—”

“It impresses me too,” said Lance quickly, and took Miss Callow’s hand.
“We’d best be getting back to Minden.” As she turned eagerly and
gratefully to him, Lance understood what had happened. Meadows,
irresistibly off on his Hippocratic urge, had seen the sprinkle of acne
across her brow and down the sides of her nose. Single-minded as he was,
he must have concluded that this was a patient; and with dedication such
as his, a patient is not a person, but a disease. The chances are good
that there had been nothing in his mind at all as he crossed the room
toward her except lists of ingredients from his impulsive apothecary.
None of this was explicable, hence: “He’s interested in you,” in a quick
whisper, and to the anxious Meadows, “I’ll bring her back. Soon.” and he
whisked her out.

“He frightened me,” she said candidly when they reached the footbridge.

“Only mysteries fear a scientist,” said Lance; it was one of
Barrowbridge’s saws. “He was interested in you, that’s all.”

“My,” she breathed, “what has come over me these days?”

Nothing yet, he said, but silently. He felt miserable. He liked plans
which worked out.

“We needn’t walk so fast,” she said a little breathlessly. “Sir Gregory
has gone to London with Miss Elaine, and cook can take care of the other
two.”

“I must hurry back. He’ll need me. He’s doing a great work.”

“Oh. Oh dear, what is it?”

“I can’t tell you until it’s finished.”

“Oh of course; I’m sorry. …You needn’t walk all the way to Minden,
Captain. Not if it will obstruct your work.”

“Why, I couldn’t think of—”

“Please. I shall be safe; it’s still broad daylight. And with Sir
Gregory not there—well, you needn’t. Really.”

He knew she didn’t mean a word of it, but he stopped and doffed his hat.
“Very well, then; it’s most thoughtful of you, Miss Callow.”

“Good-by,” she said wistfully, and, “Tomorrow?”

He had a horrid intuition that if he denied her she would follow him
home. “Tomorrow,” he said, the breathy, stringed-instrument way.

He watched her go, heartily wishing she would fall into the brook,
wishing he were back in London. London … whatever was going on in London
by this time? He must ride for the post.

He strolled slowly back to the house. A hangdog Meadows awaited him. “I
say, old man, I was a boor. No, don’t be decent about it. I was. I don’t
know what’s got into me.”

“You’ve been working too hard.”

“Perhaps I ought to go back to London and—”

“I haven’t been helping you enough, that’s all.”

“Oh, you have! I shouldn’t be able to do anything without your ideas,
your confidence in me.”

“What confidence?” He couldn’t help it; it slipped out.

“Ah,” said Meadows, “you’re pulling my leg. I say, that Miss Fallow—”

“Callow. She isn’t fallow,” said Lance with deep conviction.

“I just couldn’t do anything else. Those eruptions on her; my, what I
wouldn’t give to have them here to work on. What is it?”

“Twonk’s disease,” said Lance soberly.

“Oh dear. Well, the poor thing. I’d like to help.”

“Perhaps she’s better off the way she is.”

“You can’t mean that!”

“I don’t suppose I can.” He turned to the door. “I have to go—you know.”
He went inside.

“Brave chap,” murmured Meadows. He went to the lab to see if he could
find, in Paracelsus, a reference to Twonk’s disease.

Upstairs, Lance flung himself into Barrowbridge’s great chair. The
barrister looked at him questioningly and Lance simply shook his head.

“I wish I could help, lad.”

“That’s what Meadows said.”

“He didn’t!”

“That he did. I told him she had Twonk’s disease, and off he scurried to
invent some foul concoction to cure her.”

_“Got it!”_

“Good heavens, sir!” Lance sank back; Barrowbridge’s sudden exclamation
had bent him like a bow.

“A scandal you wanted, a scandal you’ll get.” Barrowbridge began to
laugh, and then he began to talk.

It was warm and dark. The great hall was dimly lit by two candles, a
lanthorn and the fireplace, and some stray light from the laboratory,
where the interminable simmering and kilning proceeded regardless of the
hour.

Lance led Miss Callow in. They paused and listened; all was quiet. He
had extracted her from Minden without being seen, in the best romantic
tradition—a pebble at her window, a whispered word. They had hardly
spoken to one another on the way down, except for the heavy pulse that
beat against him as he held her before him on his horse.

He took her hand and led her to the central bedroom, taking one of the
candles as they passed the fireplace. Inside the room, he put down the
candle and took her by the shoulders.

“Don’t be afraid,” he whispered.

She tried to speak, apparently could not. She shook her head.

“You get ready,” he said. He made a gesture.

“Don’t leave me alone.”

“You won’t be alone for long.” He slipped back into the hall, back
through the kitchen, and up the stairs.

“That quickly?” Barrowbridge whispered.

Lance snapped his fingers to show how quickly. Barrowbridge got
comfortable by his gimlet-hole. “You made no promises, nothing
specific,” he ascertained.

“Nothing. I was completely misunderstood,” said Lance with satisfaction.

There came a stirring. “Look!” Lance dived across the bed and took over
the gimlet-hole. He saw Meadows stop in the light, look to the right,
look to the left, and then approach the bedroom, bearing in both hands
before him, like a crown on a cushion, a capacious earthen bowl.

He went in.

Lance got a confused glance of rapidly moving figures, and then
Barrowbridge’s hard old shoulder shunted him aside. There came a short
piercing shriek and a reiterated _“No! No! No!”_ and Meadows’ irritated
squeak, “Hold still, dash it all! I won’t hurt you!”

“Once around,” murmured Barrowbridge. “Twice around.”

“Please!” Reluctantly, Barrowbridge yielded.

Lance saw the third round, the fourth. Miss Callow, revealing an
astonishingly hairy body covered with great gobbets of yellow-green
grease, shot past the bedroom door, with Meadows in hot pursuit, ladling
further gobbets of his evil ointment at her and shrilling at her to hold
fast. At last she slipped and fell; Meadows, turning sharply to follow
her, slipped also and inverted his receptacle over them both. Miss
Callow scuttled under the bedstead and out the other side, through the
bedroom door, down the great hall, and out into the night as fast as her
sturdy legs could carry her. Meadows staggered to the bedroom door and
hung there panting and dripping.

A perfectly monstrous smell rose up and smote them. Lance coughed and
stuffed a corner of his handkerchief into the hole.

The smell began to penetrate the walls. “Phoo! I never thought of that!”

“Why did he have to use so much?”

“You know Meadows. If a little is good, a lot is wonderful.”

“Well this is wonderful,” choked Barrowbridge.

“I’m sorry, sir. I have to get out.”

“Why not stay here and be a sage and let me go out?”

“I’m sorry, sir.” And Lance stumbled to the door.

Barrowbridge lay back and grinned wryly, and began to use the mechanisms
he had learned for controlling pain and despair. They worked quite well
on this minor thing.

Of Miss Callow there was no sign. Lance kept his distance and called
from the other end of the hall. “The devil, Meadows! You didn’t have to
bath her in the stuff!”

“She wouldn’t stay still,” said Meadows. He was still breathing hard.
“Didn’t she _want_ to heal those nasty things?”

“She may not have understood the exact nature of the treatment. Didn’t
you explain at all?”

“I thought you said you’d do that.”

“I said I’d get her ready. … I’m sorry, Meadows, but we’ve got to clean
this mess up, though short of burning down the house—”

“It isn’t so bad,” said Meadows judiciously. “I’ve had really bad smells
going. I remember—”

“This is quite bad enough. Come.”

Together they stripped the room, taking the bed apart, the carpet, the
hangings, the chairs and the table. The evil decoction was splashed high
on the walls, on the dresser mirror. Everything went. They dragged it
all outside and piled it to be burned on the morrow when a fire would
attract less attention. Lance set Meadows to smearing the walls and
floors with soft soap, preparatory to their being scrubbed by Johnson in
the morning, and disgustedly went to bed in the carriage house, curled
up on the cushions of the trap.

It had not amused him, it had not pleased him. It had only been a lot of
disgusting work.

“But worth it, I suppose,” he thought wearily. “Whatever story she
tells.”

Midmorning, and the sound of wheels.

“I say, Courtenay, there’s a—”

“I see it. Meadows, clear out, will you? I’ll handle this.”

“Who—it’s that chap up the path, Sir Gregory Eustace, isn’t it?”

“It is, and there’s about to be the devil to pay,”

“But it was my—”

“Damn it, this is bad enough without you cluttering things up. Out of
sight—_jump!”_ he barked in the tones a bull-voiced, younger
Barrowbridge used to use on his terrified office boy. Meadows muttered,
“I say,” but faintly, and jumped.

Sir Gregory picked his way across the bowling green. He was wearing
light brown velvets with white piping and a powdered wig under his brown
tricorne; he looked out of place, both for the place and the time of
day. He seemed more than ever like an owl—soft, silent, a little
ludicrous, unquestionably carnivorous.

“Good morning, Sir Gregory.”

“Ah, Courtenay.” His voice was flat, uninflected. He always spoke in
short bursts of syllables, rapidly, with long spaces between.
Unquestionably, he did not hoot. “Unpleasant business. Nice day. Too
bad.”

“Too bad,” said Lance, utilizing still another of his mentor’s
techniques.

“Unforgivable. All over London. Nine-day wonder. Girl’s a fool. Want you
to know full extent. Damage. Never heard of such nonsense.”

Lance was silent this time. He shrugged humbly.

“Got her here. Carriage. Face to face, what? Whole story. Only right.”

“As you say, sir.”

“Deuced humiliating.”

“Yes, sir, it is, and I couldn’t be more sorry,” said Lance in tones
which brought sincerity upgushing from his very shoe-tops.

Sir Gregory raised his hand and made a slight gesture. He was apparently
being watched from the carriage, because the door opened instantly and
the passenger alighted, and with head bowed, with reluctant feet, with
shamed tears half-dried on the blushing cheeks, Elaine Eustace crossed
the bowling green.

_Elaine Eustace?_

Lance stepped back a pace to lay his hand on the wooden balustrade
behind him—something solid, something real. Numbly, he waited.

Frozen, her father waited.

She came and stood before them, put her hands behind her, and hid her
face in her ruffled collar.

“Tell him, Elaine. Everything.”

The imprisoning lashes raised far enough to release a swift screened
search for Lance’s face, and dropped again. She said, in a soprano
whisper, “I—” and then even that faint sound failed her, and she stood
crying silently.

“Come, girl!”

Her mouth opened and closed; nothing else about her moved but her slow
tears.

Sir Gregory made an extremely small but acutely impatient gesture. Lance
managed to get his eyes off the girl and meet the frosted owl’s eyes.
Sir Gregory moved his head sharply and Lance followed the gesture, and
the baronet, a few yards. The girl remained standing precisely where she
was, facing the nothingness where the men were not, just as helpless,
just as crushed.

“Dammit,” said the baronet, and wet his little lips. “Heavy father. Not
my style. Don’t know how, ackshly. What? Can’t stand this. But.” He wet
his lips again. Lance thought after a time that he had no more to say,
it took him so long. “But Right’s right, what? Can’t have it. Agree?” He
flicked an unhappy glance at the girl. “Make amends. Put it right. Want
to have a shot? I can’t. I’ll wait.”

Very, very carefully, Lance phrased his question. “Exactly what do you
want me to do, sir?”

“Get the story. All of it.” Suddenly the owl countenance looked
downdrawn and miserable. “No mother, y’know. Dashed nuisance. Go on, go
on. Don’t take any. Nonsense, what?”

“I’ll—try, sir.”

Sir Gregory turned away and turned back. “I say, Courtenay.”

“Yes, sir.”

“No need to be harsh, what? Sensitive, girls. Never know.” He made an
abrupt, disgusted sound and strode back up to the carriage as fast as
his neat little legs would carry him.

Then he returned to the girl. What prompted him to do so, he did not
know, but he reached out and took her hand. He led her away from the
house to the grove of willows and poplars which grew by the stream, and
as if she were made of blown glass, helped her onto the wide swing which
hung over the bank. She was submissive, almost inert, but once he had
her ensconced and had slipped to the seat beside her, she gave a funny,
little-girl wiggle and hunkered back a more comfortable inch. Then she
was still again, watching with her nearly closed eyes the hands on her
lap, which lay strangely, not folded but one upon the other with the
palms up. She had stopped crying.

One of her curls fell forward off her shoulder and swung to her cheek,
where it clung.

Lance said softly, “Your father wants you to tell me something. Tell me
whatever you like.”

She said nothing.

“Maybe you’d rather not tell me,” Lance said, rather stupidly, he
thought. “But if you don’t, I’ll have to know what to say to Sir
Gregory.”

Still she said nothing and made no move, but by some extra sense, he
knew there was a change. She was no longer just sitting; she was
waiting.

Impulsively, recalling more with his fingers than with his mind how it
had been to take her hand, he said, “Would you like to hold my hand
while you tell me?”

She said, not moving her head and barely her mouth, “Da can see.”

“I think that would be all right.”

“Not if I reached for your hand.”

“Well then!” and he took her hand. She then raised her lashes and looked
at him with her eyes wide open. He all but gasped. He had never seen her
eyes before. He had hardly seen her before. The thing lasted perhaps a
tenth of a second, and perhaps its effect on him was neither deep nor
important, but he knew it was permanent. After that bright blaze, her
eyes hid away again and she gave her gaze back to the hand he had left
in her lap.

“Now can you tell me what this is about?”

“I don’t know. I … want to.”

“Then do.”

“I want to tell you all of it.” Her voice was steady but almost
inaudible, and pitched surprisingly low for a child. If she was a child.
He tried very hard to imagine how this must be for her, an unaccustomed
exercise for him. “But there’s a part I can’t say,” she whispered.

He recalled how Barrowbridge used to shock the truth out of reluctant
clients, and tried a very gentle version of the same: “What’s the part
you can’t say? _Say it!”_

“I love you.” She laughed then, perhaps four pure clear syllables before
the tears returned most unfairly, without warning, so that she choked
and had to cough. He had no clean handkerchief to offer (and for that,
made a solemn vow) and she tried awkwardly to reach one which peeped out
of her puffed left sleeve with her free left hand. He released the hand
he held but she would not remove it, so he reached over and plucked out
the handkerchief and handed it to her. “Oh dear, I’m just awful,” she
said miserably, and in the same breath, without pause, and with nothing
but joy, “I said it, didn’t I?”

“I’m very pleased you said it. Is that what your father wanted you to
tell me?”

“I don’t think so. I have to tell you what I did yesterday.” There
followed a continuous rush of words so rapid and confusing that at first
Lance was lost totally, and his impulse was to stop her and make her
start over. But then he began picking up things from context, until
abruptly the whole picture cleared: “Barby that’s my sister thought of
the armor,” was the way she began, “and that made me hurt inside because
it was silly but it was a very beautiful and right thing to think about
you and I should have thought of it, and I hated her because she did it
instead. Bella that’s my other sister always saw you coming up the path,
riding or walking, every time you came, early, late, Barby saw you
first, and that hurt me inside too because I was the one who should have
seen you coming every time if I really love you I’d _know_ when you were
coming and I’d hate to think I didn’t.” The blaze of eyes came and was
gone, so quickly that he almost missed it. “I hurt and that was silly
because they’re just children and don’t know _how_ to love or anything
like that. Then I hurt about Callow, _Miss_ Callow I should say, she had
you to herself all the time almost every single day for hours and hours.
But I thought about that and it stopped hurting quite so much because
who could love Miss Callow? and besides I suddenly thought you were with
Miss Callow so you could talk and talk about me. _Please_ don’t say if
you did or didn’t, I don’t want to know.” She swung a foot, pointed the
toe and swung it again, failing to reach the turf. “Swing us. Please?”

“I beg your—? Oh.” He set them to swinging gently. Her left hand still
slept curled in her lap like a pink shell, and still she spoke down into
it, gazed down into it, as if filling it carefully with the little seeds
of her words. “So I hurt about Barby and about Bella and about Callow
excuse me, _Miss_ Callow. Then Da took me to London and I thought of
something so wonderful I almost couldn’t sleep the whole night before.
And I did it, I never thought everybody would be upset. I told
everybody, just everybody I could, that I was to be married. Married,
married, married to you.” This time it was not a blaze, a flash; it was
a long, careful, wide-eyed examination of his face, his mouth, the tilt
of his head, up to his hair, down to his chin and around its point.
During it he sat steady and watched her eyes doing this careful thing,
knowing that the slightest misconstrued quiver of a cheek, shift of a
lip, tension of jaw and temple, might wound her beyond bearing. He was
not aware of trying not to wound her; he simply knew he could. He did
not. When she dropped her gaze it was like putting down a weight; her
very shoulders slumped with relief.

“Da began to hear about it at teatime, and oh, dozens of times after
that. People just flocked around us. Some of them knew you. Da was kind
while they were doing it. He told them they must have me mixed up with
someone else. Or he joked, he said, “Yes, and I’m to marry the Princess
of Wales.” He never, he never once said I was a little liar. And thief
too.”

_“Thief?”_

“The ring. Oh—da said I must tell you specially about the ring and show
it to you.” Deftly, she unbuttoned a small tight pocket in her waistband
and extracted a cushion of silk and handed it to him. Being as careful
as she had been not to remove the contact of their hands, he worked it
open and found himself staring thunderstruck at a curiously wrought
ring, the only one carrying both silver and gold that he had ever
instinctively liked. And it bore a diamond cut like a teardrop, an
immense thing weighing seven karats or better. “It was Mother’s ring,”
she explained. “I took it the night before we left, and then wherever we
went, whenever I could be out of sight for a second, I told people.”

“—that we were engaged, you and I, and with this?”

She nodded briefly, and tumbled along with her narrative, and a good
thing too; Lance didn’t know whether to laugh or drop his jaw or what to
say; he sat listening, and watching the hard beams of the jewel as the
swing shifted about amongst the leaf-shadows and the freckled sun
between. Oh God, how they must be talking in London! And Barrowbridge
had been looking for scandal, had he? “Da was kind when the people were
talking to us but all the way back in the carriage—_all_ the way back—he
told me how wicked it was for me to do that. To be a liar and a thief
was only the first small part of it, he said. He said I might have done
you some terrible damage. He said it wasn’t fair to a young man to tell
the world he had such a stone. He said you’d have every right to be
angry. What’s a jactitation?”

“A _what?”_

“You frightened me! … Didn’t I say it right?”

“Who told you about jactitation?”

“I don’t know. Somebody. Everybody. They’re all talking about it in
London. Somebody got one,” she said, uncaring. “They said you could get
one against me, about four different people said that to me, to tease.
What is it?”

“A tease,” he said, and smiled it away. _So somebody got one,_ he
exulted. The exultation was sufficient to handle this and any other
situation which might present itself this wonderful day. “Is that all
you were to tell me?”

“Yes.”

“Am I angry?”

“You … you don’t _look_ angry,” she said hopefully.

“Come along to your father and we’ll see how angry I am.”

She said, as if she were still in the throes of her narrative, as if she
had not claimed to have finished it, “And he said the worst thing I
might have done would be to spoil it for you if you were engaged to
someone else.”

At that he laughed. “I’m not, however. Would you be sorry if you’d done
that one thing, though?”

“I keep giving you things to hate me for …” she said, appalled, and, “No
I wouldn’t; I’d be glad, but don’t tell Da I said that.”

He laughed again, slipped off the swing, held out both his hands. She
took them and skipped down and for a perilous moment held tight and
stood close; he thought he was going to kiss her and he thought that she
was going to cry. “Don’t cry,” he whispered to her. “If you cry, you’re
a child.”

“I’m almost fifteen,” she said coolly, and then she did cry, two hot
little tears on each side. She scrubbed angrily at them with her
handkerchief. “I’m just being sentimental,” she pouted, for reasons of
her mysterious own.

He took her hand and because he knew she wanted to be stately and
chastened, he perversely ran with her up to the carriage, so that she
arrived high-colored and laughing and begging him to stop. He saw the
delight in the baronet’s face and the swift overlay of the
disciplinarian. “Your daughter, sir,” he said in courtly fashion,
handing her up.

“Have you told Captain Courtenay everything?”

“Yes, Da.”

“I accept responsibility, Captain. If I may make amends. Letters to
anyone. Restitution. What?”

“You may grant a great favor, sir.”

“Granted. Quite. What is it?”

“But it would be granted to Miss Elaine, sir, and not to me.”

“Ask.”

“Punish her no more. She now understands, and I am quite unharmed.”

Down climbed the baronet, and brought his again unreadable little face
close to Lance’s. “That favor’s granted neither of you, but to me. Well
you know it.” And Lance knew he had played this right, like a
Barrowbridge.

He said, “So much the better, sir; it will make us all three happy.”

“Very deft tongue. Future for you. Assist any way. Call on me.”

“You are most kind, Sir Gregory.”

“Nonsense,” said the baronet, climbed into his carriage and was off.
Lance saw the girl’s head as it was put shyly out of the carriage and
snatched swiftly back.

He returned to the house, shaking his head and smiling to himself.

“Meadows! I say—Meadows!”

No answer. He went to the door of the laboratory wing. “Meadows?”

Something moved in a far corner. Lance went in, laughing. “You can come
out now, old chap. It’s—oh dear.”

He found himself face to face with Hepzibah Callow.



10.


“MISS CALLOW!”

“I’ve come back,” she said, and showed her teeth. Her eyes were narrowed
and they glittered. She was garbed in a voluminous drapery of an
oriental cast and a material heavy and ornate enough to be totally
unsuitable to the time of year. On second inspection, it was, in its
toga-like folds, totally unsuitable to be a garment at all. “It’s a
tapestry,” she informed him, aware of his inspection, “from the north
room at Minden. The upstairs maid put it out to sun behind the stables
yesterday and must have forgotten it. Thank heaven.”

“We … we burned your clothes,” he said, as the only thing he could think
of to say. Which reminded him of the reason for their cremation, which
brought back the veritable diapason of that earth-shaking,
petal-shriveling, light-bending miasma, which in turn made it clear to
him that he recognized the odor not exclusively in memory. Miss Callow
still smelt like the midden of an almshouse.

“Ah, clothes,” she said disdainfully, and before he could shriek,
_Stop!_ she shrugged her shoulders and let the heavy folds fall to her
waist. “Look,” she said breathlessly, “Look at me.”

He had averted his face. “Miss Callow, please …”

“Look, look,” she said insistently. “In art modesty has no place, nor in
nature, nor in science …” She drew a deep breath. “Nor in science, I
say. Look, look, look what you’ve done to me.”

So he looked and absorbed first the fact that she was neither bird nor
reptile; but this was a generality. His second observation was that the
skin affliction on her face was indeed repeated on her body, as Meadows
had reported, though it was slight and looked harmless. It was also
un-cured. “It’s wonderful,” she said, closing her eyes ecstatically,
“isn’t it? Wonderful …”

“I suppose it is,” he said inanely, “What is wonderful?”

“Why the, you know. Hair,” she said hardily; art, science, or natural
philosophy to the contrary, “hair” was to her an improper word when
describing anything below the earlobes.

“I don’t see any hair,” he said bluntly.

“Isn’t it _wonderful?”_

He understood. “Meadows!” he bellowed. “Mead—_dows!”_

“Ek?” said the window timidly. He looked and saw the top of Meadows’
head, down to the eyebrows, protruding above the sill.

“Come here, Meadows, hurry!”

The head rose slowly and steadily as if floated in a filling bowl until
the eyes were discovered. “My word!” it said faintly, and disappeared.

“Half a mo’,” Lance said to the governess, flung out of the laboratory
and collared Meadows, who was scuttling pellmell for the footbridge.
“Come back, hang it all!”

“She’ll put out my eyes!” wailed Meadows.

_“I_ will if you don’t come. Cheer up, old chap; it’s all right.” He
walked the reluctant alchemist back into the laboratory where, faced
with the vision which stood in the center of the room like some mad
variation of the new classicism, Meadows put his eyes in his fists and
his fists on Lance’s shoulderblades and they approached her like a
quadruped.

“Ah, Mr. Meadows. Look—do look,” coaxed Miss Callow, making it even more
unavoidable. Meadows, peeked, ducked, rose, peered, then at last set
aside his human screen and frankly examined the specimen. “Oh, I say,
Courtenay, this is extrawdnry. No hair, what?”

“A miracle,” said Miss Callow. “Magic. Look here.” She turned her head
and put back her side locks. She had a bald spot as broad as a hand on
the back of her head. “Even here. Not that I mind. My fault, really; I
wasn’t helping. You, and you, dear Lance, are the two most tactful
gentlemen I have ever met.”

Lance had thought himself beyond shock, but this proved him wrong.
“We’re _what?”_

“Ah, that’s like you, modest, too,” she beamed. “You knew all along that
you couldn’t mention such a thing as my—as all that, well, hair. You
knew so much better than I what would help, and how to go about it. Is
it … off for good, do you imagine?”

Lance and Meadows met one another’s eyes; Meadows shrugged. “Perhaps
not,” Lance translated. “But Meadows can make up more for you if you
ever—I say, Meadows, you _can_ make up more?”

“I certainly jolly well positively—I really don’t know,” said Meadows.
“I say, she—that is, it does smell a bit.”

“Come along with me, Miss Callow. I’ll have Johnson sluice you down. She
did wonders with the bedroom walls this morning.” Miss Callow started to
follow him, almost stumbled on the dragging ends of her drapery, and
brought them up over her shoulders with, Lance thought, some reluctance.
He squired her into the kitchen and gave explicit instructions to
Johnson, whose eyes and nostrils vied with one another for the most
expansion while he talked. He left them and returned to the laboratory,
where Meadows was already at work mixing.

“Jolly good job. Meadows. What’s in the filth—the stuff, anyway?”

“A lot of things,” said Meadows abstractedly, clearing off a bit of
bench-space with a sweep of his forearm. “I’ve a bit left in the bottom
of this bowl.” He raised the lid of the bowl and Lance sprang and
pressed it down with both hands.

“Well, d’ye suppose you could work up some more and keep track and write
out a receipt, so much of this, so much of that?”

“If you’d like.”

“I’d like,” said Lance. “Meadows, m’boy, you have discovered how to turn
rancid goose-grease into gold. If you can get that receipt we’ll hire
somebody to put it up for us in little round boxes and sell it in the
apothecary shops for two shillings an ounce.”

“I say, what a lark!”

“Well then, call it a lark if you will. But do it. I’ll take care of all
the trading part, and share with you, say twenty percentum to eighty?”

“I wouldn’t think of taking such a share,” said Meadows. “Not from you,
my dear chap.”

“You deserve it. After all, you invented it.”

“I couldn’t have, without you.”

“I can’t argue money with you, old man,” Lance said warmly, wondering if
he could hold the fool at seventy-five.

“Well, just make mine ten percentum,” said Meadows. “I say, I must open
this flask of ox-musk now, and I rather think you won’t care for it.”

Lance retreated, exultant.

So was launched one of the happiest periods of Lance Courtenay’s
life—five quietly eventful years, which began with the receipt of a
letter from Beasley, enclosed in a heavy packet of half banknotes, the
government-approved method of sending currency to foil the highwayman:

  _Mr. Lance Captain Courtenay, dear Sir:_

  _Herewith my warmest Compliments and the inclosed, id est £400 in
  banknotes duly halved, the rest despatched by post rider to Messrs.
  Worthington of Westerham, the which I understand is within an hour’s
  ride from your holding. Mr. Gerald Worthington is apprised of your
  coming, and in possession of a description of you, a tracing of your
  Signature-in-Hand, and a receipt on which I trust you will make your
  Mark and return to me._

  _By which you will have deduced, my Dear Sir, the successful
  conclusion of our Enterprise. Having submitted her Complaint against
  Mr. Augustus John Hervey to the Ecclesiastical Court, Milady Chudleigh
  did thereupon swear unto her Spinsterhood. Mr. Hervey, who was there
  present, did accept the Censure of said Court in good part, and give
  his Word that he would henceforth and forever Cease and Desist from
  repetition of the Offense, to wit, boastfully and groundlessly
  Publishing as a Fact a Relationship now held, in view of said oath, to
  be a Nullity._

  _Milady and the good Evelyn Pierrepont, Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull,
  entered into Matrimony on the 17th instant and on the 18th did embark
  for Calais, accompanied by Miss Axelrood, who at our last Meeting sent
  you her Affectionate Regards._

  _Please remember my Suggestion concerning a chair for you in my
  Offices, should such Activity appeal to you at any future time. It has
  been Edifying and Pleasant to be, and is to remain,_

  _Yr. Obt. Svt, Sir,_

  _Buggley Beasley._

It was Lance’s Midas phase. Everything he touched throve and showered
him with success. Evelyn Meadows departed to institute production
facilities for what was nearly called My Darling Courtenay Hair and
Stubble Ointment for Gentlemen and Ladies—a christening suggestion by
Miss Callow and approved by Meadows—but which at length reached the
market as Milady Hepzibah’s Salve, a Hound to the Hairs, when Miss
Callow was at length convinced that Lance, as young country gentleman,
could not afford to be connected publicly with a proprietary toiletry.
Miss Callow left her post and followed Meadows to London, partly because
of her idolatry, and partly to be near a source of supply, for she grew
hair at an amazing rate. She became so anxious for the success of the
enterprise that she took it upon herself to represent it in the back
rooms of apothecaries all over the County of London, where in the
interest of science she exhibited her calculated pattern of pilation and
depilation to startled shopkeepers.

She was, indeed, one of the happiest happenstances of those fine years.
For example, when Evelyn Meadows fled to America, she took over the Miss
Hepzibah business and trebled it in a month, for all her pique at Lance,
who had arranged (through Sir Gregory) the position of Collection
Officer in the Tax Office in Boston so that Meadows could be kept out of
trouble while his Cousin Charles cooled down. Cousin Charles had come
bursting out of Milan looking for Evelyn’s ears to box, for having been
idling in the Downs while their inheritance was snapped out from under
them by the infamous Miss Chudleigh. He even came to Featherfront
looking for Evelyn, without success. He was a precise little man who
affected linen without a pleat, a ruffle, or a single seam more than it
took to hold it together. He left a message for Evelyn to the effect
that if their uncle predeceased the new Countess and left her with all
that money to spend, he, Charles, would flay him, Evelyn, with a
shoehorn even if it took a week. He then returned to Milan.

Wonderful years … there was what came to be known as the Hobby. Perhaps
it was Beasley who caused it, through the letter he got from Lance
acknowledging the £400, in which he thanked the barrister and declined
his offer: … _I am interested in the Law only as it piques my Curiosity,
and should be considered as a Collector thereof._ Or perhaps
Barrowbridge, in drafting the letter for him, secretly hoped for such a
result. However it came about, Lance gained a small, highly select, and
quiet reputation for being able to come up with the most surprising
solutions for knotty problems at law—or in avoidance thereof.
“Astonishin’ chap,” the young bloods at the Fish and Staff would tell
one another. “Get into a tacky patch, tip off old Lance, let him buzz
off to the hills and ruminate a bit, and next thing y’know, he’s come up
with the kind of answer nobody expects—’specially if you didn’t expect
any answer at all. And know what? by Jove, you can’t give him a penny
for it.”

You couldn’t give him a penny for it. But you might find out he needed
another horse. He might sportingly be intrigued in an investment in a
spice ship, any profits to be taken in his name, any losses to be borne
by grateful old you. You might be able to divine the name of his tailor,
and somehow think of dropping around and paying the fellow, to give old
Lance a pleasant surprise when next he was in the City. Perhaps you’d
visit him in his little diggings in the Downs and find him wistful about
the scratchy condition of his grounds, and send over the gardener and
some helpers from your manse for a week or two. Such a decent chap, you
wondered how he ever made the connections he did. Want some neat and
necessary surgery with a knitting needle? He knew a woman in Bermondsey
who—Want to sell off a bit of the silver plate until the guv’nor comes
through with the next quarterly? Lance could steer you to a chap in
Cheapside who’d give you a decent price without a word, and you’d _know_
the stuff would never be seen in England again.

But where he shone was in the dustiest reaches of law. “Mr.
Barrowbridge,” he said one evening after his return from London, “met a
chap at Drury Lane who’s in a bit of a stew. Seems he’s married.”

“Can’t help him,” said Barrowbridge sleepily. As time went on, he slept
even more, though the sleep was lighter; he was approaching a condition
of perpetual light trance, a constant drowse through which his mind
flickered and flashed like summer lightning.

“He’s Oswald Marryat, the French brandy chap. Got two castles and a race
course of his own.”

“We can help him,” Barrowbridge said immediately. “What’s saddened him?”

“This marriage of his. Third wife, y’know. He’s afraid his second wife
will find out about it.”

“And charge bigamy, what? I presume there’s a first wife, too.”

“Not any more. She just died. Her relations feel she should have more of
an estate out of it. They’re the ones who are hinting at telling the
second wife about the third wife.”

Barrowbridge frowned while his mind tested, turned, threaded and
reviewed. “That’s not bigamy, lad, that’s trigonometry. …Who’s the
second wife? Where’s she come from?”

“I think he said her mother was married to his Uncle Oswald.”

Barrowbridge’s eyes opened abruptly. “Really … I say, how tidy d’ye
suppose their marriage records are?”

“Not very, I’d imagine. He’s only recently made his pile. They’re
nobodys, actually. Village folk.”

“Do you tell your Mr. Marryat,” said Barrowbridge, “that if he can
arrange things so that he changes places in the records with his uncle
of the same name, his troubles are over.”

“Over how?”

“Why, by an honest accident, unbeknownst to himself, you might say, his
second wife is his niece. Now that’s within the prohibited degree, and
though the marriage isn’t void, it’s readily voidable, and on the
record, too, without her knowledge or appearance. Get him to a good
barrister and have that done.”

“Very well, but wouldn’t it call attention to his bigamy?”

“Not if he brought the action to void. Ignorance of consanguinity is a
defence; its being his action makes it good faith. They’ll void.”

“I’m sorry, sir; I still don’t understand how voiding that marriage
solves his problem.”

“Well, lad I’ll spell it out for you. His dead wife’s relations can’t
bring charges for bigamy when his second marriage is a nullity.”

“Ah, I see. And what about the third marriage? He was married to her
while the second marriage existed.”

“The second marriage never existed, now we’ve voided it.”

“And what about the third marriage, in regard to the first?”

“First one’s dead. Do you go tell Marryat instantly to become his own
uncle. Slide me that chamber, will you, lad?”

And so when the liberated Mr. Marryat found out that Lance did not have
a cellar large enough for the cases of fine brandy he wished to give
him, he had one dug for him.

One of the pleasantest things about the Hobby was the good relations
Lance set up with lawyers. He never missed an opportunity to send the
people involved to lawyers, virtually never solved any but the most
simple problems with advice alone. As a result lawyers cultivated him,
added to his “collection” of uncommon law, and in general made things as
happy for him as they could. Beasley early became one of his staunchest
and most voluble admirers. “Chap practically a beardless youth,” he
would say at the Club, “and thinks like a Lord Advocate. You’d think
he’d been at the bar for fifty years.”

Splendid years. … There was Minden, Sir Gregory, Elaine. Despite the
fact that he associated with the little baronet primarily for his
position and influence, however limited, he was not immune to the man’s
surprisingly deep enthusiasm for the immense history he was compiling.
Sir Gregory read Latin and Greek with familiarity and French as if he
had been born to it, and many a literary and historical tag Lance
carried away with him, to be hoarded and flashed briefly as the
circumstance offered itself in London—that is, the presence in a
gathering of just the right level of folk who could be and should be
impressed by a young man’s scholarly attributes, and the absence of
scholars. Yet at times he came away bemused, for the moment oriented in
the swell and change of culture against culture, the pressure of Rome
against the world around her; the pinching off of the Parthians and the
explosive rise of the Sassanian Persians which, with the ambition of the
Teutonic tribes, Sir Gregory held responsible for the dissolution of the
Roman Empire, despite its power in subsequent centuries. These spells of
identification with history and humanity were transient but heady, and
Lance was confirmed in his belief that Sir Gregory was a great if
unimportant little man, whose history of Rome would be, if nothing else,
a phenomenon, like a stone column in a desert; useless in itself but a
good deal more than other men could boast of.

Elaine became a lady. Her eyes and her hair grew brighter and her figure
ripe; in one way only did she not change, and that was only because it
was initially a state of completeness: her devoted constancy to Lance.
Isolated as she was with her sisters and a series of genteel tutors, she
had no opportunity to acquire fashionable guiles and tactics, no wish or
need for them. She loved Lance openly and wholeheartedly. It was one of
those rare affections seen sometimes in the religious recluse, the
artist and the scholar, wherein to love is sufficient, to be loved
inconceivable. Indeed, her emotion for Lance fed her quite as adequately
as her father’s engrossment in dead Italians fed him. Lance struck a
posture of grave regard when he was with her, and permitted no peaks on
this particular plateau. He had brief moments of regret that her father
was such a small baronet and his holdings so unimpressive, else this
might have been one of the great loves of the period. Sir Gregory
permitted him unlimited freedom with the girl, perhaps sensing Lance’s
attitude, perhaps, in his preoccupations, genuinely unaware that he
might be expected to do otherwise.

Bella and Barbara likewise blossomed, and each had her extremes of
passion for Lance, each more than once; but this was a game, part of the
atmosphere, and there was no question in their minds as to whose
“property” he was.

During those years there were disappointments for Lance, but in the long
run they served only to etch in the finer shadows and put his greater
contentment in perspective. Chief among these shadows was a perpetual
and nagging pique at the new Countess of Kingston and her ward Miss
Axelrood, which became inflamed after 1773, when the Duke died.
Completely overlooking the handsome remuneration he had already
received, he began to believe he had been “had”—that his entire aim in
the operation had been to secure the implied promise that they would see
to it he was circulated about, placed next to the mighty, and even given
entree at court. The continued residence abroad of the Kingston ménage
made this impossible, and although he kept up his visits to Blanton
House and a few others of that ilk, his acquaintance in the City did not
expand very much. Barrowbridge was of course no longer in a position to
pressure and black—well, grey-mail him into high society; so all things
considered, these were years of consolidation, of retrenchment, wherein
he became far more the country gentleman and less the man-about-town.
His salve enterprise throve, and his income from it increased, even
after he halved his interest by the sale of manufacturing rights to an
apothecary in Soho who had married Miss Callow primarily out of a desire
to retain for himself the displays of the salve’s effectiveness. It was
rumored that he executed, in a _mezzo-relievo_ of skin and hair, a
magnificent St. George and Dragon on her back and hips, but Lance was
content to relegate this to fancy and eschewed his privilege,
unquestionable even now, to see for himself.

In the fall of 1775, which marked Lance’s fifth season at Featherfront,
he returned from Minden one evening to find a dusty horse with the reins
over its head clomping unforgivably about upon the bowling green. His
occasional man Hicks had gone for the post and there was apparently no
one about but Johnson, who had always expressed herself terrified of
horses. Cursing and grumbling, Lance captured the animal and led it to
the stable yard, where he tethered it.

Returning to the front of the house, he rounded the corner by the
bayberry bush and was confounded by the explosion, as if out of the
ground, of a leaping, yelling figure wearing a long headdress of
brilliantly dyed feathers, leathern leggings which left the buttocks
bare, and a fringed buckskin shirt. This apparition brandished a small,
long-handled, and apparently very sharp axe, and with its other hand
cupped over its shrieking mouth, created a wavering ululation so
shocking in effect that Lance’s leap upward threatened his very
shoe-buckles. He staggered back into the zinnia bed and put his
shoulders against the house lest he fall in a faint, and stood there
awaiting death. His mouth was dry and his lips drew back and twitched
against his upper teeth; he stopped breathing.

The nightmare creature bounded about in a large semicircle, pounding its
mouth, pounding its chest, waving the tomahawk aloft and plunging it
into the ground, cutting great gobbets out of the already damaged green,
and arriving at last face to face with Lance, with the axe raised for
its terminal coup. It was a tableau for a horrid frozen instant and then
the red Indian said, “Oh, I say, old chap, I mean, don’t smile at me
like that, you make me feel contemptible.”

“Meadows!”

“I mean, I should jolly well’ve known I couldn’t make you turn a hair,
what? Not you.”

“What the devil are you doing in that outlandish … the deuce do you mean
by chopping up my bloody bowling green … tie up your ruddy horse … come
from anyway?” It all burst from Lance with apparent simultaneity, and
the savage figure backed away from the torrent, fluttering his hands
uselessly in front of him. The tomahawk, fastened to his wrist with a
thong, slipped from his fingers, swung down and gashed his thigh. “Oh, I
say. This bloody thing’s all bloody,” he whimpered, separating the cut
edges of legging and flesh. Again there was tableau as they stared at
one another, and suddenly they were pounding each other on the back: “I
say, it _is_ good to see you, whatever in the world, why didn’t you
write?”

“Come in, dammit,” said Lance. “No—wait; can you show me that … that
dance thing again?”

“Rather good, what? But I am bleeding a bit.”

“Hang the bleeding. We’ll have it put right in a trice. Do you just show
me how one of those howling savages enters a house.”

The effect, even though expected, actually frightened Lance for a
moment. He followed the howling, capering figure into the great hall,
seeing at the far end the horrified figure of Johnson disappear behind a
slammed door. Even over the uproar Meadows was making, he could hear
other doors bang in rapid succession—the kitchen, the pantry, the back
kitchen, the scullery, the wood-room, and finally the rear exit. He
wondered how far she would get before she turned back. He was also aware
of the rattling intake of breath discernable in the area of the gimlet
hole, which was his reason for asking the encore. Delighted, he fell
back on the settle and brought surcease: “Well enough, old chap, look
out, you’ll have my mantel cloven. I say, stop! old boy—enough!”

Dripping sweat and blood and panting like a bellows, Meadows ceased, and
Lance went to the kitchen to fetch water and cloth to bind him up. And
while he did so, Meadows, with many discursions and chronological
trackings back and trackings forth, told of his adventures in America.

It appeared that Boston _circa_ 1770 was not what he and Sir Gregory and
Lance had thought—at least, not for a Crown tax collector. “Place is
positively seething, I mean. Chaps rushing about burning M.P.’s in
effigy and that sort of thing. Politeness doesn’t count a bit there,
y’know. After all, one’s just doing one’s duty, but the very nicest
people are likely to get positively rude when one asks for taxes, even
if one apologizes first.” He had stumbled along exposing himself to a
minimum of fury on the one hand from the colonists and on the other from
his superiors, until he had his bright idea. His income (a fund from his
uncle the Duke of Kingston), plus his small share of the large amount
paid as royalty on the salve, and his salary, had been just sufficient
to carry him in his deception for nearly four years. He would make his
rounds, but in all but a few cases this was purely a social act. He
would then return to his office, count out what moneys he had, and give
them together with doctored books to his superiors. He was helped in
this incredible charity by two factors: his predecessors had not been
able to collect even this pittance, and his superiors could not
understand bookkeeping. And as long as the people paid no taxes and the
collectors received them, Meadows was left alone. His deception was
revealed in October of 1774, when the last act of the fleeing tax
commissioners was actually to throw him into the river Charles for
having softened the King’s hand on these rebels by leading them into
non-payment of excises. There were more formal punishments in the _codus
lex,_ of course, but they all took time, and time was what the
commissioners had not at the moment. The Massachusetts Assembly was
prorogued clean out of existence, and the hapless Meadows was, as
reported, thrown into the Charles by the commissioners on their way to
safety on board the anchored men-of-war. And as if this were not tragedy
enough for one night, when he paddled ashore and hauled himself,
exhausted and chilled, down the riotous streets toward his lodgings, he
was recognized as a tax collector by a band of patriots, who
unhesitatingly carried him back and threw him into the Charles again.
This time he swam out to a British frigate, where first the galley-dregs
were thrown upon him by accident and next some bored shipbound
grenadiers started potting at him with their muskets. He cried long live
George III until bubbles began to appear between the syllables and they
at last took pity and grappled him aboard.

Three days later he was able to join an armed shore party and make his
way to his lodgings to pick up his things, only to find that looters had
preceded him, and all that was left was his Indian costume. Resignedly
he took it along because it was all he had to show for four and a half
years in the government service, and because it occurred to him that it
might amuse old Lance Courtenay to see it in action. And so he had come
back to England, and here he was.

Lance laughed unabashedly during this recital, and afterward promised to
see to it that suit was instituted to recover the tax money he had so
nobly paid for the colonists, a suggestion which threw Meadows into
blind panic on the instant. No, he would let well enough alone. What,
try to present records for those years—itemize those tax payments? “It’s
over, old man—finished. Don’t let’s live it again. Besides—dear dead
uncle Evelyn’s dear old bank draught will be along in a fortnight. If I
can put up with you for a day or so, I shall be all right.”

“You’re welcome, of course,” said Lance sincerely, thinking, I wonder if
Hepzibah will take him off my hands … I wonder if Sir Gregory can wangle
something else for him … has he no ruddy relatives? “What do you hear
from your cousin Charles?”

“Oh, he’s back on the continent—Leghorn, this time, exporting exports
and importing imports and all that. Which is jolly fine. Every time he
hears a word about the Duchess Elizabeth he gets livid and can’t be
polite. He can’t even be understood. He just makes noises.”

“What do you hear of her?”

“The last I heard she was being squired about by His Holiness Pope
Clement the Fourteenth, but of course he’s dead now.”

“Surely it wasn’t true.”

“So they say. Oh, I don’t think there was anything … you know. After
all, she’s going on sixty, what?”

“Mm. … Miss Axelrood still with her?”

“Always. And you don’t hear any gossip about _her,_ by Jove. I don’t
know just what she does, what? but she does it quietly.”

Lance didn’t know, and said so. He did know how quietly she could get
into and out of an inn, and didn’t say so. He laughed suddenly.

The red Indian made a questioning sound.

“I was just thinking that it’s sort of amusing, the wheels-within-wheels
thing, Meadows. The reason you’re strapped, waiting for a draught, is
because the Duchess has the money. But the reason you get the money is
that she doesn’t get it—and it all comes from the same place.”

“It’s a wonder she didn’t get it,” said Meadows, “the way she had him
buffaloed. (American expression; good, what?) Not that she needs it.”

“Lord no.” The Kingston fortune was large indeed, and it was by no means
all in frozen assets. Lance knew a bit more than most people just how
large it was; Beasley had given him a draft of the Duke’s will to
examine for loopholes, and he and Barrowbridge had fine-toothed it,
curried it down, and delivered it shining; it was as final as the last
trump. He laughed again. It had been Barrowbridge’s exclusive idea to
continue Charles and Evelyn Meadows’ settlements and quarterly income;
as heirs apparent (but for the Duchess) they might be angered if she got
the bulk of the estate, and let them; but they might be dangerous if
they got nothing. As for the other clause—that the Duchess would inherit
the estate and keep it only so long as she did not remarry—that too was
Barrowbridge’s idea, he knowing full well that the Duchess would so
present it that it would appear to be a concession. Actually, he could
not imagine a circumstance which would make that extraordinary women
happier than to be hugely wealthy, free to go where she wished, do what
she cared to do, and be forbidden to marry. … But at the moment, Evelyn
Meadows was his problem. “I say, you know dear old Hepzibah married.”

“Yes, I’d heard. Who’s the, ah, lucky chap?”

“Fellow named Suarno, Portugee or some such. Apothecary.” He laughed.
“Interested in sculpture too, I’ve heard.”

“Sculpture, oh, I say. Always wanted to try my hand at sculpture.”

“Evelyn, you’re a very funny fellow sometimes,” said Lance, hardly able
to contain himself. “We’ll ride up to the City tomorrow … I say, you
_do_ have some other clothes?”

“Oh yes,” said Meadows, touching his great train of feathers. “These are
just extras.”

So Lance took him to the City; and indeed it was an excellent idea; not
only did Hepzibah take Meadows in, but it was all Lance could do to keep
her from adding him to her household as well. It took all day, but at
last he laughingly pried himself away, stopped laughing as the door
closed, looked at the sky and then at his watch, and decided to ride
home that very evening. And thus he rode into his destiny.

It happened some hours later, a mile along the bridle path from the
Tatsfield Road; it happened to him as it happened to travelers all over
England.

The shadow detached itself from the loom of dark between the poplars and
became the outline of a horseman. “Stand,” it said roughly, “and
deliver.”

Lance’s mouth went dry, and his lips skinned back from his teeth and
began a subtle quiver. His horse stood in shadow as deep as the
highwayman’s; had he been ten feet back or ten feet farther on, he would
have been in pale moonlight.

He couldn’t be seen.

The highwayman said, unmistakably cocking a horse pistol, “I’ll not
shoot thee, Lanky me lad, if thee’ll talk to me. Wipe me away once more
and so help me God on the cross ye’re a dead man, and there’ll be two o’
us, for I’m dead already.”

When he could—and it was a long tense time before he could—Lance cried,
“Piggott! Piggott—is that really you?”



11.


“YE MIGHT SAY IT’S really I,” said the old man, “and you might not. It’s
what’s left o’ me, at any rate.”

“Ah, that’s you, right enough. Come into the moon so I may see you …
Piggott, you look like hell itself.”

“Ay, I live there.” He looked at the pistol and put it away. “It ain’t
loaded, but coo, ain’t it got a nice loud cock?”

“It has that; are you really a highwayman?”

“Na, lad; I just wanted to see thee, and ye’re always more yourself when
you’re angry.”

Lance had not realized how angry he was until he was moved to laugh at
this and found it difficult. “Well by God,” he said in a resurgence of
astonishment, “Piggott … where have you been, Piggott?

“Hup town, down town, all around the square. Ah, lad, it doesn’t matter.
I … give up the carriage. Got a nice price for ’er too. Came to my
sister’s daughter for a while. Fell ill a bit. You know; the years go by
… just now I’m up from Ickworth.”

“Ickworth?” Something stirred in Lance’s memory; he set it aside. He was
going to speak but was interrupted by a spasm of coughing—deep,
wrenching, sickly coughs, frightening to hear.

“Touch of frost,” said Piggott after a time. “Might we move along,
Lanky?”

“Yes, we’d better … Piggott,” he demanded, “why did you leave me?”

“It was what you wanted.”

“I never said that!”

“D’ye recall that night, Lanky?”

“Of course I do.”

“Then do you tell me what came about.”

“Why, I went to Blanton House. When I came out you were gone. That’s
all.”

They rode in silence for a time. Piggott had nothing to say. At length
Lance blurted, “You were deuced stubborn about something, I’ll tell you
that.”

“What was it?”

“Whatever it was,” said Lance straightly, “it wasn’t worth your walking
out when I needed you.”

“You can’t remember, lad, can you?”

“If I can’t, it’s because it doesn’t matter. Didn’t matter.”

“I remember. You had it I’d betrayed ye, made a gold sovereign to find
your lodgings for yon trollop o’ Miss Chudleigh’s.”

“Oh. Oh yes.” A long wait, while Piggott, lying face-down in the saddle,
coughed, and coughed, and coughed. When he sat up again, shoulders limp,
Lance said, _“Someone_ told her.”

“Ay.”

“It wasn’t you, then.”

“Told ye so that night.”

“But dash it, I—”

“Na, Lanky, say no more about it,” growled the old man. “I’m not ’ere to
make ye sorry or ’umble; ye’re not, and ye wouldn’t be; that’s just you,
eh? As to the rights and wrongs o’ that special argyment, we could ’ave
at the truth ’till we broke it free, and us all tired and blue i’ the
face, and we’d only find that the argyment ’ad nothin’ to do with what
’appened. What I mean, if it ’adn’t been the Axelrood matter, it’d ’a
been somethin’ else. Your time ’ad come, as I always knew it would—your
big step up, though I’ll admit I was slow to see it, thinkin’ all along
that it’d be a Courtenay matter, and not some little hanky-panky wi’ Lib
Chudleigh an’ ’er affairs. Any’ow—you ’ad to reach a time when any
Piggott was too much Piggott, an’ that was it. Thinkin’ I’d betrayed ye
was a reason, but you’d no need of a reason.”

“I’ll not listen to this!” Lance shouted. “Why would I ever want to do
that? Who fed me and clothed me from the cradle up; who led me to
apprenticeship in the law; who was my coachman and confidant and
helpmate from the time I was born until that night in Holcomb—who but
you?”

“An’ there ye give all the reasons why you’d ’ad enough. Ye’ve a
sniggling suspicion in ye that part o’ your blood stinks o’ Bermondsey
or worse, and when ye saw ye might move upward an’ away, ye wanted
nothing about ye to remind ye of it. And who but the old fool who’d done
those things you’ve listed could remind ye more?”

“You’ve no right to speak to me that way!”

“I’ve a dead man’s right,” said Piggott hollowly.

“Will you stop saying that? Are you trying to sound like Mr.
Barrowbridge?”

“I know nothin’ of Barrowbridge. ’E disappeared out o’ Bermondsey years
ago. As to my bein’ a dead man, ’tis true enough, Lanky. Na—I don’t want
your sympathy and ’tisn’t that I’ve come ’ere for. I know the signs; my
ruddy lungs are gone and I shan’t last the bleedin’ winter.”

“Well then, what _have_ you come for?” Lance had had very nearly enough
of this disturbing conversation, and his tone showed it.

“Let me ask you first: where do ye stand just now on the matter of the
Courtenay title?”

“What business is it of—” and Lance’s voice was cut off by the old man’s
hoarse cry. It was a wordless statement of impatience, frustration,
physical and emotional anguish, ending in a series of weak coughs, all
that the emptied lungs could yield up. For an appalling time then there
was no inhalation at all; it came at last cautiously, a meticulous
attempt to ward off paroxysm. Lance was badly frightened by it; it was
an unnerving thing to stand so close to the dying.

When Piggott could speak again, it was in a hoarse whisper. “Ye whelp!
Ye’ll bandy words and stand on your dignity and excuse and delude
yersel’ while I rot before your ruddy eyes. I’ve not time nor patience
to gambol wi’ ye; I’ve that to tell ye which can mean your bloody
fortune; ye can ’ear me out or ye can leave me now and go back to your
muckin’ little shed i’ the wilderness.” The man was outraged and yes,
certainly dying; old, hurt, fevered, finished.

“Fortune?” asked Lance.

They plodded through the fitful moon-shadows for a time while Piggott
went through his careful series of shallow inhalations, persuading his
lungs to bear with him just a little longer. “God help me,” he gasped,
“but I don’t care to finish what I’ve started.”

Another long pause. It had grown colder, and their breath streamed like
scarves back over their shoulders. Lance waited while Piggott struggled
over something unseen. “Na then,” he said, more like his old self, “wi’
ye answer me?”

“Of course,” said Lance gently.

“About the Courtenay matter then: how d’ye fare?”

“I’ve never lost sight of it,” said Lance. “Yet it’s not a simple thing,
nor overly hopeful. I’d stand a better chance were I quietly and
decently renowned for something; connected well and publicly respected.
Also I must wait on the death of Sir Ffoulkes Courtenay. A harmless old
gossip he is, but overly fond of genealogy. He can’t last much longer.
In short—I progress, but slowly.”

“And it remains a ’ope, an’ only that. Good then; for did that seem a
greater thing for ye than anything else, I might be silent now. Na then,
’earken: I’m just from Ickworth, in Suffolk, and bear ye the tidings of
the death of the Earl.”

“What’s that to me? … That’d be Bristol. No! I say!” Lance ejaculated,
as his brains stopped feeling and began functioning. “George William
Hervey, eh? Which at long last gives Augustus John, Sir Cuckold, the
title Elizabeth Chudleigh married him for! Earl of Bristol! Well, that’s
one she missed; and much good it does _him,_ to boot.”

“Ah wouldn’t speak so of your da,” said Piggott.

The moments of uncertainty in a human life are uncountable as the stars.
Each moment of decision is a-flicker with uncertainties, for
consciousness itself is only the ability to choose between reactions
under a stimulus, and that instant before the instant of choice is the
very color of uncertainty, be the choice wife or wine, war, wig or
wimple. The moments of utter and unalloyed certainty are correspondingly
rare: they are unforgettable, epochal, catastrophic, for they strike the
consciousness with a bolt of substance disparate from life, energetic
and unfamiliar. It was such a moment that Lance now experienced; he
knew, without knowing how he knew, that of all things in time he needed
not, he need not ask Piggott what it was he had just said.

Peel by silken peel, he took down fact upon fact which lay about this
thundering statement, separating it like a young spring onion. And at
long long last he spoke without conscious direction of his words, barely
to be heard above the soft clump of the pacing horses and the whispering
of the casual breeze through frozen hedgerows: “I,” he breathed, “am a
dirty son of a bitch.”

“Ah, never that, lad! Ye’ve never been dirty!”

Lance began to laugh. He laughed till he hurt, he laughed till he cried,
he laughed until, literally, he could not sit his horse and he must
slide off and hang to the saddle-pouches, gasping. And in time it
appeared he was weeping; he himself could not have said just what this
retching, wrenching, wailing thing was when it wearied and left him.

He, son and once lawful heir of Augustus John Hervey, just now turned
Earl of Bristol …

He, child of Elizabeth Chudleigh and her mad, hidden, poisonous marriage
to a foolish boy …

He, barrister’s boy, trapped into manipulating that marriage into a
nullity, and himself into the very bastardy he had carried like a curse
for all the years it did not exist …

He, mountebank and impersonator, searching for a title by chicanery when
he was born to one …

He, who must, in filling in the details in this structure, learn more
about himself, and who could not know how to prepare himself for any
more such quakes, and yet who must, who must …

“How long have you known?”

“All your life.”

“I think … you’d … you’d better tell me all of it,” said Lance faintly.
He climbed back to the saddle, Piggott riding forward to assist, then
falling back to cough.

“There’s little to tell, ’Twas in ’43 I saw her first, at the Venetian
ambassador’s ball. Masquerade it was, great costly beast of an affair. I
was footman at the time to milord Bath. ’E’s a sticky old gout-gait
today, but ’e was a boundin’ billy of a youngster then, full o’ the
devil and a ’appy thing to come to any gathering. I used to make ’im
laugh; we ’ad a jolly sort o’ friendship, me keeping to my place
o’course, but jolly for a’ that. Anyway, me an’ the rest of the foot-
an’ coachmen were loungin’ about in the back kitchens, soppin’ up ’fores
an’ afters—you know, things the lords an’ lidy’s ’adn’t wanted and
things they’d never see—when right in the middle o’ us all up pops the
young Earl o’ Bath: ‘Piggott,’ ’e says, ‘I’ve no right to do such a
thing but upon my soul I’d never forgive myself did I not let you see
this,’ and off ’e ’auls me to the edge o’ the servin’ doors where I
might see out; and a good thing ’e did it then, for five seconds later
it were four deep wi’ every servant and staff in half o’ London, groom’s
boy to upstairs maid.

“The ballroom was grand as you please, a-crawl wi’ the ’ighest nobility
of England and ’er allies; where I was was behind George ’imself, that’s
’is present mad majesty’s grandfather; ’e was on a great chair, on a
dais, no farther from me than yon poplar tree. And the young Earl, ’e
gives me a great nudge in the ribs and a wink, an’ points wiv ’is thumb,
and slips out into that pretty crowd. They was dressed like milkmaids
an’ ’eathen warriors an’ statuary and all whatnot; but nobody was ever
dressed like what I saw when I looked where ’e pointed. ‘Gadzooks!’ I
cried right out, ‘but ’ere’s a saucy bawd!’—eh, I couldn’t ’elp myself,
and I’ll take my oath the King heard me, but ’e paid it no mind prolly
thinkin’ me only a bishop or some such ’angin about be’ind ’im.

“For there makin’ ’er entrance was our Miss Chudleigh, bold as all
innocence; and where all the mighty there was dressed up in their finest
fantasy, she was dressed down in her barest fact. She ’ad on a sweepin’
great skirt that ’id as much as a gust o’ wind on a fine day; around ’er
waist a bitty garland of flowers; and all the rest of ’er was dressed in
white skin an’ pretty hair.

“There was a thunderin’ plague-struck great hush while those who could
take their eyes off ’er looked to the King to see what ’e’d make of it.
’E was getting old then but ’e rose to the occasion. Up ’e got and stood
for her as I think ’e wouldn’t do for a churchman, and began clappin’
’is hands. So everyone else did, an’ I did too, an’ it was while she was
comin’ down the long lane the nobility opened for ’er that the word
buzzed back be’ind me and the ’elp come crowdin’ fit to squirt me into
’igh society like a ruddy apple seed. I stopped applaudin’ and ’ung on
to the door-frame with both ’ands and a leg, and watched ’er come to the
dais and sink down in as pretty a’ dyin’-swan deep curtsey as you’d want
to see. The King asks ’er what she represents; I might’ve told him clear
enough, but she said somethin’ of ’er own: ‘Iphigenia, your Majesty,’
she says from the floor, and to this day, I ’aven’t found out what one
of those is, but I’d like a pair of ’em for pets. Any’ow, down steps ’is
Majesty and raises ’er up and ’ands ’er ’is great gold gobbet of a
watch, and the ball goes on.

“Betimes I’m back i’ th’ scullery tryin’ to press back my bulgin’
eyeballs, all of two hours away and still full of Iphigenia, when up
pops my young lord Bath again. ‘Piggott’ ’e says, ‘do you slip around to
the west doorway and up on the covered carriage wi’ th’ black pair
you’ll see there. I’ll be out wi’ a passenger for ye; if we don’t slip
’er out quiet-like, every blood in London will be upon ’er like
pack-dogs. Take ’er where she wants to go, an’ Piggott,’ ’e says, ’mind
your manners or ye’ll answer to me.’

“I did as bid, and I’m no sooner up on this fine black trap when out ’e
comes with ’er, wrapped up in a gentleman’s cloak, and pops ’er in, and
off I go like a scraped-bottom sloop in a full gale. ‘Where to, milady?’
says I, and, ‘Oh,’ she sings, ‘anywhere, anywhere, and drive faster.’

“So out we go and up to ’Ampstead—ay, clear up there, and she shouts to
me to drive out on the ’Eath, and once out there she must stop and leap
out o’ th’ carriage and run about i’ the moonlight, leavin’ the cloak,
and me treated to the sight a second time, Piggott alone granted what
all the ’ighborn ’ad to share.

“She were ’alf mad wi’ excitement, what with ’er mad costume an’ the
King’s watch an’ all the dukes and earls snufflin’ at ’er like pigs at
whey; then she’d been snatched away at the very peak o’ things and it
left ’er drunk in a drunker way than every brandy smote a body.
‘Coachman!’ she cries to me, ‘coachman, dance wi’ me!’ an’ ’olds out ’er
arms i’ th’ moonlight, an’ I did, I did. It were cold out there on the
dewy down, but ’er flesh were ’ot an’ dry and she ’ad sparks in ’er
eyes. An’ when I touched ’er first I thought she’d faint, for she
trembled all over and fell against me an’ ’er eyes rolled up like a dead
man’s for a moment. Eh! but I danced wi’ ’er … mad, it were. And wi’ th’
last grain o’ sense left to me I recalled what milord ‘ad said about my
manners, an’ scooped ’er up and flung ’er back into the carriage and
hurried back to cobbled streets again. Betimes she thumped an’ I peeked
down at ’er and she was swathed to the nose in the cloak again.

“ ‘Coachman,’ she says, ‘what’s your name?’ an’ I told her; ‘Piggott,’
she says, ‘you’ve been good to me, better than I wanted ye to be, an’ I
must reward ye. What would ye most like from me?’

“Now I must tell ye, lad, that she ’ad a bold an’ jokin’ way about ’er,
that you knew she could ’ave a jollity and take one too. And before I
knew what I was sayin’ I blurted out, ‘To ’ave a child of yours to call
me father’; then I ’urries to say that failin’ that I’d take ’er promise
that she’d never tell a soul about this madness just now on the ’Eath,
lest we both find ourselves wi’ a shirtful of bees. ‘Piggott,’ says she,
‘ye shall get your wish.’

“I thought she meant my second wish, but ’twas the first she granted,
not six months later, and there ye were, Lanky my bucko, in the arms of
the most surprised footman that ever drew breath or got a three-minute
visit at midnight from a veiled lady wi’ a package.

“Ay, she was something to see in the old days …”

The old days faded, and the old voice faded, and the moon faded away
behind a cloud.

“She was married then?”

“Ay, that she was, and all a deep secret. She ’adn’t a farthin’, and
Augustus Hervey had nothin’ but ’opes an’ a pretty baby face. ’E was
four years ’er junior, y’know. After the ball young Bath pulled the
right ropes and she found ’erself Maid of Honour in th’ ruddy retinue of
Augusta, Princess of Wales. She _’ad_ to keep ’er marriage secret to
keep ’er job. As for the babe—well!”

“But—just to give it away to a footman who made a joke …”

“That was ’er way. And she didn’t want ye or need ye. She … didn’t
forget ye, though. ’Twas ’er had me put you in wi’ Barrowbridge. I
couldn’t say why. I think she ’ad a run-in once wi’ him. Might be she
thought any child o’ hers would cut ’im down. Might be she thought to
use you against ’im one day. ’E never knew it, I can tell you that.”

“You mean she saw you again, talked to you?”

“Never. ’Twas a foreign-lookin’ chap came ’round wi’ the message. I
could do as she said or not, an’ if not I ’ad a hint I’d be thumped
about accidental by four or five of this chap’s friends. She ’ad no need
to threaten, but she did.”

“God,” said Lance.

“She uses everything she touches,” said Piggott. “If she doesn’t, she
shall. Why, back in those early days, when she was keepin’ ’er marriage
so secret an’ the secret leaked out, she used e’en that. She got rid o’
Hamilton by whisperin’ it to him; ’e went abroad. She turned Bath into
the surly knave ’e is today the same way. I don’t doubt she knew
everything about you, Lanky, the Courtenay matter an’ all. I wouldn’t
doubt some o’ Barrowbridge’s clients weren’t clients at all. Eh? So you
see Miss Axelrood needn’t’ve bribed anyone to find the Dirty Beast an’
you.”

“Piggott, have you any letters, papers, certificates—anything like
that?”

“Na, lad. She’s too sly for that. But the new Earl might have some such.
’Twouldn’t matter, could ye get him to accept ye, though; he’s by no
means a mighty man but ’e’s respected. ’E was commander-in-chief of the
Mediterranean Fleet, y’know, an’ a vice-admiral o’ th’ blue. Been M.P.
out o’ Bury St. Albans for donkey’s years; writes a bit, they say, for
the periodicals, an’ got ’isself genteely notorious, y’might say, for
spittin’ in the eye of Rockin’am. I mean to say, ’e’s not the
downy-cheeked silly-ass, ’e once was, by a long shot. ’E’s added to ’is
own pittance, and now ’e’s got the rest, all ’is brother ’ad, an’
Ickworth, that’s belonged to Herveys since the ruddy fifteenth century.
There’s a certain seat for St. Albans in Parliament for the Herveys o’
that line … all that’s a ’earty ’eight to jump from, eh? were you to be
next in line. Otherwise it all goes to ’is other brother Frederick, ’im
that’s a bishop in Ireland, an’ ’e don’t _need_ it; ’e ’as packets.”

“Piggott, hush up a bit or you’ll start coughing again. I know my peers
and peerage. I’ve got to think.”

“As you wish, laddy-buck. … Anyway, you carry your certificate about wi’
ye. The Herveys is a breed apart. John Hervey it was tied ’is father to
a bear an’ was hanged for somethin’ else. Frederick, they say, may be a
bishop but’s godless as well. That great old swine Dr. Johnson that
everyone’s kissin’ the ’ams of, ’e once said, ‘Call a dog Hervey an’ I
will love him.’ And a great strange thing about ’undreds o’ years o’
Herveys, two out o’ three marries an Elizabeth, even if she’s married
’erself at the time. But one thing about ’em all, they _looks_ like
Herveys, their accidents spring up throughout the ruddy population like
corn lost in a field o’ daisies. You ’ave the stamp, lad, you may take
my word. I’ll say the Hervey is blurred a bit by the Chudleigh, an’
given a choice, a stranger might say you were more Chudleigh than
Hervey; but give ’im a chance to say you’re both, and ’e’ll agree you
could be nothin’ else.”

“Will you shut up?”

“Ay, lad. … I know Lib Chudleigh got herself some sly kind of
divorcement but surely that can’t alter your fortunes; seed is seed. Ah
now, she’s got ’erself top o’ the ’eap, eh? Since the Duke died. Now
there’s a fortune could drop three Ickworths into the ruddy Channel and
never miss ’em. … But ’oo knows, tides an’ changes in humans bein’ what
they are; for you to link the Kingston properties wi’ th’ Bristol ain’t
so ruddy farfetched as the idea of snaffling off a dead Devonshire
title. I mind—”

“Now you listen to me,” snapped Lance as they rounded the bend of the
brook and approached his footbridge, “I want no more chuntering and
maundering out of you. I’m sick of listening to it. Do you tell me one
thing and one thing only; why didn’t you tell me all this years ago?”

“Coo. You don’t ’ave to ask me such a question. And you don’t ’ave to
jump salty at me neither.”

“Never mind that. I’m asking you.”

“I _am_ telling it to you, Lanky, the very instant it can do you a
pennyworth o’ good.”

“Who in hell are you to decide what’s good and what’s not good for me?
How do you know what I might have done years back, knowing this? or what
Barrowbridge might have done? _Why didn’t you tell me?”_

Angry in his turn, Piggott wheezed, “Because, damn ye, if I’ve to spell
it out: ye don’t—unless you must—ye don’t tell a child, nor tell a man,
that ’is mother’s a hoor!”

“You tell this child!” screamed Lance, smashing himself on the chest. He
was so angry he drooled. “God damn you for an interfering old pig! What
did you keep me around you for all those years—to dream you were the
father of one of your betters? Did that make you feel like part of a
gentleman instead of altogether a Bermondsey fen rat? How do you excuse
yourself for putting me out to slavery with Barrowbridge when all the
while I might have been at Harrow or abroad with a tutor, learning to
speak like a gentleman from gentlemen instead of from some strumous old
swine in the second storey of a filthy warren … ay, and sweeping, by
God, by _God!”_ he shouted, “and chamber pots! Ay, Lanky, slide me yon
chamber, then get thee out to Surrey to some foreclosed manor land and
have a threadbare poacher teach you to shoot grouse like a gentleman so
you’ll know how an M.P. does it on the twelfth of August … and all the
while it might’ve been falconry for me, and fencing. Oh Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus, Piggott, you’d’ve served me better had you sold me to the
Tripolitanians as a bloody slave! What for? What for? Have you a slice
of my mother’s humor; d’ye like to see a body squirm and suffer while
you alone know how far he has fallen, and you with a heel in his face?
Why? Why? Did ye dream I’d one day be the master of great estates and
fit you with a diamond collar and old brandy for the rest of your days?”

“Ah, lad … no, no … say no more. I raised ye for yersel’, because I
loved ye, and I could not tell ye that your mother—”

“She’s my mother, let me be the judge of that!” roared Lance. “What of
my mother? Where is my mother today, and where am I? And for this I’m to
buy a pasture and turn you out in it in your old age—for this knightly
favor? Old man, I’d not give you a cup of water, not, by God, unless you
were drowning.”

“Ah,” the old man breathed. He shook his head blindly, fumbled at his
eyes with his hands. “I feared to do it, I feared this. … Well then,
Lanky, farewell, and God be with thee.”

“And the devil with you!” and he heeled his horse and bounded over the
bridge. He never looked back.

All night long they sat before the fire, Lance Captain Courtenay, petty
squire; Lancaster Higger-Piggott, coachman’s brat; Lainston Hervey of
Ickworth, aye, Bury St. Albans and the houses of Parliament;
Chudleigh-Hervey, libertine, sweeping up and down the Continent in the
grand manner, sampling sins. There they sat, one, the other, two of
them, three, the lowly worshiping the highborn and the highest utterly
despising the rest. Back and back, round and back again he went, they
went, circling and changing one with the others in a weary, angry de
Coverly … then for a moment there would be a young man alone in a
draughty hall, up for a bit of firewood to hurl into the flames. At
times he would glare furiously upward to a gimlet-hole high in the wall;
he would not go up there, not now.

He plotted and planned and discarded and planned again, until fatigue
sucked away a part of his sanity and he began to have visions, visions
of the hunt, the masquerade, the pageantry of court … a vision of
visions, his mother, young, clad in a transparent web, prostrating
herself at his feet in a dying-swan curtsey, and he confronting her with
his full knowledge of her machinations, her huge laughter at the lad she
had caused to bastardize himself. _You laughed eh, milady? Then laugh
now! I’ll have you sweeping for me, Mother, slide me yon chamber! Miss
Axelrood, do you hand me yon wee box of stinking salve, that I may
salute my dear mother. A_ great square man in admiral’s court regalia:
and the kneeling figure moans: _Augustus! Augustus, forgive me: Take all
I have!_ and the admiral: _My son, my long lost son, Take mine, take
hers, take all._

Lance shook himself awake—or not awake, for the fugue had not been
sleep. He drew all the shades and shapes and colored lights of his
fantasies down to a hard bright white point of fury, and, _Duchess,_ he
said with all his heart and mind, _you will pay me for this._

At that point he was inspired. First, he thought rapidly, Lainston, and
the parish record, truly entered so that none can say it is not the
clear genuine record of the marriage of Augustus John Hervey to
Elizabeth Chudleigh. Thence to the one higher body than the
ecclesiastical court, and its piddling jactitation of marriage: to
Parliament with the parish record. Then what? Ah, then the Hervey
marriage must still exist, and he, Lance, is legitimate again; ay, and
Elizabeth Chudleigh is a bigamist! (But the Duke is dead!) no matter, no
matter; the law concerned itself with the first husband, and he lived,
he lived—it was bigamy, just for the act of marriage to the Duke of
Kingston. (But she is not in England: may never be.) Then Parliament
marks her as a fugitive, tries her _in absentia,_ and since her second
marriage is now the nullity, she is no longer a duchess; her properties
fall to the Crown. (But that’s not the place for such properties, out of
reach.) Then how …

Inspired, inspired!

In the public interest, anyone might bring this suit. But there was a
man who had a special interest—a man who stood to inherit the Kingston
properties, though not the title not being _de corpore suo_ … Evelyn
Meadows, who ate out of his hand—_he_ would bring the suit! He had the
right, even the duty.

Lance leaned back and rubbed his hands together rapidly, a distinctive
Barrowbridge gesture.

Now then. What of the Bristol matter—what of his father, Augustus John
Hervey, the new Earl?

He, Lance, had forced Augustus Hervey into collusion and perjury in the
jactitation action. Could these not be used against him?

… But no; he did not know of Lance, could not know he was involved in
the matter. The bigamy trial would make a laughingstock of this third
Earl of Bristol; if he never found out that Lance had anything to do
with either case, he could not blame him; if in his disgrace from
collusion and cuckoldry, perjury and persiflage, his young son appeared
out of limbo to be at his side, to honor and comfort him, to give his
declining years the son he had never had … yes, and he with the Hervey
stamp on his features and the Chudleigh certification to blur it, as the
old man had said—why, he couldn’t fail!

And Chudleigh, old, disgraced at last, duchess no longer, countess
never, would sink away into the mire with her transparent costume as a
winding-sheet; and young Meadows would have the Kingston treasures, and
could only be grateful …

And he would marry Elaine, eldest daughter and heir of Sir Gregory
Eustace, and in time add her fortune to the Bristol estates …

… And if he wanted something to do with his busy clever mind thereafter,
why not pursue the Courtenay earldom as well?

He laughed and clapped his hands together, rose and teetered happily on
his toes at the window.

It was snowing now, restfully, quietly, all’s well with the world.
Patterns of rime flaked the window-light, to show how cold it had
become. The first dawn greyed the east and turned the hedgerows into
steel-graved glyphs on the snow.

Cold … _“God!”_ he cried, coming to his senses, “Piggott!”

He flung on his heavy things and banged out of the house, round to the
stables. He saddled, mounted, his hands, his mind a blur of eagerness
and content with life. He galloped round the bowling green and over the
footbridge, stopped a moment at the path.

He wouldn’t have gone up—there’s only Minden. He’ll have gone down, to
the Tatsfield road.

He spurred his horse. His blood sang in the cold air. His fatigue was
gone with his hatred; he was alive and certain.

And he hadn’t far to go. Piggott’s horse stood athwart the path,
tethered to a poplar, stamping and rheumy with cold and inaction.
Nearby, his back against the heavy hedge, sat Piggott. He was not
lolling nor lying, nor hunched, as a man might be when afraid. He sat
with his feet apart and his hands on his knees, calmly waiting. His face
was neither sad nor angry, nor was it content; it too was merely
waiting, the face of a man of patience who knows not how long it may be
before he is met. He was looking directly at Lance, and he was
stone-dead.

Lance slipped off his horse and fell to his knees. “Piggott!” he cried
in a great voice, and it echoed and echoed away over the Downs.

“Ah, God help me, what have I done?” he moaned, and, “Look, God, look
what I’ve done: I’ve gone and killed my best witness.”



12.


“IT’S LIKE BEING BORN again, sir!”

“Well, you’ve been gestating long enough in the womb of London town,”
said Barrowbridge. He was feebler now, and hard to hear when one wasn’t
used to him; but then, one was. The old mind, however, was crisp and
clear, though subject to surprisingly sudden fits of slumber, sometimes
only a minute or two long. He had no longer any particular sleep period,
but read and slept, slept and thought, talked and slept as it came to
him. “Sit you down and tell me all you’ve done, lad … my, you look as if
you’d paid sixpence for a ruby and found it to be a diamond.”

“ ’Twas threepence, sir, and the diamond big as your head,” said Lance
exultantly. “Well, I’ve been to see our old friend Meadows.” He laughed.

“Tried to scalp ye, I’ll warrant.”

“Ah no, he’s over that. He’s living in two rooms over a tannery in
Camden Town and searching for the meaning of things.”

“On what road?”

“He says all the universe and all the years are but a hand’s breadth
away from us, and do you care to see all of it at a glance, you need
only open the casement.” He laughed. “To open this window, you place
yourself in a small room with dark hangings and no air, light a brazier,
throw on some dried leaves and lie down before it until you are
half-dead with the smoke from it, and in this condition all knowledge is
at your disposal. He finds it impossible to recall what the knowledge is
after he comes out of it, but he’s sure he recognizes it at the time and
goes back and back after it. He forgets to eat—perhaps he means not to;
he did say that eating and sweating and such intrude upon the higher
self—and he never goes out but to fetch more leaves from the lascars
down at the docks. _Ganja,_ they call it, ‘wisdom weed.’ It smells like
old rope and catnip.

“I thought I’d find him too stupefied to do anything with, thinking of
opium and such, but he surprised me. His thinking is wild as ever, but
perfectly clear—perhaps more so, as I discovered when I got him decently
dressed and over to a private room at the Fish and Staff and packed him
full of good English mutton and ale, which he ate submissively enough
but uncaring. A strange thing, his body starving and his mind not
knowing it.

“I explained to him that it was in his power to right the wrongs done
him, his cousin Charles, and his dead uncle Evelyn Pierrepont, the Duke
of Kingston. I don’t know that righting wrongs, even wrongs done to him,
is a subject of interest to the lad, but the pacification of his
tormentors definitely is, and I think the idea of gaining the approval
of his disgusted cousin Charles pleases him very much. Riches for
himself, vengeance against that—that very blight of a woman—these seem
not to reach him, but when I painted him a picture of Charles wringing
his hand and saying ‘Well done!’ why, he wept onto his mutton chops. And
when I explained to him that the action I had in mind would require
nothing from him but his signature upon various papers and that he
probably would not need to testify or appear—for the entire case rests
on documentary evidence—why, he was overjoyed.”

“And did he not question you as to your interest in the affair?”

“Not he. I do believe he lives in a world populated by but three classes
of people: those who do things to him, those who do things for him, and
those who leave him alone. The last are the ones he likes the most, and
his greatest wish is to include all humankind in it. Any action which
adds the class of persecutors to it is an action he favors. As to the
few who do things _for_ him, he feels humble and unworthy and grateful.
If he thinks about my motives at all, it is only to regard me as a
mystifyingly clever chap who goes about righting wrongs out of the
greatness of his heart, using methods he would not presume to
understand.” He laughed.

“Mind you never begin to see yourself in that light,” Barrowbridge
cautioned. “And so he agreed, eh?”

“That he did, and then and there signed identifications of self and
total charges, and I carried him back to his catnip temple. I then did
all necessary things at the Court and the Office of the Clerk, Lord’s.
The suit is begun, even now a rider is off to Lainston to take in charge
the parish record for 1744, and a package is being made of the Duke’s
marriage records, the proceedings at the suit for jactitation, and
everything else relevant. Including, of course, a despatch of
information to the Duchess and a command to return, which she won’t do.”

“Have you yourself signed anything?”

“Not a dot. I’ve a faceless little chap called Briggs, just barely a
member of the bar, to send my messengers about. He’ll voice everything
on behalf of Evelyn Meadows.”

“Ay, that was wise. The new Earl of Bristol isn’t going to be happy
about this, testifying before the House of Lords—to which he’s only now
had entry—that after those years of being cuckolded he did collude and
perjure to remove the nuisance. Should you be identified with such a
humiliation, you’ll be hard put to it to sidle up to him and say, ‘Love
me, Da.’ ”

“He’ll not find out. How could he?”

“Just you take care. … And so the case is to come up?”

“It couldn’t be stopped now. Her Grace Elizabeth, Duchess of Kingston
shall be summoned to stand trial for bigamy, will certainly refuse, will
be tried _in absentia_ and certainly found guilty.”

“Lad, don’t make a habit of using the word ‘certainly.’ But I do think
you’re right. And what else do you prophesy?”

“The Kingston marriage must be voided by the verdict, and her title with
it. The title becomes extinct, the estate goes to the cousins Meadows,
the now-valid marriage to the Earl o’ Bristol succumbs to a divorce for
adultery which must be brought and shall be granted—ay, and at a
stroke—and at the end we have a crushed and sorry Bristol to be consoled
by a dutiful son, and,” he said slowly and with the greatest pleasure,
“an obliterated Elizabeth Chudleigh.”

“Do ye hate her so much?” Barrowbridge asked.

Lance answered with a sound, a snort, which said more about hatred and
scorn than Alexander Pope could in a lifetime.

“Ay,” said Barrowbridge, nodding as if to a statement. Then, “So far,
lad, so good; things should indeed come as you say. She married Bristol
and you have the proof; she married Kingston; between the two there is
merely a rare and perjurious action. ’Tis bigamy and no mistake, and she
must be guilty. As to the Earl of Bristol, I credit ye with a fine
insight. Were ye to go to him now with no proof ’o yerself but your
Hervey’s face and your Chudleigh schemes, he’d jettison you today as he
did when you were but an unwanted proof of an unwanted circumstance. But
appear, and stand by him, when he’s sick with humiliation, call him
father and honour him, and I do believe you can win him over. … ’Tis a
pity you haven’t a speck more substance, though. Long-lost son or no,
you’re still a penniless claimant to a sizable estate.”

“But I’ve thought of that!” cried Lance, his exultation returning. “What
if my wife were daughter of a baronet, with a nice little holding and a
bit of gold coming to her?”

“Ah—ha!” said the old man appreciatively. “I see what you’re up to, ye
sly scamp. You wouldn’t marry Miss Eustace to elevate yourself to the
level of the Gregorys, but you would to elevate the Gregorys to the
level of earls!”

“Or so it will seem. But the marriage will be for love, and the
elevation will be my secret until the time comes to come to the aid of
yon poor broken Earl.”

“You’re a credit to all my wickedness,” chuckled the old man. “Tell me
now what I needn’t ask—why did you proceed with all this before asking
my thoughts?”

“Have I done any of it wrong?”

“Did I not say I needn’t ask? … Na, you’re right all along, fiendishly
so. Eh!” He closed his eyes for a space, in that swift sleeping of his.
Lance waited patiently. With his eyes still closed, Barrowbridge said,
“I suppose I was trying to make you say you needed me no longer. Now why
should I want to hear that?”

“Ah, _sir!”_ cried Lance, but the old man did not move again, nor speak,
so he shrugged and left, smiling.

As always, he was warmly received at Minden, Bella and Barbara dancing
about him and plaguing him with little attentions until shooed away by
Elaine, and Sir Gregory emerging from centuries past to grant a sherry
and a moment’s conversation to the younger man. “And how do you fare
with the work, sir?”

Sir Gregory gave a pleased grunt. “Bit proud of it. Never done before,
what? Decent history of Rome. Almost finished. Deuced lot of work.
Years. Well, worth it. What?”

“I picked up something that might be a help, sir. Source, y’know. This
chap’s done a bit of research, I think,” and he handed over the
just-published quarto he had picked up in London. “Three more volumes
being printed now; I’ve ordered them for you.”

“I say, good of you. Hm, yes,” said the baronet, peering at the book,
turning it over, opening, leafing. “Yes indeed. Look this over, what?”
and off he went into his sanctum again. Bella, the obedient one, had
already towed Barbara away, and he was alone with Elaine. She smiled and
came close. “You’re so good to Father.”

“And why not? Everyone should be.”

“What was the book?”

“Oh … something they’re all chatting about in the City just now. Haven’t
looked at it myself, but since it concerns Rome and so on, I thought he
might like it. Chap called Givens … uh, Gibbon, yes. _Decline and Fall
of the Roman Empire._ But enough of dead things, my dear.” He took her
hand and they sat together on the sofa. She was in pink this evening,
such a pink as should have gone badly with her red-gold (or gold-red)
hair, but which was enchanting instead. She had an extraordinarily fine
neck, he noticed for the first time. As she turned her face away and
down, he caressed with his eyes the clean straight lines of the tendons
to their hollowed junction below her throat, and the pink petal of ear
so shyly hidden near the upper end. He reached out with his free hand
and touched the ear. She did not move away but closed her eyes, so that
the lashes lay right down on her cheek.

“I think,” he said in a voice full of astonishment, “that I have never
seen you before.”

Not looking at him, she said, “What has happened to make you see?”

He laughed, mostly at the thought of telling her what was happening.
“I’ve been dreaming,” he said, “and I think my dreams will come true.”

“Who is in your dreams?”

“Ah … fine folk. Lands and castles and ships of gold.” He looked up
through the ceiling at some heaven of his own and chuckled richly.
“Brocades and masquerades and a great stable of blooded nags …”

He was finished, and she made a little disappointed sound, but turned to
him and smiled. “I’m glad the dreams please you so.

“Once upon a time,” he said suddenly, warmly, taking her other hand,
“there was a young prince who was put under a spell by an ugly old
witch. And it made him invisible. He walked about and did things, and
went to places and saw things, and felt that he was alive; but really,
you know, he wasn’t, because when anyone looked his way they saw …
nobody, just nobody.”

“Is there a princess?”

“Oh, most certainly there’s a princess. She had golden hair, and her
eyes—her eyes—”

“What of her eyes?”

“A wonderful thing: they were both exactly the same color.”

“Oh …” she said petulantly, and in mock anger, snatched away her hands;
but she put them right back.

“And the prince went one day and saw that the wicked old witch had lands
and treasures and castles and—all the things I was dreaming about. And
so he made a great magic when the old witch wasn’t looking, and poof!
she was punished and no one ever heard of her again, and so he took all
her lands and castles and everyone could see him.”

“Oh,” she said.

“What’s the matter?”

“I don’t like your dream.”

“Why not? It’s a lovely one!”

“It hasn’t anything about the princess.”

“But he married the princess!”

“Did he?”

“Doesn’t that please you?”

“I expect it does, all right. … He was greedy.”

He laughed immoderately. “Ay, that he was. And a good thing too, else
he’d still be a nobody.” He looked at her and sobered. “Can’t it please
you? What shall I add to it to make it please you, Elaine?”

“I’m silly,” she said, and tried to laugh lightly, making instead two
silly little squeaks. At that she blushed, and again he had this strange
sensation of never having seen her before.

“Tell me,” he begged.

“Oh-h … I thought the princess would love him truly, and one day she
would wish for a prince, and kiss her wish, and poof! there he would be,
right by her where he had been all along.”

A most amazing sensation came to him. It felt like shame, and if it was,
he was incapable of understanding why. It certainly felt like it. He
pressed it away and asked tolerantly, “How do you kiss a wish?”

“I don’t know. I expect you just—”

What happened? What happened? It was a tease, a small thing, a nothing,
a _passe-tiempe,_ and she closing her eyes and her lips to show him some
… childish … something … and this blaze, this coruscation, arms full of,
mouth full of, break, burst, spill, crash, silence—

Breathe.

_God,_ he would say, but God was a word and he could not say a word. He
held her and stroked the nape of her neck while she cried.

She sat up suddenly and looked at him, and he said a very strange thing.
He said, “I was fourteen in the garret and a thousand times since, and
never this, not once.” He saw in her eyes a knowledge of what he meant,
though he himself hardly knew; the knowledge he saw in her eyes was past
in an instant; it seemed like the knowledge Meadows had spoken about,
that he found in his draped fuming room, known utterly at the time and
inexpressible thereafter.

She put her hand on his mouth, and took it away, and put her other hand
to make a cup on her lap. She sat looking down into it while he rose
quietly and left without a word.

All the way back to Featherfront he looked up at new stars with new
eyes, and the only articulate thought he could command in all that time
was, “But … a kiss did that?”

On the eve of the trial he went to see the lawyer Briggs, and secured
copies of each indenture, affidavit, certificate and instrument
pertaining to the action, and carried them all home for Barrowbridge’s
inspection. He was followed from London by two horsemen, which was
unpleasant; once he told himself _but I’m not invisible any more_ and
was irritated at the thought: this was no time for whimsy; and then he
began to think they were highwaymen, which made him think of Piggott,
which unaccountably angered him even more. But when he turned in at the
path, and climbed the first slope, he looked back and saw them canter
past, going straight on toward Tatsfield, and then he laughed at himself
for a fool and forgot the matter.

This was a time for happy moments; Barrowbridge gave him one after he
had seen the papers. It was only a grunt and a shake of the head; he had
not a word to change nor a suggestion to make; just a caution: “Do not
let a whisper of your part in this get to the Earl o’ Bristol, and
you’ve not a thing to fear.” Suddenly he flung the papers upward with a
shadow of his old great shout, and, “Lord!” he cried, “what a structure!
What a retribution! You could rack the old bitch and never hurt her so
much as this! And all so safe, and all without her even daring to defend
herself!” He looked at Lance with fond amaze. “I lie here sometimes and
wonder what I’ve been spared for, Lanky, for by rights I should have
died when I said I did, in Bermondsey. I’ll never think that again; I’ve
lived for this, and I’m happy.”

Lance was embarrassed. “Ah …” he said, shy as a pipit. “Meadows thinks
I’m put here to make people happy, too.”

The old man chuckled, then: “Ah yes—Meadows. Have you a plan for
Meadows? ’Twould be a shame to waste all the Kingston estates on him.”

“Oh … I shall scan them; mayhap there’ll be a town house or a bit of a
manor which I might wistfully covet and he might gratefully deed me. He
will have his opportunity.”

“If wistful you must be, let it be for lack of a block of high rentals
’round Grosvenor.”

“Mr. Barrowbridge,” Lance said abruptly, “I’m in love.”

“Tchah!”

“I am, sir. Truly.”

“The blind archer at last … d’ye know what Cupid confers on his victims,
Lanky?”

“Madness, they say,” smiled Lance.

“Blindness, Lanky. His own blindness.”

“But it’s Miss Eustace, sir. Don’t you agree that a linkage with—”

“ ’Tis not the girl I object to, nor the plan. They’re both exquisite. …
A strange thing about the wonderful Jesuit, Balthazar Gracian, is that
his _Oraculo_ contains not a single maxim about love and courtship. In a
specialist on worldly wisdom this seems a dreadful oversight, but the
penetrating mind will discover that it is not. It is, indeed, the
greatest part of his wisdom.”

“How so?”

“Why, it is his way of saying that the wise think so little of love that
they think of it not at all. If I presumed to add a maxim to the
_Oraculo_ on the subject, explaining this, I would say—He closed his
eyes and slept, or seemed to sleep. Then he opened them and continued,
“—would say _When considering marriage, look first for love, and if it
is absent, proceed. The moth, in a room of a thousand lights, sleeps
safe on an unlit candle.”_

Shocked, Lance cried, “Why, she’s the most—” But Barrowbridge was
asleep.

Lance gathered up the papers and went away.

A shepherd’s crook and a bony sturgeon swung in the bright noon sun over
the entrance to the Fish and Staff. And it was full of fine folk on such
a fine day, eating the splendid food and drinking the good ale and old
brandy. ’Tis a day of largesse, thought Lance, for the first time in his
life tossing a silver sixpence to a beggar. ’Tis a day of brightness and
certainty, marred only by one’s inability to be a fly on the wall of the
House of Lords, watching the progress of humiliation, seeing the pen
strokes sending disaster away to Italy and the enemy, searching the
newest Earl’s face as it crumbled under the blows and was softened for
the aid and comfort he would build for it as meticulously as he had
designed these wounds.

He paused and looked down the street where a corner of Parliament
toasted in the sun. Was it started? Was it over? Would it take all day,
and adjourn, and take tomorrow, while the business of America waited,
while the disasters of Rockingham, the stubbornness of George III, the
balanced forcefulness of Pitt and the balance it forced from Fox—would
all these matters wait on him through today … through the week? _Ah
Parliament,_ he exulted, _the next time I sway you, you’ll know well
it’s I._ He would sit with the Prime Minister over a glass of port one
day, he thought, and he would say _Remember the day back in ’76, and the
trial of the false Duchess of Kingston? You were there, were you, and
saw it. Ha ha! Now let me tell you what really happened._

From the direction of Parliament came a great closed coach, yellow,
struck golden in the sunlight. _I shall ride in such a carriage._ He
stood on the walk before the Fish and Staff and watched it come.

From his left he heard his name called. He turned. From the Fleet Street
corner came a lady and a—why, it was Sir Gregory Eustace! And in a pale
blue sacque, Elaine! He raised his hand, and to his amazement saw the
baronet stop dead, shaking his fist. He saw Elaine turn to her father,
clasp her hands anxiously, then suddenly run from him, to come tripping
down the street toward Lance, holding out her arms.

From his right he heard his name called. He whirled. The great coach was
almost opposite now. Its door swung wide, and its passenger held out an
imperious bejeweled hand to him.

He turned again. Elaine’s face was pink with exertion and something
else; it was twisted as a face so fair and dear should never be. He took
a step toward her, but, from across the road: _“Here!”_ in as chilling,
as self-confident a command as had been flung at him since the early
days with Barrowbridge.

Spellbound, he stepped off the curb and crossed the road, and it was as
if fear had been there all his life, not born of the moment at all; fear
curled tighter in him than the spiral of a butterfly’s tongue, fear now
springing out and across his belly slashing him inwardly. For he knew
that face. Reflexively he took the extended hand. “Milady!”

“Say ‘Your Grace.’ ”

“Your Grace … ” he said faintly. Because he held the hand, and because
one did, one must—he kissed it.

Behind him, on the walk; anguished: “Lance!”

From the coach: “Get in … son.”

He got in the coach.

The door slammed and the wheels rumbled. With the sound, the
near-cataleptic numbness left him and the fear took over, drying his
mouth, capturing his lips and cheeks, knotting his stomach with a great
empty ache. So crouched he there, his eyes drawn down to glistening
slits as through their squeezed captured tears they tried to see the
magnificent menace seated opposite. Faintly, _“Lance!”_ came through the
window unheard, a glimpse of pale blue unseen; then the world was shrunk
to these rumbling walls and the presence of terror seated so close that
it touched him knee to knee.

“Well, I’ll be damned,” said the Duchess.

His vision cleared and at last he saw her.

He wished he could see a Hervey now, so that he could understand the
admixture. But that was a detail; his mirror henceforth could tell him
who his mother was.

She said, “I confess, this is a moment I’ve dreamed of since I was
summoned, and in the dream you have crawled, you have wept, you have
fled, you have fainted. I never thought to find you smiling.”

He said nothing.

“Perhaps Lily was right in her preoccupation. Does it please you to
learn that she would speak of you daily if I permitted it; that she has
written you seven letters which I have had to intercept? … I should
listen more to Lily.”

She had a strange voice. Different … different how? Different from what
one would expect. He knew her as resourceful and shrewd; he had coupled
softness, mellifluousness with these. Therefore he did not expect this
brassy quality. Her voice was coarse as a Bermondsey barmaid’s, her
diction pure as an archbishop’s. It shocked, it transfixed. She said,
“Are you going to persist in using one of my own best tactics, and
remain silent until you can command the situation?”

He bent his head until his lips were in his puffed scarf, and tried to
wet them with his tongue. It was too soon.

She observed this sharply and made a mistake. “Very well, then—smile. I
shall give you the situation, exactly as it is, and defy you to command
it.

“I am just come from Lords’. It is over—all over. It took under two
hours. You’re a fool, boy. You’re the cleverest fool I think I’ve ever
known, and there may be hope for you. And perhaps ignorance of the most
important piece in this pattern does not quite qualify you as a fool;
I’ll give you that.

“You did not know because you could not what passed between me and Bath
in the old days, between me and Hamilton, ay, and Winchester and Bishop
Hervey—ha! even Bath was astonished to find out about _him!_ You don’t
know what passed between us, and you couldn’t know what was left.

“You could have known, however, how they all feel about Augie—I should
say, the Earl of Bristol, your honored father. Ah, you should have found
out about that first! … Perhaps you are a fool after all.

“Know, then, that I walked into Lords’ at ten of the clock this morning
after quite the busiest two days of a very busy life. And whom should I
see first but my dear old cockscomb Bath, surly and gout-ridden but with
the old devil still alight in his eyes.” She chuckled. “ ‘It’s _in
camera,_ old girl,’ says he, and takes my arm, ‘Come along with me, and,
bless you, it’s _good_ to see you again.’

“And in I went, to the Green chamber, comfy as ever with a bright fire
cheerful on the hearth, and all my old loves ranged about the room. I
tell you, boy, it was the jolliest reunion of the jolliest people on
earth.

“We sat about in that cosy place for an hour or so playing ‘Remember
when’ and confessing to each other little secrets we’d kept all these
years; at our age such things lose their harshness and mellow like
madeira. That was when I asked them to send for Winchester and the
Bishop, and when they came in it was jolly all over again.

“And at last we came down to brass tacks. ‘This stupid business of this
stupid Meadows’ is the way Bath referred to it.” She mimicked well. “
‘The fool has us to rights. Those deuced documents, y’know. We must do
something about you, Lib darling, you’re a ruddy menace.’ ”

She tapped Lance’s knee with the hard tip of a forefinger. “You can push
Parliament to do a thing, you see, but you can’t stop them from doing it
their way.

“I shall make it brief. Under no circumstances were they going to make a
House performance of this matter, partly on my behalf, bless them all,
and partly because they really like Augie. They were not going to force
him to get up before the world and confess to his difficulties with me
and his poor bumbling perjuries in the jactitation action. He wasn’t
even there, and for good reason. But I’ll come to that later.

“They asked me if I intended to stay in England and I said I did not.
That was splendid; I shall go abroad, and stay abroad, and it shall be
called agreed exile. As to the title, since it expires with my death in
any case, there is no objection to my using it until then; I deprive no
one.

Again the hard finger. “As to the estates, it may be technically true
that bigamy makes my second marriage a nullity. However, so airtight and
ironbound is that magnificent will that you, dear boy, helped draw up,
that the estates are mine because I’m me, and not merely because I am
the Duchess of Kingston. This adds weight to my keeping the title; for I
have the estates.

“The only thing which remains to be settled is the matter of my
properties here in England, which, in my tragic exile, will be useless
to me. I am therefore giving them all to my dear Lily Axelrood, who has,
after all, been a devoted helper and assistant to me and deserves a
change and a reward. Incomes sufficient for their upkeep, and a bit
over, go with them; the rest of the money will, of course, come to me.

“You wouldn’t believe how quickly these things were settled there in the
Green chamber. Ah well, Bath had them all drawn up, knowing everything
and knowing me to boot; all I had to do was nod my head and laugh with
him.

“And at the last he told me, as a sort of afterthought, ‘By the way, old
girl,’ says he, ‘we shall have to punish you for this bigamy thing. Says
so right here in the law. Brand your pretty hand.’ And with that he
takes a horrid spitting mull-iron out of the fire and brandishes it
about, dropping sparks on the carpet. He glares at me with those devil’s
eyes alight, and plunges the iron straight down into a mug of ale he has
ready.

‘Lib,’ says he, ‘it’s neither the season nor the time of day for mulled
ale, but do you take a swig o’ this while it’s hot, and drink our
health, and let us certify you branded.’ So I did, and I kissed them
all, and promised them to clear out of England as soon as I’d had my
affairs taken care of, and they all wept a bit, and that was that.

“I’m satisfied.”

“Are you, boy?”

The coach rumbled on over the cobbles, while Lance sat passive, her
words resting on his mind like snow on a cold kiln, waiting to melt
down. At length some of his preoccupation left him and vision returned
and he found himself looking at his hands a-jiggle on one knee, and he
realized that he had been staring at them for a long time. He raised his
eyes to his fellow-passenger’s face, the first half of that quick flash
of inspection one flicks at a stranger, hoping it will be unobserved,
knowing that if one meets the stranger’s eyes, one will look away and
fumble something.

He met her eyes, and there his glance was arrested. In that moment he
met one of the most compelling qualities of this woman. In his way
Barrowbridge had described it, and so had Piggott. He found that he
could look straight at her, for as long as he liked, taking whatever he
could. She did not hypnotically capture his attention, snakelike. She
did not present that detachedness which sometimes makes it possible to
inspect a new face and not be touched by it. She gazed back with neither
warning nor welcome, but with perfect frankness: here I am, all of me;
here is fire, here freeze; walk where you choose and take the
consequences.

She smiled a little and said, “Would you care to leave me now?”

“Yes,” he said.

She nodded. “That is the first word in converse you have ever spoken to
me, and one to remember. I shall expect you to use it again.” She made a
disenchanting change in the smile and vanished it, and said, “You may
not leave me now; I have one other matter to discuss.

“I have been in England for three days, but even before I arrived I knew
you for what you are and I knew what you had done. Do not be mystified.
You might have reasoned it for yourself. A charge of bigamy smacks of
proof, and proof could only be the Lainston parish record, and that
smacks of Barrowbridge, and lo! I meet you again. I had your half-mask
of an unknown lawyer Briggs located and bribed even before I set foot
ashore, and thereafter it was not difficult to divine the balance of
your plan. The bastard who was not a bastard by birth, who became a
bastard by his own machination, could only want to legitimize himself,
and there was only one way to do that, and that was to legitimize his
parents’ marriage. I do not hold against you the fact that of several
ways to do this, you chose the most vindictive; in your position I
should have done the same or worse. In my position, however, I could not
tolerate it; anyone who has ever caused me discomfort must pay
threefold, except for you, my boy, who caused me discomfort by the very
act of being born, and who continues to cause me discomfort by drawing
breath. So you pay tenfold.

“Recognizing that your only aim in this matter could be the Bristol
heritage, I took the trouble to go to Ickworth in East Anglia and visit
my … let us say, your father; that relationship is somewhat less
diffuse. Augie has become a very distinguished gentleman, and like many
weak men, has a streak of angry stubbornness when properly aroused.
Seeing him was not easy; he would not admit me and so I had to go round
the house and march in through the terrace windows and confront him, and
then it was some minutes before he understood that while he was saying I
should not be there and that he wanted no intercourse of any kind with
me, my relatives or my retinue, I was warmly agreeing with him.

“When I could, then, I informed him briefly but completely about you,
who you are, who you claim you are; your vital part in the suit for
jactitation of marriage by which, in freeing himself of me, he so
jeopardized his good name, and your present action. I also predicted in
detail your only reasonable move after this was over—to appear before
him as a long-lost son, with his face and my scheming persuasiveness,
and so manipulate him that he would pay for his humiliations by awarding
you his estate and title.”

She laughed gently. “It was intriguing to see just how furious Augie
Hervey, the third Earl of Bristol, could become. I was sure for a moment
he would fling himself down upon the carpet and scream. When I left him
he was hard at work on a letter to his barristers, arranging for a
categorical disinheritance of putative and potential heirs _de corpore
suo_ known, unknown, or to be known in future, together with a complete
alienation of his title from his property, so that in the unlikely event
that you should so convincingly prove your identity that you succeed to
the title, it will carry with it not one penny. Only a petty man can be
quite that meticulous; only an angry man could carry the thing quite
that far. Your father is a petty, angry man.

“Disappointed, dear?”

He turned his head slowly and stared unseeing out of the window. Her
words still mounted on his mind, which was shocked beyond absorption;
they would stay there until it was too weary to keep them out, and they
would come plunging in. Deep down he knew this and it terrified him.

Abruptly the carriage stopped. He turned to her again, startled, and
found her gazing interestedly at him, her magnetic head a bit on one
side, her eyes excessively bright.

“I think you are wise to be so silent. You’ve given me no words I can
ever use against you. I feel I could have you talking like a jackdaw if
I put my mind to it, but I choose not. I do not like you and cannot. I
confess however that I admire your shrewdness and your ingenuity, and
I’m all agog—really—to find out what you will do now. I hope it shall
surprise me. Whatever it is, you may be quite sure that I shall know
immediately what you’ve done. Think of me with you always, like a
bright-eyed bird on your shoulder, knowing all the details of all you
do.” She made a quick gesture so fraught with command that he obeyed
thoughtlessly and opened the door.

“Even,” she continued, “to the location of the particular public stables
where you have left your horse.”

He swung his head dully and looked and saw that she was right. He put
one foot upon the step, and felt her tug his sleeve. “Do get yourself
baptized,” she said warmly. “It will save your soul, if you have one,
and it will give me a name to call you by; you haven’t one now, you
know, for all your legitimacy.” He surged up, but she caught him again.
“I think you shall not see me again,” she said very gently.

_Now say good-by. Good-by Mother, perhaps, or, you filthy sow. But say
good-by. It will make a difference._ But he could not know what
difference it would make, exactly, nor if it would be a difference he
would want.

He leapt out and crossed the walk and went briskly into the stable. He
heard the coach rumble away while he was asking for his horse. He doled
out his syllables, being careful to miss none for all his divided
attention. He waited with his back to the doorway until his animal was
brought, then mounted and wheeled and rode out toward Westminster
Bridge.

If he had any thoughts between London and the Downs, he could never
thereafter recall them.



13.


HE RODE INTO THE stable yard at Featherfront and slid off his horse. For
a moment he leaned against it, his forehead against the damp warm
withers, wondering. It seemed to come to him only then just where he
was, what had happened. His knees buckled under the weight and shock of
it.

He shook himself like a spaniel and set his jaw, pressed himself away
from the horse and ran into the house by the back, through the kitchen.
Faithful old Johnson, grizzled now and broader than ever, ran to him
full of mute’s signals and semaphores, her heavy face urgent and
anxious, but he thrust her aside and bounded up the covered stair. _If
he’s sleeping by God I’ll twitch him out onto the floor._

But the old man’s eyes were open and pensive, one eyebrow cocked in that
comforting what’s-this-I-can-handle-it expression, and Lance almost
cried out with relief.

“She’s back, sir, the Duchess, and it’s all smashed. She’s been to
Ickworth to see Bristol and she’s got away with the Kingston title and
property, and none of it worked—none of it, not even Meadows’
_God-damned inheritance!”_ He stopped and stood gasping and demanding.

Barrowbridge lay silent, not looking at Lance, but still at the door,
with that quizzical eyebrow and the bright, bright eyes.

“Damn it, there’s nothing left! We—we are …

“Mr. Barrowbridge?” he asked softly.

“Sir?” he whispered, bending close.

Mr. Barrowbridge did not move. Mr. Barrowbridge did not speak. Mr.
Barrowbridge was dead.

Lance slammed his fists unmercifully against his own eyes and loosed a
great agonized cry, and amidst the dots and splashes of painful speckled
light from the blows, he backed away to the door, turned and plunged
down the stairs.

In a boiling jumble of anguish he thought as he ran, It’s all gone and I
never had a mother to run to Piggott was my mother Barrowbridge was my
mother and a bed’s a great mother’s breast to cry on and feed me.

Across the great hall and a shin-hungry chair, rung-wringing to clatter
and break and spin him grunting to the window, to fall there a-grasping
and gripping and ripping the drape; cough in the dusty folds of it,
fight them away and knee up and stumble and knee up again and go banging
to bed to hide.

“Captain Courtenay how nice!” in clear sweet syllables each a true
half-tone lower than the one before; and there in the bed he so needed
for now sat Lilith Axelrood with her back to the bolster at the
headboard and a white silk scarf arranged round her shoulders and her
heavy hair arranged on the white silk.

Lance rocked in the doorway until he was able to raise one arm and point
at her. His lungs filled and emptied with pain at the extremes, and when
he tried to speak his lips disobeyed him and pursed, so that he
half-whistled, half-wheezed, a Barrowbridge kind of noise. He stood
insane in the doorway, pointing like that, wheezing like that, and then
began to come across the room toward her, the one hand still pointing,
the other forgotten, the legs striding wide apart like a sailor’s in a
hurricane.

“Lance!” she coquetted, holding out her arms to him, and “Lance!” she
cried in alarm; and the next time she cried out it was not a word at
all. He struck her like a charge of grapeshot, everywhere, he snapped,
he struck, he flopped like a banked trout. Warding him off was
impossible, so she threw slim steel arms about him and held him tight
and tighter and tighter until she held him almost still. He was far
stronger, but she could do it because he was utterly out of control. And
his fighting became a shuddering and the shudder something else. Still
he punished her, he flogged the wide world and all life and effort, but
he was met in this, he flashed upward like a gusted gull, he stood over
the world like a mountain, spread over it like a cloud; and the shudder
again, now a shiver, now still, now still …

She still held him tightly, but not altogether to protect herself. She
pulled her head a little distance away, to see him better, and said
tremulously, “Lance, you … hurt me! Lance…?”

The sound of her voice struck the flames in him like a flung bowl of
brandy, and they exploded. It was as violent as before, but as he
punished the world and her, he punished himself and his stupidity, and
his dreams for being stupid, and his acts for being stupid; he cut and
slashed at the stupid thing of being alive until abruptly he was spent.
He could not draw breath then for a painful time, and when he did, he
expelled it in a woeful wail, and dropped his face into the hollow of
her neck and shoulder and cried; he baaaed like a sheep, baaaoh, baaaoh,
while she held him tight again, frightened; and then he escaped, he was
asleep.

In his sleep he called, from far away: “Elaine?”

Asleep, he sat up in panic, his eyes wide, and shouted, “Elaine?”

Soft arms put him down, a soft hand covered his eyes until they closed.
Softly, _“Shhh. Shhh.”_

He sniffled and twice there was an infantile, past-misery catch in his
breath. He burrowed close, snug, snug and close, and slept quietly.

He awoke in the black dark, and far away there was a point of light
which, if he came close enough, might be an opening through which he
could look. He blinked hard to make it come clear, and suddenly it did,
and was a candle across the room. He watched it for a time, pleased with
it.

Under his cheek was something more firm, more smooth than a pillow, and
down from his chin to the edge of the bed, a column lay. He raised his
head to see, and under his cheek was a hand, and the column was an arm,
and up from the edge of the bed came the hair and face of Lilith
Axelrood. She knelt on the floor by the bed, and perhaps she had been
sleeping there, but she had kept her hand under his face so that she
would know when he awoke.

He looked at her in silent amazement. She straightened up and bent over
him, so that her hair fell over both their faces like a magic tent. And
she said in a tone he had never heard before, that he would have
believed impossible to a human throat, so soft and full and intense it
was: _“Oh-h-h … I_—_love_—_you_—_so …”_ and when he opened his mouth to
answer she dropped her lips to it, with an illimitable tenderness he
surely would have missed had he not been too weak to move.

She slipped away from him and was back in three heartbeats with the
thick earthen bowl of broth which had stood covered on the tabouret. She
set it on the floor and removed the cover, and took broken bread and
dipped it and put it to his lips. He took it slowly, watching her face
the whole time. When it was about half-finished he shook his head
slightly, and she put it by, staying where she was just to watch him
live.

“Lilith Axelrood,” he said.

“Lance …” She stroked his face. He fell asleep. When she was sure, she
rose carefully and crossed the room on tiptoe and blew out the candle.

Lance went out and walked to the footbridge and stood looking down at
the water quarreling about the pebbles below. He could not believe the
morning and he did not remember the night, and he knew he must and
would.

What was this madness about marriage? Who had spoken of it first?

On impulse he crossed the bridge and stepped down the bank and knelt to
dash the clear bubbly water into his face. Talk, talk, talk with Lilith,
and it was a haze until now, but now it came, not in order, but clearly
enough:

“I have all the Kingston properties in England; they’re mine,” she had
said, and “I didn’t know, I didn’t know I’d love you. I didn’t know
love.” Oh yes, and: “I came here for her, because she wanted to know
just what you were going to do next, and I was to dazzle you and find
out. But oh Lance, I didn’t know this would happen!” That’s right,
that’s right, and she had said, too, that she had the Duchess’s
permission to leave her service, but that if she did the Duchess would
punish her, “I don’t know how. I wouldn’t know, until it happened. She
says I may go, but she doesn’t want me to, not really.”

And what was that about the last time: “I couldn’t forget you. I wanted
to, but I couldn’t. It wasn’t like this, it was just a glow that
wouldn’t go away … remember, Lance, what I said about wanting only to
find out how high is high? This is high enough, my darling my dear; I
want no more, ever again, than this.”

Somewhere in midmorning there returned his daily-man, woeful adjutant to
the slow parade he led: the doctor’s black rig bearing the priest, and a
wagon with three laborers and a coffin for Mr. Barrowbridge, all
summoned at dawn from Tatsfield. (Lilith had said “The Duchess _said_ he
was here, but we couldn’t find out … Lance, you loved him, didn’t you?”)
They put him to sleep beside old Piggott, in a little burial ground
which had not been used for three centuries; and when the priest said
the right words, old Johnson said the real ones, without words; Lance,
suddenly overcome, watching the spadesful of earth showering down, said
an anguished thing within himself. Oddly enough, it was not said to
Barrowbridge; it was “Ah, Piggott, if you forgive me I’ll …” and was
never finished. It tore him, which he could ill afford, and he returned
to the house and Lilith, who held him until he could talk again.

And the talk came around again to the marriage … who talked it first?

He didn’t know. … Well, what does it matter who first?

“This time yesterday I’d have wangled to marry you or not, Lance,
whichever suited me, and it wouldn’t have suited me. Now… oh, my
_darling!”_

“I have nothing, I shall never have anything of my own!” he had cried
suddenly, remembering. And she had laughed and kissed him in the new
tender way he had just learned was possible. “What’s mine is yours,
beloved. What’s getting, as long as you get? What’s having as long as
you have? Wouldn’t you have wanted the Kingston holdings? Then why not
take them from me?”

How to trust her? But surely, though she had words and words, could she
counterfeit that light in her eyes, that never-before tone in her voice?
And hadn’t she said … “Decide, Lance—a clear decision. If it’s no,
promise, oh promise to see me whenever you can. Or … don’t promise that;
just say no. But say yes if you can, even if you almost can; I’ll make
up the difference for you, you’ll see.”

Elaine.

He had kissed Elaine once, and virtually this same thing had happened.
But it had happened to both of them, whereas here, only Lilith was
affected. He might be, but he wasn’t now, or wasn’t yet.

He shook his bothered head confusedly. Lilith was away at noon, gone up
to London to see Beasley, and perhaps the Duchess. She would be back
tonight, or tomorrow.

_Once upon a time there was a prince, and he was invisible … and the
wicked old witch was banished, and he took all the lands and castles and
everybody could see him._

(How do you kiss a wish?)

“Mr. Barrowbridge!” he yelled at the top of his voice. Johnson popped
out of the kitchen door and looked at him, wringing her hands. “What
shall I do, sir?” Lance whispered.

The brook bubbled and a bird sang. Somebody said something about a moth
in a room of a thousand lights, safe on a cold candle.

Years back in his mind, somebody said something about a libertine.

“I, libertine,” murmured Lance Courtenay, “being of sound mind and clear
faculties, do hereby depose and declare that all my life has been a
grind and a climb; that in spite of how I might seem to the chaps in the
City who think I am a young gentleman of leisure, or to Johnson to whom
I am but a Power which comes and goes in mystery; or to Lilith, who
loves me, or to Elaine Eustace, whom I love with all my heart …

“Or to Barrowbridge, to whom I could have been but an ingenious
incompetent …

“Or to Piggott, to whom I was a serpent …

“Or to Meadows, who calls me philanthropist, or Hepzibah, who says
godling and genius …”

His eyes began to sting, and he closed them and bowed his head, and
breathed with difficulty. “Or to my mother,” he whispered, “who wants me
the way I am more than she wants my death …

“I therefore hereby and whereas,’ he choked, and shook himself, “do now
and forever forswear the paths into which I am pushed, and choose those
by which I shall profit; and the color of that profit shall be that for
which I have been starved all my life—my pleasure. And because never in
my life have I had life’s permission to develop the taste for simple
pleasures, I shall pursue dark ones.

“And the darkest direction for me now is to marry a woman of great
property who loves me, and through her and her property to pursue, by
falsehood and chicanery and insincerity, the Courtenay crest. I shall
kill if I must to get it; I shall not regard it as a triumph unless I
trample the innocents to get it, slander and slaughter and destroy; and
all of this I shall enjoy.

“So never again will life, or Elizabeth, Duchess of Kingston, stay me;
there is nothing more she can do to me; she has done it all.

“Never again will the idea of destiny tempt me; no fortune unwrought by
a man himself is to be trusted. A man makes his own fortune. I have
fought and striven all my life for the simple thing of having a decent
man call me a decent man—just that—and since destiny has never had that
for me, I’ll have no more to do with destiny.

“Hereafter, then, let it be Lilith and the libertine. I shall make her
very happy, and the rest of the world—afraid.”

It grew dark and late. Lily had gone up to town unattended; he should
have got someone to go with her; he hoped she had secured someone to
come back. He ate a cold mutton sandwich and changed his shirt for a
better one, and changed his boots twice. He tried to read, and he tried
to write to Meadows to explain matters. When the rider clumped into the
stable yard he whipped a comb through his side hair, ran to the door,
and flung it open to the first sound of footsteps outside. “Yes,
darling—yes!” he cried.

“Righto. What? What?” said Sir Gregory Eustace, blinking in out of the
dark. “Courtenay. I say, good evening, what?”

“Oh, sir, I _do_ beg your pardon,” said Lance, overcome. He pulled
himself together. “Come in, sir, come in. I was … uh … expecting, you
know, someone else.”

“Sh’d say so. Yes. Darling, what?”

“Oh yes,” said Lance. “T. D. Darling, you know, Holcomb barrister. Nice
chap.”

“Nice chap, yes,” said Sir Gregory. “Don’t know him.” He stood in the
middle of the great hall while Lance got out the port.

“What can I do for you, sir?”

“Like old times, what? Accept, ah, apology.”

“Apology? I? Sir Gregory, what on earth …”

“Way I acted. City. Shakin’ jolly-well fist. That sort of rot.”

Lance recalled, now, in that awful moment when the yellow carriage met
him, Elaine running toward him in some sort of distress, and at the
corner, the small angry figure of the baronet. “Why, sir, I noticed
nothing.”

“Decent of you, but _haw!_ must confess. Very angry. Book, y’know.
Gibbon, _Decline and Fall._ Blamed you.”

“You were angry at me because of the book?”

“Way you handed it over. Source book. Hah! Blooming masterpiece. Never
do anything like it in three lifetimes. All my work, up the spout, what?
Years. Thought you were making a fool o’ me.”

“My dear Sir Gregory, I didn’t read a blessed thing in the book but the
title. I heard it was good, that’s all.”

“Thought o’ that later. Upset, y’know. Forbade Elaine speak to you. Hah!
Defied me, see that? Right on London street, what? Lots o’ pepper, that
gel.” He raised his glass. “Cheers.”

“Cheer’o. … I’m terribly sorry if the book …”

“Not’tall, old chap. Good of you. Well, I’ll pop. Very, very decent of
you. ’Night.”

Lance saw him to the door. “Good night, sir.”

“Start on something else now. Blessed ’f I know what, what? ’Night. Very
decent of you, old chap.”

“Good night.” He held the door open and looked out into the blackness,
hearing a dwindling mutter around to the stable yard of “Decent of you.
Awfully decent. Decent chap. …”

It grew really late, and Lance’s worriment reached a peak and passed it.
If she’s not here by ten, he thought, then she’ll stay over and be here
tomorrow. And as he concluded this, he heard the hoofs outside. He ran
to the door, and snatched it open at the first step, saying nothing at
all this time.

And a good thing too; it was a dusty footman—Haines, of Blanton House.

“Ah. Good evening, Haines.”

“Evenin’, sir. Letter for you.”

Lance took the letter curiously. It bore his name, nothing else, on the
outside, and was sealed without a signet. He left it on the hall table
and brought Haines a shilling and a spot of brandy. “Thankee’ sir,” said
the man, and with simultaneous motions threw the brandy down his throat
and the shilling into his pocket. He saluted and left.

Lance took the letter to an easy chair and sat down with his back to two
candles. Something told him he must settle himself and take this at
ease.

He opened it and grunted. Lilith.

He read:

  _My very darling:_

  _I must say what I have to say briefly and quickly, or never say it at
  all._

  _I have told the Duchess that we would marry if it suited you. She
  said immediately that we must not. I’m afraid I rather lost my head at
  that but now I confess she is right. Her reason, and this is exactly
  what she said, is this: “If you marry him, I shall tell you who your
  mother is.”_

  _Lance, I can’t tell you what she means—I don’t know. I have known her
  all my life. I have not known anything of my parents. And darling, it
  does not matter whether or not her horrid suggestion is true—she would
  use it, you know she would._

  _I told you she would punish me because I wanted to leave her. And you
  know how far she will go to punish you. There is nothing we can do, my
  darling. She has won again, as she always wins._

  _I was free to come to you and tell you, but I dare not. I shall
  remain in England … she is keeping her promise about the Kingston
  lands here, but I mistrust it; doubtless she will let it all revert to
  the Meadows when she dies. I have earned her hatred, and I think that
  she would express it so._

  _Beloved … oh, my beloved … go to your Elaine and be happy with her.
  High enough is—high enough, my dear._

  _Your own,_

  _Lilith_

  _P.S. If you think of me as a sister, then at least you may love me a
  little._

There was a spatter of tears across the shaky postscript.

Slowly Lance lowered the letter to his knee and bowed his head.

Strike Elizabeth Chudleigh with a zephyr and she’ll respond with a
hurricane.

Lilith … Lilith … (Lilith was the devil’s brother.)

(Who the devil had told her about Elaine?)

I … devil?

“Oh, _no!”_ Lance said aloud. And as he said it, madness trickled out of
him like a dark fluid and lay all about him before it evaporated
spiritously, leaving of itself no trace; and he saw the meaning of that
pleasure which had eluded him all his life.

He had striven for what Barrowbridge felt he should have, so hard that
when fortune handed him a silver platter piled with happy fruits, he was
suspicious even of the platter, and especially of the donor. He had
taken as his own the revenge of an old man, confusing it with the
bright, dark desire to be a libertine—a devil if you like—that lives in
all men. And after all, there had been Lilith.

But when, he demanded of himself, were you ever something that you
wanted to be, when did you strive for something because you wanted it?
Where is the one thing you have ever found that you wanted?

Unaccountably, he felt wonderful. Marvelous. He closed his eyes and
looked at tomorrow, and made a wish. He kissed the wish.



AFTERWARD


THE STORY OF ELIZABETH Chudleigh is substantially true; she was, and she
did, all the things herein described. She was undoubtedly an
extraordinary woman. Perhaps it would be of interest to the reader to
know what happened to her afterward.

She left England in 1776, after having been found guilty in the trial by
the House of Lords, and never returned.

She finally repaired to St. Petersburgh, where she became fast friends
with Catherine the Great. There she built a fabulous estate, calling it
Chudleigh. Catherine was nine years her junior—specifically, 50 to the
Duchess’s 59 years; and one of the most intriguing of conjectures is the
nature of the reminiscences these two colorful old biddies must have
shared over their tea.

Elizabeth, Duchess of Kingston, died in 1788 at the age of 68, and the
title died with her. The estate did indeed go to Charles Meadows, a
nephew of the Duke, though Evelyn Meadows, who had brought the suit for
bigamy, was still alive.

These odds and ends might be of interest to you, too, as they were to
me:

The suit for jactitation of marriage has descended to the common law and
is a legitimate action, though still extremely rare.

It was not until 1835 that consanguineous marriages in England became
automatically void. Before that, they were voidable but quite binding
and valid until voided.

The earldom of Devon, which died in Padua in 1556 in the person of
Edward Courtenay, was twice gained and lost, once by a Blount and once
by a Cavendish. In 1831 one William Courtenay, a respected clerk of
Parliament, equipped with a far-reaching genealogy and the fact of
omission of the _de corpore suo_ clause in the ancient Courtenay
patent—that is to say, technically succession need not follow from the
duke’s issue, but was allowable from a collateral—actually succeeded in
reviving the title, and it still exists.



AFTERWORD


THE AUTHOR URGES HISTORICALLY minded sharpshooters to draw their beads
on this narrative, and wishes them good hunting. They will find certain
licenses in my Libertine—as a small example, the unseasonably warm
weather when everyone _knows_ Elizabeth’s suit for jactitation took
place in February 1769—and more power to them. When they are done, let
them proceed to Aesop and delete everything they find there about
talking animals.

In short, this is a fable, written by and for the dilettante of the
fabulous. It was extraordinarily easy and pleasant to write and it is
hoped that it is correspondingly easy and pleasant to read.

Acknowledgment must be made to those without whom the book and the
author surely never would have been known at all. First, there is Mr. T.
H. White, whose _Age of Scandal_ served up Elizabeth Chudleigh, hot and
crackling in her transparent gown. Mr. Theodore Sturgeon assisted nobly
with the research, Mr. Jean Shepherd pushed and _pushed_ at the author
until he was, in the world of books, born; and last mentioned but first
of all, the Night People whose battle-cry is Excelsior, and whose humor
and forbearance are really responsible for the work.



A BIOGRAPHY OF THEODORE STURGEON


Theodore Hamilton Sturgeon (1918–1985) is the acclaimed author of eleven
novels and more than two hundred short stories. Considered to be among
the most influential writers of science fiction’s “Golden Age,” he won
the International Fantasy Award for his novel _More Than Human_, and the
Hugo and Nebula Awards for his short story “Slow Sculpture.”

Born Edward Hamilton Waldo in Staten Island, New York, Sturgeon was the
son of Edward Molineaux Waldo, a paint and dye manufacturer, and
Christine Hamilton Waldo, a teacher. At the age of eleven, following his
mother’s remarriage, his name was legally changed to Theodore Sturgeon.

Sturgeon began writing stories and poems during the three years he spent
working as an engine room laborer on a freighter. Beginning in 1938, he
published short stories for genre and general market publications
including _Astounding_ (now _Analog Science Fiction and Fact_), _Unknown
Worlds of Science Fiction_, and _Argosy_. His groundbreaking short story
“The World Well Lost” (1953), which was among the first science fiction
stories to include positive themes of homosexuality, went on to win the
Gaylactic Spectrum Award in 2000.

Sturgeon’s 1953 novel _More Than Human_ was considered groundbreaking
for science fiction in its stylistic daring, fine characterization, and
visionary impact. Offering the idea that the next step in human
evolution was a gestalt organism composed of people with different and
strange talents who “bleshed,” _More Than Human_ was an inspiration to
many in the 1960s counterculture, including artists and musicians such
as the Grateful Dead and Crosby, Stills and Nash.

In the 1960s, Sturgeon ventured into television writing, penning the
screenplays for two of the most popular _Star Trek_ episodes: “Shore
Leave” (1966) and “Amok Time” (1967). He is credited with inventing the
story of Spock’s sex life, as well as the famous Vulcan greeting, “Live
long and prosper,” and (with Leonard Nimoy) its accompanying hand
signal. Two of Sturgeon’s stories were adapted for _The New Twilight
Zone_, and his novella _Killdozer!_ (1944) became a television movie in
1974. He is also the creator of Sturgeon’s Law—90 percent of everything
is crap—which he developed to counter the common denigration of science
fiction as a genre.

Beloved by critics and readers alike, Sturgeon inspired a generation of
authors across genres, such as Samuel R. Delany, Michael Chabon,
Jonathan Lethem, Octavia E. Butler, Karen Joy Fowler, and Rad Bradbury.
Kurt Vonnegut considered Sturgeon to be one of the best writers in
America, and Sturgeon served as inspiration for Vonnegut’s recurring
character, Kilgore Trout.

Survived by his seven children, Sturgeon died in Eugene, Oregon, on May
8, 1985. In 2000, he was posthumously inducted into the Science Fiction
Hall of Fame.

[bio]

The decree wherein Sturgeon is officially adopted by his stepfather
(William “Argyll” D. Sturgeon) and his mother, and his last name is
changed accordingly, from “Waldo” to “Sturgeon.” (Photo courtesy of
Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer Research Library, University of
Kansas.)

[bio]

Sturgeon’s report card from the Pennsylvania State Nautical Schoolship
“Annapolis” postmarked April 10, 1937, showing his rank as last in his
class of cadets. (Photo courtesy of Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer
Research Library, University of Kansas.)

[bio]

Sturgeon with his third wife, Marion McGahan, and (left to right)
daughter Tandy (b. 1954), son Robin (b. 1952), and daughter Noël (b.
1956).

[bio]

A typescript page from _More Than Human_ with handwritten edits. (Photo
courtesy of Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer Research Library,
University of Kansas.)

[bio]

A page from Sturgeon’s “inspiration file.” (Photo courtesy of Special
Collections, Kenneth Spencer Research Library, University of Kansas.)

[bio]

Notes, dated 6/12/66 and entitled “Spock Blows Top,” for an episode of
_Star Trek_ that Sturgeon wrote, ultimately titled “Amok Time.” (Photo
courtesy of Special Collections, Kenneth Spencer Research Library,
University of Kansas.)

[bio]

Sturgeon in his library.

[bio]

The Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award trophy, designed by Elden Tefft.
The Gunn Center for the Study of Science Fiction at the University of
Kansas presents the award annually for the genre’s best short stories of
the year. (Photo courtesy of the Gunn Center for the Study of Science
Fiction.)

[bio]

From left to right, author N. K. Jemisin; Noël Sturgeon, Theodore’s
daughter and trustee of the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust; and author
Samuel R. Delany at a May 4, 2011, tribute to Sturgeon, sponsored by the
_New York Review of Science Fiction._ (Photo courtesy of Marc Blackman.)

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this ebook onscreen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of the
publisher.

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents
either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used
fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead,
businesses, companies, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 1956 by Frederick R. Ewing

Cover design by Mauricio Diaz

978-1-4804-1010-7

This edition published in 2013 by Open Road Integrated Media

345 Hudson Street

New York, NY 10014

www.openroadmedia.com

[colophon]



EBOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON


FROM OPEN ROAD MEDIA

[ad] [ad] [ad] [ad] [ad] [ad] [ad] [ad]

Available wherever ebooks are sold

[logo]

ALSO AVAILABLE:


The Complete Short Stories of Theodore Sturgeon Series

—now in hardcover and ebook!

[ad] [ad] [ad]

On sale wherever books are sold from North Atlantic Books, distributed
by Random House

WWW.NORTHATLANTICBOOKS.COM

Join the conversation! Find fellow Sturgeon fans at
www.NABCommunities.com.

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

I. The Ultimate Egoist (1994)

II. Microcosmic God (1995)

III. Killdozer! (1996)

IV. Thunder and Roses (1997)

V. The Perfect Host (1998)

VI. Baby Is Three (1999)

VII. A Saucer of Loneliness (2000)

VIII. Bright Segment (2002)

IX. And Now the News… (2003)

X. The Man Who Lost the Sea (2005)

XI. The Nail and the Oracle (2007)

XII. Slow Sculpture (2009)

XIII. Case and the Dreamer (2010)

[ad] North Atlantic Books

[logo2]

OPEN ROAD INTEGRATED MEDIA is a digital publisher and multimedia content
company. Open Road creates connections between authors and their
audiences by marketing its ebooks through a new proprietary online
platform, which uses premium video content and social media.

VIDEOS, ARCHIVAL DOCUMENTS, AND NEW RELEASES

Sign up for the Open Road Media newsletter and get news delivered
straight to your inbox.

Sign up now at

www.openroadmedia.com/newsletters

FIND OUT MORE AT

WWW.OPENROADMEDIA.COM

FOLLOW US:

@OPENROADMEDIA AND

FACEBOOK.COM/OPENROADMEDIA
