[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon circa 1946, in New York City, with his sister-in-law.

[]

Copyright © 1997 the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1946, 1947, 1948, 1953, 1955 by Theodore
Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Foreword copyright ©
1996 by Paramount Pictures; reprinted from _The Joy Machine_ by kind
permission of the publisher and the author. All rights reserved. No
portion of this book, except for brief review, may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise —
without the written permission of the publisher. For information contact
North Atlantic Books.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover art _Sun Spots_ © Jacek Yerka 1994
Cover design by Paula Morrison

_Thunder and Roses_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native
Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are
to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

eISBN: 978-1-58394-748-7

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:

Sturgeon, Theodore.

    Thunder and Roses / Theodore Sturgeon.
        p.   cm — (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon; v. 4)
    I. Science fiction, American.   I. Title.   II. Series: Sturgeon,
Theodore.
Short Stories; v. 4
PS3569.T875A6   1997
813′,54—dc21

94–21610

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the fourth of a series of volumes that will collect all of
his short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel. The
volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized chronologically
by order of composition (insofar as it can be determined). This fourth
volume contains stories written between early 1946 and the end of 1947.
One is being published here for the first time; and three others have
never before appeared in a Sturgeon collection.

Preparation of each of these volumes would not be possible without the
hard work and invaluable participation of Noël Sturgeon, Debbie Notkin,
and our publishers, Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. I would also
like to thank, for their significant assistance with this volume, James
Gunn, the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, Marion Sturgeon, Jayne
Williams, Dorothe Tunstall, Ralph Vicinanza, Kyle McAbee, Judith Merril,
Faren Miller, Tom Whitmore, Angus MacDonald, Paula Morrison, Catherine
Campaigne, T. V. Reed, Cindy Lee Berryhill, and all of you who have
expressed your interest and support.

BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON

_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry_ Medusa](1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore_ _Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News …_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (2010)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

_Editor’s Note_

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword by James Gunn

Maturity

Tiny and the Monster

The Sky Was Full of Ships

Largo

Thunder and Roses

It Wasn’t Syzygy

The Blue Letter

Wham Bop!

Well Spiced

Hurricane Trio

That Low

Memory

There Is No Defense

The Professor’s Teddy Bear

A Way Home

Story Notes by Paul Williams

Appendix:
The original second half of _Maturity_



FOREWORD
BY JAMES GUNN


I MET TED Sturgeon because an editor called me. I had received letters
from editors about my manuscripts, a couple of rejections and then a
life-changing acceptance from Sam Merwin, Jr., but one day my telephone
rang and a voice said, “This is Horace Gold calling from _Galaxy_.”

It was the fall of 1950. I was a graduate student at the University of
Kansas, completing a master’s degree in English, and I had been writing
science fiction since 1948. I had gone back to graduate school under the
G.I. Bill in the summer of 1949, after a year of freelancing in which I
discovered that I could write and sell stories, though not fast enough
to make a living at it. But I continued to write stories as a graduate
student, and I had talked the English department into letting me write a
science-fiction play called “Breaking Point” for academic credit. I had
turned that into a novella. John Campbell rejected it at _Astounding_,
and I sent it off to a new magazine whose first issue had just come out.
It had attracted my attention by the variety of stories it was
publishing and the skillful way they were written. It was called
_Galaxy_.

I had published two stories in 1949, two so far in 1950, including one
in what had been my favorite magazine for a dozen years, _Astounding_,
and I would publish four more in 1951. It was enough to make me the envy
of other graduate students, who had yet to be published, but I had made
no particular impression on the science-fiction community. Now Horace
Gold was calling. What he had to say could make a difference.

“I’d like to buy your story ‘Breaking Point,’ ” Gold said, “but it’s too
long.”

“I’ll cut it,” I said quickly. I knew the process of translating a play
into fiction had left the story overburdened with dialogue.

“I don’t trust you to do it,” Gold said bluntly. He was either blunt or
charming. “And I need it done in a hurry. Would you let Ted Sturgeon cut
it by a third?”

I agreed without hesitation, even after I learned that Gold intended to
compensate Sturgeon by giving him one cent a word of my
three-cents-a-word payment. It still would be the longest story I had
ever sold, and for more money than I had ever earned from writing, and
Ted Sturgeon was a writer that I had admired, extravagantly, since I had
become aware that particular kinds of stories were written by particular
authors. I liked Asimov and Heinlein and van Vogt and De Camp and Simak
for various reasons, often different, but Sturgeon’s work was special.
His offbeat characters were more believable and his prose was more
carefully wrought. He was a writer’s writer.

I recognized Sturgeon’s touch in such early stories as “Ether Breather,”
“Microcosmic God,” “Memorial,” “Maturity,” “Mewhu’s Jet,” and “Thunder
and Roses” in _Astounding_ and in “The Sky Was Full of Ships” in
_Thrilling Wonder Stories_. When I occasionally came across a copy of
_Astounding_’s sister fantasy magazine, _Unknown_, I found that special
Sturgeon quality in “It,” “The Ultimate Egoist,” “Shottle Bop,”
“Yesterday Was Monday” and others. But I had missed out on a lot of
magazines during World War II, and Sturgeon’s work may have made the
greatest impression when I saw the anthologies that began to appear
after the war: “A God in a Garden” actually appeared in 1939, in Phil
Stong’s pioneer anthology _The Other Worlds_, but there was “Killdozer!”
in Groff Conklin’s _The Best of Science Fiction_ and “Minority Report”
in August Derleth’s _Beyond Time and Space_.

Then Sturgeon’s first novel, _The Dreaming Jewels_, was published in the
February 1950 issue of _Fantastic Adventures_. The great short-story
artist could write novels, too, I discovered, although to the end of his
days he was at his best in the shorter lengths.

As a matter of fact Sturgeon had had a novelette, “The Stars Are the
Styx,” in the first issue of _Galaxy_. I waited anxiously to hear from
Sturgeon or Gold about “Breaking Point.” I kept looking at issues of
_Galaxy_ as they came out, and at its forecasts for what would be
published in the next issue, thinking that maybe my novella was going to
get published without my being notified, or paid. I may have written to
Sturgeon, finally; I remember a letter from Sturgeon telling me that he
had put off working on the project for several months, and when he had
got around to it Gold said he didn’t want the story cut, he wanted it
rewritten.

That might have been the end of it, but it wasn’t: Lester del Rey
published “Breaking Point” in the March 1953 issue of _Space Science
Fiction_, and Piers Anthony wrote me a couple of decades later that
reading it had made him realize that it was possible to write stories
like that and get them published. It also was the title story for my
1972 collection. By the time “Breaking Point” was published, however, I
had attended my first World Science Fiction Convention and I had met
Sturgeon. He wasn’t at the convention, but my agent was. My agent was
Fred Pohl. Gold, who had disappointed me about my story, had recommended
me to Fred. I had earned my degree and was working as an editor in
Racine, Wisconsin, but I had continued to write and send stories to
Fred. I also had persuaded my employers to send me to the convention in
Chicago, had my first experience of meeting other writers and
science-fiction enthusiasts, and talked with Fred, who told me he had
just sold four stories for me. One of them, incidentally, was to
_Galaxy_, “The Misogynist.”

On the strength of that success, flimsy as it was, I quit my job and
returned to freelance writing. It seems rash now but times, and needs,
were simpler then. I made a trip to New York to meet editors, and I
arranged to meet Ted (I was calling him Ted now). Ted’s work had been
appearing regularly in _Galaxy_ (and in _Fantasy & Science Fiction_, as
well), including the classic “Baby Is Three” in the October 1952 issue,
which appeared just a couple of months before we met. I should have been
in awe—though only five years older, he was a dozen years more
experienced in writing and getting published—but Ted wouldn’t let me. He
was living in a house a former ship’s captain had built on a hill
overlooking the Hudson River, and he prepared lunch, and told me about
his life and his writing, and the unusual relationships among the movers
and shakers in New York science fiction.

Ted had a way of focusing his attention on people, of caring about them,
that made them love him. _The St. James Guide to Science Fiction
Writers_ called him “the best loved of all SF writers.” By the time I
left that evening for a party at Horace Gold’s apartment—Ted drove me to
the Manhattan side of the George Washington Bridge—I felt as if Ted was
a contemporary and maybe even a friend.

I followed Ted’s career from a distance. We met one other time in the
1950s, at the World Science Fiction Convention in Philadelphia in 1953,
when he gave a talk in which he announced what later came to be known as
“Sturgeon’s Law”: “Ninety per cent of science fiction is crud, but then
ninety per cent of everything is crud.” _More Than Human_, the novel
built around “Baby Is Three,” was published in 1953, _The Cosmic Rape_
in 1958, and _Venus Plus X_ in 1960. That, except for a novelization of
_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ and the posthumous _Godbody_ (1986),
made up his entire science-fiction novel production. He wrote five other
non-SF novels, including the rakish _I, Libertine_ and the sensitive
psychological case study of vampirism _Some of Your Blood_.

But Ted published twenty-six collections of short stories, beginning in
1948 with _Without Sorcery_ and continuing through such classics as _E
Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953), _Caviar_ (1955), _A Touch of Strange_ (1958),
_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964), _Sturgeon Is Alive and Well_ … (1971), _The
Golden Helix_ (1979). In 1994, North Atlantic Books began publishing a
ten-volume set of his complete short fiction. Ted also published a
collection of the Western stories he had written, three in collaboration
with Don Ward, _Sturgeon’s West_ (1973).

After a glorious flow of creativity in the 1950s, Ted faded from the
science-fiction scene. Partly it was writer’s block; in one famous
instance, Robert Heinlein sent him a letter filled with story ideas and
Ted turned at least two of them into stories. He also talked about the
novel he had been working on for years; it may have been _Godbody_.
Partly he was busy writing other things, including radio adaptations of
his own stories in the 1950s and 1960s, and television scripts based on
his work and that of others. All that came to a focus, it would seem, in
the two scripts he wrote for _Star Trek_, the classics “Shore Leave” and
“Amok Time.” He also adapted “Killdozer!” as a television movie, but a
revision by Ed MacKillop left him dissatisfied with the result. During
the 1960s and 1970s Ted also reviewed books for the _New York Times_ and
wrote a column for the _National Review_.

His leave of absence from science fiction, broken by the publication of
“Slow Sculpture” in 1970 and its Nebula and Hugo awards, was the reason
his 1971 collection was titled _Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ He also
won the 1954 International Fantasy Award for _More Than Human_, was
Guest of Honor at the 1962 World Science Fiction Convention in Chicago,
and received the 1985 World Fantasy Convention Life Achievement Award
the year he died.

He had hopes, periodically raised, regularly dashed, that his greatest
novel, _More Than Human_, would become a feature film.

I created the Intensive English Institute on the Teaching of Science
Fiction in 1974, as a response to the teachers who had written me during
my term as president of the Science Fiction Writers of America saying,
“I’ve just been asked to teach a science-fiction course. What do I
teach?” The Institute became a regular summer offering in 1978, and I
invited three writers to be guests for a week each: Gordon R. Dickson,
with his enthusiasm for story structure and theme; Fred Pohl, with his
broad range of experience as writer, editor, and agent; and Ted
Sturgeon, with his charm and empathy and concern for style. All three
accepted, and all three joined us every summer until Ted’s death.

Those were the days when I really got to know Ted. He and his wife Jayne
looked forward to a quiet week in Lawrence, I believe, and Ted liked the
endless variety of students, from those of college age to the elderly,
and from more than half a dozen foreign countries. They all loved Ted.
That was Ted’s greatest talent, and that was what he wrote about, the
varieties of love, particularly the love of outcasts or the handicapped
or the repressed. Love would save the world, he thought, if it ever got
the chance. Ted’s stories, John Clute wrote in _The Encyclopedia of
Science Fiction_, “constituted a set of codes or maps capable of leading
maimed adolescents out of alienation and into the light.”

All three visiting writers had their special areas of interest. Ted’s
was craft and style, titles and opening sentences. He talked about
“metric prose” and brought along an English translation of a book
published in French, which told the same pointless story in dozens of
different styles. He was good at titles; his favorite was “If All Men
Were Brothers, Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?” And he recalled a
contest with Don Ward (who by coincidence was my mentor as an editor in
Racine, and attended the second Institute session) to invent the best
opening sentence. Ted’s was “At last they sat a dance out.” [See “The
Blue Letter,” unpublished until this volume of _The Complete Stories of
Theodore Sturgeon_.] But he thought Don’s was better: “They banged
through the cabin door and squared off in the snow outside.” My favorite
was Ted’s opening sentence for _The Dreaming Jewels_, “They caught the
kid doing something disgusting out under the bleachers at the
high-school stadium.” It turned out he was eating ants because he had a
formic acid deficiency.

One of the projects that got started here at the University of Kansas
after Ted’s death, a decade ago, was a Writers Workshop in Science
Fiction, and one of the early participants was a university student
named John Ordover. A year later he told me he was going to return to
his native New York to become an editor. He got his wish, first at Tor
Books, then at Pocket Books, where he became editor of the _Star Trek_
series. But he returned to the Workshop every summer as a guest editor
and a vocal participant in the Campbell Conference, at which we sit
around a table and discuss a single topic. In the summer of 1995 John
brought something special along with him, the outline for a _Star Trek_
episode that Ted Sturgeon had proposed back in the 1960s but that had
never been produced. It was called “The Joy Machine,” and he asked me if
I would be interested in turning it into a novel.

I took a look at Ted’s outline—his original outline, typos and all—and
liked the idea. “The Joy Machine,” after all, was a variation on the
theme of 1962 novel, _The Joy Makers_, and I was still fascinated by the
interplay between happiness and aspiration, between pleasure and
struggle. In his outline, Ted saw pleasure, easily obtained and totally
satisfying, as a threat to human existence, and I saw ways of building
on Ted’s situation to say some other things about happiness and the
human condition. I agreed to write the novel. The result [_Star Trek,
The Joy Machine_, a novel by James Gunn, based on the story by Theodore
Sturgeon] was published in 1996.

My first contact with Ted Sturgeon came when Ted was asked to shorten my
story. My last came when I was asked to lengthen his story. There must
be a meaning in there somewhere.

James Gunn        
Lawrence, Kansas



MATURITY


DR. MARGARETTA WENZELL, she of the smooth face and wise eyes and flowing
dark hair, and the raft of letters after her name in the medical “Who’s
Who,” allowed herself to be called “Peg” only by her equals, of whom
there were few. Her superiors did not, and her inferiors dared not. And
yet Dr. Wenzell was not a forbidding person in any way. She had fourteen
months to go to get to her thirtieth birthday; her figure hadn’t changed
since she was seventeen; her face, while hardly suited to a magazine
cover, was designed rather for a salon study. She maintained her careful
distance from most people for two reasons. One was that, as an
endocrinologist, she had to make a fetish of objectivity; and the other
was the fact that only by a consistent attitude of impersonality could
she keep her personal charm from being a drawback to her work. Her work
meant more to her than anything else in life, and she saw to it that her
life stayed that way.

And yet the boy striding beside her called her “Peg.” He had since he
met her. He was neither her superior nor her inferior, and he was
certainly not her equal. These subconscious divisions of Dr. Wenzell’s
had nothing to do with age or social position. Her standards were her
own, and since Robin English could not be judged by any of them—or by
anyone else’s standards, for that matter—she had made no protest beyond
a lift of the eyebrow. It couldn’t be important.

He held her arm as they crossed the rainy street. He always did that,
and he was one of the half-dozen men she had met in her life who did it
unconsciously and invariably.

“There’s a taxi!” she said.

He grinned. “So it is. Let’s take the subway.”

“Oh, Robin!”

“It’s only temporary. Why, I’ve almost finished that operetta, and any
day now I’ll get the patent on that power brake of mine, and—” He smiled
down at her. His face was round and ruddy, and it hadn’t quite enough
chin, and Peg thought it was a delightful face. She wondered if it knew
how to look angry or—purposeful.

“I know,” she said. “I know. And you’ll suddenly have bushels of money,
and you won’t have to worry about taxis—”

“I don’t worry about ’em anyhow. Maybe such things’ll bother me when
your boy friend gets through with me.”

“They will, and don’t call him my boy friend.”

“Sorry,” he said casually.

They went down the steps at the subway terminal. Sorry. Robin could
always dismiss things with that laconic expression. And he _could_.
Whether he was sorry or not, wasn’t important, somehow; it was the way
he said it. It reduced the thing he was sorry for to so little value
that it wasn’t worth being sorry about.

Peg stood watching him as he swung up to the change booth. He walked
easily, with an incredible grace. As graceful as a cat, but not at all
like a cat. It was like the way he thought—as well as a human being, but
not like a human being. She watched the way the light fell on his
strange, planeless, open face, and his tousled head of sandy horsehair.
He annoyed her ever so much, and she thought that it was probably
because she liked him.

He stood aside to let her through the turnstile, smiling at her and
whistling a snatch of a Bach fugue through his teeth. That was another
thing. Robin played competent piano and absolutely knocked-out trumpet;
but he never played the classics. He never whistled anything else.

There was no train in. They strolled up the platform slowly. Peg
couldn’t keep her eyes off Robin’s face. His sensitive nostrils dilated,
and she had the odd idea that he was smelling a sound—the echoing
shuffle of feet and machinery in the quiet where there should be no
quiet. As they passed the massive beam-and-coil-spring bumper at the end
of the track, Robin paused, his eyes flickering over it, gauging its
strength, judging its materials. It had never occurred to her to look at
such a thing before. “What does that matter to you, Robin?”

He pointed. “First it knocks the trains pigeontoed. Then she’ll nose
into the beam there and the springs behind it will take up the shock.
Now why do they use coils?”

“Why not?”

“Leaf springs would absorb the collision energy between the leaves, in
friction. Coil springs store the energy and throw it right back … oh! I
see. They took for granted when they designed it that the brakes would
be set. Big as those springs are, they’re not going to shove the whole
train back. And then, the play between the car couplings would—”

“But Robin—what does it matter? To you, I mean. No,” she said quickly as
a thick little furrow appeared and disappeared between his eyes. “I’m
not saying you shouldn’t be interested. I’m just wondering exactly what
it is about such devices that fascinates you so.”

“I don’t know,” he said. “The … the integration, I suppose. The thought
that went into it. The importance of the crash barrier to Mrs. Scholtz’s
stew and Sadie’s date, and which ferry Tony catches, and all the other
happenings that can happen to the cattle and the gods who use the
subways.”

Peg laughed delightedly. “And do you think about all of the meanings to
all of the people of all of the things you see?”

“I don’t have to think of them. They’re there, right in front of me.
Surely you can see homemade borscht and a goodnight kiss and thousands
of other little, important things, all wrapped up in those big helical
springs?”

“I have to think about it. But I do see them.” She laughed again. “What
do you think about when you listen to Bach?”

He looked at her quickly. “Did I say I listened to Bach?”

“My gremlins told me.” She looked at him with puzzlement. He wasn’t
smiling. “ ‘You whistle it,” she explained.

“Do I? Well, all right then. What do I think of? Architecture, I think.
And the complete polish of it. The way old J. S. burnished every note,
and the careful matching of all those harmonic voices. And … and—”

“And what?”

He laughed, a burst of it, a compelling radiation which left little
pieces of itself as smiles on the faces of the people around them. “And
the sweating choirboys who had to pump the organ when he composed. How
they must have hated him!”

A train came groaning into the station and stopped, snicking its doors
open. “Watch them,” said Robin, his quick eyes taking inventory of the
people who jostled each other out of the train. “Not one in fifty is
seeing anything. No one knows how far apart these pillars are, or the
way all these rivets are set, or the cracks in the concrete under their
feet. They’re all looking at things separated from them in space and
time—the offices they have left, the homes they’re going to, the people
they will see. Hardly any of them are consciously here, _now_. They’re
all ghosts, and we’re a couple of Peeping Toms.”

“Robin, Robin, you’re such a _child!_”

“To you, of course. You’re older than I am.”

“Four days.” It was a great joke between them.

“Four thousand years,” he said soberly. They found a seat. “And I’m not
a child. I’m a hyperthymus. You said so yourself.”

“You won’t be for very much longer,” said Dr. Margaretta Wenzell. “Dr.
Warfield and I will see to that.”

“What are you doing it for?”

“You’ll find out when we send the bill.”

“I know it isn’t that.”

“Of course not,” she said. Her remark tasted badly in her mouth. “It’s
just … Robin, how long have you had that suit?”

“Uh … suit?” He looked vaguely at the sleeve. “Oh, about three years.
It’s a good suit.”

“Of course it is.” It was, too. She remembered that he had gotten it
with prize money from a poetry contest. “How many weeks room rent do you
owe?”

“None!” he said triumphantly. “I rewired all the doorbells in the
apartment house and fixed Mrs. Gridget’s vacuum cleaner and composed a
song for her daughter’s wedding reception and invented a gadget to hold
her cookbook under the kitchen shelf, with a little light that goes on
when she swings it out. Next thing I knew she handed me a rent receipt.
Wasn’t that swell of her?”

“Oh,” said Peg weakly. She clutched grimly at the point she was trying
to make. “How much are you in debt?”

“Oh, that,” he said.

“That.”

“I guess ten-twelve thousand.” He looked up. “Kcans Yppans. What are you
driving at?”

“_What_ did you say?”

He waved at the car card opposite. “Snappy Snack. Spelled backwards.
Always spell things backward when you see them on car cards. If you
don’t, there’s no telling what you might be mising.”

“Oh, you blithering _idiot!_”

“Sorry. What were you saying?”

“I was getting to this,” she said patiently. “There doesn’t seem to be
anything you can’t do. You write, you paint, you compose, you invent
things, you fix other things, you—”

“Cook,” he said, as she stopped for breath; and he added idly, “I make
love, too.”

“No doubt,” said the gland specialist primly. “On the other hand, there
doesn’t seem to be anything you’ve accomplished with all of these
skills.”

“They’re not skills. They’re talents. I have no skills.”

Peg saw the distinction, and smiled. It was quite true. One had to spend
a little time in practice to acquire a skill. If Robin couldn’t do
promisingly the first time he tried something, he would hardly try
again. “A good point. And that is what Dr. Warfield and I want to
adjust.”

“ ‘Adjust,’ she says. Going to shrivel up all the pretty pink lobulae in
my thymus. The only thymus I’ve got, too.”

“And about time. You should have gotten rid of it when you were
thirteen. Most people do.”

“And then I’ll be all grim and determined about everything, and generate
gallons of sweat, and make thousands of dollars, so that at age thirty I
can go back to school and get that high school diploma.”

“Haven’t you got a high school diploma?” asked Peg, her appalled voice
echoing hollowly against her four post-graduate degrees.

“As a senior,” smiled Robin, “I hadn’t a thing but seniority. I’d been
there six years. I didn’t graduate from school; I was released.”

“Robin, that’s _awful!_”

“Why is it awful? Oh—I suppose it is.” He looked puzzled and
crestfallen.

Peg put her hand on his arm. It had nothing to do with logic, but
something in her was wrenched when Robin looked hurt. “I suppose it
doesn’t matter, Robin. What you learn, and what you do with it, are
really more important than _where_ you learn.”

“Yes … but not _when_. I mean, you can learn too late. I know lots of
things, but the things I don’t know seem to have to do with getting
along in the world. Isn’t that what you mean by ‘awful’? Isn’t that what
you and Dr. Warfield are going to change?”

“That’s it. That’s right. Robin. Oh, you’re such a strange person!”

“Strange?”

“I mean … you know, I was sure that Mel Warfield and I would have no end
of trouble in persuading you to take these thymus treatments.”

“Why?”

With a kind of exasperation she said, “I don’t think you fully realize
that the change in you will be drastic. You’re going to lose a lot
that’s bad about you—I’m sure of that. But you’ll see things quite
differently. You … you—” She fought for a description of what Robin
would be like without his passionate interest in too many things, and
her creative equipment bogged down. “You’ll probably see things quite
differently.”

He looked into her eyes thoughtfully. “Is that bad?”

Bad? There never was a man who had less evil about him, she thought. “I
think not,” she said.

He spread his hands. “I don’t think so either. So why hesitate? You have
mentioned that I do a lot of things. Would that be true if I got all
frothed up every time I tried something I’d never tried before?”

“No. No, of course not.” She realized that it had been foolish of her to
mix ordinary practical psychology into any consideration of Robin
English. Obviously gland imbalances have frequent psychological
symptoms, and in many of these cases the abnormal condition has its own
self-justifying synapses which will set up a powerful defense mechanism
when treatment is mentioned. Equally obviously, this wouldn’t apply to
Robin. Where most people seem to have an inherent dislike of being
changed, Robin seemed to have a subconscious yearning for just that.

He said, “We get off at the next station.”

“I know.”

“I just wanted to tell you.”

“Where to get off?”

In utter surprise, he said “Me?” and it was the most eloquent
monosyllable she had ever heard. For the first time it occurred to her
to wonder consciously what he thought of her. It hadn’t seemed to
matter, before. What was she, in his eyes? She suddenly realized that
she, as a doctor meeting a man socially, had really no right to corner
him, question him, analyze and diagnose the way she had over the past
few weeks. She couldn’t abide the existence of a correctable condition
in her specialty, and this was probably the essence of selfishness. He
probably regarded her as meddling and dominating. She astonished herself
by asking him, point-blank.

“What do I think of you?” He considered, carefully. He appeared not to
think it remarkable that she could have asked such a question. “You’re a
taffy-puller.”

“I’m a _what?_”

“A taffy-puller. They hypnotize me. Didn’t you ever see one?”

“I don’t think so,” she breathed. “But—”

“You see them down on the boardwalk. Beautifully machined little rigs,
all chrome-plated eccentrics and cams. There are two cranks set near
each other so that the ‘handle’ of each passes the axle of the other.
They stick a big mass of taffy on one ‘handle’ and start the machine.
Before that sticky, homogeneous mass has a chance to droop and drip off,
the other crank has swung up and taken most of it. As the crank handles
move away from each other the taffy is pulled out, and then as they move
together again it loops and sags; and at the last possible moment the
loop is shoved together. The taffy welds itself and is pulled apart
again.” Robin’s eyes were shining and his voice was rapt. “Underneath
the taffy is a stainless steel tray. There isn’t a speck of taffy on it.
Not a drop, not a smidgin. You stand there, and you look at it, and you
wait for that lump of guff to slap itself all over those roller bearings
and burnished con rods, but it never does. You wait for it to get tired
of that fantastic juggling, and it never does. Sometimes gooey little
bubbles get in the taffy and get carried around and pulled out and
squashed flat, and when they break they do it slowly, leaving little
soft craters that take a long time to fill up; and they’re being mauled
around the way the bubbles were.” He sighed. “There’s almost too much
contrast—that competent, beautiful machinist’s dream handling—what?
Taffy—no definition, no boundaries, no predictable tensile strength. I
feel somehow as if there ought to be an intermediate stage somewhere.
I’d feel better if the machine handled one of Dali’s limp watches, and
the watch handled the mud. But that doesn’t matter. How I feel, I mean.
The taffy gets pulled. You’re a taffy-puller. You’ve never done a
wasteful or incompetent thing in your life, no matter what you were
working with.”

She sat quietly, letting the vivid picture he had painted fade away.
Then, sharply, “Haven’t I!” she cried. “I’ve let us ride past our
station!”

Dr. Mellett Warfield let them in himself. Towering over his colleague,
he bent his head, and the light caught his high white forehead, which,
with his peaked hairline, made a perfect Tuscan arch. “Peg!”

“Hello, Mel. This is Robin English.”

Warfield shook hands warmly. “I _am_ glad to see you. Peg has told me a
lot about you.”

“I imagine she has,” grinned Robin. “All about my histones and my
albumins and the medullic and cortical tissues of my lobulae. I love
that word. Lobulae. I lobule very much, Peg.”

“Robin, for Pete’s sake!”

Warfield laughed. “No—not only that. You see, I’d heard of you before.
You designed that, didn’t you?” He pointed. On a side table was a simple
device with two multicolored disks mounted at the ends of a rotating
arm, and powered by a little electric motor.

“The Whirltoy? Robin, I didn’t know that!”

“I don’t know a child psychologist or a pediatrician who hasn’t got
one,” said Warfield. “I wouldn’t part with that one for fifty times what
it cost me—which is less than it’s worth. I have yet to see the child,
no matter how maladjusted, glandular, spoiled, or what have you, who
isn’t fascinated by those changing colors. Even the colorblind children
can’t keep their eyes off it because of the changing patterns it makes.”

Peg looked at Robin as if he had just come in through the wall.
“Robin … the patent on that—”

“Doesn’t exist,” said Warfield. “He gave it to the Parents’
Association.”

“Well, sure. I made mine for fun. I had it a long time before a friend
of mine said I ought to sell the idea to a toy manufacturer. But I heard
that the Parents’ Association sent toys to hospitals and I sort of
figured maybe kids that needed amusement should have it, rather than
only those whose parents could afford it.”

“Robin, you’re crazy. You could have—”

“No, Peg,” said Warfield gently. “Don’t try to make him regret it.
Robin … you won’t mind if I call you Robin … what led you to design the
rotors so that they phase over and under the twentieth-of-a-second sight
persistence level, so that the eye is drawn to it and then the mind has
to concentrate on it?”

“I remember Zeitner’s paper about that at the Society for Mental
Sciences,” said Peg in an awed tone. “ ‘A brilliant application of
optics to psychology.’ ”

“It wasn’t brilliant,” said Robin impatiently. “I didn’t even know that
that was what it was doing. I just messed with it until I liked it.”

A look passed between Warfield and Peg. It said, “What would he
accomplish if he ever really tried?”

Warfield shook his head and perched on the edge of a table. “Now listen
to me, Robin,” he said, gently and seriously. “I don’t think Peg’ll mind
my telling you this; but it’s important.”

Peg colored slightly. “I think I know what you’re going to say. But go
ahead.”

“When she first told me about you, and what she wanted to try, I was
dead set against it. You see, we know infinitely more about the ductless
glands nowadays than we did—well, even this time last year. But at the
same time, their interaction is so complex, and their functions so
subtle that there are dozens of unexplored mysteries. We’re getting to
them, one by one, as fast as they show themselves and as fast as we can
compile data. The more I learn the less I like to take chances. When Peg
just told me about you as a talented young man whose life history was a
perfect example of hyper-thymus—infantilism, I think was the word she
used—”

“Da! Also goo!” laughed Robin. “She might have been kind enough to call
it, say, a static precocity.”

“Please don’t tease me about it, Robin.”

“Oh. Sorry. Go on, Mel.” Peg smiled at Warfield’s slight start. She had
done the same thing, for the same reason, the first time Robin called
her “Peg.”

“Anyhow, I certainly had no great desire to follow her suggestion—shoot
you full of hormones and sterones to help you reorganize your metabolism
and your psychology. After all, interesting as these cases are, a doctor
has to ration his efforts. There are plenty of odd glandular situations
walking around in the guise of a human beings. In addition, I had no
personal interest in you. I have too much work to do to indulge a
Messiah complex.

“But Peg was persistent. Peg can be _very_ persistent. She kept bringing
me late developments. I didn’t know whether you were a hobby or an
inverted phobia of hers. With some effort I managed to remain
uninterested until she brought me those blood analyses.”

“I’ll never get over my disappointment about what she did with those
blood specimens,” said Robin soberly.

“Disappointment? Why?”

“I had hoped she was a vampire.”

“Go on, Mel. Don’t try to keep up with him.”

“It wasn’t until I found out that you wrote ‘The Cellophane Chalice’—and
mind you, I never did like poetry, but that was _different_—and that you
also”—he ticked them off on his fingers—“wrote the original continuity
for that pornographic horror of a comic strip ‘Gertie and the Wolves,’
did the pipe-cleaner figurines that were photographed to illustrate ‘The
Tiny Hans Anderson,’ dropped a sackful of pine oil into the fountain at
Radio City purely because you wanted to see thirty thousand gallons of
bubbles, got thrown in the pen for it and while there saved the lives of
two prisoners and a guard by slugging it out with a homicidal maniac in
the bull pen; composed ‘The Lullaby Tree’ … by the way, how was it Rollo
Vincente got all the credit—and the money—for that song? It was Number
One on the hit list for sixteen weeks.”

“He did a swell job,” said Robin. “He wrote it down for me.”

“Robin can’t read music,” Peg said tiredly.

“Oh Lord,” said Warfield reverently. “I also learned that you invented
that disgusting advertising disease ‘Stoplight Acne’ and gave it for
free to an advertising copywriter—”

“Who is now making twenty thousand a year,” said Peg.

“That guy was desperate,” said Robin. “Besides, he gave me my gold
trumpet.”

“Which is in hock,” said Peg.

“Oh, why go on?” said Warfield. “Most important, I learned that you
didn’t eat regularly, that you suffered from recurrent eviction, that
you continually gave away your possessions, including your overcoats,
with such bland illogic that once you spent four months in the hospital
with pneumonia and complications—”

“Four winter months, I might point out,” said Robin. “So help me, I
don’t know how I’d have gotten through that winter otherwise. That was
well worth the price of an overcoat.”

“So Peg began to make a social issue of it. She said that you were a
fountainhead of art, science, and industry and that the dispersal of
your talents was a crime against humanity. At this stage I would be
inclined to agree with her even if she weren’t Peg.” Warfield looked at
the girl, and the way he did it made Robin grin.

“So now that we have your cooperation, we’ll go ahead, for the greater
honor and glory of humanity and creative genius, as Dr. Wenzell here
once phrased it. But I want you to understand that although there is
every chance of success, there might be no result at all, or … or
something worse.”

“Like what?”

“How do I know?” said Warfield sharply, and only then did Peg realize
what a strain this was to him.

“You’re the doctor,” said Robin. Suddenly he walked up to Warfield and
touched his chest gently. He smiled. He said, “Mel, don’t worry. I’ll be
all right.”

Peg’s emotional pop-valve let go a hysterical giggle. Warfield turned
abruptly away and roughly tore a drawer open and pulled out a thin sheaf
of documents. “You’ll have to sign these,” he said roughly. “I’m going
to get the solutions ready. Come on, Peg.”

In the laboratory, Peg leaned weakly against the centrifuge. “Don’t
worry, Mel,” she quoted mistily.

“From the time of Hippocrates,” growled Warfield, “it has been the duty
and practice of the physician to do everything in his power to engender
confidence in the patient. And he—”

“Made you feel better.”

After a long pause Warfield said, “Yes, he did.”

“Mel, I think he’s right. I think he _will_ be all right. I think that
what he has can’t be killed. There’s too _much_ of it!”

She suddenly noticed that Warfield’s busy hands had become still, though
he didn’t turn to look at her. He said, “I was afraid of that.”

“What?”

“Oh, I—skip it.”

“Mel, what’s the matter?”

“Nothing of any importance—especially to you. It’s just the way you talk
about Robin … the way your voice sounds—”

“That’s utterly ridiculous!”

Warfield chuckled a little. “Not that I can blame you. Really I can’t.
That boy has, without exception, the most captivating—”

“Mel, you’re being offensive. You certainly know me well enough to know
that my interest in Robin English is purely professional—even if I have
to include the arts among the professions. Personally he doesn’t appeal
to me. Why, he’s a _child!_”

“A situation which I shall adjust for you.”

“That was the n-nastiest thing anyone ever said to me!” she blazed.

“Oh, Peg.” He came to her, wiping his hands on a towel. He threw it
away—a most uncharacteristic gesture, for him—and put his hands gently
on her shoulders. She would not meet his eyes. “Your lower lip is twice
as big as it ought to be,” he said softly. “I am sorry, darling.”

“Don’t call me darling.”

“I lost my good sense. May I ask you to marry me again?”

“M-marry you again?”

“Thank the powers for that sense of the ridiculous! May I ask you again?
It’s about time.”

“Let’s see—what is the periodicity?—You ask me every nineteen days,
don’t you?”

“Aloud,” he said gravely.

“I—” At last she met his eyes. “No. No! Don’t talk about it!”

He took his hands off her shoulders. “All right, Peg.”

“Mel, I wish you wouldn’t keep bringing this up. If I ever change my
mind, I’ll speak up.”

“Yes, he said thoughtfully. “I believe you would.”

“It’s just that you—Oh Mel, everything’s so balanced now! My work is
finally going the way I want it to go, and I just don’t _need_ anything
else.” She held up a hand, quickly. “If you say anything about ductless
glands I’ll walk out of here and never see you again!”

“I won’t, Peg.”

There was a strained silence. Finally Peg said, “Are you almost ready?”

Mel nodded and went back to the bench. “You can bring him in now.”

Peg went out into the reception office. Something white and swift
swished past her face, went rocketing up into the corner of the ceiling,
hovered, and then drifted down to the floor in slow spirals. “What in—”

“Oh—Sorry, Peg,” Robin said, grinning sheepishly. He went and picked up
the white object, and held it out to her. “Tandem monoplane,” he
explained. “The Langley principle. If Langley had only had a decent
power plant, aviation history would have been drastically different. The
thing is really airworthy.”

“Robin, you’re impossible. Mel’s ready. Where’s the thing he asked you
to sign?”

“Hm-m-m? Oh, that—this is it.”

“You made that airplane out of it?”

“Well, I wanted to see if I could do it without tearing the paper. I
did, too.” He disassembled the craft busily, and smoothed the papers.
“They’re all right, see?”

“I ought to make you stand in the corner,” she said, half angrily. She
looked at him and suddenly, violently, resented Mel for what he had
intimated. “Come on, Robin,” she said. She took his hand and led him
into the laboratory.

“Sit down, Robin,” said Warfield without looking up.

“Per–dition!” said Robin, wide-eyed. “You’ve got more glassware here
than the Biltmore Bar. As the hot, cross Bunsen said to the evaporator,
‘Be still, my love.’ ”

Peg moaned. Warfield said, “And what did the evaporator say to that?”

“ ‘Thank you very much.’ You see,” said Robin solemnly, “It was a retort
courteous.”

“Do you think,” gasped Peg, “that we’ll be able to put a stop to that
kind of thing with these treatments?”

“Here,” said Warfield, handing him a glass. “Bottoms up.”

Robin rose, accepted the glass, bowed from the waist, and said, “Well,
here’s to champagne for my real friends and real pain for my sham
friends. Exit wastrel.” And he drained the glass.

“Now if you’ll rope him and throw him,” said Warfield, approaching with
a hypodermic. Robin sat on the examining table, quite relaxed, as the
needle sank into his arm.

“Never felt a thing,” he said briskly, and then collapsed. Peg caught
his head before it could strike the pillow and lowered it gently. She
took his wrist. His pulse felt as if it had lost its flywheel.

“Post-pituitary syncope,” said Warfield. “I half expected that. He’ll be
all right. It’s compensated for. There just isn’t any way of slowing
down neopituitrin. Watch what happens when the pineal starts kicking
up.”

Peg suddenly clutched at the limp wrist. “He’s … he’s—Oh Mel, it’s
stopped.”

“Hang on, Peg. Just a few more seconds, and it should—”

Under Peg’s desperate fingers, the pulse beat came in full and strong,
as suddenly as if it had been push button turned. With it, Peg began to
breathe again. She saw Warfield wipe his eyes. Sweat, probably.

Robin’s eyes opened slowly, and an utterly beatific expression crossed
his face. He sighed luxuriously. “Beautiful,” he said clearly.

“What is it, Robin?”

“Did you see it? I never thought of that before. It’s the most perfectly
functional, aesthetically balanced thing produced by the mind of man.”
Sheer wonder suffused his face. “I _saw_ one!”

“What was it?”

“A baseball bat!”

Warfield’s chin came up. “Well I’ll be … Peg, don’t laugh.” Peg was
hardly likely to. “You know, he’s about right?”

“I’ll think about aesthetics later,” said Peg with some heat. “Is he
going to be all right?”

“That’s all of the immediate reactions that I suspected. There’ll be
some accelerated mental states—melancholia and exuberance alternating
pretty rapidly and pretty drastically. He’ll have to have some outlet
for stepped-up muscular energy. Then he’ll sleep.”

“I’m glad it’s over.”

“Over?” said Warfield, and went out. She called after him, but he went
straight out through the office.

Robin sat up and shook his head violently. “How did—”

Peg took his upper arm. “Sit up, Robin. Up and go.” She raised him, but
instead of merely sitting up, he rose and pulled away from her. He paced
rapidly down the laboratory, turned and came back. His face held that
pitiable, puzzled look, with the deep crease between his brows. He
walked past her, his eyes distant; then he whirled suddenly on her. His
smile was brilliant. “Peg!” he shouted. “I didn’t expect to see you
here!” His eyes drifted past her face, gazed over her shoulder, and he
turned and looked around the walls. “Where, incidentally, is ‘here’?”

“Dr. Warfield’s laboratory.”

“Mel. Oh … Mel. Yes, of course. I must be getting old.”

“Perhaps you are.”

He put his hand on his chest, just below his throat. “What would my
thymus be doing about now? Trying to think of something quotable to say
as its last words?”

“It may be some time,” she smiled. “But I imagine it’s on its way out.
Get your coat on. I’ll go home with you.”

“What on earth for?”

She considered, and then decided to tell him the truth. “You’re full of
sterones and hormones and synthetic albuminoids, you know. It isn’t
dangerous, but glandular balance is a strange thing, and from the
treatment you just got you’re liable to do anything but levitate—and
knowing you,” she added, “even that wouldn’t surprise me.”

“Gosh. I didn’t realize that I might be a nuisance to people.”

“You didn’t realize … why, there was a pretty fair list of possibilities
of what might happen to you in that release you signed.”

“There was? I didn’t read it.”

“Robin English, I don’t know what I’m supposed to do with you.”

“Haven’t you already done it?” he shrugged. “What’s the odds? Mel said
I’d have to sign it, and I took his word for it.”

“I wish,” said Peg fervently, “that I could guarantee the change in your
sense of values the way I can the change in your hormone adjustment.
You’re going to have to be educated! And let this be the first
lesson—_never_ sign anything without reading it first! What are you
laughing at, you idiot?”

“I was just thinking how I would stall things if I go to work for some
big outfit and have to sign a payroll,” he chuckled.

“Get your coat,” said Peg, smiling. “And stop your nonsense.”

They took a taxi, after all. In spite of Robin’s protests, Peg wouldn’t
chance anything else after Robin:

Nearly fainted on the street from a sudden hunger, and when taken to a
restaurant got petulant to the point of abusiveness when he found there
was no Tabasco in the place, advancing a brilliant argument with the
management to the effect that they should supply same to those who
desired it even if what the customer _had_ ordered was four pieces of
seven-layer cake.

Ran half a block to give a small boy with a runny nose his very
expensive embroidered silk handkerchief.

Bumped into a lamp-post, lost his temper and swung at it, fracturing
slightly his middle phalanx annularis.

Indulged in a slightly less than admirable remorseful jag in which he
recounted a series of petty sins—and some not too petty at that—and cast
wistful eyes at the huge wheels of an approaching tractor-trailer.

Went into gales of helpless laughter over Peg’s use of the phrase “Signs
of the times” and gaspingly explained to her that he was suffering from
sinus of the thymus.

And the payoff—the instantaneous composition of eleven verses of an
original song concerning one “Stella with the Springy Spine,” which was
of far too questionable a nature for him to carol at the top of his
voice the way he did. She employed a firmness just short of physical
force and at last managed to bundle him into a cab, in which he could
horrify no one but the driver, who gave Peg a knowing wink which
infuriated her.

After getting in his rooms—a feat which required the assistance of
Landlady Gridget’s passkey, since he had lost his, and the sufferance of
a glance of deep suspicion from the good lady—Robin, who had been
unnaturally silent for all of eight minutes, shucked off his coat and
headed for the studio couch in one continuous movement. He rolled off
his feet and onto the couch with his head buried in the cushions.

“Robin—are you all right?”

“Mm-m-m.”

She looked about her.

Robin’s two-and-kitchenette was a fantastic place. She had never dreamed
that the laws of gravity would permit such a piling-up of miscellany.
There were two guitars on an easy-chair, one cracked across the head. A
clarinet case with little holes punched in it lay on the floor by the
wall. Curious, she bent and lifted the lid. It was lined with newspaper,
and in it were two desiccated bananas and a live tarantula. She squeaked
and dropped the cover.

Leaning against the far wall was a six-foot-square canvas, unfinished,
of a dream-scape of rolling hills and pale feathery trees. She looked
away, blinked, and looked back. It could have been a mistake. She
sincerely hoped that it was; but it seemed to her that the masses of
those hills, and the foliage, made a pretty clear picture of a … a—

“No,” she whispered. “I haven’t got that kind of a mind!”

There was a beautifully finished clay figurine standing proudly amongst
a litter of plasticine, modeling tools, a guitar tuner and a flat glass
of beer. It was a nude, in an exquisitely taut pose; a girl with her
head flung back and a rapt expression on her face, and she was
marsupial. On the bookcase was a four-foot model of a kayak made of
whalebone and sealskin. Books overflowed the shelves and every table and
chair in the place. There were none in the sink; it was too full of
dishes, being sung to by a light cloud of fruit flies. It was more than
she could stand. She slipped out of her coat, moved a fishbowl with some
baby turtles in it, and an 8 mm projector, off the drainboard and went
to work. After she had done all the dishes and reorganized the china
closet, where ivy was growing, she rummaged a bit and found a spray gun,
with which she attacked the fruit flies. It seemed to be a fairly
efficient insecticide, although it smelled like banana oil and
coagulated all over the sink. It wasn’t until the next day that she
identified the distinctive odor of it. It was pastel fixatif.

She tiptoed over to the arch and looked in at Robin. He had hardly
moved. She knew he was probably good for twelve hours’ sleep.

She bent over him and gently pushed some of his rough hair away from his
eyes. She had never seen eyes, before, which had such smooth lids.

Robin smiled while he slept. She wished she knew why.

Carefully she removed his shoes. She had to step very close to the couch
to do it, and something crunched under her foot. It was a radio tube.
She shook her head and sighed, and got a piece of cardboard—there was no
dustpan—and a broom and swept up the pieces. Among them she found a
stuffed canary and a fifty-dollar bill, both quite covered with “flug,”
or dust whiskers. She wondered how many times Robin had sat on that
couch, over that bill, eating beans out of the can and thinking about
some glorious fantasy of his own.

She sighed again and put on her coat. As she reached the door she
paused, debating whether, if she left a note anywhere in this monumental
clutter, he would find it. She wanted him to call her as soon as he
awoke, so she could have an idea as to his prognosis. She knew well that
in his condition, with his particular treatment, that the imbalances
should be all adjusted within twelve hours. But still—

Then why not wake him and remind him to call?

She suddenly realized that she was afraid to—that she was glad he was
asleep and … and harmless. She felt that she could name what it was she
was afraid of if she tried. So she didn’t try.

_“Blast!”_ she said half aloud. She hated to be hesitant, ever, about
anything.

She would leave word with the landlady to wake him early in the morning,
she decided abruptly.

She felt like a crawling coward.

She turned to the door, and Robin said brightly, “Goodbye, Peg darling.
Thanks for everything. You’ve been swell. I’ll call you when I wake up.”

“You young demon!” she ejaculated. “How long have you been awake?”

“I haven’t been asleep,” he said, coming to the archway. He chuckled.
“I’m sorry to say you are right about the canvas. I forgot about the
disgusting thing’s being so conspicuous.”

“Oh, that’s all … why did you pretend to be asleep?”

“I felt something coming and didn’t want it to.”

“I … don’t know what you mean; but why didn’t you let it come?”

He looked at her somberly. Either it was something new, or she had never
noticed the tinge of green in his eyes. “Because you wouldn’t have
fought me.”

“I don’t know what you’re talking about.”

The lower half of his face grinned. “You like most of the things I do,”
he said. “I like you to humor me in those things. Those things are”—he
put his fingertips to his chest, then flung them outward—“like this—fun,
from here out. I don’t want to be humored from here _in_.”

Over his shoulder she saw the big canvas. From this distance it was even
more specific. She shuddered.

“Goodbye, Peg.”

It was a dismissal. She nodded, and went out, closing the door softly
behind her. Then she ran.

Dr. Margaretta Wenzell was highly intelligent, and she was just as
sensitive. Twice she appeared at Mel Warfield’s laboratory at the hour
appointed for Robin’s succeeding treatments. Once Robin did not speak to
her. The second time she went, Robin did not show up. On inquiry, she
learned from the information desk at the medical center that Robin had
been there, had asked if she were in Dr. Warfield’s office, and having
been told that she was, had turned around and walked out. After that she
did not go again. She called up Warfield and asked him to forward
Robin’s case history and each progress report. Mel complied without
asking questions; and if Dr. Wenzell spent more time poring over them
than their importance justified, it was the only sign she gave that it
mattered to her.

It mattered—very much. Never had Peg, in consultation or out, turned a
patient over to another doctor before. And yet, she was conscious of a
certain relief. Somehow, she was deeply certain that Robin had not
ceased to like her. Consciously, she refused to give any importance to
his liking for her, but in spite of that she derived a kind of comfort
from an arduously-reached conclusion that Robin had reasons of his own
for avoiding her, and that they would come out in good time.

She was astonished at the progress reports. She could deduce the
probable changes in Robin from the esoteric language of the
reaction-listings. Here a sharp drop in the 17-ketosteroids; there a
note of the extraordinary effect on the whole metabolism, making it
temporarily immune to the depressing effect of the adrenal cortices in
colossal overdoses. An entry in the third week of the course caused Peg
two sleepless nights of research; the pituitrin production was
fluctuating wildly, with no apparent balancing reaction from any other
gland—and no appreciable effect on the patient. A supplementary report
arrived then, by special messenger, which eased her mind considerably.
It showed a slight miscalculation in a biochemical analysis of Robin’s
blood which almost accounted for the incredible activity of the
pituitaries. It continued to worry her, although she knew that she could
hardly pretend to criticize Mel Warfield’s vast experience in the
practice of hormone therapy.

But somehow, somewhere deep inside, she did question something else in
Mel. Impersonality had to go very closely with the unpredictable
psychosomatic and physiological changes that occurred during gland
treatments; and in Robin’s case, Peg doubted vaguely that Mel was able
to be as detached as might be wished. She tried not to think about it,
and was bothered by the effort of trying. And every time she felt able
to laugh it off, she would remember Mel’s odd statement in the
laboratory that day—but then, he had taken such a quick and warm liking
to the boy. Could he possibly resent him on her behalf? Again she felt
that resurgence of fury at Mel and at herself; and again she wished that
she could be left alone; she wanted to laugh at herself in the role of
_femme fatale_, but laughter was out of order.

The progress reports were by no means the only source of information
about Robin, however. In the tenth day of his treatment, she noticed an
item in the “Man About Town” column in the _Daily Blazes_.

Patrons of the Goose’s Neck were treated to a startling sight this AM
when Vincent (The Duke) Voisier came tearing into the place, literally
bowling over a table-full of customers—and their table—in the process of
hauling Vic Hill, songwriter extraordinary, out to the curb. The center
of attention out there semed to be a tousled-headed character by the
name of Robin English, who told this snooper mildly that Mr. Voisier was
going to produce his show. At that moment The Duke and Hill came sailing
out of the bistro, scooped up this Robin English and hurled him into a
taxicab, leaving your reporter in a cloud of carbon monoxide and wild
surmise. Now followers of this column know that Brother Voisier is
usually as excitable as the occupant of Slab 3 at the City Morgue. My
guess is missed if show business isn’t about to be shown some business.
Voisier is a rich man because of his odd habit of taking no wild
chances.…

And then there was a letter from a book publisher tactfully asking for a
character reference prior to giving one Robin English an advance on an
anthology of poems. She answered immediately, giving Robin an A-1
rating, and only after sending it off did she realize that a few short
weeks ago she would not have considered such a thing. Robin’s
reliability was a strange and wonderful structure, and his record
likewise.

At long last, then, came his phone call.

“Peg?”

“Wh … oh, Robin! Robin, how are you?”

“Sharp as a marshmallow, and disgustingly productive. Will you come
over?”

“Come over?” she asked stupidly. “Where?”

“Robin’s Roost,” he chuckled. “My McGee hall closet and bath. Home.”

“But Robin, I … you—”

“Safe as a tomb,” he said solemnly.

Something within her rose delightedly at the overtone of amusement in
his voice.

“I’m a big grown-up man now,” he said. “Restrained, mature, reliable and
thoroughly unappetizing. Come over and I won’t be anything but
repulsive. Impersonal. Detached. No … say semidetached. Like a
brownstone front. A serious mien. Well, if it’s before dinner I’ll have
a chow mein.”

“Stop!” she gasped. “Robin, you’re mad! You’re delirious!”

“Delirious and repressing, like a certain soft drink. Four o’clock suit
you?”

It so happened that it did not. “All right, Robin,” she said helplessly,
and hung up.

She discovered that she had cleared her afternoon so efficiently that
she had time to go home and change. Well, of course she had to change.
That princess neckline was—not daring, of course, but—too demure. That
was it; demure. She did not want to be demure. She wanted to be
businesslike.

So she changed to a navy sharkskin suit with a wide belt and a starched
dicky at the throat, the severest thing in her wardrobe. It was
incidental that it fitted like clasped hands, and took two inches off
her second dimension and added them to her third. As incidental as
Robin’s double-take when he saw it; she could almost sense his shifting
gears.

“Well!” said Robin as he stepped back from the door. “A mannequin, kin
to the manna from heaven. Come _in_, Peg!”

“Do you write your scripts out, Robin? You _can’t_ generate those things
on the spur of the moment!”

“I can for moments like this,” he said gallantly, handing her inside.

It was her turn for a double-take. The little apartment was scrupulously
clean and neat. Books were in bookcases; it had taken the addition of
three more bookcases to accomplish that. A set of shelves had been built
in one corner, very cleverly designed to break up the boxlike
proportions of the room, and in it were neatly stacked manuscripts and,
up above, musical instruments. There was more livestock than ever, but
it was in cages and a terrarium—she wondered where the white rats had
been on her last visit. Imprisoned in the bathtub, no doubt. There was a
huge and gentle pastel of a laughing satyr on the wall. She wondered
where the big oil was.

“I painted ol’ Splay-foot over it,” said Robin.

“You include telepathy among your many talents?” she asked without
turning.

“I include a guilty conscience among my many neuroses,” he countered.
“Sit down.”

“I hear you’re getting a play produced,” she said conversationally, as
he deftly set out a beautiful tray of exotic morsels—avocado mashed with
garlic juice on little toast squares; stuffed olives sliced paper-thin
on zwieback and chive cheese; stems of fennel stuffed with blue cheese;
deviled eggs on rounds of pimento; and a strange and lovely dish of
oriental cashews in blood-orange pulp.

“It isn’t a play. It’s a musical.”

“Oh? Whose book?”

“Mine.”

“Fine, Robin. I read that Vic Hill’s doing the lyrics.”

“Well, yes. Voisier seemed to think mine were—Well, to tell you the
truth, he called in Hill for the name. Got to have a name people know.
However, they are my lyrics.”

“Robin. Are you letting him—”

“Ah—shush, Peg! No one’s doing anything to me!” He laughed. “Sorry. I
can’t help laughing at the way you, looking like a Vassar p.g., ruffle
up like a mother hen. The truth is that I’m getting plenty out of this.
There just don’t seem to be enough names to go around on the billing. I
wrote the silly little thing at one sitting, and filled in the music and
staging just to round it off—sort of an overall synopsis. Next thing you
know this Voisier is all over me like a tent, wanting me to direct it as
well; and since there’s a sequence in there—sort of a duet between voice
and drums in boogie-beat—that no one seems to be able to do right, he
wants me to act that part too.” He spread his hands. “Voisier knows what
he is doing. Only you can’t have one man’s name plastered all over the
production. The public doesn’t take to that kind of thing. Voisier’s
treating the whole deal like a business. Show business is still
business.”

“Oh—that’s better. And what about this anthology of poems?”

“Oh, that. Stuff I had kicking around the house here.” His eyes traveled
over the neat shelves and bookcases. “Remarkable what a lot of salable
material I had, once I found it by cleaning up some.”

“What else did you find?”

“Some gadgets. A centrifugal pump I designed using the business end of a
meat grinder for the impeller. A way to take three-dimensional portraits
with a head clamp and a swivel chair and a 35 mm camera. A formula for a
quick-drying artist’s oil pigment which can’t contract the paint. A way
to drill holes through glass—holes a twenty-five thousandth of an inch
or less in diameter—with some scraps of wire and a No. 6 dry cell. You
know—odds and ends.”

“You’ve marketed all these?”

“Yes, or patented or copyrighted them.”

“Oh Robin, I’m _so_ glad! Are you getting results?”

“Am I?” The old, lovely, wondering look came into his face. “Peg, people
are crazy. They just give money away. I honestly don’t have to think
about money any more. That is, I never did; but now I tell people my
account number and ask them to send their check to it for deposit, and
they keep piling it in, and I can’t cash enough checks to keep up with
it. When are you going to ask me why I’ve been keeping away from you?”

The abruptness of the question took Peg’s breath away. It was all she
had been thinking about, and it was the reason she had accepted his
invitation. She colored. “Frankly, I didn’t know how to lead up to it.”

“You didn’t have to lead up to it,” he said, smiling gravely. “You know
that, Peg.”

“I suppose I know it. Well—why?”

“You like the eatments?” He indicated the colorful dishes on the coffee
table.

“Delicious, and simply lovely to look at. But—”

“It’s like that. This isn’t food for hungry people. Canapés like these
are carefully designed to appeal to all five senses—if you delight in
the crunch of good zwieback the way I do, and include hearing.”

She stared at him. “I think I’m being likened to a … a smörgasbord!”

He laughed. “The point I’m making is that a hungry man will go for this
kind of food as happily as any other. The important thing to him is that
it’s food. If he happens to like the particular titillations offered by
such food as this, he will probably look back on his gobbling with some
regret, later, when his appetite for food is satisfied and his
psychic—artistic, if you like—hungers can be felt.” Robin grinned
suddenly. “This is a wayward and wandering analogy, I know; but it does
express why I kept away from you.”

“It does?”

“Yes, of course. Look, Peg, I can see what’s happening to me even if I
am the patient. I wonder why so many doctors overlook that? You can play
around with my metabolism and my psychology and ultimately affect such
an abstract as my emotional maturity. But there’s one thing you can’t
touch—and that is my own estimate of the things I have learned. My sense
of values. You can change my approach to these things, but not the
things themselves. One such thing is that I have a violent reaction
against sordidness, no matter how well justified the sordidness may have
been when I did the sordid thing, whatever it was. In the past,
primarily the justification has been the important thing. Now—and by
‘now’ I mean since I started these treatments—the reaction is more
important. So I avoid sordidness because I don’t want to live through
the reaction afterward, and not so much because I dislike doing a sordid
thing.”

“That’s a symptom of maturity,” said Peg. “But what has it to do with
me?”

“I was hungry,” he said simply. “So hungry I couldn’t see straight. And
suddenly so full of horse sense that I wouldn’t reach for the pretty
canapés until I could fully appreciate them. And now—sit down, Peg!”

“I … have to go,” she said in a throttled voice.

“Oh, you’re wrong,” he said, not moving. He spoke very quietly. “You
don’t have to go. You haven’t been listening to me. You’re defensive
when I’ve laid no siege. I have just said that I’m incapable of doing
anything in bad taste—that is, anything which will taste bad to me, now
or later. And you are behaving as if I had said the opposite. You are
thinking with your emotions instead of your intellect.”

Slowly, she sank back into her chair. “You take a great deal for
granted,” she said coldly.

“That, in effect, is what the bread and cheese and pimentos and olives
told me when I told them about these trays,” he said. “Oh, Peg, let’s
not quarrel. You know that all I’ve just said is true. I could
candy-coat all my phrases, talk for twice as long, and say half as much;
and if I did you’d resent it later; you know you would.”

“I rather resent it now.”

“Not really.” He met her gaze, and held it until she began to smile.

“Robin, you’re impossible!”

“Not impossible. Just highly unlikely.”

He sprang to pour coffee for her—and how did he know that she preferred
coffee to tea? he had both—and he said, “Now we can talk about the other
thing that’s bothering me. Mel.”

“What about Mel?” she said sharply.

He smiled at her tone. “I gather that it’s the other thing that’s been
bothering you?”

She almost swore at him.

“Sorry,” he said with his quick grin, and was as quickly sober.
“Warfield’s very much in love with you, Peg.”

“He—has said so.”

“Not to me,” said Robin. “I’m not intimating that he has poured out his
soul to me. But he can’t conceal it. What he mostly does is avoid
talking about you. Under the circumstances, that begins to be
repetitious and—significant.” He shrugged. “Thing is, I have found
myself a little worried from time to time. About myself.”

“Since when did you start worrying about yourself?”

“Perhaps it’s symptomatic. This induced maturity that I am beginning to
be inflicted with has made me think carefully about a lot of things I
used to pass off without a thought. No one can escape the basic
urgencies of life—hunger, self-preservation, and so on. At my flightiest
moments I was never completely unaware of hunger. The difference between
a childish and a mature approach to such a basic seems to be that the
child is preoccupied only with an immediate hunger. The adult directs
most of his activities to overcoming tomorrow’s hunger.

“Self-preservation is another basic that used to worry me not at all as
long as danger was invisible. I’d dodge an approaching taxi, but not an
approaching winter. Along come a few gland-treatments, and I find myself
feeling dangers, not emotionally, and now, but intellectually, and in
the future.”

“A healthy sign,” nodded Peg.

“Perhaps so. Although that intellectual realization is a handy thing to
have around to ward off personal catastrophes, it is also the raw
material for an anxiety neurosis. I don’t think Mel Warfield is trying
to kill me, but I think he has reason enough to.”

_“What?”_ Peg said, horrified.

“Certainly. He loves you. You—” he broke off, and smiled engagingly. She
felt her color rising, as she watched his bright eyes, the round bland
oval of his almost chinless face.

“Don’t say it, Robin,” she breathed.

“—you won’t marry him,” Robin finished easily. “Whom you love needn’t
enter into the conversation.” He laughed. “What amounts of wind we use
to avoid the utterance of a couple of syllables! Anyway, let it suffice
that Mel, for his own reasons, regards me as a rival, or at least as a
stumbling block.” His eyes narrowed shrewdly. “I gather that he has also
concluded that your chief objection to me has been my … ah … immaturity.
No, Peg, don’t bother to answer. So if I am right—and I think I am—he
has been put in the unenviable position of working like fury to remove
his chief rival’s greatest drawback. His only drawback, if you’ll
forgive the phrase, ma’am,” he added, with a twinkle and the tip of an
imaginary hat. “No fun for him. And I don’t think that Brother Mel is so
constituted that he can get any pleasure out of the great sacrifice
act.”

“I think you’re making a mountain out of—”

“Peg, Peg, certainly you know enough about psychology to realize that I
am not accusing Mel of being a potential murderer, or even of
consciously wanting to hurt me. But the compulsions of the subconscious
are not civilized. Your barely expressed annoyance at the man who
jostles you in a crowded bus is the civilized outlet to an impulse for
raw murder. Your conditioned reflexes keep you from transfixing him with
the nearest nail file; but what about the impulses of a man engaged in
the subtle complexities of a thing like the glandular overhaul I’m
getting? In the bus, your factor of safety with your reactions can run
from no visible reaction through a lifted eyebrow to an acid comment,
before you reach the point where you give him a tap on the noggin and
actually do damage. Whereas Mel’s little old subconscious just has to
cause his hand to slip while doing a subcutaneous, or to cause his eye
to misread a figure on the milligram scale, for me to be disposed of in
any several of many horrible ways. Peg! What’s the matter?”

Her voice quivering, she said quietly, “That is the most disgusting,
conceited, cowardly drivel I have ever had to listen to. Mel Warfield
may have the misfortune to be human, but he is one of the finest humans
I have ever met. As a scientist, there is no one in this
country—probably in the world—more skilled than he. He is also a
gentleman, in the good old-fashioned meaning of the word—I _will_ say
it, no matter how much adolescent sneering you choose to do—and if he is
engaged on a case, the case comes first.” She rose. “Robin, I have had
to take a lot from you, because as a specialist I knew what an advanced
condition I had to allow for. That is going to stop. You are going to
find out that one of the prices you must pay for the privilege of
becoming an adult is the control of the noises your mouth makes.”

Robin looked a little startled. “It would be a little dishonest of me to
think these things without expressing them.”

She went on as if she hadn’t heard. “The kind of control I mean has to
go back further than the antrums. All of us have mean, cowardly thoughts
from time to time. Apparently the maturity you’re getting is normal
enough that you’re developing a man-sized inferiority complex along with
it. You are beginning to recognize that Mel is a better man than you’ll
ever be, and the only way you can rationalize that is to try to make him
small enough to be taking advantage of you.”

“Holy cow,” breathed Robin. “Put down that knout, Peg! I’m not going to
make a hobby of taking cracks at Mel Warfield behind his back. I’m just
handing it to you straight, the way I see it, for just one reason—to
explain why I am discontinuing the course of treatment.”

She was halfway to the door as he spoke, and she brought up sharply as
if she had been tied by a ten-foot rope. “Robin! You’re not going to do
anything of the kind!”

“I’m going to do exactly that,” said Robin. “I’m not used to lying awake
nights worrying about what someone else is likely to do. I’m doing all
right. I’ve come as far in this thing as I intend to go. I’m producing
more than I ever did in my life before, and I can live adequately on
what I’m getting and will get for this music and these patents and plays
and poems, to live for the rest of my life if I quit working
tomorrow—and I’m not likely to quit working tomorrow.”

“Robin! You’re half hysterical! You don’t know what you’re talking
about! In your present condition you can’t depend on the biochemical
balance of your glandular svstem. It can only be kept balanced
artificially, until it gradually adjusts itself to operation without the
thymus. In addition, the enormous but balanced overdoses of other gland
extracts we have had to give you must be equalized as they recede to
normalcy. You simply _can’t_ stop now!”

“I simply _will_ stop now,” he said, mimicking her tone. “I took the
chance of starting with this treatment, and I’ll take the chance of
quitting. Don’t worry; no matter what happens your beloved Mel’s nose is
clean, because of that release I signed. I’m not going to sue anybody.”

She looked at him wonderingly. “You’re really trying to be as offensive
as you possibly can, aren’t you? I wonder why?”

“It seems the only way for me to put over a point to you,” he said
irritably. “If you must know, there’s another reason. The stuff I’m
producing now is good, if I can believe what I read in the papers. It
has occurred to me that whatever creativeness I have is largely
compounded of the very immaturity you are trying to get rid of. Why
should I cut off the supply of irrationality that produces a work of art
like my musical comedy? Why should I continue a course of treatment that
will ultimately lead me to producing nothing creative? I’m putting my
art before my course, that’s all.”

“A good pun, Robin,” said Peg stonily, “but a bad time for it. I think
we’ll let you stew in your own juice for a while. Watch your diet and
your hours, and when you need professional help, get in touch with me
and I’ll see what I can do about getting Mel to take you on again.”

“Nice of you. Why bother?”

“Partly sheer stubbornness; you make it so obvious you want nothing of
the kind. Partly professional ethics, a thing which I wouldn’t expect a
child, however precocious, to understand fully.”

He went slowly past her and opened the door. “Goodbye, Dr. Wenzell.”

“Goodbye, Robin. And _good_ luck.”

Later, in her office at the hospital, Peg’s phone rang.

“Yes?”

“Peg! I’ve just received a note, by messenger, from Robin English.”

“Mel! What did he say?”

“He enclosed a check for just twice what I billed him for, and he says
that he won’t be back.”

“Mel, is it safe?”

“Of course it’s not safe! The pituitary reactions are absolutely
unpredictable—you know that. I can’t prognosticate anything at all
without the seventy-two-hour check-ups. He might be all right; I really
wouldn’t know. He’s strong and healthy and tremendously resilient. But
to stop treatment now is taking unfair advantage of his metabolism.
Can’t you do anything about it?”

“Can’t _I_ do anything?”

“He’ll listen to you, Peg. Try, won’t you? I … well, in some ways I’m
glad to have him off my neck, frankly. It’s been … but anyway, I’ll lose
sleep over it, I know I will. Will you see if you can do anything with
him?”

A long pause.

“Hello, Peg—are you still there?”

“Yes, Mel … let him go. It’s what he wants.”

“Peg! You … you mean you won’t see him?”

“N-no, I—can’t, Mel, I won’t. Don’t ask me to.”

“I hardly know what to say. Peg, what’s the matter?”

“_Nothing_’s the matter. I won’t see him, that’s all, and if I did it
wouldn’t do any good. I don’t care what hap—Oh, Mel, do watch him! Don’t
let anything … I mean, he’s _got_ to be all right. Read his stuff, Mel.
Go see his plays. You’ll be able to f-find out that way.”

“And if I don’t like the looks of what I find out, what am I supposed to
do about it?”

“I don’t know. I don’t know. Call me up whenever you find out anything,
Mel.”

“I will, Peg. I’m—sorry. I didn’t realize that you … I mean, I knew it,
but I didn’t know you felt so—”

“Goodbye, Mel.”

She hung up and sat and cried without hiding her face.

Robin’s first novel was published five months later, while his musical,
_Too Humorous to Mention_, was eight weeks old and just at the brilliant
beginning of its incredible run, while _The Cellophane Chalice_, his
little, forgotten book of verse, went into its sixth printing, and while
three new songs from _Too Humorous_ were changing places like the shells
in the old army game on the Hit Parade in the one-two-three spots. The
title of one of them, “Born Tomorrow,” had been bought at an astonishing
figure by Hollywood, and royalties were beginning to roll in for Robin’s
self-tapping back-out drill bits.

The novel was a strange and compelling volume called _Festoon_. The
ravings of the three critics who were fortunate enough to read it in
manuscript made the title hit the top of the bestseller lists and stay
there like a masthead. Robin English was made an honorary doctor of law
by a college in Iowa, a Kentucky Colonel, a member of the Lambs Club,
and a technical advisor to the American Society of Basement Inventors.
He dazedly declined a projected nomination to the State Senate which was
backed by a colossal petition; wrote a careful letter of thanks to the
municipality of Enumclaw, Washington, for the baroque golden key to the
city it sent him because of the fact that early in his life he had been
born there; was photographed for the “Young Men of the Month” page of
_Pic_, and bought himself a startlingly functional mansion in
Westchester County. He wrote a skillful novella which was sold in Boston
and banned in Paris, recorded a collection of _muezzin_ calls, won a
pie-eating contest at the Bucks County Fair, and made a radio address on
the evolution of modern poetry which was called one of the most
magnificent compositions in the history of the language. He bought a
towboat and had a barge built in the most luxurious pleasure-yacht style
and turned them over to the city hospital for pleasure cruises to Coney
Island for invalid children. Then he disappeared.

He was a legend by then, and there was plenty of copy about him for the
columnists and the press agents to run, so that in spite of his
prominence, his absence was only gradually felt. But gradually the
questions asked in the niteries and on the graveyard shifts at newspaper
offices began to tell. Too often reporters came back empty-handed when
assigned to a new R. E. story—_any_ new R. E. story. An item in the “Man
About Town” column led to a few reader’s letters, mostly from women,
asking his whereabouts; and then there was a landslide of queries. It
was worth a stick or two on the front pages, and then it suddenly
disappeared from the papers when all the editors were told in a
mimeographed letter that Mr. English’s business would be handled by his
law firm, which had on proud exhibition a complete power of attorney—and
which would answer no queries. All business mail was photostated and
returned, bearing Robin’s rubber-stamped signature and the name of his
lawyers. All fan mail was filed.

The categories of men who can disappear in New York are extreme. The
very poor can manage it. The very rich can manage it, with care. Robin
did it. And then the rumors started. The rôle of “Billy-buffoon” which
he had taken in his musical was a mask-and-wig part, and it was said
that his understudy didn’t work at every performance. English was
reported to have been seen in Hollywood; in Russia; dead; and once even
on Flatbush Avenue. Robin’s extraordinary talents, in the gentle hands
of idle rumor, took on fantastic proportions. He was advisor to three
cabinet members. He had invented a space drive and was at the moment
circling Mars. He was painting a mural in the City Morgue. He was
working on an epic novel. He had stumbled on a method for refining U-235
in the average well-equipped kitchen, and was going crazy in trying to
conceal that he knew it. He was the author of every anonymous pamphlet
cranked out to the public everywhere, from lurid tracts through
political apassionatae to out-and-out pornography. And of course murders
and robberies were accredited to his capacious reputation. All of these
things remained as engagingly fictional as his real activities had been;
but since they had nothing like books and plays and inventions to
perpetuate them, they faded from the press and from conversation.

But not from the thoughts of a few people. Drs. Wenzell and Warfield
compiled and annotated Robin English’s case history with as close a
psychological analysis as they could manage. Ostensibly, the work was
purely one of professional interest; and yet if it led to a rational
conclusion as to where he was and what he was doing, who could say that
such a conclusion was not the reason for the work? In any case, the book
was not published, but rested neatly in the active files of Mel
Warfield’s case records, and grew. Here a flash of fantasy was a sure
sign of suprarenal imbalance, there a line of sober thought was
post-pituitary equilibrium. One couldn’t know—but then, so little could
be known.…

Dr. Mellett Warfield was called, late one night, to the hospital, on a
hormone case. It was one of the sedative and psychology sessions which
he had always found so wearing; this one, however, was worse than usual.
The consultation room was just down the corridor from Peg’s office—the
office into which he used to drop for a chat any time he was nearby. He
had not seen the inside of it for three months now; he had not been
forbidden to come in, nor had he been invited. Since Robin disappeared,
a stretched and silent barrier had existed between the doctors.

And tonight, Mel Warfield had a bad time of it. It wasn’t the patient—a
tricky case, but not unusual. It was that silent office down the hall,
empty now, and dark, empty and dark like Peg’s telephone voice these
days, like her eyes … inside the office it would be empty and dark, but
there would be a pencil from her hand, a place on the blotter where she
put her elbow when she paused to think of—of whatever she thought, these
distant days.

Efficient and hurried, he rid himself of his patient and, leaving the
last details to a night nurse, he escaped down the corridor. He was
deeply annoyed with himself; that room had been more with him than his
patient. That wouldn’t do. Realizing this, he also recognized the fact
that his recent isolation in his own laboratory had been just as bad,
just as much preoccupation, for all the work he had done.
“Overcompensation,” he muttered to himself, and then wanted to kick
himself; here he was dragging out labels to stick on his troubles like a
damned parlor psychologist. He opened the half-glazed door and stepped
into Peg’s office.

He leaned back against the closed door and closed his eyes to accustom
them to the dark. Peg seldom used scent, but somehow this room was full
of her. He opened his eyes slowly. There was the heavy bookcase, with
its prim rows of esoterica, green and gold, black and gold; some twin
books, some triplets, some cousins to each other, but all of the same
concise family, all pretending to be Fact in spite of having been
written by human beings.… He shook himself impatiently.

The clock at the end of the desk sent him its dicrotic whisper, and
glowed as faintly as it spoke. Half-past three … in twelve hours it
would be like that again, only Peg would be sitting there, perhaps bowed
forward, her chin on one hand, sadly pensive, thinking of—oh, a line of
poetry and a ductless gland, a phrase from a song and a great, corrosive
worry. If he opened his eyes wide to the desk in the darkness, he could
all but see—

She sobbed, and it shocked him so that he cried out, and saw flames.

_“Peg!”_

Her shock was probably as great, but she made no sound.

“Peg! What is it? Why are you—it’s half-past—what are you—” He moved.

“Don’t turn on the light,” she said grayly.

He went round to her, held out his hands. He thought she shook her head.
He let his hands fall and stood stupidly for a moment. Then he knew,
somehow, that she was trembling. He dropped on his knees beside her
chair and held her close to him. She cried, then.

“You’ve seen him.”

She nodded, moving her wet cheek against his neck. He thought, something
has happened, and I’ve got to know what it it is—I’ll go out of my mind
if I have to guess. “Peg, what happened?”

She cried. It was hurtful crying, the crying which granulates the
eyelids and wrenches the neck-tendons with its sawtoothed, shameless
squeaks.

He thought, I’ll ask her. I’ll ask her right out, the worst possible
thing it could be, and it won’t be that. And then I’ll ask her the next
worst thing. He wet his lips. “Did—did he—” But it wouldn’t come out
that way. “He—asked you—”

She nodded again, her cheekbone hard and hot and wet against him. “I
just said yes,” she gasped hoarsely. “What else could I say? He
knew … he must have known.…”

Mel Warfield’s stomach twisted into a spastic knot, and his stopped
breath made thunder in his ears.

He stood up, and spoke to himself levelly, with great care. He spoke
silent, balanced things about behaviorism, about things which, after
all, happen every day to people.… “God damn it!” Peg wasn’t people! Peg
was—was—

“This is crazy,” he said. “This is completely insane, Peg. Listen to me.
You’re going to tell me the whole thing, every last little rotten
detail, right from the very beginning.”

“Why?”

“Because I want you to. Because you’ve got to.” A detached part of his
mind wondered what he would have to do to make his voice sound like that
on purpose.

“If you like,” she said, and he knew she was doing it because of him,
and not at all for herself.

She had been looking for Robin. She had been looking for him for
weeks—near the theaters which were showing his plays, at the libraries,
the parks—anywhere. She had admitted to herself that although his
development would follow logic of a sort, the logic would be of a kind,
or in a direction, that would be beyond her. Therefore a haphazard
search was her most direct course. Random radiation can interfere with
any frequency. A siren touches every note on any scale.

There is a place in the Village which serves no food or hard liquor, but
only wines and champagne. There are divans and easy-chairs and coffee
tables; it is more like a living-room, thrice compounded, than a café.
Dr. Margaretta Wenzell, bound for an obscure Italian place in the
neighborhood whence emanated rumors of spaghetti and green sauce, had
yielded to some impulse and found herself ordering a wine cooler here
instead.

She sat near the corner and looked at the surprisingly good paintings
which filled most of the space between windows. Out of her sight someone
stroked a piano with dolorous perfection. Near her a man with a book
studied its cover as if he saw all its contents. Opposite, a man with a
girl studied her eyes as wordlessly, and as if he saw all her soul.

Peg sipped and felt alone. And then there was a burst of laughter from
the hidden corner, and Peg came up out of her chair as if she had been
physically snatched. “It wasn’t that I recognized his voice,” she told
Mel, “or even the way it was used. I can’t really describe what
happened. It was like the impulse which had made me come into the
place—a reasonless, vague tugging, the kind of thing that makes you say
‘Why not?’ … it was that, but a thousand times more intense. That’s
important, because it’s one of the few things that shows how he’s
changed and—and what he is.”

She ignored her spilled drink and, like a sleepwalker, went back toward
the gentle drumming of voices and the casual piano.

He was there, facing her, leaning forward over a long, low coffee table,
his hands—they seemed larger or heavier than she had remembered—spread
on it, his head turned to the girl who sat at the end of the
chesterfield at his right.

She looked at the girl, at the four other people in the group, at the
bored man who played the piano, and back again at Robin and it was only
in this second glance that she recognized him, though, oddly, she knew
he was there.

He was different. His hair was different—darker, probably because he had
used something to control its coarse rebelliousness. His eyes seemed
longer, probably because in repose they were now kept narrow. But his
face as a whole was the most different thing about him. It was stronger,
better proportioned. The old diffidence was gone, gone with the charming
bewilderment. But there was charm in the face—a new kind, a charm which
she had never associated with him. In that instant of recognition, she
knew that she could never couple the words “childish” and “Robin”
together again.

She might have spoken, but her voice had quite deserted her. Robin
looked up and rose in the same split second, with an apparent
understanding of the whole situation and all of her feelings. “Miss
Effingwell!” he said joyfully. He was at her side in three long strides,
his strong hand under her elbow—and she needed it. “Remember me? I’m
Freddy, from the Accounting Department.” His left eyelid flickered.

Too faint to think, Peg said, “F-freddy. Of course.”

He steered her to the chesterfield, into which she sank gratefully.
“Miss Effingwell, I want you to meet my quaffing-cohorts. Left to right,
Binnie Morrow, Missouri’s gift to show business. Cortlandt—he’s a real
travelling salesman. Look out.”

“I travel in hops,” said Cortlandt surprisingly.

“The kind of hops they put in beer,” Robin supplemented, and laughed
that new, confident laugh again. “And those two gentlemen with
spectacles and intense expressions are Doctors Pellegrini and Fels, who
are psychiatrists.”

“I’m still an intern,” said Pellegrini, and blushed. He seemed very
young.

“And this,” said Robin, indicating a tweedy, thin little woman, “is Miss
McCarthy, a member of the second oldest profession.”

“He makes it sound very romantic,” smiled Miss McCarthy. “Actually I’m a
pawnbroker’s assistant.”

“Her motto is _‘In hoc ferplenti_,’ ” said Robin, and sat down.

“How do you do?” murmured Peg faintly, with a small inclusive smile.

“We were in the middle of a fantastic argument,” Robin said. “I just
asked for a simple little definition, and caused no end of fireworks.”

“Do go on,” said Peg. “What were you trying to define?”

“Maturity,” said Robin; and immediately, as if to attract attention away
from Peg’s white twisted face, “Cortlandt, where on earth do you buy
your ties?”

The salesman dropped his sandy lashes and pulled up his blazing
four-in-hand, which then and there served the only real function of its
gorgeous life, by holding the eyes of the party until Peg could calm
herself.

“Where were we?” asked Miss McCarthy at length.

“I had just said,” answered Binnie Morrow, the showgirl, “that all
psychiatrists were crazy.” She blushed. It went well with the glossy
frame of chestnut hair round her face. “And then Dr. Pellegrini said
that he and Dr. Fels were psychiatrists. I’m sorry. I didn’t know.”

“Don’t apologize,” said Fels.

“No, don’t,” said Robin. “If it’s true, it’s true whether or not we have
these madmen in our midst. If it’s false, I’m sure they can defend
themselves. What about it, Dr. Fels?”

Fels turned to the showgirl. “Why do you think psychiatrists are crazy?”

She twirled the stem of her glasses. “It’s the company they keep. The
stuff comes off on them.”

Pellegrini laughed. “You know, I think you’re right! In the clinic, we
work in pairs and in groups. That way we can watch each other. Sometimes
I think about the influences a psychiatrist must come under when he’s on
his own, and I get scared.”

“What about that?” Robin asked the older doctor.

“I don’t worry much. Few neurotics are particularly dominating. There
are minor monomaniacs, of course, but many of those just stay on the
single track and don’t have operating conflicts. It’s the ones with
internal frictions who come under our hands mostly, and they’re full of
opposed or nearly opposed forces which work out to overall weakness.”

“And immaturity,” added Robin.

The salesman looked up. “There’s a definition, then,” he said. “Turn it
around and make it positive, and you define maturity as strength and
sanity.”

Robin opened his mouth and closed it again. What was so very different
about his face?

“Strength and sanity,” said Miss McCarthy thoughtfully. “They don’t mean
anything. Strength—stronger than what? A man is stronger than an ant; an
ant can move much more, for its size and weight, than a man can. And
sanity—who knows what that is?”

Pellegrini said, “Sanity and maturity are the same thing.”

“Are all children insane?” smiled Miss McCarthy.

“You know what I mean,” said Pellegrini, almost irritably. “Maturity is
the condition achieved when sanity exists within an organism at its
ontogenetic peak.”

“That’ll hold you,” grinned Robin.

“It won’t hold me,” said Cortlandt. “What do you mean by ‘ontogenetic
peak’? The fullest possible development of function and facilities in
the animal concerned?”

“That’s right.”

Cortlandt shook his sandy head. “Seems to me I read somewhere that,
according to comparative anatomies, among warm-blooded animals, homo
sapiens is unique in the fact that physically, he dies of old age before
he is fully mature.”

“That’s right,” nodded Dr. Fels. “Just as anatomy comparisons indicate
that man should have a period of gestation of eleven months instead of
nine. The law recognizes that one—did you know? Anyhow, in psychiatry we
run into immaturity all the time. I might almost say that our job is
primarily to mature our patients … man is the only animal which stays
kittenish all its life. Maturity to a bull gorilla or a full-grown lion
is a very serious thing. The basics become very close—procreation,
self-preservation, the hunt. There isn’t time for the playful amusements
which preoccupy most of humanity.”

“Ah,” said Robin. “Poetry, then, and music and sculpture—they’re all the
results of the same impulses that make a kitten roll a ball of yarn
around?”

Fels hesitated. “I—suppose they are, viewed objectively.”

The sandy-haired Cortlandt broke in again. “You just came out with
another definition, by implication, Doctor. You said that a
psychiatrist’s job is primarily to mature his patients. Maturity, then,
would be what a psychiatrist would call adjustment?”

“Or psychic balance, or orgastic potency, or ‘cured,’ ” grinned Robin,
“depending on his school.”

Fels nodded. “That would be maturity.”

Miss McCarthy, the pawnbroker’s assistant, had spoken next. “I’m
interested,” she said to Pellegrini, “in what you said a moment ago
about the onto—uh—that fullest possible development of function and
facilities that you were talking about. If it’s true that humans die of
old age before they can grow up—then what would one be like if he did
fully mature?”

Pellegrini looked startled. The other psychiatrist, Fels, answered. “How
can we extrapolate such a thing? It has never happened.”

“Hasn’t it?” asked Robin quietly. No one heard, apparently, but Peg.
_What was so different about his face?_

Cortlandt said, “That’s quite a thought. In terms of other animals, your
fully developed man would be a silent, predatory, cautious, copulating
creature to whom life and living was a deadly serious business.”

“No!” said the showgirl unexpectedly and with violence. “You’re turning
him into a gorilla instead of a making him something better.”

“Why must he be something better?” asked Robin.

“He would have to be,” said the girl. “I just know it. Maybe he would be
like that if he was just an animal; but a man is more than that. A man’s
got something else that—that—” She floundered to a stop, tried again. “I
think he would become like—like Christ.”

“Or Leonardo?” mused Cortlandt.

“Well, doctor?” Robin asked Fels.

“Don’t ask me,” said the psychiatrist testily. “You’re out of my field
with a thing like this. This is pure fantasy.”

Robin grinned broadly. “Is it, now?”

“It is,” said Fels, and rose. “If you’ll excuse me, it’s getting late,
and I have a heavy day tomorrow. Coming, Pellegrini?”

The young doctor half-rose, sat down, blushed, and said, “If you don’t
mind, Fels, I’d just as soon—I mean, I’d kind of like to see where this
is leading.”

“Into pure fantasy,” reiterated Dr. Fels positively. “Come on.”

“Dr. Fels makes a good point,” said Robin to Pellegrini, not unkindly.
“You’d better take his advice.”

Bewildered, not knowing whether he had been asked to leave, torn between
his obvious respect for Fels and his desire to pursue the subject,
Pellegrini got up and left the table. As he turned away, the elder
doctor said to Robin, “You, sir, show an astonishing degree of insight.
You should have been a psychologist.”

Robin waved his hand. “I knew you’d understand me, doctor. Good night.”

They all murmured their good-nights. When the psychiatrists were out of
earshot, Cortlandt turned to Robin, “Hey,” he said, frowning. “Something
happened here that I missed. What was it?”

“Yes,” said Miss McCarthy. “What did he mean by that remark about your
insight?”

Robin laughed richly. “Dr. Fels was guarding the young Dr. Pellegrini
against evil influences,” he said through his laughter, “and I caught
him at it.”

“Evil—what are you talking about?” asked Binnie Morrow.

Robin said patiently, “Do you remember what Fels said a while back—that
the business of psychiatry is to mature its patients? He’s right, you
know. A psychiatrist regards emotional balance and maturity as almost
the same thing. And a patient who has achieved that kind of balance is
one whose inner conflicts are under control. These inner conflicts
aren’t just born into a person. A clubfoot or a blind eye or a yearning
for a womb with a view produce no conflicts _except in terms of other
people;_ the thing called society. So—” he spread his heavy hands—“what
modern psychiatry strives to do is to mature its patients, not in
ontogenetic terms, not on an individualized psychosomatic basis, but
purely and necessarily in terms of society, which is in itself
illogical, unfunctional, and immature.”

“That makes sense,” said Cortlandt. “Society as a whole gets away with
things which are prohibited in any well-run kindergarten, in the
violence, greed, injustice, and stupidity departments. We have to wear
clothes when the weather’s too hot for it; we have to wear the wrong
kind of clothes when the weather’s too cold. We can be excused of any
crime if we do it on a large enough scale. We—but why go on? What was
Fels protecting Pellegrini from?”

“Any further consideration of maturity in terms of the individual,
completely disregarding society. When we started considering the
end-product, the extrapolated curve on the graph, we were considering an
end which negates everything that modern psychiatry is and is trying to
do. So Fels called it fantasy and cleared out.”

“You mean he didn’t want Pellegrini’s fresh young convictions in the
worth of psychiatry upset,” said Miss McCarthy sardonically.

“But—” Binnie Morrow’s voice was anxious—“you mean that psychiatry and
analysis are worthless?”

“No!” Robin exploded. “I didn’t say that! The psychos are doing a noble
job, considering what they’re up against. The fact remains that their
chief occupation is in fitting individuals to a smooth survival in a
monstrous environment. Fels realizes that very clearly. I don’t think
Pellegrini does, yet. He will when he’s been practicing for as long as
Fels. But Fels is right; when a youngster has gone as far as an
internship there’s no point in shaking him to his roots. Not until he
has been practicing long enough to learn the objectivity of competence.”

Cortlandt whistled. “I see what Fels meant by your insight.”

“Cut it out,” smiled Robin. “Let’s get back to maturity, just to sum up.
Then I have a date with one Morpheus.… Binnie, you said that there’s
more to a man than his physiology. What’s your idea on what a fully
developed, truly mature man would be?”

“What I said before,” murmured the girl. “Like Christ. Someone who would
understand everything, and do what he could for people.”

“Cortlandt?”

The salesman shifted his feet. “I don’t know. Maybe Binnie’s right.
Maybe it would be like the grim gorilla, too.” He wet his lips. “Maybe
both. An extension of the basic urges—hunger and sex and
self-preservation, but carried so far that in self-preservation he might
try to save humanity purely to keep it from killing him off when
everything went to blazes.”

“That’s interesting,” said Robin. “Miss McCarthy?”

“I think,” she said slowly, “that he would be something quite beyond our
understanding. I think that physically he would be superb—not
muscle-bound, no; but balanced and almost impervious to diseases, with
the kind of reflexes which would make him almost invulnerable to any
physical accident. But the big difference would be in the mind, and I
can’t describe that. He couldn’t describe it himself. If he tried, he
would be like a teacher—a really good teacher—trying to teach algebra to
a class of well-trained, unusually intelligent—chimpanzees.”

“Superman!” said Robin. “Miss Effingwell?”

He looked directly at Peg, who, just in time, checked herself from
looking behind her to see whom he was talking to. “M-me?” she squeaked
stupidly. “I really don’t know, Ro—uh, Freddy. I think Miss McCarthy has
the right idea. What do you think?”

Laughing, Robin rose and tossed a bill on the table. “It would be a man
with such profound understanding that he could define maturity in a
sentence. A simple sentence. He wouldn’t be asking other people what
they thought. Good night, chillun. Going my way, Miss Effingwell?”

Peg nodded mutely.

“We wus robbed!” Cortlandt called after them. “You have an answer tucked
away in your insight, Freddy!”

“Sure I have,” winked Robin, “and I’m taking it outsight with me!”

Followed by reverent groans, Robin and Peg departed.

Out on the street, Robin squeezed her upper arm and said, “Hello, Peg.…”
When he spoke quietly, his voice was almost the same as the one she
remembered.

She said, “Oh, Robin—”

“How long have you been looking for me?”

“Three months. Ever since you—”

“Yes. Why?”

“I wanted to know how you were. I wanted to know what was happening to
you. Your glands—”

“I can assume your clinical interest. That’s not what I meant by _why_.
So—why?”

She said nothing. He shrugged. “I know. I just wanted to hear you say
it. No—” he said hastily, “don’t say it now. I was playing with you. I’m
sorry.”

The “I’m sorry,” was an echo, too. “Where are we going?”

“That depends,” said Robin. “We’ll talk first.”

He led the way across Washington Square South and up wandering West
Fourth Street. Around the corner of Barrow Street was a dimly lit
restaurant, once a stable, with flagstone flooring and field-stone
walls. The tables were candlelit, the candles set in multicolored
holders made of the drippings of the countless candles which had
glimmered there before. A speaker, high up, murmured classical music.
They found a table and Robin ordered sherry. The sound of his voice
brought sharply to her their silence with each other; she had never been
silent with Robin before. She felt a togetherness, a sharing, which was
a new thing; he was not so evident to her as _they_ were, listening to
the music and watching the tilt and twist of reflected candle flames in
the meniscus of their wine.

When the music permitted, and a little after, she asked, “Where have you
been?”

“Nowhere. Right here in New York. And in the back room of my Westchester
place. Sandy Hook, for a while. You know—around.”

“Why have you been hiding?”

He looked quickly at her and away. “Have I changed?”

“You certainly have.”

“A lot,” he agreed. “And I knew it. I didn’t want anyone else to know
it. I didn’t want anyone to watch it happen. It’s happened fast. It’s
happening fast. I—I don’t know where it’s going.”

“Have you been sick?”

“Oh, no—well, some aches in my hands and face and feet, and vertigo once
in a while. Otherwise I’ve never been better.”

Peg frowned. “Aches … what have you been doing?”

“Oh—a little writing. A lot of reading. I holed up in Westchester with
all the books I could think of that I’d ever wanted to read. I got right
out of myself for a while. Not for long, though.”

“What happened?”

“It was strange … I got bored. I got so that a paragraph would tell me
an author’s style, a page would give me the plot … maybe if I could have
become interested in mathematics or something it would have been
different. I was suddenly cursed with a thing you might call
hyper-understanding. It made me quit working altogether. There was no
challenge in anything. I could do anything I wanted to do. I knew how to
do it well. I didn’t need to publish anything, or even to write it down.
I didn’t need approbation. It was pretty bad for a while. I know what
failure is like, and the what’s-the-use feeling. This was worse. This
was what’s-the-use—it will succeed.”

“I don’t know that I understand that,” said Peg thoughtfully.

“I hope you never do,” he said fervently.

After a pause, she asked, “Then what did you do?”

“What you saw me doing tonight. Starting arguments.”

“On maturity?” Suddenly she snapped her fingers. “But of course! I
should have realized. You added nothing to that discussion—you just kept
the ball rolling. But why, Robin?”

He rubbed his knuckles. “I’m—very alone, Peg. I’m a little like
Stapledon’s Sirius—I’m the only one of my kind. When I reached a stage
of boredom at which I had to find some alternative for suicide, I began
to look for something I could have in common with other people. It
seemed a slim hope. At first glance, there was nothing which interested
me which would interest enough different _kinds_ of people to make me
want their opinions.”

“There’s always sex,” said Peg facetiously.

“Sex!” he said scornfully. “The American public is basically
disinterested in sex.”

“_What!_ Robin, you’re mad! Why, every magazine cover, every plot of
every book and movie, practically, shouts sex. How can you say a thing
like that?”

“If the public were really interested,” he smiled, “do you think they’d
need all that high-pressure salesmanship? No, Peg; people are most
curious about the same thing that has been bothering me; I happen to be
in the odd position of having to face it, which is where I differ from
most people.”

“Having to face what?”

“Maturity.”

She stared at him. “And that’s what most people are interested in?”

“Certainly. You heard the argument tonight. I’ve started the same one
hundreds of times recently. It’s about all I do, these days. I’ve heard
it knocked around in bars, in parks, in subways and buses and parish
houses. Try it yourself. Bear in mind, though, that not everyone calls
it maturity. Some call it self-help, and where their self-help will get
them; others call it wishful thinking. Coué was preaching maturity; so
were Philip Wylie and the Federation of Atomic Scientists and Fletcher,
with his disgusting idea of chewing each mouthful of food a hundred
times; Santayana and Immanuel Kant and Thoreau and, in their twisted
ways, Dr. Townsend and Schopenhauer and Adolf Hitler and Billy Sunday
were striving toward maturity insofar as maturity represents a greater
goal for humanity, or a part of it … it’s a sorry mistake to think one
part deserves it over the rest.…”

“Have you found out what true, complete maturity is?”

“True, complete maturity isn’t,” he said positively. “But I _think_ I
know what it would be if it happened along. And don’t ask me. If I’m
ever absolutely sure, I’ll let you know. Now let’s talk about you.”

“Not yet,” she said, “if at all. I want to know first why you are making
these rounds.”

“Research,” he said shortly.

“Certainly you can find more authoritative sources outside of bars and
buses.”

“Can I? By reading the experts, I found out that with very few
exceptions, the more erudite and articulate a man gets, the more he
feels that the rest of the world lacks what he has, and that therefore
maturity is his condition, immaturity is the state of those less gifted
than he. The man on the street talks more sense, though he may do it
with less polish. I run into blocks occasionally—remember the hesitant
psychiatrist?—and sometimes people in the late thirties confuse
‘maturity’ with ‘middle aged’ so thoroughly that they are kept from
thinking about it. But by and large a gentle push in the right direction
will yield the most astonishing conclusions. A mature man would be a
tough, naked swami, perched in the fork of a tree, living an
indescribable psycho-cosmic existence. Or he would be a camouflaged man,
superficially a nonentity, living with but not of society, leaving it
meticulously alone in favor of a private, functional, hyper-sensual
existence. Or he would be a mysterious gangster, pulling strings, making
and stopping wars for amusement. It’s fascinating, Peg. Most people
describe maturity as an extension of themselves; some describe it as
something hateful and terrible; occasionally one, like that boy
Cortlandt tonight, will become objective enough to dream up something
like the Messianic gorilla he described.” Robin shrugged. “Research.”

“I see. And—and you? What’s happening to you?”

“I think I’m getting there. I think I’m going to be that thing that has
never happened before.”

“Let me make some tests,” she begged.

Very slowly he put his right hand, palm down, on the table, and said
“No.” It was the most positive utterance imaginable.

“Robin, why not?”

“Remember my two reasons for quitting the treatments?”

“I remember,” she said acidly. “You thought that if you matured any more
you’d stop producing your glittering little works of art. And you were
afraid of Mel Warfield.”

He apparently took no offense, but simply nodded. “They both still
apply—transmuted, extended; but still the same two excellent reasons.”

“I don’t understand. You’re not composing or writing or inventing now.”

“I’m doing something much bigger. I’m—maturing. Peg,” he said with a
flash of his old diffidence, “do pardon my colossal immodesty, but
there’s no other way to phrase it—I myself am becoming a work of art, a
deeply important, complex, _significant_ thing. I am more completely
alive now, I think, in every one of my senses, and in new ways that I’m
only beginning to understand, than any man has ever been. You don’t want
to aid that process. You want it stopped. I’m different now, but not so
different that I couldn’t be a man among men. My difference will
increase, and you are afraid of it, and there’s nothing more to your
unease than the emotion which makes the brown monkeys tear apart the
white one.”

“I’m afraid of nothing except that you’ll turn into a monster!” she said
hotly. “You seem all right now, but you obviously haven’t rid yourself
of all your childishness. It’s childish in the extreme to imagine that
nothing bad can happen to you.”

“You won’t say that,” Robin said softly, “when you’ve heard my
definition of maturity.”

“Maturity!” she spat. “Do you know what maturity is in a vegetable? It’s
death. Do you know what maturity is in a simple animal? It’s
nothing—it’s the redivision of immature cells, indefinitely—it’s
everlasting life, and everlasting immaturity. What are you, that can
find something between those extremes?”

“I am Robin English, ex-child, post-adolescent, pre—”

“Go on.”

He grinned. “Can’t. It’s never happened. There’s no word for it. Now may
we talk about you—aside from endocrinology?”

She gazed at him, her glance touching his cheek, stroking down and back
to nestle in the hollow of his neck.

“Remember what I said once,” he mused, “about the amounts of wind we
waste?”

She nodded. “Let’s not.”

He grunted approvingly. “I mentioned my senses.”

“You said that they were—uh—hyperdeveloped.”

“I like ’em,” he said, and smiled. “Maybe Cortlandt’s super-gorilla was
a good guess. I like delicacy—by the bucketful. I don’t experiment, I
don’t probe, I don’t instruct, and I don’t play around with sensual
matters.”

“I understand,” she said thickly.

“I know what you want.”

“I don’t doubt it,” she said. She was sure that, holding the overhang of
the table so tightly, every tiny thread of the tablecloth would leave an
impression on her fingers.

“You want devotion, and sharing, and growth-together, and all the other
components of that four-letter Anglo-Saxon monosyllable called love.”

“You’re playing with me again.”

“Sorry … I can’t give you those things. I think you know that. I’m far
too preoccupied with my own importance … you see? It sounds much more
effective when I say it myself! Anyway, do you want as much as I can
give you?”

“I think,” she whispered, “that you had better be specific.…”

In her office, in the dark, as she told it all to Mel Warfield, Peg
began to cry again. She tried to hold it in, tried to speak, and then
gave up to it altogether.

Mel rose from his perch on the edge of the desk and swore. “Spit it out,
Peg,” he barked. “So he asked you and you said yes.” His fist struck his
palm with a frightening snap, like bones breaking. “I wish I _had_
killed him. I wish I had the chance now.”

“You _what?_” She was shocked out of her tears. “Why?”

“For what he did to you.”

She stared at him in the darkness. “That’s a new wrinkle in chivalry,”
she said, with the ghost of her old sense of humor.

“I don’t understand you,” said Mel irritably.

Suddenly she uttered an extraordinary sound, a sort of attenuated chirp
of hysterical laughter. “Mel Warfield, what on earth do you think
I—he—just what do you think he did?”

“That is perfectly obvious,” he said. “What else could have driven you
into such a state?”

Her voice was suddenly clear and cold. “What he asked me, you purblind
idiot, was whether I was a virgin. And I said yes. And he looked at me
with that damned twinkle in his eyes and said, ‘Sorry, Peg.’ And then I
came straight here and you found me. Now gather up your shiny ideals and
that sink you call a mind and take them out of here and leave me alone!”

When Mel had backed off almost to the door, he uttered a grunt, as if
from a heavy blow, and then turned and fled.

He called three times before he realized that the hospital switchboard
operator’s bland “Dr. Wenzell is out, Dr. Warfield” was on Peg’s orders.
He wrote a letter of apology which she answered after ten days—just
_“Let’s forget it, Mel,”_ on memo paper.

The year grew old, grew cold and died, and a new one rose from its
frozen bones, to cling for months to its infantile frigidity. It robbed
itself of its childhood, sliding through a blustery summer, and found
itself growing old too early. What ides, what cusp, what golden day is a
year in its fullness, grown to its maturity? Where is the peak in a
certain cycle, the point of farthest travel in a course which starts and
ends in ice, or one which ends in dust, or starts and circles, ending in
its nascent dream?

The meteor, Robin English, had passed, and the papers put him in their
morgues and gave themselves to newer wonders and wartalk. Margaretta
Wenzell worked too much and began to grow thin. Mellett Warfield worked
too much and began to grow grey. They had nothing to do with each other.

And when Peg burst into his laboratory one grey day, there was a moment
when she paused in the doorway, shocked by his appearance as he was
shocked by hers. He was gaunt and dishevelled, and she was thin and
livid. The moment passed.

“Peg! Why, I’m so—”

“Never mind that,” she said crisply. “Look at this.” She threw down a
glossy eight by ten print.

“What—” he picked it up. It was slightly out of focus, a picture of a
man elbowing his way through a crowd. The people around him were craning
their necks toward a point off the picture, behind and beyond the grim
figure. “It’s a blow-up of a picture from this week’s _Day Magazine_,”
said Peg. “People crowding around a dogfight on 48th Street. That
doesn’t matter. What does matter is the man who got caught in the
crowd.”

Warfield flicked the edge of the print in annoyance. “I’d hoped that
this visit had something to do with me,” he growled.

“It has,” she said. “You know who that is?”

“Of course.”

“What do you think?”

Mel glanced at the picture again. “Getting to be quite a glamor boy in
his old age, isn’t he?”

Peg closed her eyes. There was a strange movement of the lids as she
rolled the eyes under them. “You call yourself a doctor,” she hissed.
“Look at his chin.”

“Nice chin.”

“You don’t remember Robin. You don’t remember that round baby face.”

“I’m not in love with him.”

Mel thought she was going to strike him. She jammed the picture under
his nose. “Look, look,” she breathed.

He sighed and looked. Then he saw what she meant. He went white. “Ac—”
His voice failed him.

“Acromegaly,” she said.

“Oh, my God.”

“We’ve got to get to him. We’ve got to arrest that condition before he
turns into a monster and dies.”

“Why should we arrest the condition?”

“Why? Mel, are you out of your mind? When does your responsibility to a
patient end?”

“When the patient stops cooperating.”

“I’ll find him myself. Somewhere, somehow or other, there’s a way to
find him. I had hoped you’d help.” She turned away.

“I know where he is,” he said dully. “I don’t see him.”

“I don’t care. I’m going to every single—you _what?_”

“I’ve always known.” He wet his lips. “He was under some sort of
delusion, apparently. A week or so after he quit his treatments he came
to see me. He … explained carefully that he had—uh—no use for you, that
there was no longer any reason for me to want to … to kill him, and—you
don’t seem surprised.”

“He told me about it.”

“You _knew_ about that?”

“Did you try to kill him, Mel?”

“It was an accident, Peg. Really it was. And he compensated for it.
Splendidly. I don’t know how he found out. The man’s incredibly sharp.”

“It was that post-pituitrin excess, wasn’t it?”

“Yes, but that couldn’t have anything to do with this—this hypertrophy,
I mean—” he faltered—“I don’t think so—”

She stared coldly at him. “Take me to him.”

“Now?”

“Now.”

He looked at her marble face, her set lips, and then slipped into his
coat. She said, as he locked his door, “Why didn’t you tell me where he
was?”

“You didn’t ask me. And, frankly, I didn’t want you to see him, not as
long as he refused to take his treatments.”

“You could have let me decide that.”

“Why did he let you know where he was?”

“Part of his fixation. He told me I could—uh—kill him any time I wanted
to, any way except with my needles. It seemed important to him. Oh,
Peg—”

She turned her face away from him. Downstairs, they caught a cab almost
immediately, and Warfield gave the driver a Riverside address. Peg sat
staring blindly ahead. Mel slumped in a corner and looked at his wrists,
dully.

Peg broke the silence only once—to ask in a deceptively conversational
voice if anything had been learned that she didn’t know about the
treatment of acromegaly. Warfield shook his head vaguely. She made a
sound, then, like a sob, but when Warfield looked at her she still sat,
dry-eyed, staring at the driver’s coat collar.

They pulled up in front of one of those stately old cell-blocks of
apartment houses that perch on the slanted, winding approaches to the
Drive. They got out, and a doorman, a bit over life-size, swung open
both leaves of a huge plate-glass-and-bronze door to let them into the
building.

“Mr. Wenzell,” said Warfield to a wax-faced desk clerk.

“What?” said Peg.

“He … it amuses him to use your name,” said Warfield, as if he were
speaking out of a mouthful of sal ammoniac.

“Mr. Wenzell is out,” said the clerk. “Can I take a message?”

“You can take a message right to Mr. Wenzell, who is not out,” said
Warfield. “Tell him his two doctors are here and must see him.”

“Tell him,” said Peg clearly, “that Margaretta Wenzell is here.”

“Yes, Mrs. Wenzell,” said the clerk with alacrity.

“Why must you make this painful as well as unpleasant?” gritted
Warfield. Peg smiled with her teeth and said nothing.

The clerk returned from the phone looking as if he had learned how to
pronounce a word he had only seen chalked on fences before. “Fourteen.
Suite C. The elevators—”

“Yes,” growled Warfield. He took Peg’s elbow and walked her over to the
elevators as if she were a window dummy.

“You’re hurting me.”

“I’m sorry. I’m—a little upset. Do you have to go through with this
weird business?”

She didn’t answer. Instead she said, “Stay down here, Mel.”

“I will not!”

She looked at him, and said a thousand words—hot-acid ones—in the sweep
of her eyes across his face.

“Well,” he said, “all right. All right. Tell you what. I’ll give you
fifteen minutes and then I’m coming up.” He paused. “Why are you looking
at me like that? What are you thinking about?”

“That corny line about the fifteen minutes. I was thinking about how
much better Robin would deliver it.”

“I think I hate you,” said Warfield hoarsely, quietly.

Peg stepped into the elevator. “That was _much_ better done,” she said,
and pushed the button which closed the doors.

On the fourteenth floor she walked to the door marked “C” and touched
the bell. The door swung open instantly.

“Come in!” grated a voice. There was no one standing in the doorway at
all. She hesitated. Then she saw that someone was peering through the
crack at the hinge side of the door.

“Come in, Peg!” said the voice. It was used gently now, though it was
still gravelly. She stepped through and into the room. The door closed
behind her. Robin was there. “Peg! It’s _so_ good to see you!”

“Hello, Robin,” she whispered. Just what gesture she was about to make
she would never know for she became suddenly conscious of someone else
in the room. She wheeled. There was a girl on the davenport, who rose as
Peg faced her. The girl didn’t look, somehow, like a person. She looked
like too many colors.

“Janice,” said Robin. It wasn’t an introduction. Robin just said the one
word and moved his head slightly. The girl came slowly across the room
toward him, passed him, went to the hall closet and took out a coat and
hat and a handbag with a long strap. She draped the coat over her arm
and opened the door; and then she paused and shot Peg a look of such
utter hatred that Peg gasped. The door closed and she was alone with
Robin English.

“Is _that_ the best you can do,” she said, without trying to keep the
loathing out of her voice.

“The very best,” said Robin equably. “Janice has no conversation. What
else she has to recommend her, you can see. She is a great convenience.”

A silly, colorful little thought crept into Peg’s mind. She looked
around the room.

“You’re looking for a smörgasbord tray,” chuckled Robin, sinking into an
easy-chair and regarding her with amusement. “Why won’t you look at me?”

Finally, she did.

He was taller, a very little. He was much handsomer. She saw that, and
it was as if something festering within her had been lanced. There was
pain—but oh! the blessed relief of pressure! His face was—_Oh yes_, said
Dr. Wenzell to herself, _pre-pituitary. Acromegaly_. She said, “Let me
see your hands.”

He raised his eyebrows, and put his hands in his pockets. He shook his
head.

Peg turned on her heel and went to the hall closet. She dipped into the
pockets of an overcoat, and then into a topcoat, until she found a pair
of gloves. She came back into the room, examining them carefully. Robin
got to his feet.

“As I thought,” she said. She held up the left glove. The seam between
the index and second finger was split. And they were new gloves. She
threw them aside.

“So you know about that. You would, of course.”

“Robin, I don’t think this would have happened if you had continued your
treatments.”

He slowly took out his hands and stared at them. They were lumpy, and
the fingers were too long, and a little crooked. “A phenomenal
hypertrophy of the bony processes, according to the books,” he said. “A
development that generally takes years.”

“There’s nothing normal about this case. There never was,” said Peg, her
voice thick with pity. “Why did you let it go like this?”

“I got interested in what I was doing.” Suddenly he got to his feet and
began to stride restlessly about the room. She tried not to look at him,
at his altered face, with the heavy, coarse jaw. She strained to catch
the remnants of his mellow voice through the harshness she heard now.

“What is it, Robin—Mel? Are you still afraid of Mel Warfield?”

“Hm? Mel … oh! Mel. I’d almost forgotten. No, Peg, not any more. That
was a long time ago. I’ve been so busy.”

“With what?”

He squinted at her, then resumed his pacing. She realized that he was
here, and not here. “My mind is working on two levels,” he said. “Maybe
more.”

“Wh—are you telepathic?”

“I don’t know. No. I’m—it’s too slowly to say it.”

“Too hard to say it?”

“Too slowly. It isn’t a thing you can say piece by piece. It’s a whole
picture; you see it all at once and it means something.”

“I don’t understand.”

“No,” he said.

“Do you have any palsy, Robin?”

He held up his misshapen hands. They were quite steady. “It isn’t
Parkinson’s disease,” he said, again speaking her thought. “My mind is
very clear, but only to me. My brain isn’t softening. It’s—deepening. A
Klein bottle has only one surface but can contain a liquid because it
has a contiguity through a fourth direction; my mind has five surfaces,
so how many different liquids can it contain at once?”

_“Robin!”_

He made some inner effort that twisted his heavy face. “I’ve found out
what maturity is, Peg,” he said.

“Sit down, Robin,” she said gently, “and tell me.”

“I won’t sit down!” he said. He took a turn around the room, and in
quite a different voice, said, “What made it so hard to find out was the
haziness of the word, and the ambivalence of the human animal. You said
that maturity, in a plant, is death. Laurence Manning said that a plant
isn’t a plant, and a man isn’t a man; they are conspiracies of millions
of separate cell animals with thousands of separate specialties. Cells
mature and die, singly and in great masses; sometimes they reach a full
function that is maturity of another kind, and perform it for a long
time—microseconds or years … so maturity is and isn’t, all the time,
within a man. The unit man, as an animal, has a maturity that can only
be an approximation—that would be when most of the specialized cells
were doing their cooperative best—not their best, but their cooperative
best, within him. And that’s maturity in man, but only in man the
animal. Man is another thing too. Call it mind, keep it simple.…” He
paused for a long time, stopped, opened and closed his hands. Peg
resisted the impulse to interrupt.

At last Robin said, “Mind is different. When the old man in the Huxley
book ate carp-guts and lived for centuries, the mind part died, and he
wasn’t a mature thing. The mind part does not mature because it can’t.
It doesn’t complete a life with a culminating death like a plant cell,
because it doesn’t simply exchange nourishment for the performance of a
specialty like that. Mind—not brain; mind—works and doesn’t work. Some
of it has to do with physical living, but most of it does_—other_ work.
And there’s no necessity for this work, no reason to start it, within
the animal; and there’s no end to it when it does work, no place it
cannot go. When is it mature? How high is up?

“But mind leads to wisdoms—precepts for mature conduct within any
framework. These are the wisdoms which can produce a mature Democrat or
Protestant or stock-broker or husband. And I’ve found the simple
statement of maturity within the largest framework any ordinary human
being can know. It is simple—all the wisdoms are simple, because, for
their fields, they are basic. I’ll tell you—”

He stopped, his great head up, listening. Peg heard nothing. “—later,”
Robin finished. The door-buzzer shrilled.

“Come in!”

“Peg!” Mel Warfield all but ran in. “Are you all right?”

“Hello, Mel.”

Warfield spun. The change from frantic male to absorbed physician was so
swift it would have been comic anywhere else. “Robin!” His eyes
flickered to the face, the hands, the feet, which were in cut slippers.
“You know what that condition is?”

“He knows,” said Peg.

“Saving no one’s presence,” said Mel Warfield. “There are three damned
fools in this room. English, we might be able to arrest that condition;
we might even—well, I can’t promise too much, you understand, but if
you’ll only start treatment again, we might at least—”

He was interrupted by quite the most horrible sound Peg had ever heard—a
burst of thunderous laughter from Robin’s distorted throat. “Sure, Mel,
sure. Glad to.”

“Robin!” cried Peg. “You will?”

He laughed again. “Of course I will. I’m—mature enough to know what to
do. Not today, though. Tomorrow all right?”

“Fine, fine,” said Mel. He looked as if some great burden had been
lifted from him—something that had been strapped to his whole body. “Ten
o’clock at my place—I’ll have everything ready. We’ll run the most
exhaustive set of tests on you that can be found this side of the Mayo
Clinic.”

“I can’t be sure about the time.” Robin went to the desk in the corner.
“My number’s unlisted,” he said, writing rapidly on a sheet of
note-paper. He folded it, folded it again. “Call me tonight or in the
morning, just to make sure.” He chuckled again. “I feel better already.
Arrest the condition? It will be easy … you’ve never had a mature
patient before.” He slipped the paper into Peg’s envelope hand-bag, and
laughed again.

“Is there a joke?” Peg asked painfully.

“Sorry … no, it isn’t a joke. But the huge relief … I see an end at last
to a thing that seemed to have none, a final adjustment of the two
factors I mentioned, one of which is an approximation, and the other a
thing with no upper limits. Why do you hate each other?”

Warfield sucked in his breath and looked at Peg. Peg looked at her feet.

“I have been my own damnation,” said Robin, “like most damned souls.
There isn’t a thing you could have done to prevent it. Mel once made an
honest mistake, and it wasn’t even a serious one. Peg, you have no right
to assume that it was made through a single motive, and that a base one.
Nature never shows one motive or one law at a time, unaffected by any
other. And Mel—to hate Peg because of the things she has felt is like
hating a man for moving when a tornado has taken him away. I—want to say
something like ‘Bless you, my children.’ Now get out of here. You’ll see
me soon enough.”

He herded them toward the door. Mel, feeling that there was something
unsaid, something important, unable to think clearly because of the
sudden rush, tried to gain a moment. “When would be the best time to
call?”

“You’ll know. Hurry, now. I have things to do.”

Through the closing door, Peg got a last glimpse of Robin’s face,
distorted and handsome, slipping into an inward-turning relaxation as he
let go the concentration that he had assumed shortly after she had
arrived. _Like a man leaving children_, she thought.

In the elevator, with wonder in his voice, Mel said, “He thinks he’s
mature. He’s just—just sick. Sick and old.”

“I don’t know what he is,” Peg said wearily. “Some of what he said
sounded like a delirium. And yet—I suppose a discussion of the Döppler
shift would sound fairly delirious to a fourth-grade child. I don’t
know, Mel, I just don’t know. I can’t think.… He seems—quite sure.…”

“We’ll do what we can,” said Mel. The doors slid open. “Peg—”

“Shh.” She took his arm.

Robin English had talents and, lately, skills.

His will divided a large fortune between Drs. Wenzell and Warfield. His
body and his brain were a mystery and a treasure to the institute to
which he donated them. The mystery lay in the cause of death; the body
was aberrated but still healthy, and it had simply stopped. A
skill … Robin English was not the first man in the world to have that
power, nor the only one. All men have it to a degree; the will to live
is its complement, and daily works greater miracles than this simple
thing of saying “Stop.”

There was a terrible time when Peg and Mel burst back into the apartment
on Riverside Drive, and after. But when enough time had gone by, it was
all part of the many things they shared, and sharing is good. They
shared their pain and their pleasure in their memories of him, as they
shared an ineradicable sense of guilt. In due season they shared an
understanding of Robin’s death; it came to them that his decision to die
had been made with his frightening burst of laughter, that day. Later
still they understood his reason, though that took longer, in spite of
the fact that he had written it on the paper he had tucked into Peg’s
handbag.

And they share, now, the simple wisdom he wrote; not a definition of
maturity, but a delineation of the Grail in which it is contained:

_“Enough is maturity—”_



TINY AND THE MONSTER


SHE _had_ TO find out about Tiny—_everything_ about Tiny.

They were bound to call him Tiny. The name was good for a laugh when he
was a pup, and many times afterward.

He was a Great Dane, unfashionable with his long tail, smooth and glossy
in the brown coat which fit so snugly over his heavily muscled shoulders
and chest. His eyes were big and brown and his feet were big and black;
he had a voice like thunder and a heart ten times his own great size.

He was born in the Virgin Islands, on St. Croix, which is a land of palm
trees and sugar, of soft winds and luxuriant undergrowth whispering with
the stealthy passage of pheasant and mongoose. There were rats in the
ruins of the ancient estate houses that stood among the foothills—ruins
with slave-built walls forty inches thick and great arches of weathered
stone. There was pasture land where the field mice ran, and brooks
asparkle with gaudy blue minnows.

But where in St. Croix had he learned to be so strange?

When Tiny was a puppy, all feet and ears, he learned many things. Most
of these things were kinds of respect. He learned to respect that swift,
vengeful piece of utter engineering called a scorpion when one of them
whipped its barbed tail into his inquiring nose. He learned to respect
the heavy deadness of the air about him that preceded a hurricane, for
he knew that it meant hurry and hammering and utmost obedience from
every creature on the estate. He learned to respect the justice of
sharing, for he was pulled from the teat and from the trough when he
crowded the others of his litter. He was the largest.

These things, all of them, he learned as respects. He was never struck,
and although he learned caution he never learned fear. The pain he
suffered from the scorpion—it happened only once—the strong but gentle
hands which curbed his greed, the frightful violence of the hurricane
that followed the tense preparations—all these things and many more
taught him the justice of respect. He half understood a basic ethic:
namely, that he would never be asked to do something, or to refrain from
doing something, unless there was a good reason for it. His obedience,
then, was a thing implicit, for it was half reasoned; and since it was
not based on fear, but on justice, it could not interfere with his
resourcefulness.

All of which, along with his blood, explained why he was such a splendid
animal. It did not explain how he learned to read. It did not explain
why Alec was compelled to sell him—not only to sell him but to search
out Alistair Forsythe and sell him to her.

She _had_ to find out. The whole thing was crazy. She hadn’t wanted a
dog. If she had wanted a dog, it wouldn’t have been a Great Dane. And if
it had been a Great Dane, it wouldn’t have been Tiny, for he was a
Crucian dog and had to be shipped all the way to Scarsdale, New York, by
air.

The series of letters she sent to Alec were as full of wondering
persuasion as his had been when he sold her the dog. It was through
these letters that she learned about the scorpion and the hurricane,
about Tiny’s puppyhood and the way Alec brought up his dogs. If she
learned something about Alec as well, that was understandable. Alec and
Alistair Forsythe had never met, but through Tiny they shared a greater
secret than many people who have grown up together.

“As for why I wrote you, of all people,” Alec wrote in answer to her
direct question, “I can’t say I chose you at all. It was Tiny. One of
the cruise-boat people mentioned your name at my place, over cocktails
one afternoon. It was, as I remember, a Dr. Schwellenbach. Nice old
fellow. As soon as your name was mentioned, Tiny’s head came up as if I
had called him. He got up from his station by the door and lolloped over
to the doctor with his ears up and his nose quivering. I thought for a
minute that the old fellow was offering him food, but no—he must have
wanted to hear Schwellenbach say your name again. So I asked about you.
A day or so later I was telling a couple of friends about it, and when I
mentioned the name again, Tiny came snuffling over and shoved his nose
into my hand. He was shivering. That got me. I wrote to a friend in New
York who got your name and address in the phone book. You know the rest.
I just wanted to tell you about it at first, but something made me
suggest a sale. Somehow, it didn’t seem right to have something like
this going on and not have you meet Tiny. When you wrote that you
couldn’t get away from New York, there didn’t seem to be anything else
to do but send Tiny to you. And now—I don’t know if I’m too happy about
it. Judging from those pages and pages of questions you keep sending me,
I get the idea that you are more than a little troubled by this crazy
business.”

She answered, “_Please_ don’t think I’m troubled about this! I’m not.
I’m interested, and curious, and more than a little excited; but there
is nothing about the situation that frightens me. I can’t stress that
enough. There’s something around Tiny—sometimes I have the feeling it’s
something outside Tiny—that is infinitely comforting. I feel protected,
in a strange way, and it’s a different and greater thing than the
protection I could expect from a large and intelligent dog. It’s
strange, and it’s mysterious enough; but it isn’t at all frightening.

“I have some more questions. Can you remember exactly what it was that
Dr. Schwellenbach said the first time he mentioned my name and Tiny
acted strangely? Was there ever any time that you can remember when Tiny
was under some influence other than your own, something which might have
given him these strange traits? What about his diet as a puppy? How many
times did he get …” and so on.

And Alec answered, in part, “It was so long ago now that I can’t
remember exactly; but it seems to me Dr. Schwellenbach was talking about
his work. As you know, he’s a professor of metallurgy. He mentioned
Professor Nowland as the greatest alloy specialist of his time—said
Nowland could alloy anything with anything. Then he went on about
Nowland’s assistant. Said the assistant was very highly qualified,
having been one of these Science Search products and something of a
prodigy; in spite of which she was completely feminine and as beautiful
a redhead as had ever exchanged heaven for earth. Then he said her name
was Alistair Forsythe. (I hope you’re not blushing, Miss Forsythe; you
asked for this!) And then it was that Tiny ran over to the doctor in
that extraordinary way.

“The only time I can think of when Tiny was off the estate and possibly
under some influence was the day old Debbil disappeared for a whole day
with the pup when he was about three months old. Debbil is one of the
characters who hang around here. He’s a Crucian about sixty years old, a
piratical-looking old gent with one eye and elephantiasis. He shuffles
around the grounds running odd errands for anyone who will give him
tobacco or a shot of white rum. Well, one morning I sent him over the
hill to see if there was a leak in the water line that runs from the
reservoir. It would only take a couple of hours, so I told him to take
Tiny for a run.

“They were gone for the whole day. I was short-handed and busy as a
squirrel in a nuthouse and didn’t have a chance to send anyone after
him. But he drifted in toward evening. I bawled him out thoroughly. It
was no use asking him where he had been; he’s only about quarter-witted
anyway. He just claimed he couldn’t remember, which is pretty usual for
him. But for the next three days I was busy with Tiny. He wouldn’t eat,
and he hardly slept at all. He just kept staring out over the cane
fields at the hill. He didn’t seem to want to go there at all. I went
out to have a look. There’s nothing out that way but the reservoir and
the old ruins of the governor’s palace, which have been rotting there in
the sun for the last century and a half. Nothing left now but an
overgrown mound and a couple of arches, but it’s supposed to be haunted.
I forgot about it after that because Tiny got back to normal. As a
matter of fact, he seemed to be better than ever, although, from then
on, he would sometimes freeze and watch the hill as if he were listening
to something. I haven’t attached much importance to it until now. I
still don’t. Maybe he got chased by some mongoose’s mother. Maybe he
chewed up some ganja-weed—marijuana to you. But I doubt that it has
anything to do with the way he acts now, any more than that business of
the compasses that pointed west might have something to do with it. Did
you hear about that, by the way? Craziest thing I ever heard of. It was
right after I shipped Tiny off to you last fall, as I remember. Every
ship and boat and plane from here to Sandy Hook reported that its
compass began to indicate due west instead of a magnetic north!
Fortunately the effect only lasted a couple of hours so there were no
serious difficulties. One cruise steamer ran aground, and there were a
couple of Miami fishing-boat mishaps. I only bring it up to remind both
of us that Tiny’s behavior may be odd, but not exclusively so in a world
where such things as the crazy compasses occur.”

And in her next, she wrote. “You’re quite the philosopher, aren’t you?
Be careful of that Fortean attitude, my tropical friend. It tends to
accept the idea of the unexplainable to an extent where explaining, or
even investigating, begins to look useless. As far as that crazy compass
episode is concerned, I remember it very well indeed. My boss, Dr.
Nowland—yes, it’s true, he can alloy anything with anything!—has been up
to his ears in that fantastic happenstance. So have most of his
colleagues in half a dozen sciences. They’re able to explain it quite
satisfactorily, too. It was simply the presence of some quite
quasi-magnetic phenomenon that created a resultant field at right angles
to the earth’s own magnetic influence. That solution sent the pure
theorists home happy. Of course, the practical ones—Nowland and his
associates in metallurgy, for example—only have to figure out what
caused the field. Science is a wonderful thing.

“By the way, you will notice my change of address. I have wanted for a
long time to have a little house of my own, and I was lucky enough to
get this one from a friend. It’s up the Hudson from New York, quite
countrified, but convenient enough to the city to be practical. I’m
bringing Mother here from Upstate. She’ll love it. And besides—as if you
didn’t know the most important reason when you saw it—it gives Tiny a
place to run. He’s no city dog.… I’d tell you that he found the house
for me, too, if I didn’t think that, these days, I’m crediting him with
even more than his remarkable powers. Gregg and Marie Weems, the couple
who had the cottage before, began to be haunted. So they said, anyway.
Some indescribably horrible monster that both of them caught glimpses
of, inside the house and out of it. Marie finally got the screaming
meemies about it and insisted on Gregg’s selling the place, housing
shortage or no. They came straight to me. Why? Because they—Marie,
anyway; she’s a mystic little thing—had the idea that someone with a
large dog would be safe in that house. The odd part of that was that
neither of them knew I had recently acquired a Great Dane. As soon as
they saw Tiny they threw themselves on my neck and begged me to take the
place. Marie couldn’t explain the feeling she had; what she and Gregg
came to my place for was to ask me to buy a big dog and take the house.
Why me? Well, she just felt I would like it, that was all. It seemed the
right kind of place for me. And my having the dog clinched it. Anyway,
you can put that down in your notebook of unexplainables.”

So it went for the better part of a year. The letters were long and
frequent, and, as sometimes happens, Alec and Alistair grew very close
indeed. Almost by accident they found themselves writing letters that
did not mention Tiny at all, although there were others that concerned
nothing else. And, of course, Tiny was not always in the role of _canis
superior_. He was a dog—all dog—and acted accordingly. His strangeness
came out only at particular intervals. At first it had been at times
when Alistair was most susceptible to being astonished by it—in other
words, when it was least expected. Later, he would perform his odd feats
when she was ready for him to do it, and under exactly the right
circumstances. Later still, he became the superdog only when she asked
him to.…

The cottage was on a hillside, such a very steep hillside that the view
of the river skipped over the railroad, and the trains were a secret
rumble and never a sight at all. There was a wild and clean air about
the place—a perpetual tingle of expectancy, as though someone coming
into New York for the very first time on one of the trains had thrown
his joyous anticipation high in the air and the cottage had caught it
and breathed it and kept it forever.

Up the hairpin driveway to the house, one spring afternoon, toiled a
miniature automobile in its lowest gear. Its little motor grunted and
moaned as it took the last steep grade, a miniature Old Faithful
appearing around its radiator cap. At the foot of the brownstone porch
steps it stopped, and a miniature lady slid out from under the wheel.
But for the fact that she was wearing an aviation mechanic’s coveralls,
and that her very first remark—an earthy epithet directed at the
steaming radiator—was neither ladylike nor miniature, she might have
been a model for the more precious variety of Mother’s Day greeting
card.

Fuming, she reached into the car and pressed the horn button. The
quavering wail that resulted had its desired effect. It was answered
instantly by the mighty howl of a Great Dane at the peak of aural agony.
The door of the house crashed open and a girl in shorts and a halter
rushed out on the porch, to stand with her russet hair ablaze in the
sunlight, her lips parted, and her long eyes squinting against the light
reflected from the river.

“What—Mother! Mother, darling, is that you? Already? Tiny!” she rapped
as the dog bolted out of the open door and down the steps. “Come back
here!”

The dog stopped. Mrs. Forsythe scooped a crescent wrench from the ledge
behind the driver’s seat and brandished it. “Let him come, Alistair,”
she said grimly. “In the name of sense, girl, what are you doing with a
monster like that? I thought you said you had a dog, not a Shetland pony
with fangs. If he messes with me, I’ll separate him from a couple of
those twelve-pound feet and bring him down to my weight. Where do you
keep his saddle? I thought there was a meat shortage in this part of the
country. Whatever possessed you to take up your abode with that
carnivorous dromedary, anyway? And what’s the idea of buying a barn like
this, thirty miles from nowhere and perched on a precipice to boot, with
a stepladder for a driveway and an altitude fit to boil water at eighty
degrees Centigrade? It must take you forever to make breakfast.
Twenty-minute eggs, and then they’re raw. I’m hungry. If that Danish
basilisk hasn’t eaten everything in sight, I’d like to nibble on about
eight sandwiches. Salami on whole wheat. Your flowers are gorgeous,
child. So are you. You always were, of course. Pity you have brains. If
you had no brains, you’d get married. A lovely view, honey, lovely. I
like it here. Glad you bought it. Come here, you,” she said to Tiny.

He approached this small specimen of volubility with his head a little
low and his tail down. She extended a hand and held it still to let him
sniff it before she thumped him on the withers. He waved his
unfashionable tail in acceptance and then went to join the laughing
Alistair, who was coming down the steps.

“Mother, you’re marvelous.” She bent and kissed her. “What on earth made
that awful noise?”

“Noise? Oh, the horn.” Mrs. Forsythe busily went about lifting the hood
of the car. “I have a friend in the shoelace business. Wanted to
stimulate trade for him. Fixed this up to make people jump out of their
shoes. When they jump they break the laces. Leave their shoes in the
street. Thousands of people walking about in their stocking feet. More
people ought to, anyway. Good for the arches.” She pointed. There were
four big air-driven horns mounted on and around the little motor. Over
the mouth of each was a shutter, so arranged that it revolved about an
axle set at right angles to the horn, so that the bell was opened and
closed by four small DC motors. “That’s what gives it the warble. As for
the beat-note, the four of them are tuned a sixteenth-tone apart.
Pretty?”

“Pretty,” Alistair conceded with sincerity. “No, please don’t
demonstrate it again, Mother! You almost wrenched poor Tiny’s ears off
the first time.”

“Oh, did I?” Contritely she went to the dog. “I didn’t mean to,
honey-poodle, really I didn’t.” The honey-poodle looked up at her with
somber brown eyes and thumped his tail on the ground. “I like him,” said
Mrs. Forsythe decisively. She put out a fearless hand and pulled
affectionately at the loose flesh of Tiny’s upper lip. “Will you look at
those tusks! Good grief, dog, reel in some of that tongue or you’ll turn
yourself inside out. Why aren’t you married yet, chicken?”

“Why aren’t you?” Alistair countered.

Mrs. Forsythe stretched. “I’ve _been_ married,” she said, and Alistair
knew that now her casualness was forced. “A married season with the
likes of Dan Forsythe sticks with you.” Her voice softened. “Your daddy
was all kinds of good people, baby.” She shook herself. “Let’s eat. I
want to hear about Tiny. Your driblets and drablets of information about
that dog are as tantalizing as Chapter Eleven of a movie serial. Who’s
this Alec creature in St. Croix? Some kind of native—cannibal, or
something? He sounds nice. I wonder if you know how nice _you_ think he
is? Good heavens, the girl’s blushing! I only know what I read in your
letters, darling, and I never knew you to quote anyone by the paragraph
before but that old scoundrel Nowland, and that was all about ductility
and permeability and melting points. Metallurgy! A girl like you mucking
about with molybs and durals instead of heartbeats and hope chests!”

“Mother, sweetheart, hasn’t it occurred to you at all that I don’t
_want_ to get married? Not yet, anyway.”

“Of course it has. That doesn’t alter the fact that a woman is only
forty percent a woman until someone loves her, and only eighty percent a
woman until she has children. As for you and your precious career, I
seem to remember something about a certain Marie Sklodowska who didn’t
mind marrying a fellow called Curie, science or no science.”

“Darling,” said Alistair a little tiredly as they mounted the steps and
went into the cool house, “once and for all, get this straight. The
career, as such, doesn’t matter at all. The work does. I like it. I
don’t see the sense of being married purely for the sake of being
married.”

“Oh, for heaven’s sake, child, neither do I,” said Mrs. Forsythe
quickly. Then, casting a critical eye over her daughter, she sighed,
“But it’s such a waste.”

“What do you mean?”

Her mother shook her head. “If you don’t get it, it’s because there’s
something wrong with your sense of values, in which case there’s no
point in arguing. I love your furniture. Now, for pity’s sake feed me
and tell me about this canine Carnera of yours.”

Moving deftly about the kitchen while her mother perched like a
bright-eyed bird on a utility ladder, Alistair told the story of her
letters from Alec and Tiny’s arrival.

“At first he was just a dog. A very wonderful dog, of course, and
extremely well trained. We got along beautifully. There was nothing
remarkable about him but his history, as far as I could see, and
certainly no indication of … of anything. I mean, he might have
responded to my name the way he did because the syllabic content pleased
him.”

“It should,” said her mother complacently. “Dan and I spent weeks at a
sound laboratory graphing a suitable name for you. Alistair Forsythe.
Has a beat, you know. Keep that in mind when you change it.”

“Mother!”

“All right, dear. Go on with the story.”

“For all I knew, the whole thing was a crazy coincidence. Tiny didn’t
respond particularly to the sound of my name after he got here. He
seemed to take a perfectly normal, doggy pleasure in sticking around,
that was all.

“Then, one evening after he had been with me about a month, I found out
he could read.”

“Read!” Mrs. Forsythe toppled, clutched the edge of the sink, and
righted herself.

“Well, practically that. I used to study a lot in the evenings, and Tiny
used to stretch out in front of the fire with his nose between his paws
and watch me. I was tickled by that. I even got the habit of talking to
him while I studied. I mean, about the work. He always seemed to be
paying very close attention, which, of course, was silly. And maybe it
was my imagination, but the times he’d get up and nuzzle me always
seemed to be the times when my mind was wandering or when I would quit
working and go on to something else.

“This particular evening I was working on the permeability mathematics
of certain of the rare-earth group. I put down my pencil and reached for
my _Handbook of Chemistry and Physics_ and found nothing but a big hole
in the bookcase. The book wasn’t on the desk, either. So I swung around
to Tiny and said, just for something to say, ‘Tiny, what have you done
with my handbook?’

“He went _whuff_, in the most startled tone of voice, leaped to his
feet, and went over to his bed. He turned up the mattress with his paw
and scooped out the book. He picked it up in his jaws—I wonder what he
would have done if he were a Scotty; that’s a chunky piece of
literature!—and brought it to me.

“I just didn’t know what to do. I took the book and riffled it. It was
pretty well shoved around. Apparently he had been trying to leaf through
it with those big splay feet of his. I put the book down and took him by
the muzzle. I called him nine kinds of a rascal and asked him what he
was looking for.” She paused, building a sandwich.

“Well?”

“Oh,” said Alistair, as if coming back from a far distance. “He didn’t
say.”

There was a thoughtful silence. Finally Mrs. Forsythe looked up with her
odd birdlike glance and said, “You’re kidding. That dog isn’t shaggy
enough.”

“You don’t believe me.” It wasn’t a question.

The older woman got up to put a hand on the girl’s shoulder.
“Honey-lamb, your daddy used to say that the only things worth believing
were things you learned from people you trusted. Of course I believe
you. Thing is—do _you_ believe you?”

“I’m not—sick, Mum, if that’s what you mean. Let me tell you the rest of
it.”

“You mean there’s more?”

“Plenty more.” She put the stack of sandwiches on the sideboard where
her mother could reach it. Mrs. Forsythe fell to with a will. “Tiny has
been goading me to do research. A particular kind of research.”

“Hut hine uffefa?”

“Mother! I didn’t give you those sandwiches just to feed you. The idea
was to soundproof you a bit, too, while I talked.”

“Hohay!” said her mother cheerfully.

“Well, Tiny won’t let me work on any other project but the one he’s
interested in. Mum, I can’t talk if you’re going to gape like that!
No … I can’t say he won’t let me do _any_ work. But there’s a certain
line of endeavor that he approves. If I do anything else, he snuffles
around, joggles my elbow, grunts, whimpers, and generally carries on
until I lose my temper and tell him to go away. Then he’ll walk over to
the fireplace and flop down and sulk. Never takes his eyes off me. So,
of course, I get all soft-hearted and repentant and apologize to him and
get on with what he wants done.”

Mrs. Forsythe swallowed, coughed, gulped some milk, and exploded, “Wait
a minute, you’re away too fast for me! What is it that he wants done?
How do you know he wants it? Can he read, or can’t he? Make some sense,
child!”

Alistair laughed richly. “Poor Mum. I don’t blame you, darling. No, I
don’t think he can really read. He shows no interest at all in books or
pictures. The episode with the handbook seemed to be an experiment that
didn’t bring any results. _But_—he knows the difference between my
books, even books that are bound alike, even when I shift them around in
the bookcase. Tiny!”

The Great Dane scrambled to his feet from the corner of the kitchen, his
paws skidding on the waxed linoleum. “Get me Hoag’s _Basic Radio_, old
feller, will you?”

Tiny turned and padded out. They heard him going up the stairs. “I was
afraid he wouldn’t do it while you were here,” she said. “He generally
warns me not to say anything about his powers. He growls. He did that
when Dr. Nowland dropped out for lunch one Saturday. I started to talk
about Tiny and just couldn’t. He acted disgracefully. First he growled
and then he barked. It was the first time I’ve ever known him to bark in
the house. Poor Dr. Nowland. He was scared half out of his wits.”

Tiny thudded down the stairs and entered the kitchen. “Give it to Mum,”
said Alistair. Tiny walked sedately over to the stool and stood before
the astonished Mrs. Forsythe. She took the volume from his jaws.

_“Basic Radio,”_ she breathed.

“I asked him for that because I have a whole row of technical books up
there, all from the same publisher, all the same color and about the
same size,” said Alistair calmly.

“But … but … how does he do it?”

Alistair shrugged. “I don’t know. He doesn’t read the titles. That I’m
sure of. He can’t read anything. I’ve tried to get him to do it a dozen
different ways. I’ve lettered instructions on pieces of paper and shown
them to him—you know, ‘Go to the door’ and ‘Give me a kiss’ and so on.
He just looks at them and wags his tail. But if I read them first—”

“You mean, read them aloud?”

“No. Oh, he’ll do anything I ask him to, sure. But I don’t have to say
it. Just read it, and he turns and does it. That’s the way he makes me
study what he wants studied.”

“Are you telling me that behemoth can read your mind?”

“What do you think? Here, I’ll show you. Give me the book.”

Tiny’s ears went up. “There’s something in here about the electrical
flux in supercooled copper that I don’t quite remember. Let’s see if
Tiny’s interested.”

She sat on the kitchen table and began to leaf through the book. Tiny
came and sat in front of her, his tongue lolling out, his big brown eyes
fixed on her face. There was silence as she turned pages, read a little,
turned some more. And suddenly Tiny whimpered urgently.

“See what I mean, Mum? All right, Tiny. I’ll read it over.”

Silence again, while Alistair’s long green eyes traveled over the page.
All at once Tiny stood up and nuzzled her leg.

“Hm-m-m? The reference? Want me to go back?”

Tiny sat again, expectantly. “There’s a reference here to a passage in
the first section on basic electric theory that he wants,” she
explained. She looked up. “Mother, you read it to him.” She jumped off
the table, handed the book over. “Here. Section forty-five. Tiny! Go
listen to Mum. Go on,” and she shoved him towards Mrs. Forsythe, who
said in an awed voice, “When I was a little girl, I used to read bedtime
stories to my dolls. I thought I’d quit that kind of thing altogether,
and now I’m reading technical literature to this … this canine
catastrophe here. Shall I read aloud?”

“No, don’t. See if he gets it.”

But Mrs. Forsythe didn’t get the chance. Before she had read two lines
Tiny was frantic. He ran to Mrs. Forsythe and back to Alistair. He
reared up like a frightened horse, rolled his eyes, and panted. He
whimpered. He growled a little.

“For pity’s sakes, what’s wrong?”

“I guess he can’t get it from you,” said Alistair. “I’ve had the idea
before that he’s tuned to me in more ways than one, and this clinches
it. All right, then. Give me back the—”

But before she could ask him, Tiny had bounded to Mrs. Forsythe, taken
the book gently out of her hands, and carried it to his mistress.
Alistair smiled at her paling mother, took the book, and read until Tiny
suddenly seemed to lose interest. He went back to his station by the
kitchen cabinet and lay down, yawning.

“That’s that,” said Alistair, closing the book. “In other words, class
dismissed. Well, Mum?”

Mrs. Forsythe opened her mouth, closed it again, and shook her head.
Alistair loosed a peal of laughter.

“Oh, Mum,” she gurgled through her laughter. “History has been made.
Mum, darling, you’re speechless!”

“I am not,” said Mrs. Forsythe gruffly. “I … I think … well, what do you
know! You’re right! I _am!_”

When they had their breath back—yes, Mrs. Forsythe joined in, for
Alistair’s statement was indeed true—Alistair picked up the book and
said, “Now look, Mum, it’s almost time for my session with Tiny. Oh,
yes; it’s a regular thing, and he certainly is leading me into some
fascinating byways.”

“Like what?”

“Like the old impossible problem of casting tungsten, for example. You
know, there is a way to do it.”

“You don’t say! What do you cast it in—a play?”

Alistair wrinkled her straight nose. “Did you ever hear of pressure ice?
Water compressed until it forms a solid at what is usually its boiling
point?”

“I remember some such.”

“Well, all you need is enough pressure, and a chamber that can take that
kind of pressure, and a couple of details like a high-intensity field of
umpteen megacycles phased with … I forget the figures; anyhow, that’s
the way to go about it.”

“ ‘If we had some eggs we could have some ham and eggs if we had some
ham,’ ” quoted Mrs. Forsythe. “And besides, I seem to remember something
about that pressure ice melting pretty much right now, like so,” and she
snapped her fingers. “How do you know your molded tungsten—that’s what
it would be, not cast at all—wouldn’t change state the same way?”

“That’s what I’m working on now,” said Alistair calmly. “Come along,
Tiny. Mum, you can find your way around all right, can’t you? If you
need anything, just sing out. This isn’t a séance, you know.”

“Isn’t it, though?” muttered Mrs. Forsythe as her lithe daughter and the
dog bounded up the stairs. She shook her head, went into the kitchen,
drew a bucket of water, and carried it down to her car, which had cooled
to a simmer. She was dashing careful handfuls of it onto the radiator
before beginning to pour when her quick ear caught the scrunching of
boots on the steep drive.

She looked up to see a young man trudging wearily in the mid-morning
heat. He wore an old sharkskin suit and carried his coat. In spite of
his wilted appearance, his step was firm and his golden hair was crisp
in the sunlight. He swung up to Mrs. Forsythe and gave her a grin, all
deep-blue eyes and good teeth. “Forsythe’s?” he asked in a resonant
baritone.

“That’s right,” said Mrs. Forsythe, finding that she had to turn her
head from side to side to see both of his shoulders. And yet she could
have swapped belts with him. “You must feel like the Blue Kangaroo
here,” she added, slapping her miniature mount on its broiling flank.
“Boiled dry.”

“You cahl de cyah de Blue Kangaroo?” he repeated, draping his coat over
the door and mopping his forehead with what seemed to Mrs. Forsythe’s
discerning eye a pure linen handkerchief.

“I do,” she replied, forcing herself not to comment on the young man’s
slight but strange accent. “It’s strictly a dry-clutch job and acts like
a castellated one. Let the pedal out, she races. Let it out three
thirty-seconds of an inch more, and you’re gone from there. Always
stopping to walk back and pick up your head. Snaps right off, you know.
Carry a bottle of collodion and a couple of splints to put your head
back on. Starve to death without a head to eat with. What brings you
here?”

In answer he held out a yellow envelope, looking solemnly at her head
and neck, then at the car, his face quiet, his eyes crinkling with a
huge enjoyment.

Mrs. Forsythe glanced at the envelope. “Oh. Telegram. She’s inside. I’ll
give it to her. Come on in and have a drink. It’s hotter than the hinges
of Hail Columbia, Happy Land. Don’t go wiping your feet like that! By
jeepers, that’s enough to give you an inferiority complex! Invite a man
in, invite the dust on his feet, too. It’s good, honest dirt and we
don’t run to white broadlooms here. Are you afraid of dogs?”

The young man laughed. “Dahgs talk to me, ma’am.”

She glanced at him sharply, opened her mouth to tell him he might just
be taken at his word around here, then thought better of it. “Sit down,”
she ordered. She bustled up a foaming glass of beer and set it beside
him. “I’ll get her down to sign for the wire,” she said. The man half
lowered the glass into which he had been jowls-deep, began to speak,
found he was alone in the room, laughed suddenly and richly, wiped off
the mustache of suds, and dived down for a new one.

Mrs. Forsythe grinned and shook her head as she heard the laughter, and
went straight to Alistair’s study. “Alistair!”

“Stop pushing me about the ductility of tungsten, Tiny! You know better
than that. Figures are figures, and facts are facts. I think I see what
you’re trying to lead me to. All I can say is that if such a thing is
possible, I never heard of any equipment that could handle it. Stick
around a few years and I’ll hire you a nuclear power plant. Until then,
I’m afraid—”

“Alistair!”

“—there just isn’t … hm-m-m? Yes, Mother?”

“Telegram.”

“Oh. Who from?”

“I don’t know, being only one fortieth of one percent as psychic as that
doghouse Dunninger you have there. In other words, I didn’t open it.”

“Oh, Mum, you’re silly. Of course you could have … oh, well, let’s have
it.”

“I haven’t got it. It’s downstairs with Discobolus Junior, who brought
it. No one,” she said ecstatically, “has a right to be so tanned with
hair that color.”

“What _are_ you talking about?”

“Go on down and sign for the telegram and see for yourself. You will
find the maiden’s dream with his golden head in a bucket of suds, all
hot and sweaty from his noble efforts in attaining this peak without
spikes or alpenstock, with nothing but his pure heart and Western Union
to guide him.”

“This maiden’s dream happens to be tungsten treatment,” said Alistair
with some irritation. She looked longingly at her work sheet, put down
her pencil, and rose. “Stay here, Tiny. I’ll be right back as soon as I
have successfully resisted my conniving mother’s latest scheme to drag
my red hairing across some young buck’s path to matrimony.” She paused
at the door. “Aren’t you staying up here, Mum?”

“Get that hair away from your face,” said her mother grimly. “I am not.
I wouldn’t miss this for the world. And don’t pun in front of that young
man. It’s practically the only thing in the world I consider vulgar.”

Alistair led the way down the stairs and through the corridor to the
kitchen, with her mother crowding her heels, once fluffing out her
daughter’s blazing hair, once taking a swift tuck in the back of the
girl’s halter. They spilled through the door almost together. Alistair
stopped and frankly stared.

For the young man had risen and, still with the traces of beer foam on
his modeled lips, stood with his jaws stupidly open, his head a little
back, his eyes partly closed as if against a bright light. And it seemed
as if everyone in the room forgot to breathe for a moment.

“Well!” Mrs. Forsythe exploded after a moment. “Honey, you’ve made a
conquest. Hey, you, chin up, chest out.”

“I beg your humble pardon,” muttered the young man, and the phrase
seemed more a colloquialism than an affectation.

Alistair, visibly pulling herself together, said, “Mother, please,” and
drifted forward to pick up the telegram that lay on the kitchen table.
Her mother knew her well enough to realize that her hands and her eyes
were steady only by a powerful effort. Whether the effort was in control
of annoyance, embarrassment, or out-and-out biochemistry was a matter
for later thought. At the moment Mrs. Forsythe was enjoying the
situation tremendously.

“Please wait,” said Alistair coolly. “There may be an answer to this.”
The young man simply bobbed his head. He was still a little wall-eyed
with the impact of seeing Alistair, as many a young man had been before.
But there were the beginnings of his astonishing smile around his lips
as he watched her rip the envelope open.

“Mother! Listen!

ARRIVED THIS MORNING AND HOPE I CAN CATCH YOU AT HOME. OLD DEBBIL KILLED
IN ACCIDENT BUT FOUND HIS MEMORY BEFORE HE DIED. HAVE INFORMATION WHICH
MAY CLEAR UP MYSTERY—OR DEEPEN IT. HOPE I CAN SEE YOU FOR I DON’T KNOW
WHAT TO THINK.

ALEC.

“How old is this tropical savage?” asked Mrs. Forsythe.

“He’s not a savage and I don’t know how old he is and I can’t see what
that has to do with it. I think he’s about my age or a little older.”
She looked up and her eyes were shining.

“Deadly rival,” said Mrs. Forsythe to the messenger consolingly. “Rotten
timing here, somewhere.”

“I—” said the young man.

“Mother, we’ve got to fix something to eat. Do you suppose he’ll be able
to stay over? Where’s my green dress with the … oh, you wouldn’t know.
It’s new.”

“Then the letters weren’t all about the dog,” said Mrs. Forsythe with a
Cheshire grin.

“Mum, you’re impossible. This is … is important. Alec is … is …”

Her mother nodded. “Important. That’s all I was pointing out.”

The young man said, “I—”

Alistair turned to him. “I do hope you don’t think we’re totally mad.
I’m sorry you had such a climb.” She went to the sideboard and took a
quarter out of a sugar bowl. He took it gravely.

Thank you, ma’am. If you don’t min’, I’ll keep this piece of silver for
the rest o’ my everlahstin’.”

“You’re wel—What?”

The young man seemed to get even taller. “I greatly appreciate your
hospitality, Miss Forsythe. I have you at a disadvantage, ma’am, and one
I shall correct.” He put a crooked forefinger between his lips and blew
out an incredible blast of sound.

“Tiny!” he roared. “Here to me, dahg, an’ mek me known!”

There was an answering roar from upstairs, and Tiny came tumbling down,
scrabbling wildly as he took the turn at the foot of the stairs and
hurtled over the slick flooring to crash joyfully into the young man.

“Ah, you beast,” crooned the man, cuffing the dog happily. His accent
thickened. “You thrive yourself here wid de lady-dem, you gray-yut
styoupid harse. You glad me, mon, you glad me.” He grinned at the two
astonished women. “Forgive me,” he said as he pummeled Tiny, pulled his
ears, shoved him away, and caught him by the jaws. “For true, I couldn’t
get in the first word with Mrs. Forsythe, and after that I couldn’t help
meself. Alec my name is, and the telegram I took from the true
messenger, finding him sighing and sweating at the sight of the hill
there.”

Alistair covered her face with her hands and said, “Oooh.”

Mrs. Forsythe whooped with laughter. When she found her voice she
demanded, “Young man, what is your last name?”

“Sundersen, ma’am.”

“Mother! Why did you ask him that?”

“For reasons of euphony,” said Mrs. Forsythe with a twinkle. “Alexander
Sundersen. Very good. Alistair—”

“Stop! Mum, don’t you dare—”

“I was going to say, Alistair, if you and our guest will excuse me, I’ll
have to get back to my knitting.” She went to the door.

Alistair threw an appalled look at Alec and cried, “Mother! What are you
knitting?”

“My brows, darling. See you later.” Mrs. Forsythe chuckled and went out.

It took almost a week for Alec to get caught up with the latest
developments in Tiny, for he got the story in the most meticulous
detail. There never seemed to be enough time to get in all the
explanations and anecdotes, so swiftly did it fly when he and Alistair
were together. Some days he went into the city with Alistair in the
morning and spent the day buying tools and equipment for his estate. New
York was a wonder city to him—he had been there only once before—and
Alistair found herself getting quite possessive about the place, showing
it off like the contents of a jewel box. And then Alec stayed at the
house a couple of days. He endeared himself forever to Mrs. Forsythe by
removing, cleaning, and refacing the clutch on the Blue Kangaroo,
simplifying the controls on the gas refrigerator so it could be
defrosted without a major operation, and putting a building jack under
the corner of the porch that threatened to sag.

And the sessions with Tiny were resumed and intensified. At first he
seemed a little uneasy when Alec joined one of them, but within half an
hour he relaxed. Thereafter, more and more he would interrupt Alistair
to turn to Alec. Although he apparently could not understand Alec’s
thoughts at all, he seemed to comprehend perfectly when Alec spoke to
Alistair. And within a few days she learned to accept these
interruptions, for they speeded up the research they were doing. Alec
was almost totally ignorant of the advanced theory with which Alistair
worked, but his mind was clear, quick, and very direct. He was no
theorist, and that was good. He was one of those rare grease-monkey
geniuses, with a grasp of the laws of cause and effect that amounted to
intuition. Tiny’s reaction to this seemed to be approval. At any rate,
the occasions when Alistair lost track of what Tiny was after occurred
less and less frequently. Alec instinctively knew just how far to go
back, and then how to spot the turning at which they had gone astray.
And bit by bit they began to identify what it was that Tiny was after.
As to why—and how—he was after it, Alec’s experience with old Debbil
seemed a clue. It was certainly sufficient to keep Alec plugging away at
a possible solution to the strange animal’s stranger need.

“It was down at the sugar mill,” he told Alistair, after he had become
fully acquainted with the incredible dog’s actions and they were trying
to determine the why and the how. “He called me over to the chute where
cane is loaded into the conveyors.

“ ‘Bahss,’ he told me, ‘dat t’ing dere, it not safe, sah.’ And he
pointed through the guard over the bull gears that drove the conveyor.
Great big everlahstin’ teeth it has, Miss Alistair, a full ten inches
long, and it whirlin’ to the drive pinion. It’s old, but strong for
good. Debbil, what he saw was a bit o’ play on the pinion shaf’.

“ ‘Now, you’re an old fool,’ I told him.

“ ‘No, bahss,’ ” he says. ‘Look now, sah, de t’ing wit’ de teet’—dem, it
not safe, sah. I mek you see,’ and before I could move meself or let a
thought trickle, he opens the guard up and thrus’ his han’ inside! Bull
gear, it run right up his arm and nip it off, neat as ever, at the
shoulder. I humbly beg your pardon, Miss Alistair.”

“G-go on,” said Alistair, through her handkerchief.

“Well, sir, old Debbil was an idiot for true, and he only died the way
he lived, rest him. He was old and he was all eaten out with malaria and
elephantiasis and the like, that not even Dr. Thetford could save him.
But a strange thing happened. As he lay dyin’, with the entire village
gathered roun’ the door whisperin’ plans for the wake, he sent to tell
me come quickly. Down I run, and for the smile on his face I glad him
when I cross the doorstep.”

As Alec spoke, he was back in the Spanish-wall hut, with the air close
under the palm-thatch roof and the glare of the pressure lantern set on
the tiny window ledge to give the old man light to die by. Alec’s accent
deepened. “ ‘How you feel, mon?’ I ahsk him. ‘Bahss, I’m a dead man now,
but I got a light in mah hey-yud.’

“ ‘Tell me then, Debbil.’

“ ‘Bahss, de folk-dem say, ol’ Debbil, him cyahn’t remembah de taste of
a mango as he t’row away de skin. Him cyahn’t remembah his own house do
he stay away t’ree day.’

“ ‘Loose talk, Debbil.’

“ ‘True talk, Bahss. Foh de Lahd give me a leaky pot fo’ hol’ ma brains.
But Bahss, I do recall one t’ing now, bright an’ clear, and you must
know. Bahss, de day I go up the wahtah line, I see a great jumbee in de
stones of de gov’nor palace dere.’ ”

“What’s a jumbee?” asked Mrs. Forsythe.

“A ghost, ma’am. The Crucians carry a crawlin’ heap of superstitions.
Tiny! What eats you, mon?”

Tiny growled again. Alec and Alistair exchanged a look. “He doesn’t want
you to go on.”

“Listen carefully. I want him to get this. I am his friend. I want to
help you help him. I realize that he wants as few people as possible to
find out about this thing. I will say nothing to anybody unless and
until I have his permission.”

“Well, Tiny?”

The dog stood restlessly, swinging his great head from Alistair to Alec.
Finally he made a sound like an audible shrug, then turned to Mrs.
Forsythe.

“Mother’s part of me,” said Alistair firmly. “That’s the way it’s got to
be. No alternative.” She leaned forward. “You can’t talk to us. You can
only indicate what you want said and done. I think Alec’s story will
help us to understand what you want and help you to get it more quickly.
Understand?”

Tiny gazed at her for a long moment, said, _“Whuff,”_ and lay down with
his nose between his paws and his eyes fixed on Alec.

“I think that’s the green light,” said Mrs. Forsythe, “and I might add
that most of it was due to my daughter’s conviction that you’re a
wonderful fellow.”

“Mother!”

“Well, pare me down and call me Spud! They’re _both_ blushing!” said
Mrs. Forsythe blatantly.

“Go on, Alec,” choked Alistair.

“Thank you. Old Debbil told me a fine tale of the things he had seen at
the ruins. A great beast, mind you, with no shape at all, and a face
ugly to drive you mad. And about the beast was what he called a ‘feelin’
good.’ He said it was a miracle, but he feared nothing. ‘Wet it was,
Bahss, like a slug, an’ de eye it have is whirlin’ an’ shakin’, an’ I
standin’ dar feelin’ like a bride at de altar step an’ no fear in me.’
Well, I thought the old man’s mind was wandering, for I knew he was
touched. But the story he told was _that_ clear, and never a single
second did he stop to think. Out it all came like a true thing.

“He said that Tiny walked to the beast and that it curved over him like
an ocean wave. It closed over the dog, and Debbil was rooted there the
livelong day, still without fear, and feelin’ no smallest desire to
move. He had no surprise at all, even at the thing he saw restin’ in the
thicket among the old stones.

“He said it was a submarine, a mighty one as great as the estate house
and with no break nor mar in its surface but for the glass part let in
where the mouth is on a shark.

“And then when the sun begun to dip, the beast gave a shudderin’ heave
and rolled back, and out walked Tiny. He stepped up to Debbil and stood.
Then the beast began to quiver and shake, and Debbil said the air aroun’
him heavied with the work the monster was doing, tryin’ to talk. A cloud
formed in his brain, and a voice swept over him. ‘Not a livin’ word,
Bahss, not a sound at all. But it said to forget. It said to leave dis
place and forget, sah.’ And the last thing old Debbil saw as he turned
away was the beast slumping down, seeming all but dead from the work it
had done to speak at all. ‘An’ de cloud live in mah hey-yud, Bahss, f’om
dat time onward. I’m a dead man now, Bahss, but de cloud gone and Debbil
know de story.’ ” Alec leaned back and looked at his hands. “That was
all. This must have happened about fifteen months pahst, just before
Tiny began to show his strange stripe.” He drew a deep breath and looked
up. “Maybe I’m gullible. But I knew the old man too well. He never in
this life could invent such a tale. I troubled myself to go up to the
governor’s palace after the buryin’. I might have been mistaken, but
something big had lain in the deepest thicket, for it was crushed into a
great hollow place near a hundred foot long. Well, there you are. For
what it’s worth, you have the story of a superstitious an’ illiterate
old man, at the point of death by violence and many years sick to boot.”

There was a long silence, and at last Alistair threw her lucent hair
back and said, “It isn’t Tiny at all. It’s a … a thing outside Tiny.”
She looked at the dog, her eyes wide. “And I don’t even mind.”

“Neither did Debbil, when he saw it,” said Alec gravely.

Mrs. Forsythe snapped, “What are we sitting gawking at each other for?
Don’t answer; I’ll tell you. All of us can think up a story to fit the
facts, and we’re all too self-conscious to come out with it. Any story
that fit those facts would really be a killer.”

“Well said.” Alec grinned. “Would you like to tell us your idea?”

“Silly boy,” muttered Alistair.

“Don’t be impertinent, child. Of course I’d like to tell you, Alec. I
think that the good Lord, in His infinite wisdom, has decided that it
was about time for Alistair to come to her senses, and, knowing that it
would take a quasi-scientific miracle to do it, dreamed up this—”

“Some day,” said Alistair icily, “I’m going to pry you loose from your
verbosity and your sense of humor in one fell swoop.”

Mrs. Forsythe grinned. “There is a time for jocularity, kidlet, and this
is it. I hate solemn people solemnly sitting around being awed by
things. What do you make of all this, Alec?”

Alec pulled his ear and said, “I vote we leave it up to Tiny. It’s his
show. Let’s get on with the work and just keep in mind what we already
know.”

To their astonishment, Tiny stumped over to Alec and licked his hand.

The blowoff came six weeks after Alec’s arrival. (Oh, yes, he stayed six
weeks, and longer. It took some fiendish cogitation for him to think of
enough legitimate estate business that had to be done in New York to
keep him that long, but after six weeks he was so much one of the family
that he needed no excuse.) He had devised a code system for Tiny, so
that Tiny could add something to their conversations. His point: “Here
he sits, ma’am, like a fly on the wall, seeing everything and hearing
everything and saying not a word. Picture it for yourself, and you in
such a position, full entranced as you are with the talk you hear.” And
for Mrs. Forsythe particularly, the mental picture was altogether too
vivid. It was so well presented that Tiny’s research went by the board
for four days while they devised the code. They had to give up the idea
of a glove with a pencil pocket in it, with which Tiny might write a
little, or any similar device. The dog was simply not deft enough for
such meticulous work; and besides, he showed absolutely no signs of
understanding any written or printed symbolism. Unless, of course,
Alistair thought about it.

Alec’s plan was simple. He cut some wooden forms—a disk, a square, a
triangle to begin with. The disk signified “yes” or any other
affirmation, depending on the context; the square was “no” or any
negation; and the triangle indicated a question or a change of subject.
The amount of information Tiny was able to impart by moving from one to
another of these forms was astonishing. Once a subject for discussion
was established, Tiny would take a stand between the disk and the
square, so that all he had to do was to swing his head to one side or
the other to indicate a “yes” or a “no.” No longer were there those
exasperating sessions in which the track of his research was lost while
they back-trailed to discover where they had gone astray. The
conversations ran like this:

“Tiny, I have a question. Hope you won’t think it too personal. May I
ask it?” That was Alec, always infinitely polite to dogs. He had always
recognized their innate dignity.

_Yes_, the answer would come, as Tiny swung his head over the disk.

“Were we right in assuming that you, the dog, are not communicating with
us, that you are the medium?”

Tiny went to the triangle. “You want to change the subject?”

Tiny hesitated, then went to the square. _No_.

Alistair said, “He obviously wants something from us before he will
discuss the question. Right, Tiny?”

_Yes_.

Mrs. Forsythe said, “He’s had his dinner, and he doesn’t smoke. I think
he wants us to assure him that we’ll keep his secret.”

_Yes_.

“Good. Alec, you’re wonderful,” said Alistair. “Mother, stop beaming. I
only meant—”

“Leave it at that, child. Any qualification will spoil it for the man.”

“Thank you, ma’am,” said Alec gravely, with that deep twinkle of
amusement around his eyes. Then he turned back to Tiny. “Well, what
about it, sah? Are you a superdog?”

_No_.

“Who … no, he can’t answer that. Let’s go back a bit. Was old Debbil’s
story true?”

_Yes_.

“Ah.” They exchanged glances. “Where is this—monster? Still in St.
Croix?”

_No_.

“Here?”

_Yes_.

“You mean here, in this room or in the house?”

_No_.

“Nearby, though?”

_Yes_.

“How can we find out just where, without mentioning the countryside item
by item?” asked Alistair.

“I know,” said Mrs. Forsythe. “Alec, according to Debbil, that
‘submarine’ thing was pretty big, wasn’t it?”

“That it was, ma’am.”

“Good. Tiny, does he … it … have the ship here, too?”

_Yes_.

Mrs. Forsythe spread her hands. “That’s it, then. There’s only one place
around here where you could hide such an object.” She nodded her head at
the west wall of the house.

“The river!” cried Alistair. “That right, Tiny?”

_Yes_. And Tiny went immediately to the triangle.

“Wait!” said Alec. “Tiny, beggin’ your pardon, but there’s one more
question. Shortly after you took passage to New York, there was a
business with compasses, where they all pointed to the west. Was that
the ship?”

_Yes_.

“In the water?”

_No_.

“Why,” said Alistair, “this is pure science fiction! Alec, do you ever
get science fiction in the tropics?”

“Ah, Miss Alistair, not often enough, for true. But well I know it. The
space ships are old Mother Goose to me. But there’s a difference here.
For in all the stories I’ve read, when a beast comes here from space,
it’s to kill and conquer; and yet—and I don’t know why—I know that this
one wants nothing of the sort. More, he’s out to do us good.”

“I feel the same way,” said Mrs. Forsythe thoughtfully. “It’s sort of a
protective cloud which seems to surround us. Does that make sense to
you, Alistair?”

“I know it from ’way back,” said Alistair with conviction. She looked at
the dog thoughtfully. “I wonder why he … it … won’t show itself. And why
it can communicate only through me. And why me?”

“I’d say, Miss Alistair, that you were chosen because of your
metallurgy. As to why we never see the beast, well, it knows best. Its
reason must be a good one.”

Day after day, and bit by bit, they got and gave information. Many
things remained mysteries, but, strangely, there seemed no real need to
question Tiny too closely. The atmosphere of confidence and good will
that surrounded them made questions seem not only unnecessary but
downright rude.

And day by day, little by little, a drawing began to take shape under
Alec’s skilled hands. It was a casting with a simple enough external
contour, but inside it contained a series of baffles and a chamber. It
was designed, apparently, to support and house a carballoy shaft. There
were no openings into the central chamber except those taken by the
shaft. The shaft turned; _something_ within the chamber apparently drove
it. There was plenty of discussion about it.

“Why the baffles?” moaned Alistair, palming all the neatness out of her
flaming hair. “Why carballoy? And in the name of Nemo, why tungsten?”

Alec stared at the drawing for a long moment, then suddenly clapped a
hand to his head. “Tiny! Is there radiation inside that housing? I mean,
hard stuff?”

_Yes_.

“There you are, then,” said Alec. “Tungsten to shield the radiation. A
casting for uniformity. The baffles to make a meander out of the shaft
openings—see, the shaft has plates turned on it to fit between the
baffles.”

“And nowhere for anything to go in, nowhere for anything to come
out—except the shaft, of course—and besides, you can’t cast tungsten
that way! Maybe Tiny’s monster can, but we can’t. Maybe with the right
flux and with enough power—but that’s silly. Tungsten won’t cast.”

“And we cahn’t build a space ship. There must be a way!”

“Not with today’s facilities, and not with tungsten,” said Alistair.
“Tiny’s ordering it from us the way we would order a wedding cake at the
corner bakery.”

“What made you say ‘wedding cake’?”

“You, too, Alec? Don’t I get enough of that from Mother?” But she smiled
all the same. “But about the casting—it seems to me that our mysterious
friend is in the position of a radio fiend who understands every part of
his set, how it’s made, how and why it works. Then a tube blows, and he
finds he can’t buy one. He has to make one if he gets one at all.
Apparently old Debbil’s beast is in that kind of spot. What about it,
Tiny? Is your friend short a part which he understands but has never
built before?”

_Yes_.

“And he needs it to get away from Earth?”

_Yes_.

Alec asked, “What’s the trouble? Can’t get escape velocity?”

Tiny hesitated, then went to the triangle. “Either he doesn’t want to
talk about it or the question doesn’t quite fit the situation,” said
Alistair. “It doesn’t matter. Our main problem is the casting. It just
can’t be done. Not by anyone on this planet, as far as I know; and I
think I know. It has to be tungsten, Tiny?”

_Yes_.

“Tungsten for what?” asked Alec. “Radiation shield?”

_Yes_.

He turned to Alistair. “Isn’t there something just as good?”

She mused, staring at his drawing. “Yes, several things,” she said
thoughtfully. Tiny watched her, motionless. He seemed to slump as she
shrugged dispiritedly and said, “But not anything with walls as thin as
that. A yard or so of lead might do it, and have something like the
mechanical strength he seems to want, but it would obviously be too big.
Beryllium—” At the word, Tiny went and stood right on top of the square,
a most emphatic _no_.

“How about an alloy?” Alec asked.

“Well, Tiny?”

Tiny went to the triangle. Alistair nodded. “You don’t know. I can’t
think of one. I’ll take it up with Dr. Nowland. Maybe—”

The following day Alec stayed home and spent the day arguing cheerfully
with Mrs. Forsythe and building a grape arbor. It was a radiant Alistair
who came home that evening. “Got it! Got it!” she caroled as she danced
in. “Alec, Tiny! Come on!”

They flew upstairs to the study. Without removing the green “beanie”
with the orange feather that so nearly matched her hair, Alistair hauled
out four reference books and began talking animatedly. “Auric
molybdenum, Tiny, what about that? Gold and molyb III should do it!
Listen!” And she launched forth into a spatter of absorption data,
Greek-letter formulae, and strength-of-materials comparisons that made
Alec’s head swim. He sat watching her without listening. Increasingly,
this was his greatest pleasure.

When Alistair was quite through, Tiny walked away from her and lay down,
gazing off into space.

“Well, strike me!” said Alec. “Look yonder, Miss Alistair. The very
first time I ever saw him thinking something over.”

“_Sh-h!_ Don’t disturb him, then. If that is the answer, and if he never
thought of it before, it will take some figuring out. There’s no knowing
what fantastic kind of science he’s comparing it with.”

“I see the point. Like—well, suppose we crashed a plane in the Brazilian
jungle and needed a new hydraulic cylinder on the landing gear. Now,
then, one of the natives shows us ironwood, and it’s up to us to figure
out if we can make it serve.”

“That’s about it,” breathed Alistair. “I—” She was interrupted by Tiny,
who suddenly leaped up and ran to her, kissing her hands, committing the
forbidden enormity of putting his paws on her shoulders, running back to
the wooden forms and nudging the disk, the yes symbol. His tail was
going like a metronome without its pendulum.

Mrs. Forsythe came in in the midst of all this rowdiness and demanded,
“What goes on? Who made a dervish out of Tiny? What have you been
feeding him? Don’t tell me. Let me … You don’t mean you’ve solved his
problem for him? What are you going to do, buy him a pogo stick?”

“Oh, Mum, we’ve got it! An alloy of molybdenum and gold. I can get it
alloyed and cast in no time.”

“Good, honey, good. You going to cast the whole thing?” She pointed to
the drawing.

“Why, yes.”

“Humph!”

“Mother! Why, if I may ask, do you ‘humph’ in that tone of voice?”

“You may ask, Chicken, who’s going to pay for it?”

“Why, that will—I—oh. Oh!” she said, aghast, and ran to the drawing.
Alec came and looked over her shoulder. She figured in the corner of the
drawing, oh-ed once again and sat down weakly.

“How much?” asked Alec.

“I’ll get an estimate in the morning,” she said faintly. “I know plenty
of people. I can get it at cost—maybe.” She looked at Tiny despairingly.
He came and laid his head against her knee, and she pulled at his ears.
“I won’t let you down, darling,” she whispered.

She got the estimate the next day. It was a little over thirteen
thousand dollars.

Alistair and Alec stared blankly at each other and then at the dog.

“Maybe you can tell us where we can raise that much money?” said
Alistair, as if she expected Tiny to whip out a wallet.

Tiny whimpered, licked Alistair’s hand, looked at Alec, and then lay
down.

“Now what?” mused Alec.

“Now we go and fix something to eat,” said Mrs. Forsythe, moving toward
the door. The others were about to follow, when Tiny leaped to his feet
and ran in front of them. He stood in the doorway and whimpered. When
they came closer, he barked.

“Sh-h! What is it, Tiny? Want us to stay here a while?”

“Say, who’s the boss around here?” Mrs. Forsythe wanted to know.

“He is,” said Alec, and he knew he was speaking for all of them. They
sat down, Mrs. Forsythe on the studio couch, Alistair at her desk, Alec
at the drawing table. But Tiny seemed not to approve of the arrangement.
He became vastly excited, running to Alec, nudging him hard, dashing to
Alistair, taking her wrist very gently in his jaws and pulling gently
toward Alec.

“What is it, fellow?”

“Seems like matchmaking to me,” remarked Mrs. Forsythe.

“Nonsense, Mum,” said Alistair, coloring. “He wants Alec and me to
change places, that’s all.”

Alec said, “Oh,” and went to sit beside Mrs. Forsythe. Alistair sat at
the drawing table. Tiny put a paw up on it, poked at the large tablet of
paper. Alistair looked at him curiously, then tore off the top sheet.
Tiny nudged a pencil with his nose.

Then they waited. Somehow, no one wanted to speak. Perhaps no one could,
but there seemed to be no reason to try. And gradually a tension built
up in the room. Tiny stood stiff and rapt in the center of the room. His
eyes glazed, and when he finally keeled over limply, no one went to him.

Alistair picked up the pencil slowly. Watching her hand, Alec was
reminded of the movement of the pointer on a ouija board. The pencil
traveled steadily, in small surges, to the very top of the paper and
hung there. Alistair’s face was quite blank.

After that no one could say what happened, exactly. It was as if their
eyes had done what their voices had done. They could see, but they did
not care to. And Alistair’s pencil began to move. Something, somewhere,
was directing her mind—not her hand. Faster and faster her pencil flew,
and it wrote what was later to be known as the Forsythe Formulae.

There was no sign then, of course, of the furor that they would cause,
of the millions of words of conjecture that were written when it was
discovered that the girl who wrote them could not possibly have had the
mathematical background to write them. They were understood by no one at
first, and by very few people ever. Alistair certainly did not know what
they meant.

An editorial in a popular magazine came startlingly close to the true
nature of the formulae when it said: “The Forsythe Formulae, which
describe what the Sunday supplements call the ‘Something-for-Nothing
Clutch,’ and the drawing that accompanies them, signify little to the
layman. As far as can be determined, the formulae are the description
and working principles of a device. It appears to be a power plant of
sorts, and if it is ever understood, atomic power will go the way of
gaslights.

“A sphere of energy is enclosed in a shell made of neutron-absorbing
material. This sphere has inner and outer ‘layers.’ A shaft passes
through the sphere. Apparently a magnetic field must be rotated about
the outer casing of the device. The sphere of energy aligns itself with
this field. The inner sphere rotates with the outer one and has the
ability to turn the shaft. Unless the mathematics used are disproved—and
no one seems to have come anywhere near doing that, unorthodox as they
are—the aligning effect between the rotating field and the two
concentric spheres, as well as the shaft, is quite independent of any
load. In other words, if the original magnetic field rotates at 3000
r.p.m., the shaft will rotate at 3000 r.p.m., even if there is only ¹/₁₆
horsepower turning the field while there is 10,000 braking stress on the
shaft.

“Ridiculous? Perhaps. And perhaps it is no more so than the apparent
impossibility of 15 watts of energy pouring into the antenna of a radio
station, and nothing coming down. The key to the whole problem is in the
nature of those self-contained spheres of force inside the shell. Their
power is apparently inherent, and consists of an ability to align, just
as the useful property of steam is an ability to expand. If, as is
suggested by Reinhardt in his ‘Usage of the Symbol ß in the Forsythe
Formulae,’ these spheres are nothing but stable concentrations of pure
binding energy, we have here a source of power beyond the wildest dreams
of mankind. Whether or not we succeed in building such devices, it
cannot be denied that whatever their mysterious source, the Forsythe
Formulae are an epochal gift to several sciences, including, if you
like, the art of philosophy.”

After it was over, and the formulae written, the terrible tension
lifted. The three humans sat in their happy coma, and the dog lay
senseless on the rug. Mrs. Forsythe was the first to move, standing up
abruptly. “Well!” she said.

It seemed to break a spell. Everything was quite normal. No hangovers,
no sense of strangeness, no fear. They stood looking wonderingly at the
mass of minute figures.

“I don’t know,” murmured Alistair, and the phrase covered a world of
meaning. Then, “Alec—that casting. We’ve got to get it done. We’ve just
got to, no matter what it costs us!”

“I’d like to,” said Alec. “Why do we have to?”

She waved toward the drawing table. “We’ve been given that.”

“You don’t say!” said Mrs. Forsythe. “And what is that?”

Alistair put her hand to her head, and a strange, unfocused look came
into her eyes. That look was the only part of the whole affair that ever
really bothered Alec. It was a place she had gone to, a little bit; and
he knew that no matter what happened, he would never be able to go there
with her.

She said, “He’s been … talking to me, you know. You do know that, don’t
you? I’m not guessing, Alec—Mum.”

“I believe you, chicken,” her mother said softly. “What are you trying
to say?”

“I got it in concepts. It isn’t a thing you can repeat, really. But the
idea is that he couldn’t give us any _thing_. His ship is completely
functional, and there isn’t anything he can exchange for what he wants
us to do. But he has given us something of great value.…” Her voice
trailed off; she seemed to listen to something for a moment. “Of value
in several ways. A new science, a new approach to attack the science.
New tools, new mathematics.”

“But what is it? What can it do? And how is it going to help us pay for
the casting?” asked Mrs. Forsythe.

“It can’t, immediately,” said Alistair decisively. “It’s too big. We
don’t even know what it is. Why are you arguing? Can’t you understand
that he can’t give us any gadgetry? That we haven’t his techniques,
materials, and tools, and so we couldn’t make any actual machine he
suggested? He’s done the only thing he can; he’s given us a new science,
and tools to take it apart.”

“That I know,” said Alec gravely. “Well, indeed. I felt that. And I—I
trust him. Do you, ma’am?”

“Yes, of course. I think he’s—people. I think he has a sense of humor
and a sense of justice,” said Mrs. Forsythe firmly. “Let’s get our heads
together. We ought to be able to scrape it up some way. And why
shouldn’t we? Haven’t we three got something to talk about for the rest
of our lives?”

And their heads went together.

This is the letter that arrived two months later in St. Croix.

Honey-lamb,

Hold on to your seat. It’s all over.

The casting arrived. I missed you more than ever, but when you have to
go—and you know I’m glad you went! Anyway, I did as you indicated,
through Tiny, before you left. The men who rented me the boat and ran it
for me thought I was crazy, and said so. Do you know that once we were
out on the river with the casting, and Tiny started whuffing and
whimpering to tell me we were on the right spot, and I told the men to
tip the casting over the side, they had the colossal nerve to insist on
opening the crate? Got quite nasty about it. Didn’t want to be a party
to any dirty work. It was against my principles, but I let them, just to
expedite matters. They were certain there was a body in the box! When
they saw what it was, I was going to bend my umbrelly over their silly
heads, but they looked so funny I couldn’t do a thing but roar with
laughter. That was when the man said I was crazy.

Anyhow, over the side it went, into the river. Made a lovely splash.
About a minute later I got the loveliest feeling—I wish I could describe
it to you. I was sort of overwhelmed by a feeling of utter satisfaction,
and gratitude, and, oh, I don’t know. I just felt _good_, all over. I
looked at Tiny, and he was trembling. I think he felt it, too. I’d call
it a thank you, on a grand psychic scale. I think you can rest assured
that Tiny’s monster got what it wanted.

But that wasn’t the end of it. I paid off the boatmen and started up the
bank. Something made me stop and wait, and then go back to the water’s
edge.

It was early evening, and very still. I was under some sort of
compulsion, not an unpleasant thing, but an unbreakable one. I sat down
on the river wall and watched the water. There was no one around—the
boat had left—except one of those snazzy Sunlounge cruisers anchored a
few yards out. I remember how still it was, because there was a little
girl playing on the deck of the yacht, and I could hear her footsteps as
she ran about.

Suddenly I noticed something in the water. I suppose I should have been
frightened, but somehow I wasn’t at all. Whatever the thing was, it was
big and gray and slimy and quite shapeless. And somehow, it seemed to be
the source of this aura of well-being and protectiveness that I felt. It
was staring at me. I knew it was before I saw that it had an eye—a big
one, with something whirling inside of it. I don’t know. I wish I could
write. I wish I had the power to tell you what it was like. I know that
by human standards it was infinitely revolting. If this was Tiny’s
monster, I could understand its being sensitive to the revulsion it
might cause. And wrongly, for I felt to the core that the creature was
good.

It winked at me. I don’t mean blinked. It winked. And then everything
happened at once.

The creature was gone, and in seconds there was a disturbance in the
water by the yacht. Something gray and wet reached up out of the river,
and I saw it was going for that little girl. Only a tyke—about three,
she was. Red hair just like yours. And it thumped that child in the
small of the back just enough to knock her over into the river.

And can you believe it? I just sat there watching and said never a word.
It didn’t seem right to me that that baby could be struggling in the
water. _But it didn’t seem wrong, either!_

Well, before I could get my wits together, Tiny was off the wall like a
hairy bullet and streaking through the water. I have often wondered why
his feet are so big; I never will again. The hound is built like the
lower half of a paddle wheel! In two shakes he had the baby by the
scruff of the neck and was bringing her back to me. No one had seen that
child get pushed, Alistair! No one but me. But there was a man on the
yacht who must have seen her fall. He was all over the deck, roaring
orders and getting in the way of things, and by the time he had his
wherry in the water, Tiny had reached me with the little girl. She
wasn’t frightened, either, she thought it was a grand joke! Wonderful
youngster.

So the man came ashore, all gratitude and tears, and wanted to
gold-plate Tiny or something. Then he saw me. “That your dog?” I said it
was my daughter’s. She was in St. Croix on her honeymoon. Before I could
stop him, he had a checkbook out and was scratching away at it. He said
he knew my kind. Said he knew I’d never accept a thing for myself, but
wouldn’t refuse something for my daughter. I enclose the check. Why he
picked a sum like thirteen thousand I’ll never know. Anyhow, I know
it’ll be a help to you, and since the money really comes from Tiny’s
monster, I’m sure you’ll use it. I suppose I can confess now. The idea
that letting Alec put up the money even though he had to clean out his
savings and mortgage his estate—would be all right if he were one of the
family, because then he’d have you to help him make it all back
again—well, that was all my inspiration. Sometimes, though, watching
you, I wonder if I really had to work so all-fired hard to get you two
married to each other.

Well, I imagine that closes the business of Tiny’s monster. There are a
lot of things we’ll probably never know. I can guess some things,
though. It could communicate with a dog but not with a human, unless it
half killed itself trying. Apparently a dog is telepathic with humans to
a degree, though it probably doesn’t understand a lot of what it gets. I
don’t speak French, but I could probably transcribe French phonetically
well enough so a Frenchman could read it. Tiny was transcribing that
way. The monster could “send” through him and control him completely. It
no doubt indoctrinated the dog—if I can use the term—the day old Debbil
took him up the waterline. And when the monster caught, through Tiny,
the mental picture of you when Dr. Schwellenbach mentioned you, it went
to work through the dog to get you working on its problem. Mental
pictures—that’s probably what the monster used. That’s how Tiny could
tell one book from another without being able to read. You visualize
everything you think about. What do you think? I think that mine’s as
good a guess as any.

You might be amused to learn that last night all the compasses in this
neighborhood pointed west for a couple of hours! ’By, now, chillun. Keep
on being happy.

     Love and love, and a kiss for Alec,
             Mum

P.S. Is St. Croix really a nice place to honeymoon? Jack—he’s the fellow
who signed the check—is getting very sentimental. He’s very like your
father. A widower, and—oh, I don’t know. Says fate, or something,
brought us together. Said he hadn’t planned to take a trip upriver with
his granddaughter, but something drove him to it. He can’t imagine why
he anchored just there. Seemed a good idea at the time. Maybe it was
fate. He is very sweet. I wish I could forget that wink I saw in the
water.



THE SKY WAS FULL OF SHIPS


SYKES DIED, AND after two years they tracked Gordon Kemp down and
brought him back, because he was the only man who knew anything about
the death. Kemp had to face a coroner’s jury in Switchpath, Arizona, a
crossroads just at the edge of the desert, and he wasn’t too happy about
it, being city-bred and not quite understanding the difference between
“hicks” and “folks.”

The atmosphere in the courtroom was tense. Had there been great
wainscoted walls and a statue of blind Justice, it would have been more
impersonal and, for Kemp, easier to take. But this courtroom was a
crossroads granger’s hall in Switchpath, Arizona.

The presiding coroner was Bert Whelson, who held a corncob pipe instead
of a gavel. At their ease around the room were other men, dirt farmers
and prospectors like Whelson. It was like a movie shot. It needed only a
comedy dance number and somebody playing a jug.

But there was nothing comic about it. These hicks were in a position to
pile trouble on Kemp, trouble that might very easily wind up in the gas
chamber.

The coroner leaned forward. “You got nothin’ to be afeard of, son, if
your conscience is clear.”

“I still ain’t talking. I brought the guy in, didn’t I? Would I done
that if I’d killed him?”

The coroner stroked his stubble, a soft rasping sound like a rope being
pulled over a wooden beam.

“We don’t know about that, Kemp. _Hmm_. Why can’t you get it through
your head that nobody’s accusing you of anything? You’re jest a feller
knows something about the death of this here Alessandro Sykes. This
court’d like to know exactly what happened.”

He hesitated, shuffled.

“Sit down, son,” said the coroner.

That did it. He slumped into the straight chair that one of the men
pushed up for him, and told this story.

I guess I better go right back to the beginning, the first time I ever
saw this here Sykes.

I was working in my shop one afternoon when he walked in. He watched
what I was doing and spoke up.

“You Gordon Kemp?”

I said yes and looked him over. He was a scrawny feller, prob’ly sixty
years old and wound up real tight. He talked fast, smoked fast, moved
fast, as if there wasn’t time for nothin’, but he had to get on to
somethin’ else. I asked him what he wanted.

“You the man had that article in the magazine about the concentrated
atomic torch?” he said.

“Yeah,” I told him. “Only that guy from the magazine, he used an awful
lot of loose talk. Says my torch was three hundred years ahead of its
time.” Actually it was something I stumbled on by accident, more or
less. The ordinary atomic hydrogen torch—plenty hot.

I figured out a ring-shaped electro-magnet set just in front of the jet,
to concentrate it. It repelled the hydrogen particles and concentrated
them. It’ll cut anything—anything. And since it got patented, you’d be
surprised at the calls I get. You got no idea how many people want to
cut into bank vaults an’ the side doors of hock shops. Well, about
Sykes …

I told him this magazine article went a little too far, but I did have
quite a gadget. I give him a demonstration or two, and he seemed
satisfied. Finally I told him I was wasting my time unless he had a
proposition.

He’s lookin’ real happy about this torch of mine, an’ he nods.

“Sure. Only you’ll have to take a couple of weeks off. Go out west.
Arizona. Cut a way into a cave there.”

“Cave, huh?” I said. “Is it legal?” I didn’t want no trouble.

“Sure it’s legal,” he tells me.

“How much?”

He says he hates to argue.

“If you’ll get me into that place—and you can satisfy yourself as to
whether it’s legal—I’ll give you five thousand dollars,” he said.

Now, five thousand berries cuts a lot of ice for me. Especially for only
two weeks’ work. And besides, I liked the old guy’s looks. He was queer
as a nine-dollar bill, mind you, and had a funny way of carryin’ on, but
I could see he was worth the kind of money he talked.

He looked like he really needed help, too. Aw, maybe I’m just a boy
scout at heart. As I say, I liked him, money or no money, and chances
are I’d have helped him out for free.

He came to see me a couple more times and we sweated out the details. It
wound up with him and me on the train and my torch and the other gear in
the baggage car up front. Maybe some of you remember the day we arrived
here. He seemed to know a lot of people here. Mm? I thought so. He told
me how many years he had been coming out to Switchpath.

He told me lots of things. He was one of the talkin’est old geezers I
ever did see. I understood about one ninth of what he said. He was
lonely, I guess. I was the first man he ever called in to help him with
his work, and he spilled the overflow of years of workin’ by himself.

About this Switchpath proposition, he told me that when he was just a
punk out of college, he was a archyologist roamin’ around the desert
lookin’ for old Indian stuff, vases and arrowheads and such stuff. And
he run across this here room in the rock, at the bottom of a deep cleft.

He got all excited when he told me about this part of it. Went on a mile
a minute about plasticine ages and messy zorics and pally o’ lithographs
or something. I called him down to earth and he explained to me that
this room was down in rock that was very old—a couple of hundred
thousand years, or maybe a half million.

He said that rock had been there either before mankind had a start here
on earth, or maybe about the same time as the missing link. Me, I don’t
care about dead people or dead people’s great grandfathers, but Sykes
was all enthusiastic.

Anyhow, it seems that this cave had been opened by some sort of an
earthquake or something, and the stuff in it must have been there all
that time. What got him excited was that the stuff was machinery of some
kind and must have been put there ’way _before there was any human
beings on earth at all!_

That seemed silly to me. I wanted to know what kind of machinery.

“Well,” he says, “I thought at first that it was some sort of a radio
transmitter. Get this,” he says. “Here is a machine with an antenna on
top of it, just like a microwave job. And beside it is another machine.

“This second machine is shaped like a dumbbell standing on one end. The
top of it is a sort of covered hopper, and at the waist of the machine
is a arrangement of solenoids made out of some alloy that was never seen
before on this earth.

“There’s gearing between this machine and the other, the transmitter. I
have figured out what this dumbbell thing is. It’s a recorder.”

I want to know what is it recording. He lays one finger on the side of
his nose and winks at me.

“Thought,” he says. “Raw thought. But that isn’t all. Earthquakes,
continental shifts, weather cycles, lots more stuff. It integrates all
these things with thought.”

I want to know how he knows all this. That was when told me that he had
been with this thing for the better part of the last thirty years. He’d
figured it out all by himself. He was real touchy about that part of it.

Then I began to realize what was the matter with the poor old guy. He
really figured he had something big here and he wanted to find out about
it. But it seems he was a ugly kid and a shy man, and he wanted to make
the big splash all by himself. It wouldn’t do for him just to be known
as the man who discovered this thing.

“Any dolt could have stumbled across it,” he’d say. He wanted to find
out everything there was about this thing before he let a soul know
about it. “Greater than the Rosetta Stone,” he used to say. “Greater
than the nuclear hypotheses.” Oh, he was a great one for slinging the
five-dollar words.

“And it will be Sykes who gave this to the world,” he would say. “Sykes
will give it to humanity, complete and provable, and history will be
reckoned from the day I speak.” Oh, he was wacky, all right. I didn’t
mind, though. He was harmless, and a nicer little character you’d never
want to meet.

Funny guy, that Sykes. What kind of a life he led I can only imagine. He
had dough—inherited an income or something, so he didn’t have the
problem that bothers most of the rest of us. He would spend days in that
cavern, staring at the machines. He didn’t want to touch them. He only
wanted to find out what they were doing there. One of them was running.

The big machine, the dumbbell-shaped one, was running. It didn’t make no
noise. Both machines had a little disk set into the side. It was half
red, half black. On the big machine, the one he called the recorder,
this here disk was turning. Not fast, but you could see it was moving.
Sykes was all excited about that.

On the way out here, on the train, he spouted a lot of stuff. I don’t
know why. Maybe he thought I was too dumb to ever tell anybody about it.
If that’s what he thought, he had the right idea. I’m just a grease
monkey who happened to have a bright idea. Anyway, he showed me
something he had taken from the cave.

It was a piece of wire about six feet long. But wire like I have never
seen before or since. It was about 35 gauge—like a hair. And crooked.
Crimped, I mean. Sykes said it was magnetized too. It bent easy enough,
but it wouldn’t kink at all, and you couldn’t put a tight bend in it. I
imagine it’d dent a pair of pliers.

He asked me if I thought I could break it. I tried and got a gash in my
lunch-hook for my trouble. So help me, it wouldn’t break, and it
wouldn’t cut, and you couldn’t get any of those crimps out of it. I
don’t mean you’d pull the wire and it would snap back. No. You couldn’t
pull it straight at all.

Sykes told me on the train that it had taken him eight months to cut
that piece loose. It was more than just tough. It fused with itself. The
first four times he managed to cut it through, he couldn’t get the ends
apart fast enough to keep them from fusing together again.

He finally had to clamp a pair of steel blocks around the wire, wait for
enough wire to feed through to give him some slack and then put about
twelve tons on some shears to cut through the wire. Forged iridium
steel, those cutters were, and that wire left a heck of a hole in them.

But the wire parted. He had a big helical spring hauling the wire tight,
so that the instant it parted it was snapped out of the way. It had to
be cut twice to get the one piece out, and when he put the ends together
they fused. I mean, both on the piece he took out and the two free ends
in the machine—not a mark, not a bulge.

Well, you all remember when we arrived here with that equipment, and how
we hired a car and went off into the desert. All the while the old man
was happy as a kid.

“Kemp, my boy,” he says, “I got it decoded. I can read that tape. Do you
realize what that means? Every bit of human history—I can get it in
detail. Every single thing that ever happened to this earth or the
people in it.

“You have no idea in what detail that tape records,” he says. “Want to
know who put the bee on Alexander the Great? Want to know what the name
of Pericles’ girlfriend really was? I have it all here. What about these
Indian and old Greek legends about a lost continent? What about old
Fort’s fireballs? Who was the man in the iron mask? I have it, son, I
have it.”

That was what went on all the way out there, to that place in the dry
gulch where the cave was.

You wouldn’t believe what a place that was to get to. How that old guy
ever had the energy to keep going back to it I’ll never know. We had to
stop the car about twenty miles from here and hoof it.

The country out there is all tore up. If I hadn’t already seen the color
of his money I’d ’a said the heck with it. Sand an’ heat an’ big rocks
an’ more places to fall into and break your silly neck—_Lord!_

Me with a pack on my back too, the torch, the gas and a power supply and
all. We got to this cleft, see, and he outs with a length of rope and
makes it fast to a stone column that’s eroded nearby. He has a
slip-snaffle on it. He lowers himself into the gulch and I drop the gear
down after him, and then down I go.

Brother, it’s dark in there. We go uphill about a hundred and fifty
yards, and then Sykes pulls up in front of a facing. By the light of his
flash I can see the remains of a flock of campfires he’s made there over
the years.

“There it is,” he says. “It’s all yours, Kemp. If that
three-hundred-years-in-the-future torch of yours is any good—prove it.”

I unlimbered my stuff and got to work, and believe me it was hard, slow
goin’. But I got through. It took nine hours before I had a hole fit for
us to crawl through, and another hour for it to cool enough so’s we
could use it.

All that time the old man talked. It was mostly bragging about the job
he’d done decoding the wire he had. It was mostly Greek to me.

“I have a record here,” he says, swishin’ his hunk of wire around, “of a
phase of the industrial revolution in Central Europe that will have the
historians gnashing their teeth. But have I said anything? Not me. Not
Sykes!

“I’ll have the history of mankind written in such detail, with such
authority, that the name of Sykes will go into the language as a synonym
for the miraculously accurate.” I remember that because he said it so
much. He said it like it tasted good.

I remember once I asked him why it was we had to bother cutting in.
Where was the hole he had used?

“That, my boy,” he says, “is an unforeseen quality of the machines. For
some reason they closed themselves up. In a way I’m glad they did. I was
unable to get back in and I was forced to concentrate on my sample. If
it hadn’t been for that, I doubt that I would ever have cracked the
code.”

So I asked him what about all this—what were the machines and who left
them there and what for? All this while I was cutting away at that rock
facing. And, man! I never seen rock like that. If it _was_ rock, which
now, I doubt.

It come off in flakes, in front of my torch. _My_ torch, that’ll cut
anything. Do you know that in those nine hours I only got through about
seven and a half inches of that stuff! And my torch’ll walk into
laminated bank vaults like the door was open.

When I asked him he shut up for a long time, but I guess he wanted to
talk. He sure was enthusiastic. And besides, he figured I was too dumb
to savvy what he was talking about. As I said before, he was right
there. So he run off about it, and this is about how it went—

“Who left these machines here or how they operate, we may never know. It
would be interesting to find out, but the important thing is to get the
records and decode them all.”

It had taken him a while to recognize that machine as a recorder. The
tipoff was that it was running and the other one, the transmitter, was
not.

He thought at first that maybe the transmitter was busted, but after a
year or two of examining the machines without touching them he began to
realize that there was a gear train waiting by the tape where it fed
through the gismo that crimped it.

This gear train was fixed to start the transmitter, see? But it was
keyed to a certain crimp in the tape. In other words, when something
happened somewhere on earth that was just the right thing, the crimper
would record it and the transmitter would get keyed off.

Sykes studied that set-up for years before he figured the particular
squiggle in that wire that would start that transmitter to sending.
Where was it sending to? Why? Sure, he thought about that. But that
didn’t matter to him.

What was supposed to happen when the tape ran out? Who or what would
come and look at it when it was all done? You know, he didn’t care. He
just wanted to read that tape, is all. Seems there’s a lot of guys write
history books and stuff. And he wanted to call them liars. He wanted to
tell them the way it really was. Can you imagine? So there I am, cutting
away with my super-torch on what seems to be a solid wall made out of
some stuff has no right to be so tough. I can still see it.

So dark, and me with black goggles on, and the doc with his back to me
so’s he won’t wreck his eyes, spoutin’ along about history and the first
unbiased account of it. And how he was going to thrust it on the world
and just kill all those guys with all those theories.

I remember quitting once for a breather and letting the mercury cells
juice up a bit while I had a smoke. Just to make talk I ask Sykes when
does he think that transmitter is going to go to work.

“Oh,” he says. “It already did. It’s finished. That’s how I knew that my
figuring was right. That tape has a certain rate through the machine.
It’s in millimeters per month. I have the figure. It wouldn’t matter to
you. But something happened a while ago that made it possible to check.
July sixteenth, nineteen hundred and forty-five, to be exact.”

“You don’t tell me,” I says.

“Oh,” he says, real pleased, “but I do! That day something happened
which put a wiggle in the wire there—the thing I was looking for all
along. It was the crimp that triggered the transmitter. I happened to be
in the cave at the time.

“The transmitter started up and the little disk spun around like mad.
Then it stopped. I looked in the papers the next week to see what it
was. Nothing I could find. It wasn’t until the following August that I
found out.”

I suddenly caught wise.

“Oh—the atom bomb! You mean that rig was set up to send something as
soon as an atomic explosion kicked off somewhere on earth!”

He nodded his head. By the glare of the red-hot rock he looked like a
skinny old owl.

“That’s right. That’s why we’ve got to get in there in a hurry. It was
after the second Bikini blast that the cave got sealed up. I don’t know
if that transmission is ever going to be picked up.

“I don’t know if anything is going to happen if it is picked up. I do
know that I have the wire decoded and I mean to get those records before
anybody else does.”

If that wall had been any thicker I never would’ve gotten through. When
I got my circle cut and the cut-out piece dropped inside, my rig was
about at its last gasp. So was Sykes. For the last two hours he’d been
hoppin’ up an’ down with impatience.

“Thirty years’ work,” he kept saying. “I’ve waited for this for thirty
years and I won’t be stopped now. Hurry up! Hurry up!”

And when we had to wait for the opening to cool I thought he’d go wild.
I guess that’s what built him up to his big breakdown. He sure was keyed
up.

Well, at last we crawled into the place. He’d talked so much about it
that I almost felt I was comin’ back to something instead of seeing it
for the first time.

There was the machines, the big one about seven feet tall, dumbbell
shaped, and the little one sort of a rounded cube with a bunch of
macaroni on top that was this antenna he was talking about.

We lit a pressure lantern that flooded the place with light—it was
small, with a floor about nine by nine—and he jumped over to the
machines.

He scrabbles around and hauls out some wire. Then he stops and stands
there looking stupid at me.

“What’s the matter, Doc?” I say. I called him Doc.

He gulps and swallows.

“The reel’s empty. It’s empty! There’s only eight inches of wire here.
Only—” and that was when he fainted.

I jumped up right away and shook him and shoved him around a little
until his eyes started to blink. He sits up and shakes himself.

_“Refilled,”_ he says. He is real hoarse. “Kemp! They’ve been here!”

I began to get the idea. The lower chamber is empty. The upper one is
full. The whole set-up is arranged to run off a new recording. And where
is Sykes’ thirty years’ work?

He starts to laugh. I look at him. I can’t take that. The place is too
small for all that noise. I never heard anybody laugh like that. Like
short screams, one after the other, fast. He laughs and laughs.

I carry him out. I put him down outside and go in for my gear. I can
hear him laughing out there and that busted-up voice of his echoing in
the gulch. I get everything onto the backpack and go to put out the
pressure lantern when I hear a little click.

It’s that transmitter. The little red and black disk is turning around
on it. I just stand there watching it. It only runs for three or four
minutes. And then it begins to get hot in there.

I got scared. I ducked out of the hole and picked up Sykes. He didn’t
weigh much. I looked back in the hole. The cave was lit up. Red. The
machines were cherry-red, straw-colored, white, just that quick. They
melted. I saw it. I ran.

I don’t hardly remember getting to the rope and tying Sykes on and
climbing up and hauling him up after me. He was quiet then, but
conscious. I carried him away until the light from the gulch stopped me.
I turned around to watch.

I could see a ways down into the gulch. It was fillin’ up with lava. It
was lightin’ up the whole desert. And I never felt such heat. I ran
again.

I got to the car and dumped Sykes in. He shifted around on the seat
some. I asked him how he felt. He didn’t answer that but mumbled a lot
of stuff.

Something like this.

“They knew we’d reached the atomic age. They wanted to be told when. The
transmitter did just that. They came and took the recordings and
refilled the machine.

“They sealed off the room with something they thought only controlled
atomic power could break into. This time the transmitter was triggered
to human beings in that room. Your torch did it, Kemp—that
three-hundred-years-in-the-future torch! They think we have atomic
power! They’ll come back!”

“Who, Doc? Who?” I says.

“I don’t know,” he mumbles. “There’d be only one reason why someone—some
creature—would want to know a thing like that. And that’s so they could
stop us.”

I laughed at him. I got in and started the car and laughed at him.

“Doc,” I said, “we ain’t goin’ to be stopped now. Like the papers say,
we’re in the atomic age if it kills us. But we’re in for keeps. Why,
humanity would have to be killed before it’d get out of this atomic
age.”

“I know that, Kemp—I know—that’s what I mean! What have we done? What
have we done?”

After that he’s quiet a while and when I look at him again I see he’s
dead. So I brought him in. In the excitement I faded. It just didn’t
look good to me. I knew nobody would listen to a yarn like that.

There was silence in the courtroom until somebody coughed, and then
everyone felt he had to make a sound with his throat or his feet. The
coroner held up his hand.

“I kin see what Brother Kemp was worried about. If that story is true I,
for one, would think twice about tellin’ it.”

“He’s a liar!” roared a prospector from the benches. “He’s a murderin’
liar! I have a kid reads that kind of stuff, an’ I never did like to see
him at it. Believe me, he’s a-goin’ to cut it out as of right now. I
think this Kemp feller needs a hangin’!”

“Now, Jed!” bellowed the coroner. ‘If we kill off this man we do it
legal, hear?” The sudden hubbub quieted, and the coroner turned to the
prisoner.

“Listen here, Kemp—somethin’ jest occurred to me. How long was it from
the time of the first atom blast until the time that room got sealed
up?”

“I dunno. About two years. Little over. Why?”

“An’ how long since that night you been talking about, when Sykes died?”

“Or was murdered,” growled the prospector.

“Shut up, Jed. Well, Kemp?”

“About eighteen mon—No. Nearer two years.”

“Well then,” said the coroner, spreading his hands. “If there was
anything in your story, or in that goofy idea of the dead man’s about
someone comin’ to kill us off—well, ain’t it about time they did?”

There were guffaws, and the end of the grange hall disappeared in a
burst of flame. Yelling, cursing, some screaming, they pushed and fought
their way out into the moonlit road.

The sky was full of ships.



LARGO


THE CHANDELIERS ON the eighty-first floor of the Empire State Building
swung wildly without any reason. A company of soldiers marched over a
new, well-built bridge, and it collapsed. Enrico Caruso filled his lungs
and sang, and the crystal glass before him shattered.

And Vernon Drecksall composed his Largo.

He composed it in hotel rooms and scored it on trains and ships, and it
took more than twenty-two years. He started it in the days when smoke
hung over the city, because factories used coal instead of broadcast
power; when men spoke to men over wires and never saw each other’s
faces; when the nations of earth were ruled by the greed of a man or the
greed of men. During the Thirty Days War and the Great Change which
followed it, he labored; and he finished it on the day of his death.

It was music. That is a silly, inarticulate phrase. I heard a woman say
“Thank you” to the doctor who cured her cancer, and then she cried, for
the words said so little. I knew a man who was born lonely, and whose
loneliness increased as he lived until it was a terrible thing. And then
he met the girl he was to marry, and one night he said, “I love you.”
Just words; but they filled the incredibly vast emptiness within him;
filled it completely, so that there was enough left over to spill out in
three syllables, eight letters.… The Largo—it was music. Break away from
individual words; separate yourself from the meaning of them strung
together, and try to imagine music like Drecksall’s Largo in E Flat.
Each note was more than polished—burnished. As music is defined as a
succession of notes, so the Largo was a thing surpassing music; for its
rests, its upbeats, its melodic pauses were silences blended in harmony,
in discord. Only Drecksall’s genius could give tangible, recognizable
tone to silence. The music created scales and keys and chords of
silence, which played in exquisite counterpoint with the audible themes.

It was dedicated to Drecksall himself, because he was a true genius,
which means that everything in the universe which was not a part of him
existed for him. But the Largo was written for Wylie, and inspired by
Gretel.

They were all young when they met. It was at a summer resort, one of
those strange outposts of city settlement houses. The guests were
plumbers and artists and bankers and stenographers and gravicab drivers
and students. Pascal Wylie was shrewd and stocky, and came there to
squander a small inheritance at a place where people would be impressed
by it. He had himself convinced that when the paltry thousands were gone
he could ease himself into a position where more could be gotten by
someone else’s efforts. Unfortunately this was quite true. It is hardly
just, but people like that can always find a moneymaker to whom their
parasitism is indispensable.

Gretel was one of the students. Without enthusiasm, she attended a
school in the city which taught a trade for which she was not fitted and
which would not have supported her if she had been. Wylie’s feminine
counterpart, she was spending her marriageable years as he spent his
money, in places where it would impress others less fortunate. Like him,
she lived in a passively certain expectation that when her unearned
assets were gone, the future would replace them. Her most valuable
possession was a quick smile and a swifter glance, which she used very
often—whenever, in fact, a remark was made in her presence which she did
not understand. The smile and the glance were humorous and understanding
and completely misleading. The subtler the remark, the quicker her
reaction. Her rather full lips she held slightly parted, and one watched
them to catch the brilliantly wise thought they were about to utter.
They never did. She was always surrounded by quasisophisticates, and
pseudo-intellectuals whose conversation got farther and farther above
her silly head until she retreated behind one slightly raised golden
eyebrow, her whole manner indicating that the company was clever, but a
bit below her. She was unbelievably dumb and an utterly fascinating
person to know slightly.

Vernon Drecksall washed pots and groomed vegetables for the waspish
cook. He had a violin and he cared about little else, but he had
discovered that to be able to play he must eat, and this job served to
harness his soul to earth, where it did not belong. He got as many
dollars each week as he worked hours each day, an arrangement which was
quite satisfactory by his peculiar standards.

Each night after Drecksall had scoured the last of his eight dozen pots,
disposed of his three bushels of garbage, and swabbed down an acre and a
half of floor-space, he went to his room for his violin and then headed
for the privacy of distance. Up into the forest on a rocky trail that
took him to the brink of a hilltop lake he would go; beating through
thick undergrowth he reached a granite boulder that shouldered out into
the water at the end of a point. Night after night he stood there on
that natural stage and played with almost heartbreaking abandon. Before
him stretched the warm, black water, studded with starlight, like the
eyes of an audience. Like the glow of an usher’s torch the riding lights
of a passing heliplane would move over the water. Like the breathing of
twenty thousand spellbound people, the water pressed and stroked and
rustled on the bank. But there was never any applause. That suited his
mood. They didn’t applaud Lincoln at Gettysburg either.

Every ten days the pot-walloper was given a day off, which meant that he
worked only until noon, which, again, generally turned out to be four in
the afternoon after various emergency odds and ends had been taken care
of. Then he had the privilege of circulating among people who disliked
him on sight while he mourned that the woods were full of vandals and
the lake was full of boats and the telejuke box was incapable of
anything but rhythmically insincere approaches to total discord. He
didn’t look forward to his days off, until he saw Gretel.

She was sitting on an ancient Hammond electric organ, staring off into
space, and thinking about absolutely nothing. The mountain sunset
streamed through a window behind her, making her hair a halo and her
profiled body the only thing in the universe fit to be framed by that
glorious light. Drecksall was unprepared for the sight; he was blinded
and enslaved. He didn’t believe her. She must be music. It was, for him,
a perfectly rational conclusion, for she was past all understanding, and
until now nothing not musical had struck him that way. He moved over to
her and told her so. He was not trying to be poetic when he said,
“Someone played you on the organ, and you were too lovely to come out as
sound.” He was simply stating what he believed.

She sat above him and turned her head. She gave him an unfathomable
half-smile, and as she drew her breath the golden glow from behind her
crept around her cheek and tinted the arched flesh of her nostrils. It
was an exquisite gesture; she saw in his eyes that she had pleased him
and thought, He stinks of grease and ammonia.

He put out his hand and touched her. He was actually afraid that she
would slip back into a swelling of symphonic sound, sweep over him and
be gone past all remembering.

“Are you a real woman who will be alive?” he faltered.

Stupid questions are not always stupid to stupid people. “Of course,”
she said.

Then he asked her to marry him.

She looked at his craggy face and boniness and his hollow chest and
mad-looking eyes and shook her head. He backed away from her, turned and
ran. He looked once over his shoulder, and caught the picture of her
that lighted his brain until the day he died. For there, in light and
shade, in warm flesh and cool colors, was the Largo; and he would have
to live until he turned her back into music. He could not command her as
she was; but if he could duplicate her in sharps and flats and
heart-stopping syncopation, then she would be his. As he ran, staring
back, his head _thwacked_ on the doorpost, and he staggered on, all
blood and tears.

Gretel looked pensively at her fingernails. “Good God,” she said, “what
a dope.” And she went back to her cow-like mental vacancy.

A couple of nights later Gretel and Pascal Wylie were in a canoe on the
hilltop lake, blandly violating the sacredness Drecksall had invested in
her, when they heard music.

“What’s that?” said Wylie sharply.

“Vi’lin,” said Gretel. For her the subject closed with an almost audible
snap, but Wylie’s peering mind was diverted; and seeing this, she
accepted it without protest, as she accepted all things. “Wonder who it
is?” said Wylie. He touched a lever, and the silent solenoid-impulse
motor in the stern of the canoe wafted them toward the sound.

“It’s that kitchen-boy!” whispered Wylie a moment later.

Gretel roused herself enough to look. “He’s crazy,” she said coldly. She
wished vaguely that Wylie would take her away from the sound of the
violin, or that Drecksall would stop playing. Or—play something else.
She had never heard these notes before, which was not surprising
considering the kind of music Drecksall played. But such music had never
bothered her until now. Very little ever bothered her. She made an
almost recognizable effort to understand why she didn’t like it,
realized that it made her feel ashamed, assumed that she was ashamed
because she was out with Wylie, and dropped the matter. Having reasoned
past the music itself, she was no longer interested. She might have been
had she realized that it was her own portrait in someone else’s eyes
that she had listened to.

Wylie felt himself stirred too, but differently. It didn’t matter to him
why this scullery lad was scraping a fiddle on the lakeshore when he
should have been asleep. The thing that struck him was that the man
could make that violin talk. He made it get inside you—inside people who
didn’t give a damn, like Wylie. Wylie began to wonder why the hands that
performed that way had taken on a duty of washing pots. He had learned
early that the best way to get along (to him that meant to get rich) was
to find your best talent and exploit it. Here was a man wasting a talent
on trees and fish.

Music is a science as well as an art, and it is a shocking thing to
those who think that musicians are by nature incompetent and
impractical, to discover that more often than not a musician has a
strong mechanical flair. Conversely, a person who is unmechanical is
seldom musical. Drecksall’s playing on this particular night was
careful, thoughtful, precise. He was building something quite as
tangible to him as a bridge is to an engineer. The future whole was
awe-inspiring, beautiful, but, like the bridge, it was composed of quite
unromantic essentials—tonal nuts, bolts and rivets. It was the skillful
machining of these that intrigued Wylie, possibly far more than would
the completed work.

Drecksall paused at the end of a bewildering arpeggio, and stood with
his violin in his hand, staring puzzledly across the water. He had just
realized the enormity of his task, and was completely wrapped up in it,
so was totally unprepared for Wylie’s sudden burst of clapping. It was
not applause, exactly; Wylie was gladhanding, following the birth of a
bright idea. He had an idea he would butter up the violinist, befriend
him, get him to someone who would know if he was really any good or not
from a commercial point of view. If he was, Wylie could take a cut,
maybe. Ten percent—forty—seventy-five? Drecksall was young. He would
last a long time, and he looked like a dope.

So he cracked his lean hands together and whistled shrilly, like a
grandfather at a burlesque house. Surely the ape would appreciate
enthusiasm!

Drecksall leapt like a startled moose, nearly lost his footing, and then
froze, peering toward the dark canoe, a hot smoke of anger curling into
his brain. He felt stripped, imposed upon. He felt kicked. His night
playing demanded infinitely more privacy than his body, and it was being
rudely stared at. He suddenly broke the violin over his knee, hurled the
pieces at the canoe, and ran into the dark woods.

“I told you he was crazy,” said Gretel complacently.

It was a long time before Pascal Wylie could puff the wind back into his
sails.

Two days later Drecksall was returning from a copse a hundred yards from
the resort’s main building, carrying a couple of large garbage pails.
There was an incinerator back there, and as he left it he heard the
whirring of rotary wings. He looked up and saw a cab descending, and
would have ignored it altogether had he not noticed that the man who
climbed out and paid the driver had a violin-case under his arm.
Drecksall looked at it the way a prep-school boy looks at a soft-drink
calendar.

“Hi,” said Pascal Wylie. Drecksall nodded.

“I want to talk to you,” said Wylie.

“Me?” Drecksall couldn’t take his eyes off the violin.

“Yeh. Heard you lost your fiddle.”

Drecksall just stared. Wylie grinned and handed over the instrument.
Drecksall dropped his garbage cans, clasped the case and clawed it open.
The violin was a good one, complete with three bows, spare strings, and
a pitch pipe. Drecksall stood helplessly, his wide mouth trying
fruitlessly to say the same thing his eyes were saying.

“You want that violin?” asked Wylie briskly. The question needed no
answer. “It’s yours if you’ll do me a favor.”

“What?”

Wylie gestured toward the cab. “Just hop in there with me. We’ll run
into the city, and you’ll play that thing for a friend of mine. Chances
are that after he hears you you can go right on playing as long as you
want to, and you’ll never wash another pot. How’s it strike you?”

Drecksall looked at the tumbled garbage cans. “I can’t leave here,” he
said. “I’d lose my job.”

Wylie was not thinking about that. If the violinist failed the audition,
he would starve—and he could, for all Wylie cared. But he thought the
man had a chance. He snatched the violin and walked toward the cab.
“Okay, then.”

Drecksall picked up the cans and stared after Wylie. His would-be
manager climbed in, giving not a backward glance. With elaborate
carelessness, however, he did manage to have a great deal of difficulty
in getting the violin-case in after him. It hung, black and shining and
desirable, for seconds; and suddenly Drecksall realized just how badly
those cans smelled. He ran to the cab and climbed in.

“Good boy,” said Wylie.

Drecksall took the violin-case from him and opened it. “I never had a
violin as nice as this before,” he said simply.

The audition went off smoothly. Drecksall was led into a soundproof room
containing a novachord and an unpleasing female organist. He was handed
a sheaf of sheet music which, but for the individual titles, he
thereafter ignored. A red light flashed, a speaker baffle said boredly,
“Go ahead, please,” and Drecksall played. He played for an hour,
stopping twice in the middle of selections to tune his violin, which was
new and springy, and once to upbraid the organist, who, after the first
few bars, had never played better in her life.

Afterward, in another room, Wylie was called in to speak to an official.
He crossed the room and, with his hat on, perched easily on the edge of
the man’s desk and looked at his fingernails until the man spoke.

“You’re this fellow’s manager?”

“Mmm.”

“Eight hundred for thirty minutes five times weekly, thirteen weeks.” He
dragged a contract form out of the desk, filled in some spaces, and
shoved it over to Wylie. Wylie looked at it gingerly as if it was one of
Drecksall’s garbage pails, took the pen, crossed out the $800 and wrote
in $5000. Then he yawned and looked out of the window.

“Don’t be silly,” said the radio executive. He looked keenly at Wylie,
sighed, and drew up another contract. It was for two thousand. Wylie
signed with alacrity. “Make that out in two checks, payable to cash,” he
said. “One eighteen hundred, and one two hundred.”

The man behind the desk made out the checks. “Yours is the ten percent
check?” he asked. Wylie smiled.

“I think you’re a heel,” said the exec, and handed the papers over.

At the door, Wylie tipped his hat and grinned. “Thank you very much,
sir,” he said. He went and found Drecksall and gave him his check. “Go
buy yourself some clothes,” he said. Drecksall looked at it and gasped.

“Two hundred dollars?”

Wylie nodded. “You’re hired. Let’s get out of here.”

That was only the beginning. Wylie knew an amazing number of people, and
before the year was out, Drecksall was nationally known. Money poured
in, and, as Wylie was shrewd as well as slick, he saw to it that
Drecksall got plenty. Since there was so much always on hand, Drecksall
never questioned the cut that Wylie took, and Wylie was remarkably
secretive about where he put his own money.

And one other thing of importance happened.

One afternoon Drecksall hurried home to the apartment he shared with
Wylie in Safrisco. It was a quietly elaborate place, and it included the
one thing Drecksall demanded—a totally soundproofed practice room.
Flinging open the door, Drecksall was halfway across the sumptuous
living room before he quite realized that on entering he had seen
someone else in the room. He swung around, staring.

“Hello,” said Gretel. She set down her drink and swung her feet off the
couch. “Remember me?”

Drecksall nodded silently, watching her, stripping gloves off his hands.

“You’re changed,” he said after a bit, looking at her clothes, her hair.

“I should be.” She smiled vapidly. “I’m married.”

“Oh.” It penetrated slowly. “Who to?”

“Pascal.”

“He—he changed you?”

Gretel’s bird-brain manufactured a bird’s laugh. “Sure.”

“Good God,” whispered Drecksall in disgust. He went into his room and
closed the door. He had just begun to hate Wylie.

Gretel picked up her drink again. “He’s still crazy,” she said.

In nearly all things Vernon Drecksall was as reasonably sane as the rest
of us; but he was a monomaniac, and he could hardly be blamed for
assuming the things he did. He and his odd conception of Gretel were
made for each other. He was the form-fitting husk for his vision of her,
and she had filled it completely. She could never do so again, because
so much of that vision was composed of sunset gold and purple shadow and
that unforgettable tinge of pink when the light shone through her
nostril. He could not be expected to understand that. He only knew that
the vision didn’t fit any more; that something had happened to change
her from that utter perfection. And he had her own word for it that
Pascal Wylie was that thing. He slumped into the most driving kind of
misery. He couldn’t see that there was anything he could do about it
except to go ahead with his building. Some day he would have her back.
Some day she would emerge from his violin in a great bubble of melody
which would settle before him, open up and reveal her there as she had
been on that summer evening. And she would be his. Toward that
iridescent ideal, he strove. Hour upon hour, alone in his soundproofed
cell, he wrought the Largo. Sometimes he was rewarded by sustained
flashes of completion. He had a phrase for her hair, a swift run for her
strange eyes as she turned her head, a dazzling contrapuntal passage for
the sound of her voice. Each little detail that was mastered was
carefully scored, and he would play them jealously now and again, seeing
his visions, spurring himself on to represent the duller notes which
represented the more prosaic part of the picture—the window frame behind
her, the scratched surface of the old Hammond organ, the crack at the
side of her shoe.

During the war, and the ruinous period afterward, he was glad that there
was no longer any time for concerts or broadcasts or public appearances,
for it left him time to work. Deep in the heart of a half-ruined hotel
he labored by candlelight, while the three great counter-revolutions
rolled and swirled around his little citadel of silence. Twice he saw
Pascal Wylie in a gibbering state of fear; both times he had thrown him
bodily out of his practice-room, ignoring his pleading and his warning
that they were all going to be shot. Wylie was in politics up to his
ears and over, though fortunately for him he had stayed in the
background and let dollars speak for him. When it was all over and the
exhausted world began to build again, Drecksall was possibly the only
man alive who neither knew nor cared what had happened. He had been
touched by it too; his investments were completely wiped out, but that
meant nothing to him. He was certain that there would be more, and he
was right. The Great Change was on, and with the nation’s rebirth there
was plenty for such as he.

And so the years swept by him as had the violence of war and revolution
and renascence. Time left him alone, and it was with something of a
shock that Wylie, during that rocky period, realized that the strange
creature was the only solid, unchanging thing in the universe. Gretel
changed by the day, for hers was the scintillant peasant beauty that
fades early. She gave every promise of finally occupying some
chimney-corner until she grew into a gargoyle and became part of the
mantel. Wylie cared for her casually from force of habit, and bent his
efforts to rebuilding his fortune. And Drecksall played.

Something else was creeping into the building of the Largo. The central
theme itself, that breathing, mutant reproduction of Gretel, was being
framed in a darker, deeper mass of tones. It was a thing like hatred,
like vengeance, that frame. It was Pascal Wylie, and it wound round and
about the thing that was Gretel. This was not mere music. This was
something more definite than even Drecksall’s crazed kind of music. It
was the outline, the detailed description, of a definite plan of action.
The same impulse that drove him to do something about his vanished
Gretel was forcing him to deal, in his own way, with Wylie.

There came a time when Drecksall felt that the Largo was nearly
complete. It would need more than scoring for the composition to be
fully rounded. It would need an audience, and it would need a setting.
It couldn’t be played in any ordinary concert hall, nor in the open air.
For its full effect, it must needs be played in an auditorium built for
it, and it alone.

A building like that never existed, nor did Drecksall expect it to. He
built it himself. It took two years or more. It cost thousands—so much,
indeed, that he went to Wylie for more; and Wylie, fearing that he would
begin asking questions, gave him more and more of his own earnings,
telling him blandly that theater managers and the broadcasting chains
were paying more these days. Drecksall didn’t care, as long as he got
enough for his purpose.

He had no end of trouble. It was months before he found an engineer who
would dare attempt the auditorium, more months before he found one who
could be convinced that he meant what he said when he gave his
specifications. They were to be followed to the thousandth of a
millimeter, and Drecksall’s rages when he saw tiny variations on the
blueprints were really beautiful to behold. In time, the indignant
words, “After all, Mr. Drecksall, I’m a graduate engineer, and while you
may be the world’s foremost violinist, you are not qualified to—” became
real poison to him. After breaking up a few expensive violins and
accessories over their erudite heads, he gave up personal visits from
architects and contractors and handled the thing vitriolically, by mail.

But when the auditorium was finished, it was what he had ordered, from
the bedrock and soil he had specified to the top of the heavy square
tower. It was certainly a strange affair. It was not very large, and
looked like the conventionalized nose of a space cruiser. Its walls were
thin at the bottom, thick and massive at its domed top. Inside, the
basic construction was easily seen. It was made of thirty-eight arches
all joining at the top and forming the circular walls at the sides and
base. The tower was squat and massive; solid, steel-reinforced concrete.
There were no windows, and the door was self-sealing, an integral part
of its wall. It was lighted from a fixture which also was built into the
contours of the wall. The only thing that detracted from that symphony
of metrical lines on the interior wall was a heavy concrete block that
jutted out over a stone chair—high over it. On the other side of the
chamber was another such chair, but the wall over it was like all the
others. At the exact center of the building was a tiny red tile, set
into the floor, and this was the only indication of a stage, a place
from which to perform. It was certainly a strange creation; but then, it
had been built for a strange purpose.

Drecksall made his demands several weeks before he intended to play the
Largo, because he expected resistance. He got it. Wylie failed to see
why he should sit through a highly involved musical masterpiece when he
had never cared particularly for music; why he should go out into the
wilds, miles from the nearest city, to hear it; why it couldn’t be
played in the apartment or at their country place; and most
particularly, why he should rouse Gretel from the intellectual stupor
she had fallen into these last years and drag her out there to the
auditorium. Drecksall heard him out patiently, said, “It really isn’t
much to ask,” and left the room. He was back in a moment with the
concert violin which he wrapped carefully in a plexiskin and put away in
its case. “I’m not going to play again,” he said quietly, “until I play
the Largo for you and Gretel, in my auditorium.” Then, leaving Wylie to
give puzzled shrugs at the violin-case, he went out.

It took just forty-eight hours for Wylie to discover that Drecksall was
really serious, for it was that long before the violinist had an
engagement. Wylie got into his soup and fish, went to call Drecksall,
and found him sprawled smiling on the couch of his practice room. He
refused to go. Fuming, Wylie canceled the concert. He didn’t give in on
that occasion, nor on the next, but when he read a note on one of the
facsi-papers to the effect that the Old Master was at long last
developing temperament, and that perhaps the word “maybe” should be
inserted before the date of each of his scheduled concerts, Wylie broke
down, at last asking himself why he had made an issue of it at all.
Drecksall had been easy enough to get along with.

And at long last they hired a heliplane and whirred the long miles out
to the auditorium. As they landed, Wylie broke his glum silence to ask,
“How long’ll we be here?”

“I couldn’t say,” grinned Drecksall happily.

“How long will it take to play the thing?”

“About an hour.”

“Shall I tell him to come back in about that time?” asked Wylie, nodding
toward the cab-driver.

Drecksall alighted from the cab and helped Gretel out. “If you like,” he
said.

The plane shot away and they walked up the rough trail toward the
auditorium. “That the place?” asked Wylie.

“That’s the place.”

Wylie looked at it. “Hell! What did you go and spend all that jack on
that place for? Why, it wouldn’t hold fifty people!”

“It wasn’t meant to,” said Drecksall gently.

They reached the door—that is, the point where the path ended against
the wall. Drecksall paused and looked at them.

“You have a hard collar on,” he said. “Take it off.”

“Take—what for?”

“This building is the last word—_my_ last word—in acoustics. I can’t
have anything spoiling it.” He looked at Gretel. She was standing there,
uncomplaining as ever. “Tell her to take off those stockings, too.
They’re sheer plastic, and might echo.”

Wylie glanced over his shoulder at the speck that was the retreating
heliplane, shrugged, and took off his collar. “Take your stockings off,”
he said to Gretel.

The spasm that signified mental activity crossed Gretel’s bland face.
“He’s crazy,” she said, looking at Drecksall.

“You’re kiddin’,” said Wylie. “Go on—take ’em off.”

Once that was disposed of, Drecksall opened the door and followed them
in. He turned on the lights, closed the door. “Sit over there,” he said
to Wylie, indicating the stone seat under the jutting block. He led
Gretel over to the other chair. Then he took his violin out and put the
case into a recess in the wall. A panel slid over it.

“This is a looney sort of place,” said Wylie. His voice echoed so that
it hurt his ears. For his own comfort, he whispered. “What gave you the
idea for it?”

Drecksall stopped rubbing his bow with rosin to stare at his manager.
“What gave me the idea? Study, you fool. Years of it. Infinite patience
in going into the laws and phenomena and—and tricks of acoustics. Be
quiet. I’m going to play.”

He snuggled the tail of the violin into the hollow of his throat, bowed
the open strings, flattened one of them microscopically. Then, without
another word, he began to play.

Little else could be said here than that he played his Largo. It began
stridently, weaving that dreadful flaming frame for the vision of
Gretel; and Wylie was whisked deep into it. One part of his brain ticked
busily away, still wondering about this auditorium, the fact that it was
built for an audience of two, the surprise in discovering that for years
Drecksall had had a secret activity, the realization that the acoustics
of the place were indeed amazing. The notes spread out from his inspired
violin, were gathered at the top of the dome and hurled back with a
force that made the building tremble. Yes, the building echoed; soon, it
had far more echoed sound in it than original, so that Drecksall could
slip into a thin, sweet piping and be accompanied by a tumultuous
background of sound that he had created long seconds before.

The music suddenly took an ear-shattering turn, and then began a theme—a
theme that caught both Wylie and the comatose Gretel the same way, made
them both stretch their memories back and back until they settled on a
dark lake. They saw again a figure on a rock, pressing notes out through
the warm air on a hilltop lake. The same theme—and then again that
crashing series of bass runs; and then, before the listeners had time to
be startled by it, that almost telepathic theme again. Back and back
again he returned to it, the roar of the bass strings and the compelling
measures of the memory theme; and always they were faster, and louder,
and closer together. They blended finally into a great crescendo, a
monster welling of sound that gathered in the dome and came crashing
down, pressing the stone block away from the wall, sending its massive
tons down on Pascal Wylie. Its crash was symphonic, precisely blended
with the mood and rhythm of the music; and as the echoes died away, that
whole section of floor sank out of sight, bearing Wylie’s crushed body
and the pile of rubble that hid it; and a panel slid across the opening.
Now the auditorium was acoustically perfect for the greater task that
was at hand.

Gretel sat in a paralysis of fear, and Drecksall played earnestly on.
This part of the Largo was justice. He had long wanted to kill Wylie
because Wylie, he felt, had killed the Gretel he pictured. But artistic
integrity forbade the use of any weapon but music, for music was so
deeply involved.

And now began the recreation of his old, old vision. He did not look at
the unmoving Gretel, but sketched in the essentials of his
tone-portrait, and then went over them and over them, filling in. He
never lost sight of the shades he had already drawn, but all the while
he strove for more and more perfect completion. Even Gretel began to see
it. The music moved, with mechanical perfection, across her mental
screen, burning indelibly wherever it touched. It moved with speed,
slowly, the way the darting photoelectric beam slowly draws a
transmitted photograph. It moved as indirectly and as purposefully and
as implacably.

The laboring strings hummed and crackled, and Drecksall’s fingers were a
blur. Gretel, shockingly, felt the fabric of the clothes she had worn
that day, all over her body; she felt the warmth of the setting sun on
her back, and her lips began to move in the words she had spoken then,
so vivid was the music.

And then, shrilly, the thing was complete. The picture was there,
sustained by one thin, high note that fell and fell until it became low
and vibrant and infinitely compelling. It continued unbearably, filling
the room, filling it again at twice the pressure, again and again. A
trickle of powdered stone came down from the tower’s base, and then the
tortured stone could stand no more. The upper walls cracked and the
tower burst through.

And as it did, Vernon Drecksall saw and claimed his reward. The mass of
masonry opened high over his head and a shaft of golden sunlight speared
through, and in the roaring, dust-filled auditorium Gretel sat
spotlighted. Her pose, her hair, her very expression, were, to his
crazed and triumphant mind, the Largo, come alive. With a glad cry he
hurled his violin away and caught her in his arms on the very instant
that the great tower crushed down on them both. He had his revenge, and
he had his consummation.

_The chandeliers on the eighty-first floor of the Empire State Building
swung wildly without any reason. A company of soldiers marched over a
new, well-built bridge, and it collapsed. Enrico Caruso filled his lungs
and sang, and the crystal glass before him shattered_.

_And Vernon Drecksall composed his Largo_.



THUNDER AND ROSES


WHEN PETE MAWSER learned about the show, he turned away from the GHQ
bulletin board, touched his long chin, and determined to shave. This was
odd, because the show would be video, and he would see it in his
barracks.

He had an hour and a half. It felt good to have a purpose again—even
shaving before eight o’clock. Eight o’clock Tuesday, just the way it
used to be. Everyone used to catch that show on Tuesday. Everyone used
to say, Wednesday morning, “How about the way she sang ‘The Breeze and
I’ last night?” “Hey, did you hear Starr last night?”

That was a while ago, before all those people were dead, before the
country was dead. Starr Anthim, institution, like Crosby, like Duse,
like Jenny Lind, like the Statue of Liberty.

(Liberty had been one of the first to get it, her bronze beauty
volatilized, radioactive, and even now being carried about in vagrant
winds, spreading over the earth—)

Pete Mawser grunted and forced his thoughts away from the drifting,
poisonous fragments of a blasted Liberty. Hate was first. Hate was
ubiquitous, like the increasing blue glow in the air at night, like the
tension that hung over the base.

Gunfire crackled sporadically far to the right, swept nearer. Pete
stepped out of the street and made for a parked ten-wheeler. There’s a
lot of cover in and around a ten-wheeler.

There was a Wac sitting on the short running-board.

At the corner a stocky figure backed into the intersection. The man
carried a tommy gun in his arms, and he was swinging to and fro with the
gentle, wavering motion of a weathervane. He staggered toward them, his
gun muzzle hunting. Someone fired from a building and the man swiveled
and blasted wildly at the sound.

“He’s—blind,” said Pete Mawser, and added, “He ought to be,” looking at
the tattered face.

A siren keened. An armored jeep slewed into the street. The
full-throated roar of a brace of .50-caliber machine guns put a swift
and shocking end to the incident.

“Poor crazy kid,” Pete said softly. “That’s the fourth I’ve seen today.”
He looked down at the Wac. She was smiling.

“Hey!”

“Hello, Sarge.” She must have identified him before, because now she did
not raise her eyes or her voice. “What happened?”

“You know what happened. Some kid got tired of having nothing to fight
and nowhere to run to. What’s the matter with you?”

“No,” she said. “I don’t mean that.” At last she looked up at him. “I
mean all of this. I can’t seem to remember.”

“You … well, gee, it’s not easy to forget. We got hit. We got hit
everywhere at once. All the big cities are gone. We got it from both
sides. We got too much. The air is becoming radioactive. We’ll all—” He
checked himself. She didn’t know. She’d forgotten. There was nowhere to
escape to, and she’d escaped inside herself, right here. Why tell her
about it? Why tell her that everyone was going to die? Why tell her that
other, shameful thing: that we hadn’t struck back?

But she wasn’t listening. She was still looking at him. Her eyes were
not quite straight. One held his but the other was slightly shifted and
seemed to be looking at his temples. She was smiling again. When his
voice trailed off she didn’t prompt him. Slowly he moved away. She did
not turn her head, but kept looking up at where he had been, smiling a
little. He turned away, wanting to run, walking fast.

(How long can a guy hold out? When you’re in the Army they try to make
you be like everybody else. What do you do when everybody else is
cracking up?)

He blanked out the mental picture of himself as the last one left sane.
He’d followed that one through before. It always led to the conclusion
that it would be better to be one of the first. He wasn’t ready for that
yet.

Then he blanked that out, too. Every time he said to himself that he
wasn’t ready for that yet, something within him asked, “Why not?” and he
never seemed to have an answer ready.

(How long could a guy hold out?)

He climbed the steps of the QM Central and went inside.

There was nobody at the reception switchboard. It didn’t matter.
Messages were carried by guys in jeeps, or on motorcycles. The Base
Command was not insisting that anybody stick to a sitting job these
days. Ten desk men would crack up for every one on a jeep, or on the
soul-sweat squads. Pete made up his mind to put in a little stretch on a
squad tomorrow. Do him good. He just hoped that this time the adjutant
wouldn’t burst into tears in the middle of the parade ground. You could
keep your mind on the manual of arms just fine until something like that
happened.

He bumped into Sonny Weisefreund in the barracks corridor. The tech’s
round young face was as cheerful as ever. He was naked and glowing, and
had a towel thrown over his shoulder.

“Hi, Sonny. Is there plenty of hot water?”

“Why not?” grinned Sonny. Pete grinned back, cursing inwardly. Could
anybody say anything about anything at all without one of these
reminders? Sure there was hot water. The QM barracks had hot water for
three hundred men. There were three dozen left. Men dead, men gone to
the hills, men locked up so they wouldn’t—

“Starr Anthim’s doing a show tonight.”

“Yeah. Tuesday night. Not funny, Pete. Don’t you know there’s a war—”

“No kidding,” Pete said swiftly. “She’s here—right here on the base.”

Sonny’s face was joyful. “Gee.” He pulled the towel off his shoulder and
tied it around his waist. “Starr Anthim here! Where are they going to
put on the show?”

“HQ, I imagine. Video only. You know about public gatherings.” And a
good thing, too, he thought. Put on an in-person show, and some torn-up
GI would crack during one of her numbers. He himself would get plenty
mad over a thing like that—mad enough to do something about it then and
there. And there would probably be a hundred and fifty or more like him,
going raving mad because someone had spoiled a Starr Anthim show. That
would be a dandy little shambles for her to put in her memory book.

“How’d she happen to come here, Pete?”

“Drifted in on the last gasp of a busted-up Navy helicopter.”

“Yeah, but why?”

“Search me. Get your head out of that gift horse’s mouth.”

He went into the washroom, smiling and glad that he still could. He
undressed and put his neatly folded clothes down on a bench. There were
a soap wrapper and an empty toothpaste tube lying near the wall. He went
and picked them up and put them in the catchall. He took the mop which
leaned against the partition and mopped the floor where Sonny had
splashed after shaving. Got to keep things squared away. He might say
something if it were anyone else but Sonny. But Sonny wasn’t cracking
up. Sonny always had been like that. Look there. Left his razor out
again.

Pete started his shower, meticulously adjusting the valves until the
pressure and temperature exactly suited him. He didn’t do anything
slapdash these days. There was so much to feel, and taste, and see now.
The impact of water on his skin, the smell of soap, the consciousness of
light and heat, the very pressure of standing on the soles of his
feet—he wondered vaguely how the slow increase of radioactivity in the
air, as the nitrogen transmuted to Carbon Fourteen, would affect him if
he kept carefully healthy in every way. What happens first? Do you go
blind? Headaches, maybe? Perhaps you lose your appetite. Or maybe you
get tired all the time.

Why not go look it up?

On the other hand, why bother? Only a very small percentage of the men
would die of radioactive poisoning. There were too many other things
that killed more quickly, which was probably just as well. That razor,
for example. It lay gleaming in a sunbeam, curved and clean in the
yellow light. Sonny’s father and grandfather had used it, or so he said,
and it was his pride and joy.

Pete turned his back on it and soaped under his arms, concentrating on
the tiny kisses of bursting bubbles. In the midst of a recurrence of
disgust at himself for thinking so often of death, a staggering truth
struck him. He did not think of such things because he was morbid, after
all! It was the very familiarity of things that brought death-thoughts.
It was either “I shall never do this again” or “This is one of the last
times I shall do this.” You might devote yourself completely to doing
things in different ways, he thought madly. You might crawl across the
floor this time, and next time walk across on your hands. You might skip
dinner tonight, and have a snack at two in the morning instead, and eat
grass for breakfast.

But you had to breathe. Your heart had to beat. You’d sweat and you’d
shiver, the same as always. You couldn’t get away from that. When those
things happened, they would remind you. Your heart wouldn’t beat out its
_wunklunk, wunklunk_ any more. It would go _one-less, one-less_, until
it yelled and yammered in your ears and you had to make it stop.

Terrific polish on that razor.

And your breath would go on, same as before. You could sidle through
this door, back through the next one and the one after, and figure out a
totally new way to go through the one after that, but your breath would
keep on sliding in and out of your nostrils like a razor going through
whiskers, making a sound like a razor being stropped.

Sonny came in. Pete soaped his hair. Sonny picked up the razor and stood
looking at it. Pete watched him, soap ran into his eye, he swore, and
Sonny jumped.

“What are you looking at, Sonny? Didn’t you ever see it before?”

“Oh, sure. Sure. I was just—” He shut the razor, opened it, flashed
light from its blade, shut it again. “I’m tired of using this, Pete. I’m
going to get rid of it. Want it?”

Want it? In his foot locker, maybe. Under his pillow. “Thanks no, Sonny.
Couldn’t use it.”

“I like safety razors,” Sonny mumbled. “Electrics, even better. What are
we going to do with it?”

“Throw it in the … no.” Pete pictured the razor turning end over end in
the air, half open, gleaming in the maw of the catchall. “Throw it out
the—” No. Curving out into the long grass. You might want it. You might
crawl around in the moonlight looking for it. You might find it.

“I guess maybe I’ll break it up.”

“No,” Pete said. “The pieces—” Sharp little pieces. Hollow-ground
fragments. “I’ll think of something. Wait’ll I get dressed.”

He washed briskly, toweled, while Sonny stood looking at the razor. It
was a blade now, and if you broke it, there would be shards and
glittering splinters, still razor sharp. You could slap its edge into an
emery wheel and grind it away, and somebody could find it and put
another edge on it because it was so obviously a razor, a fine steel
razor, one that would slice so—“I know. The laboratory. We’ll get rid of
it,” Pete said confidently.

He stepped into his clothes, and together they went to the laboratory
wing. It was very quiet there. Their voices echoed.

“One of the ovens,” said Pete, reaching for the razor.

“Bake ovens? You’re crazy!”

Pete chuckled. “You don’t know this place, do you? Like everything else
on the base, there was a lot more went on here than most people knew
about. They kept calling it the bake shop. Well, it _was_ research
headquarters for new high-nutrient flours. But there’s lots else here.
We tested utensils and designed beet peelers and all sorts of things
like that. There’s an electric furnace in here that—” He pushed open a
door.

They crossed a long, quiet, cluttered room to the thermal equipment. “We
can do everything here from annealing glass, through glazing ceramics,
to finding the melting point of frying pans.” He clicked a switch
tentatively. A pilot light glowed. He swung open a small, heavy door and
set the razor inside. “Kiss it good-bye. In twenty minutes it’ll be a
puddle.”

“I want to see that,” said Sonny. “Can I look around until it’s cooked?”

“Why not?”

(Everybody around here always said “Why not?”)

They walked through the laboratories. Beautifully equipped, they were,
and too quiet. Once they passed a major who was bent over a complex
electronic hook-up on one of the benches. He was watching a little amber
light flicker, and he did not return their salute. They tiptoed past
him, feeling awed at his absorption, envying it. They saw the models of
the automatic kneaders, the vitaminizers, the remote-signal thermostats
and timers and controls.

“What’s in there?”

“I dunno. I’m over the edge of my territory. I don’t think there’s
anybody left for this section. They were mostly mechanical and
electronic theoreticians. The only thing I know about them is that if we
ever needed anything in the way of tools, meters, or equipment, they had
it or something better, and if we ever got real bright and figured out a
startling new idea, they’d already built it and junked it a month ago.
Hey!”

Sonny followed the pointing hand. “What?”

“That wall section. It’s loose, or … well, what do you know?”

He pushed at the section of wall, which was very slightly out of line.
There was a dark space beyond.

“What’s in there?”

“Nothing, or some semiprivate hush-hush job. These guys used to get away
with murder.”

Sonny said, with an uncharacteristic flash of irony, “Isn’t that the
Army theoretician’s business?”

Cautiously they peered in, then entered.

“Wh … _hey!_ The door!”

It swung swiftly and quietly shut. The soft click of the latch was
accompanied by a blaze of light.

The room was small and windowless. It contained machinery—a “trickle”
charger, a bank of storage batteries, an electric-powered dynamo, two
small self-starting gas-driven light plants and a Diesel complete with
sealed compressed-air starting cylinders. In the corner was a relay rack
with its panel-bolts spot-welded. Protruding from it was a red-top
lever. Nothing was labeled.

They looked at the equipment wordlessly for a time and then Sonny said,
“Somebody wanted to make awful sure he had power for something.”

“Now, I wonder what—” Pete walked over to the relay rack. He looked at
the lever without touching it. It was wired up; behind the handle, on
the wire, was a folded tag. He opened it cautiously. “To be used only on
specific orders of the Commanding Officer.”

“Give it a yank and see what happens.”

Something clicked behind them. They whirled. “What was that?”

“Seemed to come from that rig by the door.”

They approached it cautiously. There was a spring-loaded solenoid
attached to a bar which was hinged to drop across the inside of the
secret door, where it would fit into steel gudgeons on the panel.

It clicked again. “A Geiger,” said Pete disgustedly.

“Now why,” mused Sonny, “would they design a door to stay locked unless
the general radioactivity went beyond a certain point? That’s what it
is. See the relays? And the overload switch there? And this?”

“It has a manual lock, too,” Pete pointed out. The counter clicked
again. “Let’s get out of here. I got one of those things built into my
head these days.”

The door opened easily. They went out, closing it behind them. The
keyhole was cleverly concealed in the crack between two boards.

They were silent as they made their way back to the QM labs. The small
thrill of violation was gone and, for Pete Mawser at least, the hate was
back, that and the shame. A few short weeks before, this base had been a
part of the finest country on earth. There was a lot of work here that
was secret, and a lot that was such purely progressive and unapplied
research that it would be in the way anywhere else but in this quiet
wilderness.

Sweat stood out on his forehead. They hadn’t struck back at their
murderers! It was quite well known that there were launching sites all
over the country, in secret caches far from any base or murdered city.
Why must they sit here waiting to die, only to let the enemy—“enemies”
was more like it—take over the continent when it was safe again?

He smiled grimly. One small consolation. They’d hit too hard: that was a
certainty. Probably each of the attackers underestimated what the other
would throw. The result—a spreading transmutation of nitrogen into
deadly Carbon Fourteen. The effects would not be limited to the
continent. What ghastly long-range effect the muted radioactivity would
have on the overseas enemies was something that no one alive today could
know.

Back at the furnace, Pete glanced at the temperature dial, then kicked
the latch control. The pilot winked out and then the door swung open.
They blinked and started back from the raging heat within, then bent and
peered. The razor was gone. A pool of brilliance lay on the floor of the
compartment.

“Ain’t much left. Most of it oxidized away,” Pete grunted.

They stood together for a time with their faces lit by that small
shimmering ruin. Later, as they walked back to the barracks, Sonny broke
his long silence with a sigh. “I’m glad we did that, Pete. I’m awful
glad we did that.”

At a quarter to eight they were waiting before the combination console
in the barracks. All hands except Pete and Sonny and a wiry-haired,
thick-set corporal named Bonze had elected to see the show on the big
screen in the mess hall. The reception was better there, of course, but,
as Bonze put it, “you don’t get close enough in a big place like that.”

“I hope she’s the same,” said Sonny, half to himself.

Why should she be? thought Pete morosely as he turned on the set and
watched the screen begin to glow. There were many more of the golden
speckles that had killed reception for the past two weeks. Why should
anything be the same, ever again?

He fought a sudden temptation to kick the set to pieces. It, and Starr
Anthim, were part of something that was dead. The country was dead, a
real country—prosperous, sprawling, laughing, grabbing, growing and
changing, leprous in spots with poverty and injustice, but healthy
enough to overcome any ill. He wondered how the murderers would like it.
They were welcome to it, now. Nowhere to go. No one to fight. That was
true for every soul on earth now.

“You hope she’s the same,” he muttered.

“The show, I mean,” said Sonny mildly. “I’d like to just sit here and
have it like … like—”

Oh, thought Pete mistily. Oh—that. Somewhere to go, that’s what it is,
for a few minutes. “I know,” he said, all the harshness gone from his
voice.

Noise receded from the audio as the carrier swept in. The light on the
screen swirled and steadied into a diamond pattern. Pete adjusted the
focus, chromic balance, and intensity. “Turn out the lights, Bonze. I
don’t want to see anything but Starr Anthim.”

It _was_ the same, at first. Starr Anthim had never used the usual
fanfares, fade-ins, color, and clamor of her contemporaries. A black
screen, then _click_, a blaze of gold. It was all there, in focus;
tremendously intense, it did not change. Rather, the eye changed to take
it in. She never moved for seconds after she came on; she was there, a
portrait, a still face and a white throat. Her eyes were open and
sleeping. Her face was alive and still.

Then, in the eyes which seemed green but were blue flecked with gold, an
awareness seemed to gather, and they came awake. Only then was it
noticeable that her lips were parted. Something in the eyes made the
lips be seen, though nothing moved yet. Not until she bent her head
slowly, so that some of the gold flecks seemed captured in the golden
brows. The eyes were not, then, looking out at an audience. They were
looking at me, and at _me_, and at ME.

“Hello—you,” she said. She was a dream, with a kid sister’s slightly
irregular teeth.

Bonze shuddered. The cot on which he lay began to squeak rapidly. Sonny
shifted in annoyance. Pete reached out in the dark and caught the leg of
the cot. The squeaking subsided.

“May I sing a song?” Starr asked. There was music, very faint. “It’s an
old one, and one of the best. It’s an easy song, a deep song, one that
comes from the part of men and women that is mankind—the part that has
in it no greed, no hate, no fear. This song is about joyousness and
strength. It’s—my favorite. Isn’t it yours?”

The music swelled. Pete recognized the first two notes of the
introduction and swore quietly. This was wrong. This song was not
for … this song was part of—

Sonny sat raptly. Bonze lay still.

Starr Anthim began to sing. Her voice was deep and powerful, but soft,
with the merest touch of vibrato at the ends of the phrases. The song
flowed from her without noticeable effort, seeming to come from her
face, her long hair, her wide-set eyes. Her voice, like her face, was
shadowed and clean, round, blue and green but mostly gold:

_“When you gave me your heart, you gave me the world_,

_You gave me the night and the day_,

_And thunder, and roses, and sweet green grass_,

_The sea, and soft wet clay_.

_“I drank the dawn from a golden cup_,

_From a silver one, the dark_,

_The steed I rode was the wild west wind_,

_My song was the brook and the lark.”_

The music spiraled, caroled, slid into a somber cry of muted, hungry
sixths and ninths; rose, blared, and cut, leaving her voice full and
alone:

_“With thunder I smote the evil of earth_,

_With roses I won the right_,

_With the sea I washed, and with clay I built_,

_And the world was a place of light!”_

The last note left a face perfectly composed again, and there was no
movement in it; it was sleeping and vital while the music curved off and
away to the places where music rests when it is not heard.

Starr smiled.

“It’s so easy,” she said. “So simple. All that is fresh and clean and
strong about mankind is in that song, and I think that’s all that need
concern us about mankind.” She leaned forward. “Don’t you see?”

The smile faded and was replaced with a gentle wonder. A tiny furrow
appeared between her brows; she drew back quickly. “I can’t seem to talk
to you tonight,” she said, her voice small. “You hate something.”

Hate was shaped like a monstrous mushroom. Hate was the random speckling
of a video plate.

“What has happened to us,” said Starr abruptly, impersonally, “is
simple, too. It doesn’t matter who did it—do you understand that? _It
doesn’t matter_. We were attacked. We were struck from the east and from
the west. Most of the bombs were atomic—there were blast bombs and there
were dust bombs. We were hit by about five hundred and thirty bombs
altogether, and it has killed us.”

She waited.

Sonny’s fist smacked into his palm. Bonze lay with his eyes open, quiet.
Pete’s jaws hurt.

“We have more bombs than both of them put together. We _have_ them. We
are not going to use them. _Wait!_” She raised her hands suddenly, as if
she could see into each man’s face. They sank back, tense.

“So saturated is the atmosphere with Carbon Fourteen that all of us in
this hemisphere are going to die. Don’t be afraid to say it. Don’t be
afraid to think it. It is a truth, and it must be faced. As the
transmutation effect spreads from the ruins of our cities, the air will
become increasingly radioactive, and then we must die. In months, in a
year or so, the effects will be strong overseas. Most of the people
there will die, too. None will escape completely. A worse thing will
come to them than anything they gave us, because there will be a wave of
horror and madness which is impossible to us. We are merely going to
die. They will live and burn and sicken, and the children that will be
born to them—” She shook her head, and her lower lip grew full. She
visibly pulled herself together.

“Five hundred and thirty bombs—I don’t think either of our attackers
knew just how strong the other was. There has been so much secrecy.” Her
voice was sad. She shrugged slightly. “They have killed us, and they
have ruined themselves. As for us—we are not blameless, either. Neither
are we helpless to do anything—yet. But what we must do is hard. We must
die—without striking back.”

She gazed briefly at each man in turn, from the screen. “We must _not_
strike back. Mankind is about to go through a hell of his own making. We
can be vengeful—or merciful, if you like—and let go with the hundreds of
bombs we have. That would sterilize the planet so that not a microbe,
not a blade of grass could escape, and nothing new could grow. We would
reduce the earth to a bald thing, dead and deadly.

“No, it just won’t do. We can’t do it.

“Remember the song? _That_ is humanity. That’s in all humans. A disease
made other humans our enemies for a time, but as the generations march
past, enemies become friends and friends enemies. The enmity of those
who have killed us is such a tiny, temporary thing in the long sweep of
history!”

Her voice deepened. “Let us die with the knowledge that we have done the
one noble thing left to us. The spark of humanity can still live and
grow on this planet. It will be blown and drenched, shaken and all but
extinguished, but it will live if that song is a true one. It will live
if we are human enough to discount the fact that the spark is in the
custody of our temporary enemy. Some—a few—of his children will live to
merge with the new humanity that will gradually emerge from the jungles
and the wilderness. Perhaps there will be ten thousand years of
beastliness; perhaps man will be able to rebuild while he still has his
ruins.”

She raised her head, her voice tolling. “And even if this is the end of
humankind, we dare not take away the chances some other life form might
have to succeed where we failed. If we retaliate, there will not be a
dog, a deer, an ape, a bird or fish or lizard to carry the evolutionary
torch. In the name of justice, if we must condemn and destroy ourselves,
let us not condemn all life along with us! We are heavy enough with
sins. If we must destroy, let us stop with destroying ourselves!”

There was a shimmering flicker of music. It seemed to stir her hair like
a breath of wind. She smiled.

“That’s all,” she whispered. And to each man there she said, “Good
night—”

The screen went black. As the carrier cut off—there was no
announcement—the ubiquitous speckles began to swarm across it.

Pete rose and switched on the lights. Bonze and Sonny were quite still.
It must have been minutes later when Sonny sat up straight, shaking
himself like a puppy. Something besides the silence seemed to tear with
the movement.

He said softly, “You’re not allowed to fight anything, or to run away,
or to live, and now you can’t even hate any more, because Starr says
‘no.’ ”

There was bitterness in the sound of it, and a bitter smell to the air.

Pete Mawser sniffed once, which had nothing to do with the smell. He
froze, sniffed again. “What’s that smell, Son’?”

Sonny tested it. “I don’t—Something familiar. Vanilla—no … no.

“Almonds. Bitter—_Bonze!_”

Bonze lay still with his eyes open, grinning. His jaw muscles were
knotted, and they could see almost all his teeth. He was soaking wet.

“Bonze!”

“It was just when she came on and said ‘Hello—you,’ remember?” whispered
Pete. “Oh, the poor kid. That’s why he wanted to catch the show here
instead of in the mess hall.”

“Went out looking at her,” said Sonny through pale lips. “I can’t say I
blame him much. Wonder where he got the stuff.”

“Never mind that.” Pete’s voice was harsh. “Let’s get out of here.”

They left to call the meat wagon. Bonze lay watching the console with
his dead eyes and his smell of bitter almonds.

Pete did not realize where he was going, or exactly why, until he found
himself on the dark street near GHQ and the communications shack. It had
something to do with Bonze. Not that he wanted to do what Bonze had
done. But then he hadn’t thought of it. What would he have done if he’d
thought of it? Nothing, probably. But still—it might be nice to be able
to hear Starr, and see her, whenever he felt like it. Maybe there
weren’t any recordings, but her musical background was recorded, and the
Sig might have dubbed the show off.

He stood uncertainly outside the GHQ building. There was a cluster of
men outside the main entrance. Pete smiled briefly. Rain, nor snow, nor
sleet, nor gloom of night could stay the stage-door Johnny.

He went down the side street and up the delivery ramp in the back. Two
doors along the platform was the rear exit of the communications
section.

There was a light on in the communications shack. He had his hand out to
the screen door when he noticed someone standing in the shadows beside
it. The light played daintily on the golden margins of a head and face.

He stopped. “Starr Anthim!”

“Hello, soldier. Sergeant.”

He blushed like an adolescent. “I—” His voice left him. He swallowed,
reached up to whip off his hat. He had no hat. “I saw the show,” he
said. He felt clumsy. It was dark, and yet he was very conscious of the
fact that his dress shoes were indifferently shined.

She moved toward him into the light, and she was so beautiful that he
had to close his eyes. “What’s your name?”

“Mawser. Pete Mawser.”

“Like the show?”

Not looking at her, he said stubbornly, “No.”

“Oh?”

“I mean … I liked it some. The song.”

“I … think I see.”

“I wondered if I could maybe get a recording.”

“I think so,” she said. “What kind of a reproducer have you got?”

“Audiovid.”

“A disk. Yes; we dubbed off a few. Wait, I’ll get you one.”

She went inside, moving slowly. Pete watched her, spellbound. She was a
silhouette, crowned and haloed; and then she was a framed picture, vivid
and golden. He waited, watching the light hungrily. She returned with a
large envelope, called good night to someone inside, and came out on the
platform.

“Here you are, Pete Mawser.”

“Thanks very—” he mumbled. He wet his lips. “It was very good of you.”

“Not really. The more it circulates, the better.” She laughed suddenly.
“That isn’t meant quite as it sounds. I’m not exactly looking for new
publicity these days.”

The stubbornness came back. “I don’t know that you’d get it, if you put
on that show in normal times.”

Her eyebrows went up. “Well!” she smiled. “I seem to have made quite an
impression.”

“I’m sorry,” he said warmly. “I shouldn’t have taken that tack.
Everything you think and say these days is exaggerated.”

“I know what you mean.” She looked around. “How is it here?”

“It’s O.K. I used to be bothered by the secrecy, and being buried miles
away from civilization.” He chuckled bitterly. “Turned out to be lucky
after all.”

“You sound like the first chapter of _One World or None_.”

He looked up quickly. “What do you use for a reading list—the
Government’s own _‘Index Expurgatorius’?_”

She laughed. “Come now—it isn’t as bad as all that. The book was never
banned. It was just—”

“—Unfashionable,” he filled in.

“Yes, more’s the pity. If people had paid more attention to it when it
was published, perhaps this wouldn’t have happened.”

He followed her gaze to the dimly pulsating sky. “How long are you going
to be here?”

“Until … as long as … I’m not leaving.”

“You’re not?”

“I’m finished,” she said simply. “I’ve covered all the ground I can.
I’ve been everywhere that … anyone knows about.”

“With this show?”

She nodded. “With this particular message.”

He was quiet, thinking. She turned to the door, and he put out his hand,
not touching her. “Please—”

“What is it?”

“I’d like to … I mean, if you don’t mind, I don’t often have a chance to
talk to—Maybe you’d like to walk around a little before you turn in.”

“Thanks, no, Sergeant. I’m tired.” She did sound tired. “I’ll see you
around.”

He stared at her, a sudden fierce light in his brain. “I know where it
is. It’s got a red-topped lever and a tag referring to orders of the
commanding officer. It’s really camouflaged.”

She was quiet so long that he thought she had not heard him. Then, “I’ll
take that walk.”

They went down the ramp together and turned toward the dark parade
ground.

“How did you know?” she asked quietly.

“Not too tough. This ‘message’ of yours; the fact that you’ve been all
over the country with it; most of all, the fact that somebody finds it
necessary to persuade us not to strike back. Who are you working for?”
he asked bluntly.

Surprisingly, she laughed.

“What’s that for?”

“A moment ago you were blushing and shuffling your feet.”

His voice was rough. “I wasn’t talking to a human being. I was talking
to a thousand songs I’ve heard, and a hundred thousand blond pictures
I’ve seen pinned up. You’d better tell me what this is all about.”

She stopped. “Let’s go up and see the colonel.”

He took her elbow. “No. I’m just a sergeant, and he’s high brass, and
that doesn’t make any difference at all now. You’re a human being, and
so am I, and I’m supposed to respect your rights as such. I don’t.
You’re a woman, and—”

She stiffened. He kept her walking, and finished, “—and that will make
as much difference as I let it. You’d better tell me about it.”

“All right,” she said, with a tired acquiescence that frightened
something inside him. “You seem to have guessed right, though. It’s
true. There are master firing keys for the launching sites. We have
located and dismantled all but two. It’s very likely that one of the two
was vaporized. The other one is—lost.”

“Lost?”

“I don’t have to tell you about the secrecy,” she said disgustedly. “You
know how it developed between nation and nation. You must know that it
existed between State and Union, between department and department,
office and office. There were only three or four men who knew where all
the keys were. Three of them were in the Pentagon when it went up. That
was the third blast bomb, you know. If there was another, it could only
have been Senator Vandercook, and he died three weeks ago without
talking.”

“An automatic radio key, hm-m-m?”

“That’s right. Sergeant, must we walk? I’m so tired—”

“I’m sorry,” he said impulsively. They crossed to the reviewing stand
and sat on the lonely benches. “Launching racks all over, all hidden,
and all armed?”

“Most of them are armed. Enough. Armed and aimed.”

“Aimed where?”

“It doesn’t matter.”

“I think I see. What’s the optimum number again?”

“About six hundred and forty; a few more or less. At least five hundred
and thirty have been thrown so far. We don’t know exactly.”

“Who are we?” he asked furiously.

“Who? Who?” She laughed weakly. “I could say, ‘The Government,’ perhaps.
If the President dies, the Vice President takes over, and then the
Speaker of the House, and so on and on. How far can you go? Pete Mawser,
don’t you realize yet what’s happened?”

“I don’t know what you mean.”

“How many people do you think are left in this country?”

“I don’t know. Just a few million, I guess.”

“How many are here?”

“About nine hundred.”

“Then as far as I know, this is the largest city left.”

He leaped to his feet. _“NO!”_ The syllable roared away from him, hurled
itself against the dark, empty buildings, came back to him in a series
of lower-case echoes: nononono … no-no—n …

Starr began to speak rapidly, quietly. “They’re scattered all over the
fields and the roads. They sit in the sun and die in the afternoon. They
run in packs, they tear at each other. They pray and starve and kill
themselves and die in the fires. The fires—everywhere, if anything
stands, it’s burning. Summer, and the leaves all down in the Berkshires,
and the blue grass burnt brown; you can see the grass dying from the
air, the death going out wider and wider from the bald spots. Thunder
and roses … I saw roses, new ones, creeping from the smashed pots of a
greenhouse. Brown petals, alive and sick, and the thorns turned back on
themselves, growing into the stems, killing. Feldman died tonight.”

He let her be quiet for a time. “Who is Feldman?”

“My pilot.” She was talking hollowly into her hands. “He’s been dying
for weeks. He’s been on his nerve ends. I don’t think he had any blood
left. He buzzed your GHQ and made for the landing strip. He came in with
the motor dead, free rotors, giro. Smashed the landing gear. He was
dead, too. He killed a man in Chicago so he could steal gas. The man
didn’t want the gas. There was a dead girl by the pump. He didn’t want
us to go near. I’m not going anywhere. I’m going to stay here. I’m
tired.”

At last she cried.

Pete left her alone, and walked out to the center of the parade ground,
looking back at the faint huddled glimmer on the bleachers. His mind
flickered over the show that evening, and the way she had sung before
the merciless transmitter. “Hello—you.” “If we must destroy, let us stop
with destroying ourselves!”

The dimming spark of humankind—what could it mean to her? How could it
mean so much?

_“Thunder and roses.”_ Twisted, sick, nonsurvival roses, killing
themselves with their own thorns.

_“And the world was a place of light!”_ Blue light, flickering in the
contaminated air.

The enemy. The red-topped lever. Bonze. “They pray and starve and kill
themselves and die in the fires.”

What creatures were these, these corrupted, violent, murdering humans?
What right had they to another chance? What was in them that was good?

Starr was good. Starr was crying. Only a human being could cry like
that. Starr was a human being.

Had humanity anything of Starr Anthim in it?

Starr _was_ a human being.

He looked down through the darkness for his hands. No planet, no
universe, is greater to a man than his own ego, his own observing self.
These hands were the hands of all history, and like the hands of all
men, they could by their small acts make human history or end it.
Whether this power of hands was that of a billion hands, or whether it
came to a focus in these two—this was suddenly unimportant to the
eternities which now infolded him.

He put humanity’s hands deep in his pockets and walked slowly back to
the bleachers.

“Starr.”

She responded with a sleepy-child, interrogative whimper.

“They’ll get their chance, Starr. I won’t touch the key.”

She sat straight. She rose, and came to him, smiling. He could see her
smile because, very faintly in this air, her teeth fluoresced. She put
her hands on his shoulders. “Pete.”

He held her very close for a moment. Her knees buckled then, and he had
to carry her.

There was no one in the Officers’ Club, which was the nearest building.
He stumbled in, moved clawing along the wall until he found a switch.
The light hurt him. He carried her to a settee and put her down gently.
She did not move. One side of her face was as pale as milk.

There was blood on his hands.

He stood looking stupidly at it, wiped it on the sides of his trousers,
looking dully at Starr. There was blood on her shirt.

The echo of no’s came back to him from the far walls of the big room
before he knew he had spoken. Starr wouldn’t do this. She couldn’t!

A doctor. But there was no doctor. Not since Anders had hung himself.
Get somebody. _Do_ something.

He dropped to his knees and gently unbuttoned her shirt. Between the
sturdy, unfeminine GI bra and the top of her slacks, there was blood on
her side. He whipped out a clean handkerchief and began to wipe it away.
There was no wound, no puncture. But abruptly there was blood again. He
blotted it carefully. And again there was blood.

It was like trying to dry a piece of ice with a towel.

He ran to the water cooler, wrung out the bloody handkerchief and ran
back to her. He bathed her face carefully, the pale right side, the
flushed left side. The handkerchief reddened again, this time with
cosmetics, and then her face was pale all over, with great blue shadows
under the eyes. While he watched, blood appeared on her left cheek.

There must be _somebody_—He fled to the door.

“Pete!”

Running, turning at the sound of her voice, he hit the doorpost
stunningly, caromed off, flailed for his balance, and then was back at
her side. “Starr! Hang on, now! I’ll get a doctor as quick as—”

Her hand strayed over her left cheek. “You found out. Nobody else knew,
but Feldman. It got hard to cover properly.” Her hand went up to her
hair.

“Starr, I’ll get a—”

“Pete, darling, promise me something?”

“Why, sure; certainly, Starr.”

“Don’t disturb my hair. It isn’t—all mine, you see.” She sounded like a
seven-year-old, playing a game. “It all came out on this side, you see?
I don’t want you to see me that way.”

He was on his knees beside her again. “What is it? What happened to
you?” he asked hoarsely.

“Philadelphia,” she murmured. “Right at the beginning. The mushroom went
up a half mile away. The studio caved in. I came to the next day. I
didn’t know I was burned, then. It didn’t show. My left side. It doesn’t
matter, Pete. It doesn’t hurt at all, now.”

He sprang to his feet again. “I’m going for a doctor.”

“Don’t go away. Please don’t go away and leave me. Please don’t.” There
were tears in her eyes. “Wait just a little while. Not very long, Pete.”

He sank to his knees again. She gathered both his hands in hers and held
them tightly. She smiled happily. “You’re good, Pete. You’re so good.”

(She couldn’t hear the blood in his ears, the roar of the whirlpool of
hate and fear and anguish that spun inside him.)

She talked to him in a low voice, and then in whispers. Sometimes he
hated himself because he couldn’t quite follow her. She talked about
school, and her first audition. “I was so scared that I got a vibrato in
my voice. I’d never had one before. I always let myself get a little
scared when I sing now. It’s easy.” There was something about a
windowbox when she was four years old. “Two real live tulips and a
pitcherplant. I used to be sorry for the flies.”

There was a long period of silence after that, during which his muscles
throbbed with cramp and stiffness, and gradually became numb. He must
have dozed; he awoke with a violent start, feeling her fingers on his
face. She was propped up on one elbow. She said clearly, “I just wanted
to tell you, darling. Let me go first, and get everything ready for you.
It’s going to be wonderful. I’ll fix you a special tossed salad. I’ll
make you a steamed chocolate pudding and keep it hot for you.”

Too muddled to understand what she was saying, he smiled and pressed her
back on the settee. She took his hands again.

The next time he awoke it was broad daylight, and she was dead.

Sonny Weisefreund was sitting on his cot when he got back to the
barracks. He handed over the recording he had picked up from the parade
ground on the way back. “Dew on it. Dry it off. Good boy,” he croaked,
and fell face downward on the cot Bonze had used.

Sonny stared at him. “Pete! Where’ve you been? What happened? Are you
all right?”

Pete shifted a little and grunted. Sonny shrugged and took the audiovid
disk out of its wet envelope. Moisture would not harm it particularly,
though it could not be played while wet. It was made of a fine spiral of
plastic, insulated between laminations. Electrostatic pickups above and
below the turntable would fluctuate with changes in the dielectric
constant which had been impressed by the recording, and these changes
were amplified for the video. The audio was a conventional hill-and-dale
needle. Sonny began to wipe it down carefully.

Pete fought upward out of a vast, green-lit place full of flickering
cold fires. Starr was calling him. Something was punching him, too. He
fought it weakly, trying to hear what she was saying. But someone else
was jabbering too loud for him to hear.

He opened his eyes. Sonny was shaking him, his round face pink with
excitement. The audiovid was running. Starr was talking. Sonny got up
impatiently and turned down the audio gain. “Pete! Pete! Wake up, will
you? I got to tell you something. Listen to me! Wake up, will yuh?”

“Huh?”

“That’s better. Now listen. I’ve just been listening to Starr Anthim—”

“She’s dead,” said Pete. Sonny didn’t hear. He went on explosively,
“I’ve figured it out. Starr was sent out here, and all over, to _beg_
someone not to fire any more atom bombs. If the government was sure they
wouldn’t strike back, they wouldn’t have taken the trouble. Somewhere,
Pete, there’s some way to launch bombs at those murdering cowards—and
I’ve got a pret-ty shrewd idea of how to do it.”

Pete strained groggily toward the faint sound of Starr’s voice. Sonny
talked on. “Now, s’posing there was a master radio key, an automatic
code device something like the alarm signal they have on ships, that
rings a bell on any ship within radio range when the operator sends four
long dashes. Suppose there’s an automatic code machine to launch bombs,
with repeaters, maybe, buried all over the country. What would it be?
Just a little lever to pull; thass all. How would the thing be hidden?
In the middle of a lot of other equipment, that’s where; in some place
where you’d expect to find crazy-looking secret stuff. Like an
experiment station. Like right here. You beginning to get the idea?”

“Shut up. I can’t hear her.”

“The hell with her! You can hear her some other time. You didn’t hear a
thing I said!”

“She’s dead.”

“Yeah. Well, I figure I’ll pull that handle. What can I lose? It’ll give
those murderin’ … _what?_”

“She’s dead.”

“Dead? Starr Anthim?” His young face twisted, Sonny sank down to the
cot. “You’re half asleep. You don’t know what you’re saying.”

“She’s dead,” Pete said hoarsely. “She got burned by one of the first
bombs. I was with her when she … she—Shut up, now, and get out of here
and let me listen!” he bellowed hoarsely.

Sonny stood up slowly. “They killed her, too. They killed her. That does
it. That just fixes it up.” His face was white. He went out.

Pete got up. His legs weren’t working right. He almost fell. He brought
up against the console with a crash, his outflung arm sending the pickup
skittering across the record. He put it on again and turned up the gain,
then lay down to listen.

His head was all mixed up. Sonny talked too much. Bomb launchers,
automatic code machines—

_“You gave me your heart,”_ sang Starr. _“You gave me your heart. You
gave me your heart. You—”_

Pete heaved himself up again and moved the pickup arm. Anger, not at
himself, but at Sonny for causing him to cut the disk that way, welled
up.

Starr was talking, stupidly, her face going through the same expression
over and over again. _“Struck from the east and from the Struck from the
east and from the—”_

He got up again wearily and moved the pickup.

“You gave me your heart. You gave me—”

Pete made an agonized sound that was not a word at all, bent, lifted,
and sent the console crashing over. In the bludgeoning silence he said,
“I did, too.”

Then, “Sonny.” He waited.

_“Sonny!”_

His eyes went wide then, and he cursed and bolted for the corridor.

The panel was closed when he reached it. He kicked at it. It flew open,
discovering darkness.

“Hey!” bellowed Sonny. “Shut it! You turned off the lights!”

Pete shut it behind him. The lights blazed.

“Pete! What’s the matter?”

“Nothing’s the matter, Son’,” croaked Pete.

“What are you looking at?” said Sonny uneasily.

“I’m sorry,” said Pete as gently as he could. “I just wanted to find
something out, is all. Did you tell anyone else about this?” He pointed
to the lever.

“Why, no. I only just figured it out while you were sleeping, just now.”

Pete looked around carefully while Sonny shifted his weight. Pete moved
toward a tool rack. “Something you haven’t noticed yet, Sonny,” he said
softly, and pointed. “Up there, on the wall behind you. High up. See?”

Sonny turned. In one fluid movement Pete plucked off a fourteen-inch box
wrench and hit Sonny with it as hard as he could.

Afterward he went to work systematically on the power supplies. He
pulled the plugs on the gas engines and cracked their cylinders with a
maul. He knocked off the tubing of the Diesel starters—the tanks let go
explosively—and he cut all the cables with bolt cutters. Then he broke
up the relay rack and its lever. When he was quite finished, he put away
his tools and bent and stroked Sonny’s tousled hair.

He went out and closed the partition carefully. It certainly was a
wonderful piece of camouflage. He sat down heavily on a workbench
nearby.

“You’ll have your chance,” he said into the far future. “And by heaven,
you’d better make good.”

After that he just waited.



IT WASN’T SYZYGY


BETTER NOT READ it. I mean it. No—this isn’t one of those “perhaps it
will happen to you” things. It’s a lot worse than that. It might very
possibly be happening to you right now. And you won’t know until it’s
over. You can’t, by the very nature of things.

(I wonder what the population really is?)

On the other hand, maybe it won’t make any difference if I do tell you
about it. Once you get used to the idea, you might even be able to relax
and enjoy it. Heaven knows there’s plenty to enjoy—and again I say it—by
the very nature of things.

All right, then, if you think you can take it …

I met her in a restaurant. You may know the place—Murphy’s. It has a big
oval bar and then a partition. On the other side of the partition are
small tables, then an aisle, then booths.

Gloria was sitting at one of the small tables. All of the booths but two
were empty; all the other small tables but one were unoccupied, so there
was plenty of room in the place for me.

But there was only one place I could sit—at her table. That was because,
when I saw Gloria, there wasn’t anything else in the world. I have never
been through anything like that. I just stopped dead. I dropped my
briefcase and stared at her. She had gleaming auburn hair and olive
skin. She had delicate high-arched nostrils and a carved mouth, lips
that were curved above like gull’s wings on the downbeat, and full
below. Her eyes were as sealed and spice-toned as a hot buttered rum,
and as deep as a mountain night.

Without taking my eyes from her face, I groped for a chair and sat
opposite her. I’d forgotten everything. Even about being hungry. Helen
hadn’t, though. Helen was the head waitress and a swell person. She was
fortyish and happy. She didn’t know my name but used to call me “The
Hungry Fella.” I never had to order. When I came in she’d fill me a
bar-glass full of beer and pile up two orders of that day’s Chef’s
Special on a steak platter. She arrived with the beer, picked up my
briefcase, and went for the fodder. I just kept on looking at Gloria,
who, by this time, was registering considerable amazement, and a little
awe. The awe, she told me later, was conceived only at the size of the
beer-glass, but I have my doubts about that.

She spoke first. “Taking an inventory?”

She had one of those rare voices which makes noises out of all other
sounds. I nodded. Her chin was rounded, with the barest suggestion of a
cleft, but the hinges of her jaw were square.

I think she was a little flustered. She dropped her eyes—I was glad,
because I could see then how very long and thick her lashes were—and
poked at her salad. She looked up again, half smiling. Her teeth met,
tip to tip. I’d read about that but had never actually seen it before.
“What is it?” she asked. “Have I made a conquest?”

I nodded again. “You certainly have.”

“Well!” she breathed.

“Your name’s Gloria,” I said positively.

“How did you know?”

“It had to be, that’s all.”

She looked at me carefully, at my eyes, my forehead, my shoulders. “If
your name is Leo, I’ll scream.”

“Scream then. But why?”

“I—I’ve always thought I’d meet a man named Leo and—”

Helen canceled the effects of months of good relations between herself
and me, by bringing my lunch just then. Gloria’s eyes widened when she
saw it. “You must be very fond of lobster hollandaise.”

“I’m very fond of all subtle things,” I said, “and I like them in great
masses.”

“I’ve never met anyone like you,” she said candidly.

“No one like you ever has.”

“Oh?”

I picked up my fork. “Obviously not, or there’d be a race of us.” I
scooped up some lobster. “Would you be good enough to watch carefully
while I eat? I can’t seem to stop looking at you, and I’m afraid I might
stab my face with the fork.”

She chortled. It wasn’t a chuckle, or a gargle. It was a true Lewis
Carroll chortle. They’re very rare. “I’ll watch.”

“Thank you. And while you watch, tell me what you don’t like.”

“What I _don’t_ like? Why?”

“I’ll probably spend the rest of my life finding out the things you do
like, and doing them with you. So let’s get rid of the nonessentials.”

She laughed. “All right. I don’t like tapioca because it makes me feel
conspicuous, staring that way. I don’t like furniture with buttons on
the upholstery; lace curtains that cross each other; small
flower-prints; hooks-and-eyes and snap fasteners where zippers ought to
be; that orchestra leader with the candy saxophones and the yodeling
brother; tweedy men who smoke pipes; people who can’t look me in the eye
when they’re lying; night clothes; people who make mixed drinks with
Scotch—my, you eat fast.”

“I just do it to get rid of my appetite so I can begin eating for
esthetic reasons. I like that list.”

“What don’t _you_ like?”

“I don’t like literary intellectuals with their conversations all
dressed up in overquotes. I don’t like bathing-suits that don’t let the
sun in and I don’t like weather that keeps bathing-suits in. I don’t
like salty food; clinging-vine girls; music that doesn’t go anywhere or
build anything; people who have forgotten how to wonder like children;
automobiles designed to be better streamlined going backwards than going
forward; people who will try anything once but are afraid to try it
twice and acquire a taste; and professional skeptics.” I went back to my
lunch.

“You bat a thousand,” she said. “Something remarkable is happening
here.”

“Let it happen,” I cautioned. “Never mind what it is or why. Don’t be
like the guy who threw a light-bulb on the floor to find out if it was
brittle.” Helen passed and I ordered a Slivovitz.

“Prune brandy!” cried Gloria. “I love it!”

“I know. It’s for you.”

“Some day you’re going to be wrong,” she said, suddenly somber, “and
that will be bad.”

“That will be good. It’ll be the difference between harmony and
contrast, that’s all.”

“Leo—”

“Mm?”

She brought her gaze squarely to me, and it was so warm I could feel it
on my face. “Nothing. I was just saying it, Leo. _Leo!_”

Something choked me—not the lobster. It was all gone.

“I have no gag for that. I can’t top it. I can match it, Gloria.”

Another thing was said, but without words.

There are still no words for it. Afterward she reached across and
touched my hand with her fingertips. I saw colors.

I got up to go, after scribbling on a piece of the menu. “Here’s my
phone number. Call me up when there’s no other way out.”

She raised her eyebrows. “Don’t you want my phone, or my address, or
anything?”

“No,” I said.

“But—”

“This means too much,” I said. “I’m sorry if I seem to be dropping it in
your lap like this. But any time you are with me, I want it to be
because you want to be with me, not because you think it’s what I might
want. We’ve got to be together because we are traveling in the same
direction at approximately the same speed, each under his own power. If
I call you up and make all the arrangements, it could be that I was
acting on a conditioned reflex, like any other wolf. If you call, we can
both be sure.”

“It makes sense.” She raised those deep eyes to me. Leaving her was
coming up out of those eyes hand over hand. A long haul. I only just
made it.

Out on the street I tried valiantly to get some sense of proportion. The
most remarkable thing about the whole remarkable business was simply
this: that in all my life before, I had never been able to talk to
anyone like that. I had always been diffident, easy-going, unaggressive
to a fault, and rather slow on the uptake.

I felt like the daydreams of the much advertised 97-pound weakling as he
clipped that coupon.

“Hey—you!”

I generally answered to that as well as anything else. I looked up and
recoiled violently. There was a human head floating in midair next to
me. I was so startled I couldn’t even stop walking. The head drifted
along beside me, bobbing slightly as if invisible legs carried an
invisible body to which the visible head was attached. The face was
middle-aged, bookish, dryly humorous.

“You’re quite a hell of a fellow, aren’t you?”

Oddly, my tongue loosened from the roof of my mouth. “Some pretty nice
people think so,” I faltered. I looked around nervously, expecting a
stampede when other people saw this congenial horror.

“No one can see me but you,” said the head. “No one that’s likely to
make a fuss, at any rate.”

“Wh-what do you want?”

“Just wanted to tell you something,” said the head. It must have had a
throat somewhere because it cleared it. “Parthenogenesis,” it said
didactically, “has little survival value, even with syzygy. Without it—”
The head disappeared. A little lower down, two bony, bare shoulders
appeared, shrugged expressively, and vanished. The head reappeared.
“—there isn’t a chance.”

“You don’t say,” I quavered.

It didn’t say. Not any more, just then. It was gone.

I stopped, spun around, looking for it. What it had told me made as
little sense to me, then, as its very appearance. It took quite a while
for me to discover that it had told me the heart of the thing I’m
telling you. I do hope I’m being a little more lucid than the head was.

Anyway, that was the first manifestation of all. By itself, it wasn’t
enough to make me doubt my sanity. As I said, it was only the first.

I might as well tell you something about Gloria. Her folks had been poor
enough to evaluate good things, well enough off to be able to have a
sample or two of these good things. So Gloria could appreciate what was
good as well as the effort that was necessary to get it. At twenty-two
she was the assistant buyer of a men’s department store. (This was
toward the end of the war.) She needed some extra money for a pet
project, so she sang at a club every night. In her “spare” time she
practiced and studied and at the end of a year she had her commercial
pilot’s license. She spent the rest of the war ferrying airplanes.

Do you begin to get the idea of what kind of people she was?

She was one of the most dynamic women who ever lived. She was thoughtful
and articulate and completely un-phony. She was strong. You can have no
idea—no; some of you do know how strong. I had forgotten.… She radiated
her strength. Her strength surrounded her like a cloud rather than like
armor, for she was tangible through it. She influenced everything and
everyone she came near. I felt, sometimes, that the pieces of ground
which bore her footprints, the chairs she used, the doors she touched
and the books she held, continued to radiate for weeks afterward, like
the Bikini ships.

She was completely self-sufficient. I had hit the matter squarely when I
insisted that she call me before we saw each other again. Her very
presence was a compliment. When she was with me, it was, by definition,
because that was where she would rather be than any other place on
earth. When she was away from me, it was because to be with me at that
time would not have been a perfect thing, and in her way she was a
perfectionist.

Oh, yes—a perfectionist. I should know!

You ought to know something about me, too, so that you can realize how
completely a thing like this is done, and how it is being done to so
many of you.

I’m in my twenties and I play guitar for a living. I’ve done a lot of
things and I carry around a lot of memories from each of them—things
that only I could possibly know. The color of the walls in the rooming
house where I stayed when I was “on the beach” in Port Arthur, Texas,
when the crew of my ship went out on strike. What kind of flowers that
girl was wearing the night she jumped off the cruise ship in Montego
Bay, down in Jamaica.

I can remember, hazily, things like my brother’s crying because he was
afraid of the vacuum cleaner, when he was four. So I couldn’t have been
quite three then. I can remember fighting with a kid called Boaz, when I
was seven. I remember Harriet, whom I kissed under a fragrant tulip
poplar one summer dusk when I was twelve. I remember the odd little lick
that drummer used to tear off when, and only when he was really riding,
while I was playing at the hotel, and the way the trumpet man’s eyes
used to close when he heard it. I remember the exact smell of the
tiger’s wagon when I was pulling ropes on the Barnes Circus, and the
one-armed roustabout who used to chantey us along when we drove the
stakes, he swinging a twelve-pound maul with the rest of us—

_Hit_ down, _slap it_ down, _haul_ back, _snub_, bub,

_Half_ back, _quarter_ back, _all_ back, _whoa!_

—he used to cry, with the mauls rat-tatting on the steelbound peg and
the peg melting into the ground, and the snubber grunting over his taut
half-hitch while the six of us stood in a circle around the peg. And
those other hammers, in the blacksmith’s shop in Puerto Rico, with the
youngster swinging a sledge in great full circles, clanging on the
anvil, while the old smith touched the work almost delicately with his
shaping hammer and then tinkled out every syncopation known to man by
bouncing it on the anvil’s horn and face between his own strokes and
those of the great metronomic sledge. I remember the laboring and
servile response of a power shovel under my hands as they shifted from
hoist to crowd to swing to rehaul controls, and the tang of burning
drum-frictions and hot crater compound. That was at the same quarry
where the big Finnish blast foreman was killed by a premature shot. He
was out in the open and knew he couldn’t get clear. He stood straight
and still and let it come, since it was bound to come, and he raised his
right hand to his head. My mechanic said he was trying to protect his
face but I thought at the time he was saluting something.

Details; that’s what I’m trying to get over to you. My head was full of
details that were intimately my own.

It was a little over two weeks—sixteen days, three hours, and
twenty-three minutes, to be exact—before Gloria called. During that time
I nearly lost my mind. I was jealous, I was worried, I was frantic. I
cursed myself for not having gotten her number—why, I didn’t even know
her last name! There were times when I determined to hang up on her if I
heard her voice, I was so sore. There were times when I stopped work—I
did a lot of arranging for small orchestras—and sat before the silent
phone, begging it to ring. I had a routine worked out: I’d demand a
statement as to how she felt about me before I let her say another
thing. I’d demand an explanation of her silence. I’d act casual and
disinterested. I’d—

The phone did ring, though, and it was Gloria, and the dialogue went
like so:

“Hello?”

“Leo.”

“Yes, Gloria!”

“I’m coming up.”

“I’m waiting.”

And that was it. I met her at the door. I had never touched her before,
except for that one brief contact of her hands; and yet, with perfect
confidence, with no idea of doing anything different, I took her in my
arms and kissed her. This whole thing has its terrible aspects, and yet,
sometimes I wonder if moments like that don’t justify the horror of it.

I took her hand and led her into the living room. The room wavered like
an underwater scene because she was in it. The air tasted different. We
sat close together with our hands locked, saying that wordless thing
with our eyes. I kissed her again. I didn’t ask her anything at all.

She had the smoothest skin that ever was. She had a skin smoother than a
bird’s throat. It was like satin-finished aluminum, but warm and
yielding. It was smooth like Gran’ Marnier between your tongue and the
roof of your mouth.

We played records—Django Reinhardt and The New Friends of Rhythm, and
Bach’s _Passacaglia and Fugue_ and _Tubby the Tuba_. I showed her the
Smith illustrations from _Fantazius Mallare_ and my folio of Ed Weston
prints. I saw things and heard things in them all that I had never known
before, though they were things I loved.

Not one of them—not a book, nor a record, nor a picture, was new to her.
By some alchemy, she had culled the random flood of esthetic expression
that had come her way, and had her choices; and her choices were these
things that I loved, but loved in a way exclusively hers, a way in which
I could share.

We talked about books and places, ideas and people. In her way, she was
something of a mystic. “I believe that there is something behind the old
superstitions about calling up demons and materializations of departed
spirits,” she said thoughtfully. “But I don’t think it was ever done
with mumbo-jumbo—witches’ brew and pentagrams and toads’ skins stuffed
with human hair buried at the crossroads on a May midnight, unless these
rituals were part of a much larger thing—a purely psychic and un-ghostly
force coming from the ‘wizard’ himself.”

“I never thought much about it,” I said, stroking her hair. It is the
only hair that was not fine that I have ever touched with pleasure. Like
everything else about her, it was strong and controlled and glowing.
“Have you ever tried anything like that? You’re some sort of a
sorceress. I know when I’m enchanted at any rate.”

“You’re not enchanted,” she said gravely. “You’re not a thing with magic
on it. You’re a real magic all by yourself.”

“You’re a darling,” I said. “Mine.”

“I’m not!” she answered, in that odd way she had of turning aside
fantasy for fact. “I don’t belong to you. I belong to _me!_”

I must have looked rather stricken, for she laughed suddenly and kissed
my hand. “What belongs to you is only a large part of ‘us,’ ” she
explained carefully. “Otherwise you belong to you and I belong to me. Do
you see?”

“I think I do,” I said slowly. “I said I wanted us to be together
because we were both travelling together under our own power. I—didn’t
know it was going to be so true, that’s all.”

“Don’t try to make it any different, Leo. Don’t _ever_. If I started to
really belong to you, I wouldn’t be _me_ any more, and then you wouldn’t
have anything at all.”

“You seem so sure of these hazy things.”

“They aren’t hazy things! They’re important. If it weren’t for these
things, I’d have to stop seeing you. I_—would_ stop seeing you.”

I put my arms tight around her. “Don’t talk about that,” I whispered,
more frightened than I have ever been in my life before. “Talk about
something else. Finish what you were saying about pentagrams and
spirits.”

She was still a moment. I think her heart was pounding the way mine was,
and I think she was frightened too.

“I spend a lot of time reading and mulling over those things,” she said
after a quiet time. “I don’t know why. I find them fascinating. You know
what, Leo? I think too much has been written about manifestations of
evil. I think it’s true that good is more powerful than evil. And I
think that far too much has been written and said about ghosties an’
ghoulies an’ things that go ‘boomp’ i’ th’ nicht, as the old Scottish
prayer has it. I think those things have been too underlined. They’re
remarkable enough, but have you ever realized that things that are
remarkable are, by definition, rare?”

“If the cloven-hoofed horrors and the wailing banshees are
remarkable—which they are—then what’s commonplace?”

She spread her hands—square, quite large hands, capable and beautifully
kept. “The manifestations of good, of course. I believe that they’re
much easier to call up. I believe they happen all the time. An evil mind
has to be very evil before it can project itself into a new thing with a
life of its own. From all accounts I have read, it takes a tremendously
powerful mind to call up even a little demon. Good things must be much
easier to materialize, because they fall in the pattern of good living.
More people live good lives than such thoroughly bad ones that they can
materialize evil things.”

“Well then, why don’t more people bring more good things from behind
this mystic curtain?”

“But they do!” she cried. “They must! The world is so full of good
things! Why do you suppose they’re so good? What put the innate goodness
into Bach and the Victoria Falls and the color of your hair and Negro
laughter and the way ginger ale tickles your nostrils?”

I shook my head slowly. “I think that’s lovely, and I don’t like it.”

“Why not?”

I looked at her. She was wearing a wine-colored suit and a marigold
silken kerchief tucked into the throat. It reflected on the warm olive
of her chin. It reminded me of my grandmother’s saying when I was very
small. “Let’s see if you like butter,” as she held a buttercup under my
chin to see how much yellow it reflected. “You are good,” I said slowly,
searching hard for the words. “You are about the—the goodest thing that
ever happened. If what you say is really true, then you might be just a
shadow, a dream, a glorious thought that someone had.”

“Oh, you idiot,” she said, with sudden tears in her eyes. “You big,
beautiful hunk of idiot!” She pressed me close and bit my cheek so hard
that I yelped. “Is that real?”

“If it isn’t,” I said, shaken, “I’ll be happy to go on dreaming.”

She stayed another hour—as if there were such a thing as time when we
were together—and then she left. I had her phone number by then. A
hotel. And after she was gone, I wandered around my apartment, looking
at the small wrinkles in the couch-cover where she had sat, touching the
cup she had held, staring at the bland black surface of a record,
marvelling at the way its grooves had unwound the _Passacaglia_ for her.
Most wonderful of all was a special way I discovered to turn my head as
I moved. Her fragrance clung to my cheek, and if I turned my face just
so, I could sense it. I thought about every one of those many minutes
with her, each by itself, and the things we had done. I thought, too,
about the things we had not done—I know you wondered—and I gloried in
them. For, without a word spoken, we had agreed that a thing worth
having was a thing worth awaiting and that where faith is complete,
exploration is uncalled for.

She came back next day, and the day after. The first of these two visits
was wonderful. We sang, mostly. I seemed to know all her very favorite
songs. And by a happy accident, my pet key on the guitar—B flat—was
exactly within her lovely contralto range. Though I say it as shouldn’t,
I played some marvellous guitar behind and around what she sang. We
laughed a lot, largely at things that were secret between us—is there a
love anywhere without its own new language?—and we talked for a long
time about a book called _The Fountainhead_ which seemed to have had the
same extraordinary effect on her that it had on me; but then, it’s an
extraordinary book.

It was after she left that day that the strangeness began—the
strangeness that turned into such utter horror. She hadn’t been gone
more than an hour when I heard the frightened scramble of tiny claws in
the front room. I was poring over the string-bass part of a trio
arrangement I was doing (and not seeing it for my Gloria-flavored
thoughts) and I raised my head and listened. It was the most
panic-struck scurrying imaginable, as if a regiment of newts and
salamanders had broken ranks in a wild retreat. I remember clearly that
the little claw susurrus did not disturb me at all, but the terror
behind the movement startled me in ways that were not pleasant.

What were they running from? _was infinitely more important than_ What
were they?

Slowly I put down the manuscript and stood up. I went to the wall and
along it to the archway, not so much to keep out of sight as to surprise
the _thing_ that had so terrorized the possessors of those small
frightened feet.

And that was the first time I have ever been able to smile while the
hackles on the back of my neck were one great crawling prickle. For
there was nothing there at all; nothing to glow in the dark before I
switched on the overhead light, nothing to show afterward. But the
little feet scurried away faster—there must have been hundreds of
them—tapping and scrabbling out a perfect crescendo of horrified escape.
That was what made my hackles rise. What made me smile—

The sounds radiated from _my_ feet!

I stood there in the archway, my eyeballs throbbing with the effort to
see this invisible rout; and from the threshold, to right and left and
away into the far corners of the front room, ran the sounds of the
little paws and tiny scratching claws. It was as if they were being
generated under my soles, and then fleeing madly. None ran behind me.
There seemed to be something keeping them from the living room. I took a
cautious step further into the front room, and now they did run behind
me, but only as far as the archway. I could hear them reach it and
scuttle off to the side walls. You see what made me smile?

_I_ was the horror that frightened them so!

The sound gradually lessened. It was not that it lessened in overall
intensity. It was just there were fewer and fewer creatures running
away. It diminished rapidly, and in about ninety seconds it had reduced
to an occasional single scampering. One invisible creature ran around
and around me, as if all the unseen holes in the walls had been stopped
up and it was frantically looking for one. It found one, too, and was
gone.

I laughed then and went back to my work. I remember that I thought quite
clearly after that, for a while. I remember writing in a _glissando_
passage that was a stroke of genius—something to drive the doghouse
slapper crazy but guaranteed to drive the customers even crazier if it
could be done at all. I remember zoom-zooming it off under my breath,
and feeling mightily pleased with myself over it.

And then the reaction struck me.

Those little claws—

What was happening to me?

I thought instantly of Gloria. _There’s some deadly law of compensation
working here_, I thought. For every yellow light, a purple shadow. For
every peal of laughter, a cry of anguish somewhere. For the bliss of
Gloria, a touch of horror to even things up.

I licked my lips, for they were wet and my tongue was dry.

What was happening to me?

I thought again of Gloria, and the colors and sounds of Gloria, and most
of all, the reality, the solid normalcy of Gloria, for all her exquisite
sense of fantasy.

I couldn’t go crazy. I _couldn’t!_ Not _now!_ I’d be—unfit.

Unfit! As terrifying to me, then, as the old cry of _“Unclean”_ was in
the Middle Ages.

_“Gloria, darling,”_ I’d have to say, _“Honey, we’ll just have to call
it quits. You see, I’m off my trolley. Oh, I’m quite serious. Yes
indeedy. The men in the white coats will come around and back up their
little wagon to the door and take me away to the laughing academy. And
we won’t see each other any more. A pity. A great pity. Just give me a
hearty little old handshake, now, and go find yourself another fellow.”_

“Gloria!” I yelled. Gloria was all those colors, and the lovely sounds,
and the fragrance that clung to my cheek and came to me when I moved and
held my head just so.

“Oh, I dunno,” I moaned. “I just don’t know what to do! What is it? What
is it?”

_“Syzygy.”_

_“Huh?”_ I came bolt upright, staring around wildly. Twenty inches over
the couch hovered the seamed face of my jovial phantom of the street
outside Murphy’s. “You! Now I know I’m off my—hey! What is syzygy?”

“What’s happening to you.”

“Well, what is happening to me?”

“Syzygy.” The head grinned engagingly. I put my head in my hands. There
is an emotional pitch—an unemotional pitch, really—at which nothing is
surprising, and I’d reached it. “Please explain,” I said dully. “Tell me
who you are, and what you mean by this sizz-sizz whatever-it-is.”

“I’m not anybody,” said the head, “and syzygy is a concomitant of
parthenogenetic and certain other low types. I think what’s happening
_is_ syzygy. If it isn’t—” The head disappeared, a hand with spatulate
fingers appeared and snapped its fingers explosively; the hand
disappeared, the head reappeared and smiled, “—you’re a gone goose.”

“Don’t _do_ that,” I said miserably.

“Don’t do what?”

“That—that piecemeal business. Why do you do it?”

“Oh—that. Conservation of energy. It works here too, you know.”

“Where is ‘here’?”

“That’s a little difficult to explain until you get the knack of it.
It’s the place where reverse ratios exist. I mean, if something stacks
up in a three to five ratio there, it’s a five to three ratio here.
Forces must balance.”

I almost had it. What he said almost made sense. I opened my mouth to
question him but he was gone.

After that I just sat there. Perhaps I wept.

And Gloria came the next day, too. That was bad. I did two wrong things.
First, I kept information from her, which was inexcusable. If you are
going to share at all, you must share the bad things too. The other
thing I did was to question her like a jealous adolescent.

But what else could be expected? Everything was changed. Everything was
different. I opened the door to her and she brushed past me with a
smile, and not a very warm one at that, leaving me at the door all
outstretched arms and large clumsy feet.

She shrugged out of her coat and curled up on the couch.

“Leo, play some music.”

I felt like hell and I know I looked it. Did she notice? Did she even
care? Didn’t it make any difference at all how I felt, what I was going
through?

I went and stood in front of her. “Gloria,” I said sternly, “where have
you been?”

She looked up at me and released a small, retrospective sigh that turned
me bright green and sent horns sprouting out of my scalp. It was such a
happy, satisfied little sound. I stood there glowering at her. She
waited a moment more and then got up, switched on the amplifier and
turntable, dug out the “Dance of the Hours,” turned the volume up, added
too much bass, and switched in the volume expander, which is quite the
wrong thing to use on that record. I strode across the room and turned
the volume down.

“Please, Leo,” she said in a hurt tone. “I like it that way.”

Viciously I turned it back up and sat down with my elbows on my knees
and my lower lip stuck out. I was wild. This was all wrong.

_I know what I should do_, I thought sullenly. _I ought to yank the plug
on the rig and stand up and tell her off_.

How right I was! But I didn’t do it. How could I do it? This was
_Gloria!_ Even when I looked up at her and saw her staring at me, saw
the slight curl to her lip, I didn’t do it. Well, it was too late then.
She was watching me, comparing me with—

Yes, that was it. She was comparing me with somebody. Somebody who was
different from her, someone who rode roughshod over everything delicate
and subtle about her, everything about her that I liked and shared with
her. And she, of course, ate it up.

I took refuge in the tactic of letting her make the first move. I think,
then, that she despised me. And rightly.

A bit of cockney dialogue I had once heard danced through my mind:

“D’ye love us, Alf?”

“Yus.”

“Well, knock us abaht a bit.”

You see? I knew the right things to do, but—

But this was Gloria. I _couldn’t_.

The record finished, and she let the automatic shut off the turntable. I
think she expected me to turn it over. I didn’t. She said, “All right,
Leo. What is it?” tiredly.

I said to myself, “I’ll start with the worst possible thing that could
happen. She’ll deny that, and then at least I’ll feel better.” So I said
to her, “You’ve changed. There’s somebody else.”

She looked up at the picture molding and smiled sleepily. “Yes,” she
said. “There certainly is.”

“Uff!” I said, because that caught me right in the solar plexus. I sat
down abruptly.

“His name’s Arthur,” she said dreamily. “He’s a real man, Leo.”

“Oh,” I said bitterly. “I can see it. Five o’clock shadow and a head
full of white matter. A toupée on his chest and a vernacular like a
boatswain. Too much shoulders, too little hips, and, to quote Thorne
Smith, a voice as low as his intentions. A man who never learned the
distinction between eating and dining, whose idea of a hot time consists
of—”

“Stop it,” she said. She said it quite casually and very quietly.
Because my voice was raised, it contrasted enough to have a positively
deafening effect. I stood there with my jaw swinging like the lower gate
of a steam-shovel as she went on, “Don’t be catty, Leo.”

It was a studied insult for her to use such a woman-to-woman phrase, and
we both knew it. I was suddenly filled with what the French call _esprit
d’escalier_—the wit of the staircase; in other words, the belated
knowledge of the thing you should have said if you’d only thought of it
in time, which you mumble frustratedly to yourself as you go down the
stairs on your way out. I should have caught her to me as she tried to
brush past me when she arrived, smothered her with—what was that corny
line? “kisses—hard tooth-raking kisses, that broke his lips and hers in
exquisite, salty pain.” Then I should have threatened her with pinking
scissors—

And then I thought of the glittering, balanced structure of self-denial
I had built with her, and I could have cried.…

“Why come here and parade it in front of me?” I shouted. “Why don’t you
take your human bulldozer and cross a couple of horizons with him? Why
come here and rub my nose in it?”

She stood up, pale, and lovelier than I had thought a human being could
be—so beautiful that I had to close my eyes. “I came because I had to
have something to compare him with,” she said steadily. “You are
everything I have ever dreamed about, Leo, and my dreams are … very
detailed.…” At last she faltered, and her eyes were bright. “Arthur
is—is—” She shook her head. Her voice left her; she had to whisper. “I
know everything about you, Leo. I know how you think, and what you will
say, and what you like, and it’s wonderful, wonderful … but Leo, Arthur
is something outside of me. Don’t you see? Can’t you see? I don’t always
like what Arthur does. _But I can’t tell what he’s going to do!_ You—you
share everything, Leo, Leo darling, but you don’t_—take_ anything!”

“Oh,” I said hoarsely. My scalp was tight. I got up and started across
the room toward her. My jaws hurt.

“Stop, Leo,” she gasped. “Stop it, now. You can do it, but you’ll be
acting. You’ve never acted before. It would be wrong. Don’t spoil what’s
left. No, Leo—no … no …”

She was right. She was so right. She was always right about me; she knew
me so well. This kind of melodrama was away out of character for me. I
reached her. I took her arm and she closed her eyes. It hurt when my
fingers closed on her arm. She trembled but she did not try to pull
away. I got her wrist and lifted it. I turned her hand over and put a
kiss on the palm, closing her fingers on it. “Keep that,” I said. “You
might like to have it some time.” Then I let her go.

“Oh Leo, darling,” she said. “Darling,” she said, with a curl to her
lip …

She turned to go. And then—

_“Arhgh!”_ She uttered a piercing scream and turned back to me, all but
bowling me over in her haste to get away from Abernathy. I stood there
holding her tight while she pressed, crouched, squeezed against me, and
I burst into laughter. Maybe it was reaction—I don’t know. But I roared.

Abernathy is my mouse.

Our acquaintance began shortly after I took the apartment. I knew the
little son-of-a-gun was there because I found evidences of his
depredations under the sink where I stored my potatoes and vegetables.
So I went out and got a trap. In those days the kind of trap I wanted
was hard to find; it took me four days and a young fortune in carfare to
run one of them down. You see, I can’t abide the kind of trap that hurls
a wire bar down on whatever part of the mouse happens to be available,
so that the poor shrieking thing dies in agony. I wanted—and by heaven I
got—one of those wirebasket effects made so that a touch on the bait
trips a spring which slams a door on the occupant.

I caught Abernathy in the contraption the very first night. He was a
small gray mouse with very round ears. They were like the finest tissue,
and covered with the softest fuzz in the world. They were translucent,
and if you looked very closely you could see the most meticulous
arrangement of hairline blood vessels in them. I shall always maintain
that Abernathy owed his success in life to the beauty of his ears. No
one with pretensions to a soul could destroy such divine tracery.

Well, I let him alone until he got over being frightened and frantic,
until he got hungry and ate all the bait, and a few hours over. When I
thought he was good and ready to listen to reason, I put the trap on my
desk and gave him a really good talking-to.

I explained very carefully (in simple language, of course) that for him
to gnaw and befoul in his haphazard fashion was downright antisocial. I
explained to him that when I was a child I was trained to finish
whatever I started to eat, and that I did it to this day, and I was a
human being and much bigger and stronger and smarter than he was. And
whatever was good enough for me was at least good enough for him to take
a crack at. I really laid down the law to that mouse. I let him mull
over it for a while and then I pushed cheese through the bars until his
tummy was round like a ping-pong ball. Then I let him go.

There was no sign of Abernathy for a couple of days after that. Then I
caught him again; but since he had stolen nothing I let him off with a
word of warning—very friendly this time; I had been quite stern at
first, of course—and some more cheese. Inside of a week I was catching
him every other night, and the only trouble I ever had with him was one
time when I baited the trap and left it closed. He couldn’t get in to
the cheese and he just raised Cain until I woke up and let him in. After
that I knew good relations had been established and I did without the
trap and just left cheese out for him. At first he wouldn’t take the
cheese unless it was in the trap, but he got so he trusted me and would
take it lying out on the floor. I had long since warned him about the
poisoned food that the neighbors might leave out for him, and I think he
was properly scared. Anyhow, we got along famously.

So here was Gloria, absolutely petrified, and in the middle of the floor
in the front room was Abernathy, twinkling his nose and rubbing his
hands together. In the middle of my bellow of laughter, I had a severe
qualm of conscience. Abernathy had had no cheese since the day before
yesterday! _Sic semper amoris_. I had been fretting so much over Gloria
that I had overlooked my responsibilities.

“Darling, I’ll take care of him,” I said reassuringly to Gloria. I led
her to an easy-chair and went after Abernathy. I have a noise I make by
pressing my tongue against my front teeth—a sort of a squishy-squeaky
noise, which I always made when I gave cheese to Abernathy. He ran right
over toward me, saw Gloria, hesitated, gave a “the hell with it” flirt
with his tail, turned to me and ran up my pants-leg.

The outside, fortunately.

Then he hugged himself tight into my palm while I rummaged in the icebox
with my other hand for his cheese. He didn’t snatch at it, either, until
he let me look at his ears again. You never saw such beautiful ears in
your life. I gave him the cheese, and broke off another piece for his
dessert, and set him in the corner by the sink. Then I went back to
Gloria, who had been watching me, big-eyed and trembling.

“Leo—how can you _touch_ it?”

“Makes nice touching. Didn’t you ever touch a mouse?”

She shuddered, looking at me as if I were Horatio just back from the
bridge. “I can’t stand them.”

“Mice? Don’t tell me that you, of all people, really and truly have the
traditional Victorian mouse phobia!”

“Don’t laugh at me,” she said weakly. “It isn’t only mice. It’s any
little animal—frogs and lizards and even kittens and puppies. I like big
dogs and cats and horses. But somehow—” She trembled again. “If I hear
anything like little claws running across the floor, or see small things
scuttling around the walls, it drives me crazy.”

I goggled. “If you hear—hey; it’s a good thing you didn’t stay another
hour last night, then.”

“Last night?” Then, “Last night …” she said, in a totally different
voice, with her eyes looking inward and happy. She chuckled. “I was
telling—Arthur about that little phobia of mine last night.”

If I had thought my masterful handling of the mouse was going to do any
good, apparently I was mistaken. “You better shove off,” I said
bitterly. “Arthur might be waiting.”

“Yes,” she said, without any particular annoyance, “he might. Goodbye,
Leo.”

“Goodbye.”

Nobody said anything for a time.

“Well,” she said, “goodbye.”

“Yes,” I said, “I’ll call you.”

“Do that,” she said, and went out.

I sat still on the couch for a long time, trying to get used to it.
Wishful thinking was no good; I knew that. Something had happened
between us. Mostly, its name was Arthur. The thing I couldn’t understand
was how he ever got a show, the way things were between Gloria and me.
In all my life, in all my reading, I had never heard of such a complete
fusion of individuals. We both felt it when we met; it had had no chance
to get old. Arthur was up against some phenomenal competition; for one
thing that was certain was that Gloria reciprocated my feelings
perfectly, and one of my feelings was faith. I could understand—if I
tried hard—how another man might overcome this hold, or that hold, which
I had on her. There are smarter men than I, better-looking ones,
stronger ones. Any of several of those items could go by the board, and
leave us untouched.

But not faith! Not that! It was too big; nothing else we had was
important enough to compensate for a loss of faith.

I got up to turn on the light, and slipped. The floor was wet. Not only
was it wet; it was soft. I floundered to the seven-way lamp and cranked
both switches all the way around.

The room was covered with tapioca. Ankle-deep on the floor, inches deep
on the chairs and the couch.

“She’s thinking about it now,” said the head. Only it wasn’t a head this
time. It was a flaccid mass of folded tissue. In it I could see pulsing
blood vessels. My stomach squirmed.

“Sorry. I’m out of focus.” The disgusting thing—a sectioned brain,
apparently—moved closer to me and became a face.

I lifted a foot out of the gummy mass, shook it, and put it back in
again. “I’m glad she’s gone,” I said hoarsely.

“Are you afraid of the stuff?”

“No!” I said. “Of course not!”

“It will go away,” said the head. “Listen; I’m sorry to tell you; it
isn’t syzygy. You’re done, son.”

“What isn’t syzygy?” I demanded. “And what is syzygy?”

“Arthur. The whole business with Arthur.”

“Go away,” I gritted. “Talk sense, or go away. Preferably—go away.”

The head shook from side to side, and its expression was gentle. “Give
up,” it said. “Call it quits. Remember what was good, and fade out.”

“You’re no good to me,” ’ I muttered, and waded over to the book case. I
got out a dictionary, glowering at the head, which now was registering a
mixture of pity and amusement

Abruptly, the tapioca disappeared.

I leafed through the book. Sizable, sizar, size, sizzle—“Try S-Y,”
prompted the head.

I glared at it and went over to the S-Y’s. Systemize, systole—

“Here it is,” I said, triumphantly. “The last word in the S section.” I
read from the book. “ ‘Syzygy—either of the points at which the moon is
most nearly in line with the earth and the sun, as when it is new or
full.’ What are you trying to tell me—that I’m caught in the middle of
some astrological mumbo-jumbo?”

“Certainly not,” it snapped. “I will tell you, however, that if that’s
all your dictionary says, it’s not a very good one.” It vanished.

“But—” I said vaguely. I went back to the dictionary. That’s all it had
to say about syzygy. Shaking, I replaced it.

Something cat-sized and furry hurtled through the air, clawed at my
shoulder. I startled, backed into my record cabinet and landed with a
crash on the middle of my back in the doorway. The thing leaped from me
to the couch and sat up, curling a long wide tail against its back and
regarding me with its jewelled eyes. A squirrel.

“Well, hello!” I said, getting to my knees and then to my feet. “Where
on earth did you come from?”

The squirrel, with the instantaneous motion of its kind, dived to the
edge of the couch and froze with its four legs wide apart, head up, tail
describing exactly its recent trajectory, and ready to take off
instantly in any direction including up. I looked at it with some
puzzlement. “I’ll go see if I have any walnuts,” I told it. I moved
toward the archway, and as I did so the squirrel leaped at me. I threw
up a hand to protect my face. The squirrel struck my shoulder again and
leaped from it—

And as far as I know it leaped into the fourth dimension or somewhere.
For I searched under and into every bed, chair, closet, cupboard, and
shelf in the house, and could find no sign of anything that even looked
like a squirrel. It was gone as completely as the masses of tapioca.…

Tapioca! What had the head said about the tapioca? “She’s thinking about
it now.” _She_—Gloria, of course. This whole insane business was tied up
with Gloria in some way.

Gloria not only disliked tapioca—she was afraid of it.

I chewed on that for a while, and then looked at the clock. Gloria had
had time enough to get to the hotel. I ran to the phone, dialed.

“Hotel San Dragon,” said a chewing-gum voice.

“748, please,” I said urgently.

A couple of clicks. Then, “Hello?”

“Gloria,” I said. “Listen; I—”

“Oh, you. Listen—can you call me back later? I’m very busy.”

“I can and I will, but tell me something quickly: Are you afraid of
squirrels?”

Don’t tell me a shudder can’t be transmitted over a telephone wire. One
was that time, “I hate them. Call me back in about—”

“Why do you hate them?”

With exaggerated patience, she said carefully, “When I was a little
girl, I was feeding some pigeons and a squirrel jumped right up on my
shoulder and scared me half to death. Now, _please—_”

“Okay, okay,” I said. “I’ll speak to you later.” I hung up. She
shouldn’t talk to me that way. She had no right—

What was she doing in that hotel room, anyway?

I pushed the ugly thought down out of sight, and went and poured myself
a beer. Gloria is afraid of tapioca, I thought, and tapioca shows up
here. She is afraid of the sound of small animals’ feet, and I hear them
here. She is afraid of squirrels that jump on people, and I get a
squirrel that jumps on people.

That must all make some sense. Of course, I could take the easy way out,
and admit that I was crazy. But somehow, I was no longer so ready to
admit anything like that. Down deep inside, I made an agreement with
myself not to admit that until I had exhausted every other possibility.

A very foolish piece of business. See to it that you don’t do likewise.
It’s probably much smarter not to try to figure things out.

There was only one person who could straighten this whole crazy mess
out—since the head wouldn’t—and that was Gloria, I thought suddenly. I
realized, then, why I had not called all bets before now. I had been
afraid to jeopardize the thing that Gloria and I shared. Well, let’s
face it. We didn’t share it any longer. That admission helped.

I strode to the telephone, and dialed the hotel.

“Hotel San Dragon.”

“748, please.”

A moment’s silence. Then, “I’m sorry, sir. The party does not wish to be
disturbed.”

I stood there looking blankly at the phone, while pain swirled and
spiralled up inside me. I think that up to this moment I had treated the
whole thing as part sickness, part dream; this, somehow, brought it to a
sharp and agonizing focus. Nothing that she could have done could have
been so calculated and so cruel.

I cradled the receiver and headed for the door. Before I could reach it,
gray mists closed about me. For a moment I seemed to be on some sort of
a treadmill; I was walking, but I could not reach anything. Swiftly,
then, everything was normal.

“I must be in a pretty bad way,” I muttered. I shook my head. It was
incredible. I felt all right, though a little dizzy. I went to the door
and out.

The trip to the hotel was the worst kind of a nightmare. I could only
conclude that there was something strange and serious wrong with me,
completely aside from my fury and my hurt at Gloria. I kept running into
these blind spells, when everything about me took on an unreal aspect.
The light didn’t seem right. I passed people on the street who weren’t
there when I turned to look at them. I heard voices where there were no
people, and I saw people talking but couldn’t hear them. I overcame a
powerful impulse to go back home. I couldn’t go back; I knew it; I knew
I had to face whatever crazy thing was happening, and that Gloria had
something to do with it.

I caught a cab at last, though I’ll swear one of them disappeared just
as I was about to step into it. Must have been another of those blind
spells. After that it was easier. I slouched quivering in a corner of
the seat with my eyes closed.

I paid off the driver at the hotel and stumbled in through the revolving
doors. The hotel seemed much more solid than anything else since this
horrible business had started to happen to me. I started over to the
desk, determined to give some mad life-and-death message to the clerk to
break that torturing “do not disturb” order. I glanced into the coffee
room as I passed it and stopped dead.

She was in there, in a booth, with—with someone else. I couldn’t see
anything of the man but a glossy black head of hair and a thick, ruddy
neck. She was smiling at him, the smile that I thought had been born and
raised for me.

I stalked over to them, trembling. As I reached them, he half-rose,
leaned across the table, and kissed her.

“Arthur …” she breathed.

“That,” I said firmly, “will do.”

They did not move.

“Stop it!” I screamed. They did not move. Nothing moved, anywhere. It
was a tableau, a picture, a hellish frozen thing put there to tear me
apart.

“That’s all,” said a now-familiar voice, gently. “That kiss did it, son.
You’re through.” It was the head, but now he was a whole man. An
ordinary-looking, middle-sized creature he was, with a scrawny frame to
match his unimpressive middle-aged face. He perched on the edge of the
table, mercifully between me and that torturing kiss.

I ran to him, grasped his thin shoulders. “Tell me what it is,” I begged
him. “Tell me, if you know—and I think you know. Tell me!” I roared,
sinking my fingers into his flesh.

He put his hands up and laid them gently on my wrists, holding them
there until I quieted down a little. I let him go. “I _am_ sorry, son,”
he said. “I hoped you would figure it all out by yourself.”

“I tried,” I said. I looked around me. The grayness was closing in
again, and through it I could see the still figures of the people in the
coffee shop, all stopped in mid-action. It was one three-dimensional
frame of some unthinkable movie-film. I felt cold sweat all but squirt
from the pores of my face. “Where am I?” I shrieked.

“Please,” he soothed. “Take it easy, and I’ll tell you. Come over here
and sit down and relax. Close your eyes and don’t try to think. Just
listen.”

I did as he asked, and gradually I stopped shaking. He waited until he
felt that I was calm, and then began talking.

“There is a world of psychic things—call them living thought, call them
dreams if you like. Now, you know that of all animals, only human beings
can reach these psychic things. It was a biological accident. There is
something about humans which is tangent to this psychic world. Humans
have the power to open a gate between the two worlds. They can seldom
control the power; often they’re not aware of it. But when that gate is
opened, something materializes in the world of the humans. Imagination
itself is enough to do it. If you are hungry, down deep inside, for a
certain kind of woman, and if you picture her to yourself vividly
enough, such a gate might open, and there she’ll be. You can see her and
touch her; she’ll be little different from a real one.”

“But—there is a difference?”

“Yes, there is. She is not a separate thing from you. She is a part of
you. She is your product. That’s what I was driving at when I mentioned
parthenogenesis. It works like that.”

“Parthenogenesis—let’s see. That’s the process of reproducing without
fertilization, isn’t it?”

“That’s right. This ‘materialization’ of yours is a perfect parallel to
that. As I told you before, however, it is not a process with high
survival value. For one thing, it affords no chance to cross strains.
Unless a living creature can bring into itself other characteristics, it
must die out.”

“Then why don’t all parthenogenetic creatures die out?”

“There is a process used by which the very simple, one-celled forms of
life take care of that. Mind you,” he broke off suddenly, “I’m just
using all of this biological talk as symbolism. There are basic laws
that work in both worlds, that work equally on the high forms of life
and the low. Do you see?”

“I see. These are just examples. But go on about this process that the
parthenogenetic creatures use to mix their strains.”

“It’s very simple. Two of these organisms let their nuclei flow together
for a time. Then they separate and go their ways again. It isn’t a
reproductive process at all. It’s merely a way in which each may gain a
part of the other. It’s called—syzygy.”

“Oh,” I said. “That. But I still don’t—let me see. You mentioned it
first when that—that—”

“When Gloria met Arthur,” the man finished smoothly. “I said that if it
were syzygy, you’d be all right. Well, it wasn’t, as you saw for
yourself. The outside strain, even though it didn’t suit her as well as
you did, was too strong. You got hurt. Well, in the workings of really
basic laws, something always gets hurt.”

“What about you? Who are you?”

“I am somebody who has been through it, that’s all. You must understand
that my world is different from the one you remember. Time itself is
different. Though I started from a time perhaps thirty years away, I was
able to open a gate near you. Just a little one, of course. I did it so
that I could try to make you think this thing out in time. I believe
that if you could, you would have been spared all this. You might even
have been able to keep Gloria.”

“What’s it to you?”

“You don’t know, do you? You really don’t know?”

I opened my eyes and looked at him, and shook my head. “No, I don’t.
I—like you, old man.”

He chuckled. “That’s odd, you know. I don’t like me.”

I craned around and looked over at Gloria and her man, still frozen in
that strange kiss. “Will those dream people stay like that forever?”

“Dream people?”

“I suppose that’s what they are. You know, I’m a little proud of Gloria.
How I managed to dream up anything so—so lovely, I’ll never know.
I—hey—what’s the matter?”

“Didn’t you understand what I was telling you? Gloria is real. Gloria
goes on living. What you see over there is the thing that happened when
you were no longer a part of her. Leo: she dreamed _you!_”

I rose to my feet and put my fists on the table between us. “That’s a
lie,” I choked. “I’m—I’m me, damn you!”

“You’re a detailed dream, Leo, and a splendid job. You’re a piece of
sentient psyche from another world injection-molded into an ideal that
Gloria dreamed. Don’t try to be anything else. There aren’t many real
humans, Leo. Most of the world is populated by the dreams of a few of
them; didn’t you know, Leo? Why do you suppose that so few people you
met knew anything about the world as a whole? Why do you suppose that
humans keep their interests confined and their environments small? Most
of them aren’t humans at all, Leo!”

“I’m _me_,” I said stubbornly. “Gloria _couldn’t_ have thought of all of
me! Gloria can’t run a power shovel! Gloria can’t play a guitar! Gloria
doesn’t know anything about the circus foreman who sang, or the Finn
dynamite boss who was killed!”

“Of course not. Gloria only dreamed a kind of man who was the product of
those things, or things like them. Have you run a shovel since you met
her? You’d find that you couldn’t, if you really tried. You’ve played
guitar for no one but her since you met her. You’ve spent all your time
arranging music that no one will ever see or play!”

“I’m _not_ anybody’s dream!” I shouted. “I’m not. If I was an ideal of
hers, we would have stayed together. I failed with her, old man; don’t
you know that? She wanted me to be aggressive, and I wasn’t.”

He looked at me so sadly that I thought he was going to cry. “She wanted
you to _take_. You were a part of her, no human can take from himself.”

“She was deathly afraid of some things that didn’t bother me at all.
What about that?”

“The squirrels, and the sound of all the little feet? No, Leo; they were
baseless phobias, and she had the power to overcome any of them. She
never tried, but it was not difficult to create you without them.”

I stared at him. “Do you mean to—Old man, are there more like me,
really?”

“Many, many,” he sighed. “But few who cling to their nonexistent,
ghostly egos as you are doing.”

“Do the real people know what they are doing?”

“Very few of them. Very few. The world is full of people who feel
incomplete, people who have everything they can possibly want and yet
are unhappy, people who feel alone in a crowd. The world is mostly
peopled by ghosts.”

“But—the war! Roman history! The new car models! What about them?”

He shook his head again. “Some of it’s real, some not. It depends on
what the real humans want from moment to moment.”

I thought a minute, bitterly. Then I asked him, “What was that you said
about coming back in world-time, and looking through a little gateway at
things that had happened?”

He sighed. “If you _must_ hang on to the ego she gave you,” he said
wearily, “you’ll stay the way you are now. But you’ll age. It will take
you the equivalent of thirty or so years to find your way around in that
strange psychic world, for you will have to move and think like a human.
Why do you want to do that?”

I said, with determination, “I am going back, then, if it takes me a
century. I’m going to find me right after I met Gloria, and I’m going to
warn me in such a way that I’ll figure out a way to be with Gloria for
the rest of her life.”

He put his hands on my shoulders, and now there really were tears in his
eyes. “Oh, you poor kid,” he said.

I stared at him. Then, “What’s—your name, old man?”

“My name is Leo.”

“Oh,” I said. “Oh.”



THE BLUE LETTER


THEY SAT A dance out, finally, because her hair was sending dark
tendrils over the nape of her neck. They sat together in a wing chair
under the balcony, a chair just too big for one; and she pulled pins out
of her hair.

“Lovely,” he said. He touched it. “Lovely. I didn’t know it was so
long.”

She smiled, arching her body to see into the wall mirror around the tall
wing of the chair, and combed deftly.

“I have always—I’ve never—” he faltered. “I mean, women shouldn’t be
allowed to cut their hair.”

“Didn’t you say your wife has long hair?”

“Yes, she has, but not like that. She hasn’t cut it since I married her,
but it isn’t like that.”

The comb stopped, its teeth streaming little wakes like stones in a
painted waterfall. He looked into the mirror and saw her face there,
watching him gravely. She said, “Are you happy?”

He hesitated. None of his friends who had ever seen him with his wife
had ever asked that. It would be silly to ask that.

Before he could speak, the comb finished its stroke and she
half-whispered, “You said you were happy, while we were dancing.”

“Yes, I did. I was. I never danced with anyone like you. I never danced
as well.”

She bent her head, making a part, looking at the mirror upward through
her brows. “Your wife must be very good, judging by the way you dance.”

He almost shook his head. “She’s—She doesn’t enjoy it very much.”

She turned to him suddenly, with her eyes wide. They were green, and
ever so slightly slanted. The planes of her ivory face were subtly
distinct from one another. She spoke urgently, “She’ll be back soon,
won’t she? And then you and I will—Well, I’ll drop out, that’s all.
She’s two thousand miles away from here, because you had to come back
and make a new start alone. Well, you’ve made your new start, and it’s
not _right_ for you to be alone. Why can’t you—why can’t we take what we
want until she comes back?”

He didn’t know which of them moved, but suddenly their lips were
together, just barely touching. She closed her eyes, and her hair was
softly around his face. She turned her head slightly, stroking his lips
with hers, a kitten-paw touch and a high little sound spelled with m’s
escaped her. His shoulders and arms were rock-hard. His eyes closed too,
and then she twisted away from him and to her feet, laughing. She stood
before the mirror, rapidly twisting her hair up in two great swept-back
wings. She was on tiptoe as she worked, stretching tautly, and he knew
he would never forget her as long as he lived.

Later, he was in his room alone, wondering why he had given the
taxi-driver her address first, wondering why he had refused the nightcap
she offered, and knowing that it was because ultimately he would tell
his wife about it, and that would be good as long as it was not
unbeautiful in the telling.

There was a blue envelope on the floor under the maildrop. He picked it
up, smiled at his wife’s rounded handwriting, opened it and stood there
until he had read it all. It was a very short letter, completely
screened of any emotion whatsoever, and it said “I want a divorce.” It
went on about not wanting any money from him, and that she was genuinely
sorry, but he certainly realized that the separation consisted of more
than eight months and two thousand miles. It said that they both had
known for a long time that he would go farther and faster alone, and it
thanked him for those good years. It was utterly sincere and
irrevocable, or she wouldn’t have written it.

He laid the letter carefully on the table and removed his overcoat and
hung it up. Then he went to the telephone and dialed.

“Yes?”

“I hope I didn’t wake you. I just got a letter from my wife. Listen.” He
read it to her. There was such a long silence that he thought she had
hung up. “Hello?”

Surprisingly, she said, “I can’t see your face. I have my eyes closed
tight and I am listening to your voice, but I’ve never seen your face
like that.” She stopped, and he could hear her breathing. She said, “Are
you glad?’

“Well, of course.”

“I’m coming over.”

“But you c—”

“Shush,” she said, and hung up.

He cradled the telephone, picked up the letter and read it again. At
last he smiled.

It was all right. It was all perfectly all right. Obviously a
change-partners deal was indicated. Nobody need be hurt. A pity,
possibly—funny little words he and his wife had made up together, little
tricks they used to play on each other, a way they had of saying good
night. Pawing the air and gnashings of the teeth could be left to the
uncivilized. He’d be all right. Nice of her to make the break so quick
and clean. Change partners. All right; make it a double ceremony. The
whole thing was beautifully timed.

He was suddenly conscious of perfume, for a little clung to his cheek.
He thought carefully of his wife, and then of the girl, and the
comparison pleased him. He moved about, emptying an ashtray,
straightening the cover of the studio couch, learning as he moved how to
turn his head to catch the elusive fragrance of the perfume. He was
still smiling when the padded knock sounded.

“Come in.”

She was inside the room immediately, and the door was closed, with her
hands behind her on the knob. “You poor darling,” she said softly, and
came toward him.

Puzzlement swirled in him. Sorry. She was _sorry_ for him, as if
something bad had happened.

She looked up into his face, and put her hands on his chest.

She said, “Didn’t you know?”

“Not consciously. Not until tonight.” He waved at the letter. “But it’s
all right. It’s all perfectly all right.”

“And she just let you have it … Just like that. What a rotten, bitchy
thing to do!”

He watched her face, full of pity and passion, and he saw it go
questioning. Slowly, fear crept into her eyes. She backed away from him.
She opened her mouth but he said “Get out.” “Get out,” he said again,
and began to move. She turned and ran, and when the door closed, he
sighed. He was all twisted inside the way her face was twisted.

He slumped to the couch. He sat that way all night without moving.



WHAM BOP!


IT’S THE KIND of thing you wonder about, so I went and asked him at the
end of the number.

“How do you get to whip the skins in the big time?” he repeated, and
grinned at his sweating combo. He racked his sticks. “Take ten,” he
called to the boys, and then turned back to me. “Lead me to a cola with
the emphasis on ice, and I’ll tell you.”

He was a big fellow, red-headed, with wide shoulders and a good grin. We
got off the stand and around to the tables. He buried his mouth amongst
the ice cubes for a long moment and came up out of it with a sigh. It
was hot that night.

“Saw you stompin’,” he said. “You’re a cat.”

“You and your drums got me to jumping,” I smiled back.

“Thanks,” he said, and I could see he meant it. “Now I’ll tell you how a
guy can beat his way to the top.” He leaned back and, as he spoke,
looked at something over my head and quite a while ago.

“The very first combo I had,” he said, “was a five-man group—clarinet,
alto, trumpet, guitar, and me. No piano—we were strictly portable. We
were all in school and playing this river resort, partly for peanuts,
mostly for kicks. After the first couple of weeks, we began to drag a
pretty faithful public. Word got around the way it does, and pretty soon
the lot began to fill up with out-of-town license plates. I can’t say
that any one of us was really terrific. Thing was, we meshed. When we
rode it, we rode it together. It was fine.

“Things went on that way for a while, and we were in pretty solid. There
was no talk of bringing in any pro outfit, anyhow.… Oh, I might as well
come out with it. This river place I’m talking about, it was my uncle’s.
See what I mean? But don’t get me wrong. We delivered. At first, anyhow.

“Maybe I got a little cocky, after a while. I began to circulate among
the customers a little. Nothing wrong with that. Joey Harris was on
guitar. Very solid. That was rhythm enough for some numbers, and the
cats liked the drums all the better after I’d given ’em a miss for a
while. Anyhow, I planned to go places in the music business, and I
figured one good way to do it was to play the customers person-to-person
as well as from the stand. Dig me?

“Well, you can go too far with that kind of horseplay. It had to rain
sometime, and when it did, and we drew a small crowd, I couldn’t see the
sense in knocking myself out. You might remember that—too much
glad-handing is slow poison.

“One night it was like that—ten or a dozen couples and the band with or
without me was strictly so-what. I was down in the far corner telling
somebody about myself when I heard the drums.

“It was a kid called Manuel. Black-haired sleepy-looking guy, sort of
round-shouldered and slow. He was crouching in my saddle up there over
the suitcases, running over the trap with the brushes. Nothing loud, you
know. Easy. Easy like breathing. I just relaxed. I knew the kid. His old
man had a motor-launch downstream on charter. They fished some. Manuel
used to hang around a lot, watching me on the drums. He knew what he’d
get if he tore a head on me. He was careful. And besides, there was
nothing going on.

“He got his foot on the bass pedal and filled out his beat some. Before
I knew it the cats were out on the floor, letting the chairs get cold
for the first time that evening. Well, that was all right with me too. I
like to see people enjoying themselves. All hands were cutting it, and
my trumpet man, Stompy Pearle, was sitting up straight for the first
time that night.

“There was a change in the tone of the drums, but not the beat. Manuel
had dropped the brushes and grabbed the sticks. And without seeming to
make a move, he brought a lick out of those drums that was like a bucket
of gas on a coal fire. It brought me right up on my feet, and Brot
Hoffman—well, you could see him shiver from the far end of the floor. He
pointed his clarinet at the roof and blew out a climbing riff that’d
make your hair curl. It got Stompy too; he stood up on his chair and
caught the riff at the very top and brought it back down again with the
trumpet. Joey began stroking all the upbeats—something he only did when
he was really sent. Every gate in the place said ‘Ah-h-h’ at the same
time and stopped dancing.

“They stopped dancing! What was going on on the stand was just frantic,
but nobody moved. They just stood there and soaked it in, with their
mouths and nostrils open. Something went _pop!_ inside my head. I was
wild. I’d had ’em driving before, but I’d never seen the lid blow off
like that.

“I went up to the stand and back to the drums. I nudged Manuel. He was
adrift. I nudged him again. He looked up, still working, waking slowly.
I said, ‘I’ll take it.’ He slid out, and I slid in. I got the sticks
from him without missing a beat.”

Red brought his gaze down to me and shook his head slowly. “You’re a
cat. You know. You’re playing along, all of a sudden something happens,
the whole place is twenty-two thousand feet altitude—and all of a sudden
you’re back to earth. You don’t know when or why it starts or stops, but
there it is.” He shrugged. “That’s what happened when I took over.” He
turned a thumb down. “Like that. The boys fumbled it for a measure and
then slipped into our usual arrangement of ‘Whispering.’ But it was all
gone. I wanted to take them out one by one and husk them. I didn’t like
it a bit. I was mad clear through.

“We finished it somehow. On the last beat I threw my sticks on the floor
and beckoned to Manuel. When you want to tear into somebody, call them
over. Don’t go to them. I waited until he was standing by me. He looked
very worried and anxious. I guess he could see I was mad. Joey Harris
put down his guitar and came over too. I said to Manuel, ‘Who told you
to horn in?’

“Manuel just stood there licking his lips. Joey spoke up. ‘I told him to
sit in, Red,’ he said. ‘Somebody around here’s got to play drums once in
a while.’

“I told him I’d talk to him later. I said to Manuel, ‘Look, bud, you
know you’re a little out of your element around here.’ He just looked at
me, sort of squinching up his face. He knew what I meant. Joey and Brot
and Stompy and Fred—that was the guy playing alto—and me, we were all
from the resort. There were no tracks around there, but this Manuel, he
was from the wrong side of them. Dig me? I said, ‘Maybe you ought to go
graze in your own pasture.’ ”

Red went back to his cola. I watched him. I didn’t quite know what to
think. I said, “I thought you were going to tell me how a drummer gets
into the real big time.”

He flashed that grin at me. “Stick around. I’ll get to it. What it
amounts to, a guy’s got to be good. Then, he’s got to be smart. He’s got
to be smarter than anyone who tries to crowd into his spot. Well …

“Joey and Brot were still hanging around. They watched Manuel climb off
the stand and amble across the floor and out. Then they looked back at
me. They just stood there. Nobody said anything. Well, I guess they
didn’t like it. But a guy’s got to look out for himself. Those skins
were important to me, see?

“Those guys surprised me after that. They sort of ganged up on me. No
kidding! Can you tie it? Wasn’t much they could do. There was nowhere
else to play around there, and they knew that a word from me would bring
another outfit into the resort. I had ’em, but all the same they laid
down some law. I was supposed to keep hands off Manuel. I was even
supposed to let him sit in sometimes.

“I okayed that. Yeah. It wasn’t backing down. It was just being smart. I
told them that I had nothing against the kid, and he could sit in any
time things were slow, like tonight. But not when we had a mob. That was
all right with them. They wanted Manuel’s kind of drums for themselves,
not for the customers. We dropped it there. After that we played a lot
of music, and if I didn’t get much company from them, I got along all
right without it. One of them—I don’t know who—went down to see Manuel
the next day and explained things to him. He showed up every once in a
while after that, when he wasn’t working the launch with his father. Sat
in a few times, too. But never unless I told him he could, and that was
only often enough to keep the boys happy. He was good. I had to admit
that. Had the easiest attack I’ve ever seen. Strictly relaxed. A simple,
shuffling stroke that left you cold—you thought—until you felt the
goose-pimples.

“Couple weeks after that there was a picnic and dance down at the
Island. It was two miles downstream and out toward the middle of the
river. A nice place. Pavilion, tables—you know. Most of the customers
would go down in their boats. The resort hired the old launch to take
care of the overflow.

“I remember it struck me as peculiar that Fred came to me before
rehearsal one afternoon and mentioned Manuel. Wanted to know if the kid
could sit in at the picnic. I said sure. Why not? We wouldn’t be drawing
anything much but local people. He seemed happier about it than he let
on. I forgot about it.

“It was Joey that gave me the first idea that there would be anything
special about that picnic. As I said, Joey played very solid guitar. He
could read, but mostly he ran his progressions by the seat of his pants.
He broke into the middle of ‘One O’clock Jump’ and wanted to know about
that modulation in the bridge section, and should he go through an
augmented fifth instead of right from his tonal seventh to the dominant.
Stop popping your eyes! Guitar players all talk like that. I said,
‘Let’s hear it.’ He ran it off both ways: the new way was strictly from
Roxy. I told him yes, if he liked it that way. I trusted him. Next thing
I know Fred is up, blushing like he used to do. His mouth was almost
useless to him without a saxophone in it, he was so shy. Seems he’d
worked out some counterpoint with Stompy and Brot. Could they run it
off? Well, I didn’t know they’d been rehearsing among themselves, but
why should I kick? I put out an ear and they tore off into this thing.

“It was a sort of fugue. It was like braiding three colors of rope
together, so that you get one strand but you can follow each color of
each rope all through it. I’d never heard anything like it before. Not
from a jive combo, anyhow. It killed me.

“When they were finished, nobody said much. Joey was sitting back with
his eyes rolled up, making little noises with his tongue.

“ ‘Fred.’ I said when I got my breath back, ‘you’ve been sneaking into
dark corners, that’s what you’ve been doing, and you’ve been listening
to Bach. You’re a Persian, Fred, a long-haired cat. It’s beautiful. It’s
gorgeous. I’ll buy it.’

“We ran it off again while I worked the drums in. At first I accented it
hard, but the three of them looked as if I was cussing in Sunday school,
and Joey held his hands up in front of his face. I got the idea and
dropped off to an easy brush, just a low-down walkaway behind all that
precision stuff. It was fine. And I still didn’t get the idea. Why
should they take all that trouble for a picnic date?

“I got the idea the day before the picnic, though, but good—and I went
up in a mushroom-shaped cloud. My uncle got hold of me and told me to
play some really good music at the Island. I said we always played good
music. He took out his toothpick and told me no, this was important, or
it could be. Seems that one of the out-of-town guests was Phil Drago.
The Marshalls were bringing him.

“Phil Drago! Can you imagine how I felt?” asked Red.

“No,” I said. “Who is he?”

“One of the big wheels in the music business. The public knows all the
name bands, but the real cats know who plays what instruments how well.
Guys like Drago, though, they never get a spotlight. They’re the
arrangers and orchestra managers. They do the styling, making one
orchestra sound different from another. And mostly, what they say goes.
Drago, he was with the King of Swing himself that year.”

It began to dawn on me. “And that was the year that the King’s drummer
got into that—”

He nodded. “That was the year the King was looking for a new drummer.
And you know how he used to pick up players from the bush. Man, this was
it!

“Well,” he went on, “first of all, I wanted to tear into that gang of
mine and rip ’em apart piece by each. That bunch of so-and-so’s had
probably known about this for days. Hence all that frantic arranging.
Hence something else—I’d been caught unawares and made a promise to let
Manuel sit in. I saw the whole pitch. If I laid down the law, they’d
give me the big Or Else. They knew the spot I was on. If I was going to
play the kind of drums Phil Drago would notice, I’d need a group to back
me up, and if I didn’t let Manuel get in a couple of licks, I wouldn’t
have a group.

“Now, you were asking me how a guy gets to the top in this business.
Remember what I said? You’ve got to be good in your work. And you’ve got
to be smarter than anybody who has his eye on what you want.”

“I’m making a list,” I said. “What’s the next item?”

“The next item,” said Red, and made the grin again, “is to be quite sure
of what it is you want, and then to use any material at hand to get it.
And I mean _any_.”

“How low can you get?” I muttered. I was embarrassed when I realized
he’d heard me. He just laughed.

“How ambitious can you get?” he said, and went on with his story.

“As I told you, this Manuel character helped his father with a launch.
It was a busted-up old scow, long ago retired from harbor service, where
it used to carry sailors out to ships at anchor and stuff like that.
Maybe you won’t blame me too much for what I did. Manuel was a darn good
mechanic and knew his boats. I really believed that he’d be happier
sticking with it. He might get a disappointment with the drum deal, but
he’d get over it. As for me, I felt that the drums were my high talent.
I could justify what I did—to myself, anyway. And it was easy to do. You
see, Manuel and his father were the only ones in miles who held inland
waterway licenses. The launch had to run that night. It was chartered by
the resort, and they needed the dough. If Manuel’s father couldn’t run
it, Manuel would have to. You don’t take chances with the Steamboat
Commission.” He shrugged. “Manuel’s father wasn’t there to run the
launch that night. He was out of town. He got a telegram from his
sister. She was awful sick. Or at least that’s what it said in the
telegram—that I sent.” He smiled.

I said, in a certain way, “Well.”

Red gripped my arm. “Wait now. Let me tell you what happened. This is
something you’ve got to hear all of, or not at all.”

I settled back. “Go ahead.”

“It couldn’t have been timed better. Manuel’s father worked the whole
early part of the evening. He was at the wheel of the launch when it
took the combo to the picnic. I even left Manuel to set out the drums
and warm himself up while I circulated, and while the old man went back
for another load. My guys warmed up with Manuel, and they were raring to
go. It was on that trip that the old man found the telegram waiting for
him. He came back to the Island, picked up Manuel, and turned the launch
over to him. And Phil Drago hadn’t showed yet!

“We played some great stuff. The boys were feeling good because they
thought they’d put one over on me, and I felt good for reasons of my
own.

“The Marshalls arrived and I had a good gander at the little guy with
them. Mousy-looking fellow, with hair like an unmade bed and great big,
intelligent-looking eyes. He didn’t say much to anyone. Just listened.
We swung into an oldie—‘Sweet Sue,’ I think it was—and gave it a
treatment. It was fine. Afterward I told the boys to take fifteen. I
didn’t want to rush it. Slip it to him a little at a time. I circulated
some, but had the sense to stay away from Drago. Playing sells these
guys, not personality.

“In the meantime Fred went down to the dock to find out what was keeping
Manuel. When he came back his, chin was dragging. He slouched up to the
stand and broke the news that Manuel would have to work all evening.

“You could see the heart go out of those boys. It was as if something
dropped out of them and rolled under the stand. The rest of that evening
was a nightmare. Those guys played tall and green. Nobody fluffed
anything, understand. But there was no jump. I did my best on the skins,
and only succeeded in putting the drums front and center with nothing to
back them up. I felt foolish, and I guess I looked it.

“I called a huddle in the second intermission. I said, ‘What in time is
the matter with you guys?’

“Joey said, ‘Maybe we’d be better if you’d get that grin off your puss.
What’ve you got to be so happy about?’

“Joey didn’t usually talk like that. I was about to pin his ears back
when I noticed the look on his face. I shrugged it off. Time enough to
start trouble when we were back at the resort. I said, ‘We’re serving it
up cream-style to that orchestra scout over there.’ It was the first
time we’d mentioned Drago right out, though I knew they’d all had their
heads together. I said, ‘What say we riff off that fugue-break of
Fred’s? That’ll send the whole place airmail special.’

“Fred looked up from where he’d been diddling with the spit-valve on his
alto horn. He didn’t blush, either. He said, ‘No.’ Just like that.

“I looked around at the rest of them, and I could see that they’d go
along with him. ‘For Pete’s sake, why not?’

“Brot Hoffman shrugged his shoulders. He said, ‘It takes a special kind
of drums.’

“I got my mouth open to say something and then closed it again. I
suddenly knew what he meant. That low-down, easy walkaway wasn’t my
style at all. Fred had worked out that fugue for Manuel.

“I didn’t say anything for a minute. This wasn’t the way I’d planned it
at all. On the other hand, I had half of what I wanted. Drago was not
going to hear Manuel. I was sore, but not sore enough to stop being
smart. I said, ‘Let’s get back to it. And try to sound at least like a
cylinder phonograph, will you?’

“It was the longest evening I ever sat through. It was awful. The music
was good enough to dance to. Period. Nobody ever got anywhere playing
music just good enough to dance to. Once I noticed the Marshalls making
get-up-and-go-home movements, and I saw Drago stop them. That was
encouraging, but not very. We just played it out, and played-out was the
way we sounded.

“At last, they were shutting the place down for the night and we were at
the dock with our cases, waiting while Manuel warped in his old ark. I
was so disgusted I almost forgot to be mad. The Marshalls and Drago came
down the duckboards. I could hear Drago talking. He was saying something
about being sorry to have kept them there so long. ‘That redhead was
playing very clean drums when we arrived. I was hoping to hear more of
it. A fluke, I guess.’ Oh, brother! Was it a fluke!

“Manuel tied up and we loaded aboard. I hated the looks of that launch
and the smell of it and the whole idea of getting near it. If it wasn’t
for that Manuel, why I’d be—I dunno. I was fit to blow a fuse. When he
came down the companion ladder—the seats were inside ranging around the
crummy old engine—and spoke to me, I barked at him. He said there wasn’t
enough room forward for all the instruments. Would I mind storing the
drums in the lock-up on the dock? He’d pick them up in the morning. I
told him to do whatever he wanted. He went away again.

“Drago was sitting across from me, talking quietly with the Marshalls.
It occurred to me to squeeze into the conversation and do myself some
good, but I didn’t have the heart for it.

“Manuel cast off and kicked the starter. The motor caught. Great
grovelin’ day, what a racket that was! Not loud. No. It sounded as if
every rev would be its last. I never had trusted the old barge, but this
trip it sounded really sick. Something the matter with the timing, it
seemed like. The first cylinder to fire let go with a sharp _wham_, and
the second barely popped, and the third and fourth just gasped. What
with that series of torturous sounds, over and over and over again, and
the intermittent _clip clop_ as the wheel took up the slack in the
steering lines, it was a fit finish to a dismal evening.

“The noise of that sick engine crawled in between my ears and curled up
there with every intention of spending the night. I looked around for
something—anything—to take my mind off it. All the guys were looking at
Drago.”

Red gulped down the last of his drink and spread his hands on the table.
“Ever watch a drummer really sending? Most of ’em talk it, especially
when they’re doing a lot of shifting. Sometimes they do it right out
loud while they work. Sounds crazy by itself, but it makes a pattern
that you can follow with your sticks. _Skiddle-d’wee, skiddle d’wat,
skwit-bap, skiddle-d’tat_,” he recited, tapping the table.

“Yes,” I said. “A lot of them do it.”

“Well,” said Red, “that’s what Drago was doing. His eyes were glazing
over and he was talking along with that deathbed motor. I followed it on
his lips. He had it just right:

_“ ‘Wham-bop, shillu, shillop_,

_Wham-bop, shillu, shillop.’_

“I looked around again. Joey’s hands were moving. Fred and Brot leaned
forward suddenly as if they’d been pulled by the same string. Stompy
just looked vacant. His three valve fingers trembled the way they do
when he’s clearing his horn for a high riff.

_“Wham-bop, shillu, shillop_,

_Wham-bop, shillu, shillop …_

“I tell you, it rocked part of you right to sleep and brought something
else in you wide, wide awake.

“All of a sudden there was another noise in with it. The steering lines,
whipping up slack as the wheel was twitched from side to side—not enough
to turn the rudder, mind you; just sufficient to slap the lines against
the inside of the guards—and mixed up in it was the very gentle tapping
of feet on the deck overhead and a little aft, by the wheelpost. One
toe, one heel. And all the while this motor noise backing it. Subtle?
Hey! I’ll try to talk it for you:

_“Wham-bop, shillu, shillop_,

_Wham-bop, shillu, shillop …_

(And with the feet and the ropes:)

_Tickety wham-bop t’tick shillop_,

_T’tickety bop shillu, shillop_,

_Tack bop t’tock shillop …_

“Drago sat there soaking it up. He put his palms together very carefully
and began to squeeze, and began to smile a little too. Brot gasped
something about ‘That’s for me!’ and dove for the forepeak where the
instruments were stowed. He tore his clarinet out of its case, just
dropping the case where he stood—and Brot was usually a very careful
character. He got the reed into his face and ripped out that incredible
climbing gliss that had been torn out of him the first night Manuel
played the drums. And all the while that motor was beating it out—

_“Wham-bop, shillu, shillop …_

(And Brot rode in:)

_Hoodle-de-dop, bop, d’dewdy …_

“Stompy and Joey beat their heads together on their way to the
fore-peak. The sound of it faded right in on an upbeat. It was
beautiful. Brot carried that frantic solo until he saw Stompy with the
brass on the side of his mouth, the trumpet bell turned upward like a
nestling waiting for breakfast. Brot blew out that hand-over-rail wail
and the trumpet went right up after it, caught it, brought it back down
again and threw it to the motor like:

_“Wham-bop, shillu, shillop …_

(and then Stompy:)

_“Reet! Bop, rootu shillop_

_Wham-tareet shillu tareet …_

“And by that time Joey had undressed his guitar and was throwing a
chord-circle around Stompy’s theme. Minors, they were—A minor, D
seventh, B flat minor, A again, like:

“_Whum-bum, shillum, shillop …_

“It was heartbeat, Jack. It was murder. It was riff-marole, but brutal.
_And me without my drums!_

“Aw, I had to admit it. Nobody there needed drums. Fred was in there
now, with a quiet, bubbling sort of trill on the sax that took the
clarinet and trumpet down to it, and the three of them stayed low that
way, sort of tumbling over each other and getting fainter and fainter.
And then it came.

“The wheelpost was behind us and over our heads—a bronze casting, kind
of an inverted funnel. It had an opening at deck level, so that in
effect it was an upside-down megaphone. Out of that hole came the
shuffle:

_“Sh-shuff-shop, shillil, sh’shuff_,

_Shoosh! Shop, shill, shup …_

“The real walkaway. Fred opened a corner of his mouth away from the sax
and came out with the oddest squeak I’ve ever heard from a human being.
Then he set his lips around that alto horn and tumbled on into the first
notes of his fugue in re-bop, with Stompy and Brot right in there. They
played it in technicolor, but through a sepia filter, if you dig me. Low
and easy, bright but quiet. Drago’s eyes rolled right up out of sight. I
had to see that shuffashuff done. That was backbone stuff, man.

“I ducked out of the cabin and looked up at the wheel. Manuel was up
there, staring ahead at the channel lights, and scrubbing the wheelpost
with two big wire brushes, the kind you use to dress rusty iron before
you red-lead it. I could see the gleam of brass under the brushes where
they’d taken the paint off. But his hands were light as—as—did you ever
see a cat drink milk? You know how his whiskers twitch on the surface?
It was like that. I went back below and sat down and pictured those
hands while my eyes were closed. Oh, a handsome drive those hands had!”

They wound up that fugue and came out even, Joey coming in powerfully on
a sixth chord that brought everything over, out and clear. After that
everybody just sat, and there was only the motor left:

_“Wham bop, shillu, shillop …_

“Then it slowed and cut, and we bumped the dock gently. We still sat. I
think we were waiting for Drago to say something. He finally whispered,
‘Who _is_ that?’ as he thumbed the overhead.

“I called, ‘Manuel!’

“He came down, looking as if he had stolen something. He said, ‘What,
Red?’ I pointed at Drago. Drago looked at the kid as if he was afraid
he’d disappear in a puff of smoke. He said, ‘You come and see me
tomorrow. Now—don’t anybody say anything.’ He turned to look at the
engine, murmured, _‘Wham-bop’_ and went up the ladder like a
sleepwalker, with the Marshalls behind him.

“I said, ‘Beat it, you guys. I want to talk to Manuel.’ Fred said, ‘Oh,
no!’

“Everybody looked at me. ‘What do you take me for?’ I bellowed at them.
‘I’m not going to do anything!’ Joey came up and looked into my face.
Joey always seemed to understand things. He said, ‘Come on, fellows.’
They packed their instruments and went ashore.

“Manuel said, ‘I thought you’d be sore.’

“I punched him on the shoulder, but easy, easy. I said, ‘Manny, whatever
else I might be, I guess I’m a cat first. You’re a genius.’

“He looked like he was going to cry. ‘You’re being real big about this,’
he told me. ‘I’m sorry, Red.’

“That flattened me. ‘Sorry? What have you got to be sorry for?’

“He gulped. He beckoned me down below. He leaned over the engine and
snapped off the distributor cap. ‘When you ride an old barge like this
as long as I have, that beat gets into your blood.’ He lifted out a
little crescent of gasket material. ‘You see? When the rotor came around
to here, this stuff lifted it enough to give bad contact to two
cylinders and delay the third until it was half-flooded when it fired.’
He looked at me. ‘I even made you leave your drums at the Island. Aren’t
you sore, Red?’

“Well, I just sat down and laughed until I got lost. When I sobered up I
grabbed his hand and shook it. Easy, though. You treat hands like that
with respect. I said, ‘Manny, you sit in every minute you can, hear?
There are things I want to learn about drums.’ ”

Red was quiet a minute, grinning. “He never did, though. Drago took him
to New York the next day. He played with the King only one season, and
then went out with a band of his own. His name’s Reskin.”

“What?” I shouted. “Riff Reskin?”

Red nodded. “Manuel ‘Riff’ Reskin. Six hundred thousand phonograph
records last year. That’s the boy.”

Somebody called from the stand. Red got up, swung back to me, while I
was trying to ravel up my gaping jaw. “Hey,” he said. “That list of
yours. Remember it?”

“Huh? Oh. I think so.” I ticked them off. “To get into the big time,
you’ve got to be good at your spot; you’ve got to be smarter than anyone
who’s after what you want; and you’ve got to be able to use the
materials at hand.” And I laughed with him.

He went back to the stand. He had a drum break in the next number. He
did it with a brush and a stick. It went,

_Wham-bop, shillu, shillop …_

And the joint rocked, really rocked—like a boat.



WELL SPICED


TAMARISK JUST HAPPENED. Some forgotten Conestoga cap’n had chosen the
Tamarisk hollow as a route down the valley, rather than the exactly
similar hollow on the other side of the rise. The town’s first building
appeared when one Pericles Zapappas sold the oxen which hauled his chuck
wagon. The old wagon, hub-deep in the sandy soil, was the nucleus.
Because it was there, it was logical to set up a general supplies shack
near it, and because of the shack and its increasing stock, settlers
took to the nearby lush foothills, knowing they had a trading place.
With the settlers came the helpers and the hangers-on, the blacksmiths
and the gamblers, the assay office and the livery stable and the hotel.

Pericles Zapappas stuck with Tamarisk. He hadn’t planned to; he hadn’t
planned not to. It was just that there were so many people to feed—and
he liked feeding people. He liked to see the tin plates, and later, the
thick china ones, mopped clean with great chunks of sourdough bread, or
the muscular black loaves he baked himself. The old wagon soon sported a
canvas awning which became a mess tent which gradually acquired wooden
walls and a tin roof, and as the busy years and the busy wagon trains
passed, there was a new building with a real kitchen, rows of iron
skillets, three glass sugar bowls, and a spittoon.

Pericles was the only fixture that showed no change. He was a grizzled,
tubby little man, with a complexion the color of a frankfurter and a
skin like a silk pillow slip that has been slept on for three hot
nights. His eyes were round, clear, and blue, giving the impression of
red-hot portholes into an ice box. He smiled often, never laughed, and
was always a little frightened—afraid that the meat wouldn’t arrive,
that the coffee would boil, that a customer wasn’t getting enough to
eat. He absorbed insults and compliments with the same gentle smile and
the same shuffling backward retreat, as from royalty.

Tamarisk was good to live in, as such places go, when the wind was from
the hills. But when it came panting up from the desert with fire and
salt on its breath, the town shimmered and crackled and dried in it. It
was on such a day that Fellows stamped into Pericles’s place, and the
youth’s language was not one whit less blistering than the desert wind.
His profanity swirled in, all but sweeping Pericles off his precarious
perch on a serving table, where he was hanging mesh bags of garlic,
strings of melon rind, and chains of herbs and barks to dry; for
Pericles was a great hand in the spice department.

“Feed me!” roared Fellows. “By God, likker won’t do fer this. Gimme some
o’ that slumgullion of yours, the kind that wallops you hot an’ then
smooths you off easy.”

Pericles climbed down and framed the kid in his round blue stare. “Hey
boy. Whatsa do—burn down you stable?”

“It’s thet money-jinglin’ Eastern toad, Barstow,” spat the youngster.
“Him an’ his gunmen an’ his ‘fer th’ good of th’ country’!”

“Meest’ Barstow is crazy,” said Pericles mildly. ‘Tamarisk is a plenty
big town for the valley. Whats ’e wan’ for to make a new one?”

Fellows folded himself into a creaky chair, knocking his holster clear
so that it swung as he sat. “Jest why he’s doin’ it don’t worry me right
now. It’s whut he’s doin’. You know what he done? He started a livery
stable over there. He ain’t got but four hosses, an’ nothing but a
drunked-up ol’ prospector to care for’m. But he’s _givin’_ ’em away! I
can’t charge a ranny prices like thet! Feed costs me, Peri, thet an’ a
hand to guard the place at night, what with hoss thieves an’ fire an’
all.”

Pericles, well within earshot, stirred his spices into the witches’ brew
he called slumgullion. “Meest’ Barstow dig a well,” he called.

“Yeh. I heerd about thet. Whut’s he aim to git from it—tamarisk roots?”

Pericles, tipping some of the precious fluid from a carboy mounted on a
pivoted frame, grunted, “Water, Fellows. He got it, also.”

“You mean to tell me he struck water over there?”

“He got town well. Cab Jenks, this man with piebal’ gelding, he come
tell me this morning.”

“Oh,” said Fellows, and it was an eloquent syllable. There was a recess
for thinking, and then he said, “Peri, if he’s got water, it ain’t no
good for Tamarisk.”

“Yes,” said Pericles. “No good.”

“What’s Tamarisk?” Fellows burst out after a troubled silence. “So many
shacks, so many people—what the hell. Let it go. It might’s well be a
ghost town, like Harriston or DuMoulin’s Gulch.”

“Yes,” said Pericles, coming around the partition with a deep, steaming
bowl of stew. “But—we build Tamarisk. You, you stable. Me, my place.
Gomez an’ he saddles. Trask an’ he cotton goods. Rogers an’ Hark an’
that ol’ fella Mickey Mack. Hm?”

“Yeh, Peri—but a _well!_ We ain’t got no well. We dug for’m twice, an’
you know what we got. Sweat, not water. We got to haul water a mile and
a half from Feegan’s Brook.” He dug into the stew as if he hated it,
which he did not. “How’d he know he’d strike water there?” he demanded
with his mouth full. “Builds six shacks,” he growled—quite an
achievement through that much stew, “an’ suddenly hits water in country
where they ain’t a water hole in ten miles, ’cept where the desert
drinks up Feegan’s Brook.”

“What’s about the spring, Fellows?”

“Spring? Oh—thet. Yeah. Four miles over the other way. Whyn’t he build
his town over by there, if he had to build a town?”

Pericles smiled—the smile he used instead of a laugh. “Spring in the
cliff. What trade he get by there? Bighorns? Rock squirrels?”

“I see what you mean. His place and Tamarisk sit smack in the middle of
the only two trade routes through here. Aw, mebbe you’re right, Peri.
Maybe he’s jest crazy.”

“Ask him,” said Pericles, in a slightly awed voice.

“Huh?” Fellows’s startled eyes swung from the Greek around to the door,
which was being blocked at the moment by several cubic feet of flabby
flesh, girdled by a too-new cartridge belt and topped with a city-made
Stetson. “Barstow!”

“Good morning, good morning,” said the heavy man, laughing what had been
described as a diddling laugh, “and how are the thriving burghers of
Tamarisk today?”

Fellows put down his spoon and hooked his thumbs in his belt, the
fingers of his left hand sliding down to check the gentle swinging of
his holster. His eyes were like cracks in a board as he took the
Easterner’s measure.

Barstow looked him up and down and turned a broad and insulting back.
“Mr. Zapappas,” he said unctuously. “Ahh. You’re looking well this
morning. How’s business?”

Pericles sidled behind a counter. He regarded Barstow without his smile.
“Business always good.”

“Splendid, splendid,” said Barstow heartily. “Glad to hear it. Make the
best of it while it lasts, I always say.” Then there was that laugh
again. Suddenly he turned to Fellows—so suddenly that the youngster
dropped his spoon and cursed viciously. “And how is the livery
business?”

“Good, no thanks to you,” snarled Fellows.

“Hey, Fellows, make no trouble in my place, huh?”

Barstow tittered. “There won’t be any trouble, Mr. Zapappas,” he said.
“Mr. Fellows is not familiar with—ah—modern business methods. Now, if he
would like to take over my stable, perhaps—”

“I’d jest as soon go back to ridin’ fence,” said Fellows evenly.

“That’s good! Ha ha! that’s very good. Young man, by the time Tamarisk
is a ghost city, I’ll own all the fences hereabouts, and you’ll have to
travel many a dry mile before you can hire out without my permission. Ha
ha! Better come in with me while you can. I could use a good—”

“Y’ won’t use me,” snapped Fellows.

Barstow shrugged, as if the movement were sufficient to send Fellows
into limbo and beyond, and turned back to the Greek. “It so happens, Mr.
Zapappas, that there is no eating place in Well City at the moment.”

“What’s you say, Well City?”

“Ah, yes, yes indeed. Well City it is, and Well City it will be. Ha! The
very name shows that it has a future. Tamarisk! That’s all anyone could
expect to find here—desert greens. Now, in Well City, there’s
water—good, pure water.”

“I heard,” said Fellows, looking out at the rolling desert and its
clumps of tamarisk.

Barstow ignored him, to hang his belly on the edge of the counter. “Now,
Mr. Zapappas—surely we can come to some agreement on a catering
establishment in Well City.”

Pericles shook his head with such timidity that the gesture was a mere
quiver of wattles.

“Now, now,” said Barstow heartily, “at least come over to look us over.
Well City’s going to be a great little place. I’m wrong. Well City _is_
a great little place. A foresighted businessman—”

“Ef it’s so nice yonder,” drawled Fellows, “why don’t you go on back to
it?”

Pericles recognized the tone. It reminded him vividly of his dislike of
the smell of gun smoke indoors and its attendant corpses. He opened his
mouth, closed it, opened it again and said, “Sure. Sure, Meest’ Barstow.
Tomorrow.”

Barstow brought his hands together with a meaty crash and scrubbed them
happily against each other. “Splendid, Mr. Zapappas. Splendid. You shall
have the—ha!—keys to the city. A good day to you, sir.” He strode to the
door, turned and stared coldly at Fellows. “As for you, young man, it
will pay you to remember that the law is loaded heavier than that
pop-gun of yours.”

Fellows emitted a .45-caliber oath and sprang up, clawing at his hip.
Pericles yelped as if burned, and by the time Fellows had looked at him
and back to the door, Barstow was gone.

“Peri,” said Fellows menacingly, “you are a traitor. You ain’t really
goin’ to go over to thet—Well City tomorrow?”

“I think yes,” said Pericles faintly but firmly, his eyes on Fellows’s
gun hand. “Hey, finish you stew.”

“Thet Barstow walked out o’ here with my appetite,” grumbled the
youngster. He threw a leg over his chair and sat down with an elbow on
each side of his bowl. The spicy vapors of the stew curled into his
angry nostrils, and he began to shovel tentatively, but shoveling,
nevertheless. It took three spoonfuls to fill his mouth, whereupon he
said, ‘Whut’s this law ol’ frog-face is talkin’ about?”

Pericles frowned worriedly. “Big talk.”

“It’s more’n thet,” said Fellows grudgingly. “He’s mighty cocky to be
bluffin’. Y’ reckon he’s on to somethin’ we don’t know?”

At last Pericles smiled. “Soon we know,” he said. “Tomorrow. Hm?”

Fellows glanced up as the light dawned in his brain. “Peri, you got
somethin’ up your sleeve, or stuck in your boot. I know you, you greasy
ol’ son-of-a-gun. Whut you aimin’ to do over there tomorrow?”

“Spice a little, stir a lot,” said Pericles happily, using his stock
answer to questions about his cooking.

It was late the following afternoon that Pericles’s flea-bitten mare
plodded wearily up to the restaurant. Fellows was standing in the shade,
leaning back and whittling. He stepped out and caught the bridle,
holding it while the little man dismounted heavily.

“Hot,” said Pericles unnecessarily.

“It is thet,” said Fellows, throwing the reins over the rail. “Hey,
Peri—whut’s the idea o’ them oversize saddlebags? Whut’d you tote over
there—a month’s grub?”

Pericles ignored the question, mopping his crinkled face. “Well City
very busy,” he said.

“Is, huh?”

They went inside. “Plenty fellas driving stakes,” wheezed the Greek.
“Marking streets. Meest’ Barstow show me everyt’ing. Place for
courthouse, place for smithy, place for hotel and dance hall.”

“Holy smoke! What’s he think he’s doin’?”

Pericles knelt to kindle the stove. “Place for depot too.”

“_Depot?_ Depot for what? Pony Express?”

Pericles shook his head. “Meest’ Barstow, he tells me the big secret.
Railroad coming through the Valley.”

Fellows, poised over a chair, said _“Ah-hah!”_ sitting heavily with the
second syllable. “So thet’s whut th’ horned toad is after. Finds out
they’re runnin’ a railroad survey through here, buys up some desert from
the Federal Gov’m’nt, stakes out a town, and sits in it ontil th’
railroad goes through.” He clapped his hand to his head and moaned, “An’
he has to go and find hisself a well. Hey—Peri! How about thet? D’you
see it?”

“I see it. Meest’ Barstow, first thing gives me a drink water from it.
Pull up the bucket himself. Pour it like he think it’s beer. All
morning, want me for drink more.”

“So he’s really got water in his town, huh? Oh, thet ain’t good, Peri.”

“Not good. Well right in the middle of town.”

“Yeah. I c’n see whut’s goin’ to happen to us an’ Tamarisk when Well
City gits to be a rail town.” He shook his head. “No wonder Barstow took
a day showin’ you around.”

“No all day. I took a ride,” said Pericles cryptically. He went to the
door and looked out toward the rise and Well City. “Fellows.”

“Huh?”

“You know what? I never learn to load six-gun like yours.”

“Well, I’ll be—I never knowed you was interested. You don’t never carry
a gun.” His eyes narrowed. “You expectin’ trouble, Peri?”

Pericles shrugged. He looked up at the rise again. There was a feather
of dust at its lip. “Show me, Fellows.”

“Why shore.” Fellows slipped the plated hogleg out of its holster.
“Ain’t nothin’ to it. You pull this back, break it like this, an’ jest
slip your cartridges in these here holes.”

“Whats about this thing. What you call? Cylinder?”

“Thet? It spins a little each time you shoot. You know thet.

“If it jams? Why, thet’s easy enough. With the gun broke like this, the
cylinder lifts right out. See? Then you can rod the holes out.”

Pericles reached for the cylinder, his bright eyes glinting as his hand
closed on it. “I see. Fellows—_look!_”

The youngster followed Pericles’s pudgy finger. Down over the rise swept
a group of horsemen.

“Wh—Hey, they’re from Well City! That’s Barstow’s crew!” He spun back to
the Greek, who had moved behind the partition, where his concoctions
were beginning to steam and simmer on the stove. Fellows skidded around
the counter and into the rear. “Peri! I don’t know how much you know
about this, but those guys are loaded for bear. What’s goin’ on?”

At Fellows’s first shout, Pericles had started elaborately, and was now
staring dismally into one of the pots. “Hey, boy. You shout too much
with you mouth. Now look what happen, I drop you dirty cylinder into my
stew.”

“You what? Why, you galoot! Thet thing—”

The Well City posse swept past, thirty strong, whooping. There were one
or two shots. Fellows cursed, scooped up his gun, and ran for the door.
Pericles smiled radiantly, sounded the stew with a wooden spoon, and
delicately fished out the cylinder. He carefully washed it and dried it,
and put it in the cash drawer.

Twenty minutes later he was busily packing liquor bottles into a crate
with straw. There was the rustling beat of hoofs on the hard-packed
street, and the posse streamed past, bunched around two riders with
dispatch cases.

Fellows pounded in, his face scarlet from the effort to exude profanity
and take in air simultaneously. “Peri! Gimme my——cylinder while I fill
their—s full o’—lead!”

“Whatsa do?”

“ ‘Whatsa do?’ ” screamed Fellows, dancing as if his chaps were full of
fire ants. “Don’t ask me questions, damn yuh! I’m mad enough at your
clumsiness. You done cass-trated my hawglaig. Now don’t make me madder
by actin’ foolish.”

Pericles glanced out at the rise, where the posse was dwindling out of
gunshot. He moved to the cash drawer, set the cylinder on the counter,
and scrambled in quivering panic away from Fellows’s wild dive for it.
The kid punched it into his gun, rammed home some shells, and bolted for
the door. The sight of the posse pouring over the top of the hill and
out of sight deflated him to the point where his shoulders seemed to
dislocate. He went completely limp except for his jaw muscles. He made
no sound.

Pericles smiled. “You cuss too much,” he observed. “An’ when you get
real mad, you got not’ing left to say. Hm?”

Fellows turned slowly, slowly raised his fists to his cartridge belt,
and treated Pericles to a glare that would have dried up an oat-fed cow
with a three-day calf.

Pericles turned pale. “Want a cup coffee?” he murmured.

Fellows ignored the suggestion, while Pericles bustled himself pouring
the coffee into a mug. “Peri, you are jest too good-hearted an’ stupid
to stay alive. Don’t you know what them rannies jest did?”

“Whatsa do?”

“I’ll tell you ‘whatsa do,’ ” rasped the youngster. “Surrounded the
marshal’s office, that’s what, where ol’ Mickey Mack keeps all the town
records. They got all them papers and rid off with ’em before anybody in
town knew which way to jump.” He tapered off to a trickling,
inarticulate mumble which returned in another flood of unprintables.

When the noise had died down again, Pericles asked mildly, “Was it
legal?”

“Legal? Whaddeya mean legal? It was kidnappin’, that’s what the hell!
Oh, they poked some papers at Mickey Mack fust—”

“What kind papers?”

“I dunno. Mickey tol’ us—me and Hark and some more that was there.
Somepin’ about Well City bein’ a county seat, an’ a seizure order fer
th’ county records f’m the marshal’s office at Topeka. So what’s that?”
He snorted. “Them was our records, Tamarisk records—all the deeds an’
claims an’ transfer notes an’ all. What’s Well City want with ’em?”

“It was legal,” said Pericles quietly. Fellows sat while that sank in.
Pericles put coffee before him and said, “It was legal, even if it was
no good, boy. Your gun makes big noise, big trouble. Barstow, he say the
law is loaded heavier’n you are. Is right.”

“Why, you interferin’ ol’ belly-stuffer!” bawled Fellows. “You spiked my
gun thet a way a-purpose!”

“Please,” Pericles whispered out of a dry throat. His face was puckered
with terror, for Fellows was three degrees uglier than just formidable
when his dander soared. “Fellows. Please, boy. Hey. No make trouble in
my place. Drink you coffee. You right. Meest’ Barstow tell me about this
county seat business. Federal judge, he give charter because of well. No
use to tell you—you get mad, all you sense run out you mouth, you shoot
and then you hang. No good. Well City is county seat. Is legal.”

“They cain’t do this!” wailed Fellows. “All this country here was
settled out o’ Tamarisk! Then this Easterner walks off with the rail
line an’ th’ county records and sits down on desert he bought fer
nothin’ and can sell fer a mint!”

“Is the business methods he talk about.”

“It’s the business, all right,” gritted Fellows, and added something
about Barstow that would have been shocking in Greek. Or even in
Portuguese.

Fellows slurped broodingly at his coffee. Pericles went back to packing
liquor bottles in the crate. At length Fellows said, “We c’n git up a
bigger posse than Barstow.”

Pericles froze, half bent over the crate, his shoulders hunched up and
his head back as if his nape had been touched by a hot iron. He waited.

“Scoop up our own records, huh?” muttered Fellows inevitably. “Hell, we
c’n shoot our way through those shacks of his’n and be gone with th’
papers before they know what’s up. And it’ll take a damn sight more’n
twenty armed men an’ a coupla court orders to pry us loose, this time.”

“Now, Fellows,” said Pericles carefully. “Don’ talk this kind stuff, you
hear? You get troops from Topeka an’ a rope for your neck.”

“Not me,” snarled the youngster. “I’ll get lead in my blood, or I’ll be
over th’ border afore that happens.”

“Fellows,” said Pericles pleadingly, “you can’t fight everyt’ing with
guns. Yes? Sometimes you got to use somet’ing else.”

“Fer the likes o’ Barstow? What you goin’ to do? Use a skillet an’ a
han’ful o’ cayenne? Maybe you want to feed Barstow an’ his gunmen ontil
they bust, huh?” He regarded the Greek with scorn, which changed to
interest as he noticed what Pericles was doing. “What’s the idea o’
stashing all the firewater?”

“So it not break.”

“Break how? You expectin’ trouble here?” He leaped to his feet. “Someone
pushin’ you around, Peri? Who is it? Le’s stop it afore it starts. Who
do you want hawg-tied an’ branded?”

“Shh, boy.” Pericles almost laughed. “Don’ you worry your head.” He took
down a hammer and battened the top of the crate. When he had finished he
stood up, mopped his face and head, and came around the counter.

“Fellows, listen. You good feller, see? I don’ wan’ see you in bad
trouble. Wait awhile, hun? Don’ make this posse stuff. _Please_,
Fellows, hun? This Meest’ Barstow, he is a hard man. Well City got
plenty guards, boy. Rifles. All night, until four o’clock in morning, it
gets light a little, Barstow got guards out. You get posse, you get
killed. Somebody get killed, anyway. Tamarisk men they get killed. Wait
awhile, hun?”

“Wait, hell. Armed guards? This toad wants a war, does he? This one
askin’ fer it.” Fellows scowled; then his head snapped up. “You say he
pulls his guards an hour before sunup?”

“Sure. No need them. Men stirrin’ about then anyway. But make to forget
it, hun, Fellows? You a good boy. Don’ get in bad trouble. Don’ use you
hosses for to make posse.”

Having planted his seeds, Pericles bent to the task of sliding the heavy
crate around behind the partition. That, oddly enough, placed it by the
side door and its loading-stage, against which was backed his battered
old buckboard.

Trask, the yard-goods merchant, an ex-sailor and a crack shot, reined in
beside the glowering Fellows. Around them jogged the rest of the
Tamarisk posse. A crescent moon showed the Well City trail vaguely, and
pointed up the twin ruts of a wagon that had passed earlier.

“Hell of a note,” grunted Trask. “Skedaddlin’ around this time o’ night.
I tried to turn in after the meetin’ an’ didn’t know whether I should
stay up late or git up early. Turned in an’ tried to sleep, still
couldn’t make up my mind, an’ now”—he yawned hugely—“I don’t rightly
know if I’m awake or not. Way I feel, I wouldn’t know silk f’m
sailcloth.”

“You damn well better be awake when we ride into Well City,” said
Fellows.

“Now, look, puppy,” said the grizzled Trask. “Maybe you set this here
forest fire, but just because we think you was right don’t say you kin
snap an’ snarl at yer betters.”

“Ah, it’s that lousy Zapappas,” said Fellows. “All this time claimin’
he’s a friend o’ mine, an’ then pullin’ a thing like this,” and he
nodded at the wagon tracks. “What was it you tol’ me about rats leavin’
a founderin’ ship?”

“Don’t blame him too much,” said Trask. “He’s stuck with Tamarisk
longer’n any of us an’ he rates a break from it. You know what they say
about little fat guys. They’re all good-natured because they can’t fight
an’ they can’t run.”

“Thet’s all right s’far as it goes,” said Fellows. “But he didn’t have
to tote all thet likker over to Well City to grease his way into their
gold mine.”

Trask gave a reluctant, affirmative snort. “That was sorta small.”

They went through the draw and emerged on a shelf overlooking Well City.
There were two guttering fires to be seen north and south of the town,
which was dark and still under the bright stars and the weak moonlight.
The posse milled together and drew up.

“What time is it?”

“Not four yet.”

Whup-whup-whoo-oop!

“Whut’n blazes was that?”

“A drunken poke if ever I heerd one.”

There was a blaze of light in the largest building as the door was flung
open, apparently blown by a gust of loose laughter.

“Ev’vy man Jack in th’ town must be in there gettin’ fried,” somebody
said.

“Yeah, on Zapappas’s likker, the skonk,” said another.

“Thet’s one feller we’ll squar’ with, whatever.”

“I brung a rope.”

Somebody cracked a bullwhip. “This is better.”

Trask spoke up. “It won’t get Tamarisk a thing to stampede that little
coyote. Let’m alone. He don’t know what he’s doin’.”

“Feelin’ real friendly, ain’tcha?” said an anonymous voice from the rear
ranks. “Why don’t you go on down and have a drink o’ whisky?”

“Stow that,” barked Trask. “We git to pullin’ an’ haulin’ amongst
ourselves, we won’t get no town records out o’ Well City. Now settle
down fer about forty minutes. Mickey, get that there phony seizure paper
of yours ready to whip out. You sure it’s got enough ‘Whereas’s’ on it
to keep ’em puzzled ontil we get clear with th’ records?”

“That it has,” said Mickey Mack. “_And_ a gold seal. With ribbons.”

“Good. Relax, boys. Talk quiet an’ try to keep your hosses offen the
rocks.”

The posse dismounted and hobbled their mounts. Fellows lounged over to
the Well City side of the draw and stood looking out at the half dozen
shacks that were the county seat. A few feet down the slope from him
were the shadowy masses of a large boulder and a small one. He felt the
scalp muscles behind his ears contract at the faint hiss that suddenly
reached him from the rocks. He froze, stared. Nothing. As he relaxed,
the hiss was repeated.

Now, any other man there would have reported the matter and gotten cover
for an investigation. But Fellows’s approach was always a direct one. He
tiptoed forward, gained the small boulder, waited tensely, then moved on
to the larger one. Bracing himself with his hands, he peered carefully
around it. Behind him, and between the two boulders, an extension of the
black shadow reached out and lifted his gun from his holster, to jam it
firmly into his spinal column, just below the shoulder blades.

“Walk,” said a faint whisper.

The bruise-making solidity of the gunsight in his back was completely
convincing. Without a sound he walked downgrade, without attempting to
turn around or to make a sound, and the gun shifted only enough to steer
him. His captor kept him to the blackest shadows, and turned him into
the mouth of a dry gulch that opened on the draw a hundred yards away.
_He won’t shoot me if I don’t make him_, he thought desperately. _The
posse—_

The gun turned him to the wall. He stopped, his hands up. This was it,
whatever “it” might be. “Well?” he said softly.

“Hey, boy. Don’ be mad, hey.”

“Zapappas!”

The gun muzzle rammed in agonizingly. “You be quiet with you mouth.”

There was a tense silence, and then Fellows, breathing hard, whispered,
“All right, Peri. You talk. I’ll listen.”

“At’s good, boy,” said Pericles in a low voice. ‘Hey, you t’ink they
goin’ hang me?”

“Reckon they will, Peri.”

“Oh no. No. This wrong. You tell ’em.”

“Me? I’d help ’em ef you’d get that equalizer out’n my back.”

Surprisingly, Pericles’s voice was gentle, and the gun was removed as he
said sadly, “Sit down, Fellows. Here. Tak you gun.”

Fellows stayed, stunned, where he was, face to the rock wall, hands
raised, until Pericles’s hand on his shoulder turned him around. The
little man, he could see dimly, was extending the gun to him. “Sit down,
Fellows.”

Then he talked. He talked for seven minutes, and it was not a gunshot,
but a shout of laughter that brought the posse tumbling down the draw.
There was no attack at four o’clock.

The bar of morning sunlight had crept so gradually onto Barstow’s sodden
face that it had not awakened him. He lay unbeautifully on his back, his
collar and belt open, his Eastern clothes rumpled, and his chin higher
than his nose.

When the sunlight was abruptly cut off, however, he twitched, turned his
head from side to side, moaned, clasped his temples, and sat up. Keeping
his eyes tight shut, he shifted his hands cautiously over them, and in
the soothing shade, ventured to ease the lids up. A vast throbbing
inside his big head nudged another moan through his dry lips. “What a
shindig,” he muttered, “for a county seat. Hate to think of the
high-jinks when we get to be a state capital.”

Then it was he realized that there was someone standing over him,
blocking the sunlight. He looked up quickly, wincing from the effort.

“Git up, Barstow,” said Trask. “You’re done.”

“What are you doing in my—”

“Move,” said Trask, and in such a tone that Barstow, without a second
thought nor another syllable of bluster, moved. Trask waited while he
pulled on his boots, and then stood aside, nodding toward the door.
Barstow’s gun belt hung over a chair near the window. Trask stood
between it and the door. The belt stayed where it was as Barstow walked
out.

The Easterner stopped dead as soon as he could see in the light. There
was a clump of silent men around the well, watching him.

“H-How—what—” goggled Barstow. He turned, bellowed, “Smith! Oviedo!”

“They took off at daybreak,” said Trask quietly. “The rest of your boys
are with us, only maybe a little bit madder.”

“I don’t—I won’t—” Barstow began, turning back toward his shack. Trask
spun him around, placed his boot in the small of Barstow’s back, and
shoved. Barstow staggered a few steps, went to his knees, scrambled up
again, and went toward the well, purely because the men there seemed
less menacing than Trask, who followed close behind.

“Wh—what are you going to do?”

“Jest show you something,” said Trask grimly. “Show him, boys.”

Rough hands propelled Barstow through the crowd to the well. Fellows
caught him there, put a hard young hand to the nape of the flabby neck,
and shoved Barstow’s head over the coping. “What do you see, Barstow?”

Barstow squirmed. “Nothing.”

“Speak up, Barstow.”

“The well is dry,” said Barstow hoarsely.

“Why, Barstow?”

“Those drunken—s!” swore Barstow. “They forgot to fill the well!”

“Filled it every night, didn’t they, Barstow?”

“They—I—” He looked around at the men, some grinning, some glowering. He
gulped and nodded his head.

Fellows guffawed. “That’s it, boys. This swamp-frawg had men a-haulin’
water from the spring, every night, when the rest o’ his crew was
sleepin’. Figgered to make this place the county seat, get the railroad
through here, an’ then sell his holdings an’ clear out, leavin’ someone
else to worry about a dry well an’ a useless town.”

Barstow put his hands up to his face miserably, and slumped against the
well. “What are you—” He licked his lips. “What are you going to do?”

“With you?” said Trask. “Why, we talked it over some. At first most of
the boys wanted to throw you into your hole in the ground and fill it
in. But we figger we’ll do better to tell you how we found out about
this, and then turn you loose. We like to think of you rememberin’ it.”

“It was that little guy you were tryin’ to buy into your county seat,”
grinned Fellows. “Pericles Zapappas, his name is. He got to figgering.
He’s been in this country a long time, longer’n any of us, an’ he knew
damn well that there ain’t no water to be dug for hereabouts. So he took
up your invite an’ came over here to look at your well. He was so sure
there was somethin’ wrong with it that he loaded his mare with two cook
pots full of some stuff he brewed. After he left you he circled back and
headed for th’ spring. He seen enough of a beaten track up there to make
him think he was right. He dropped his pots into th’ spring. They wuz
covered with sheep parchment and th’ stuff in ’em leaked through real
slow and flavored up th’ water jest fine.” He laughed again.

Trask took over. “He loads up his buckboard with hard likker last night
and comes over here to help you celebrate gettin’ the county
seat—_after_ goadin’ Fellows here to git up a posse to shoot you loose
from the county seat records. So thanks to him, all your hands got
drunked up. Once he has you all nice and wound up, he takes a drink of
water from the well. It tastes just like he knowed it would—like the
stuff he put in the spring. That clinches it. He leaves y’all to waller
in his likker and goes up to the draw yonder to wait for us.”

“We was goin’ to hang him,” said Fellows with awe in his voice.

“Tell’m what Zapappas put in the spring, Fellows,” said Trask.

“Tamarisk,” said Fellows solemnly. “He’s a great hand with the spices,
he is. Stripped the bark of tamarisk and biled it down. It’s bitter as
hell. He uses it in his stew.”

“Let’s go, boys,” said Trask. “Zapappas is back in Tamarisk by now,
fixin’ up the damnedest celebration breakfast this country has seen
yet.”

“What about me?” asked Barstow.

“You could drop dead,” said Fellows helpfully.

“Yer county water commission,” said Trask, “seems to of stole your
hosses. You should be glad. Gives you a chance to walk off some o’ that
blubber. They’s a tradin’-post forty mile up the valley, and a fort
thirty mile the other way.”

The last they saw of Barstow was a deflated, dejected figure squatting
on the sand by his dry well, in sole possession of a county seat—a ghost
town.

Riding through the draw, Trask said thoughtfully to Fellows, “It’s a
wonderful thing how a man’ll fight with his own tools. I seen many a
sailor brain people with a fid, and I seen a seamstress run a hatpin
into a drunk. Zapappas, he fights right out’n his kitchen.”

“Yup,” said Fellows. “Usin’ only kitchen tools.” And he swore to himself
to keep his bare back out of sight until those ring-shaped bruises on it
disappeared.



HURRICANE TRIO


YANCEY, WHO HAD once been killed, lay very still with his arm flung
across the pillow, and watched the moonlight play with the color of
Beverly’s hair. Her hair was spilled over his shoulder and chest, and
her body pressed against him, warm. He wondered if she was asleep. He
wondered if she could sleep, with that moonswept riot of surf and wind
going on outside the hotel. The waves blundered into the cliff below,
hooting through the sea-carved boulders, frightening great silver ghosts
of spray out and up into the torn and noisy air. He wondered if she
could sleep with her round, gentle face so near his thumping heart. He
wished the heart would quiet itself—subside at least to the level of the
storm outside, so that she might mistake it for the same storm. He
wished he could sleep. For two years he had been glad he did not sleep.
Now he wished he could; it might quiet his heart.

Beverly, Beverly, he cried silently, you don’t deserve this! He wished
the bed were larger, so that he might ease away from her and be but a
shriek among shrieks, melting into the hiss and smash and ugly grumble
of the sea’s insanity.

In the other bed, Lois shifted restlessly under the crisp sheet. Yancey
looked at her without turning his head. She was a thing of long lines
under the dim white, her face and hair two kinds of darkness on the
pillow. She was lean and somber. Beverly was happy and open and moved
about like the brightly colored bouncing ball which used to lead the
singing at theaters, leaping along the lyrics. Lois walked as if she did
not quite touch the floor, and the tones of her voice were like the
tones of her skin and the clothes she favored—dark and smooth. Her eyes
were long and secret and her face was a floe. Her nostrils, and the
corners of her mouth, and sometimes the slightest concerted movement of
a shoulder and an eyebrow, hinted at a heat submerged and a strength
relaxed and aware, not asleep, not a sleep. Lois … a synthesis of
subtleties, of mysteries, of delicate scents and soft puzzling laughter.

Lois moved again. He knew that she too was staring tensely up into the
mottled darkness. The spume-flecked moonlight was intolerant of detail,
but Yancey had memorized her face. He knew of the compression of her
lips, and that the corners of her mouth were softly turned despite the
tension. He was deeply troubled by the sound of the sheet as she moved,
for if he could hear that over the storm, how could Beverly miss the
throb of his heart?

Then he all but smiled: of course Beverly did not hear as he did, nor
see, nor feel, nor think with all her mind. Poor Beverly. Poor bright,
sweet, faithful bird, more wife than woman, how can you compete with one
who is more woman than … anyone?

Better, this was better than the fearful joy that was like rage. His
heart began to obey him, and he turned his cheek slightly to touch her
hair. Pity, he thought, is a sharing sort of thing—you can feel the
helplessness of the unarmed—whereas rage, like passion, stands apart
from its object and is a lonesome thing.

He settled himself now, and without moving he went limp in the
thundering night, giving himself up to the glimmer and shift of his
thoughts. More than anyone else on earth, he was sure, he enjoyed being
alive, and his perpetual delight was in being alive altogether, awake
and aware, conscious of his body and how it lay, and where, and at the
same time afloat like a gull on the wind of his thought, yielding,
controlled. Perhaps he enjoyed the dark part of his unending day the
most, camouflaged by a coverlet and the closing of eyes. In the day he
lived with that which, if he wished, he could command; at night he lived
with that which he _did_ command. He could call a symphony to heel, and
make a syllogism stand and wait. He could cut a stack of places, fan a
hand of faces, choose his pleasure of them and discard the rest. His
recall was pinpoint perfect back and back to the point where he had been
dead; before that, only excellent. He used it now as a measure against
his heart’s rebellion, so that Beverly could sleep, and, sleeping, not
know.

And because the idea of Lois, here, was unbearable, he let his mind take
him back to Lois when she was only a secret. She had been an explosion
within him, a pressure and a kind of guilt; but all the things she had
been were things he could contain, and no one knew. So back he went, to
his renascence; back through the time he had been dead, and still
farther to Lois-first-seen, to a time when a man with a job and a wife
and a settled gray life found this special astonishment.

There was a lake, and small cheap cabins crouched in a row to sip its
shores. There was a “lodge” with its stilted forefeet in the water and
its rump on a hillside. There were boats and a float, a splintery dance
floor and a bar which purveyed beverages all the way up to beer.

Yancey, with little money and only two weeks’ time, had rented a cottage
here sight unseen. He expected little of it, being resigned to the
truism that a change of surroundings constitutes a vacation all by
itself. He expected little of anything in those days. His life had
reached a plateau—a long, narrow, slightly downgraded plateau where the
horizons were close and the going easy. His job was safe and, by the
chemistry of paternalism, would increase in value as it aged, for all a
large business requires of the bulk of its employees is that they stay
just as they are.

He had been married for seven years to the blithe and patient Beverly,
who was content with him. There had been a time when they interrupted
one another in the rush to share themselves, and a longer time when
there seemed very little to say, which made them both vaguely unhappy,
and they lived with a mild and inexpressible sense of loss. And at last
they had discovered that coded communication devised by most folk with
their unexciting familiars: small talk, half-finished sentences, faint
interrogative and exclamatory sounds, and present—as opposed to
absent—silences. Life for Yancey and his wife was not dull—it was too
unplanned for that—but its pulse beat between comfortable limits.

This unplanned quality (for why make plans when life is basically so
certain?) was responsible for their late arrival at the lake. Last
year’s map did not include the dozens of roads closed by the Thruway;
somehow Yancey had never gotten around to having the spare fixed, so of
course they had a flat; then they had to drive back for the checkbook
Yancey had forgotten; and naturally it rained. It had rained all the
previous night and all day, and when they turned into the lake road it
was past eleven at night and still raining. They pulled up beside the
lodge, where a glistening faded sign proclaimed OFFICE, and Yancey
turned up his jacket collar and plunged out into the rain and floundered
up the wooden steps. When there was no answer to his knock he noticed a
soggy pasteboard stuck between the doorframe and a loose pane. He tried
to read it and could not. He went to the head of the steps and called,
“Bev! Turn the spotlight up here!”

Beverly, between the loose-valved clacking of the motor and the drumming
of rain on the car roof, heard a voice but no words. She turned off the
ignition and rolled the window down. “What?”

“The light. Spotlight. Shine it up here.”

She did, whereupon Yancey went back to the door and crouched before the
card. In a moment he came back to the car and slid in, dripping.
“They’re all in bed,” he said, “in cabin 14.”

“Which one is our cabin?”

“I don’t know. They never said. Just confirmed the reservation.

We’ll have to wake them up.” He pressed the starter.

And pressed it, and pressed it.

When the starter would deliver nothing but a click and a grunt, Yancey
leaned back and blew sharply through his nostrils. “Wires wet, I guess.”

“What are we going to do?”

“Walk. Or sit here.”

She touched his sodden shoulder and shuddered. “It can’t be too
far … we’ll have to take a bag.”

“Okay. Which one?”

She considered. “I guess the brown one. It has my robe in it, I
remember … I think.”

He knelt on the seat and reached into the back, found and fumbled the
brown suitcase out. “Better turn off the lights. Ignition, too.”

“The ignition _is_ off,” Beverly said, trying it.

“What!”

“When you were on the porch. I couldn’t hear you. I turned it off.

The advantage of that status between married folk which communicates by
grunts and silences is that scorn, as well as contentment, can be
expressed with little effort. Yancey was simply and completely silent,
and she said, “Oh dear.” Then, defensively, “How was I supposed to know
you didn’t turn it back on?”

Yancey merely snorted. Beverly huddled in the seat. “Now it’s all my
fault,” she muttered. This was more than a statement of fact; it meant
in addition that any discomfort from this point on would be laid to her,
and that the day’s previous delays and exasperations would also be
attached to her, making her culpable in every way for everything. Yancey
maintained his silence. Anything he might say would militate in her
favor—to say one thing would forgive her, another would give her some
ground for defense or counterattack. There was no real vindictiveness in
his silence. He did not care whether or not she accepted the guilt as
long as it was clear that guilt was not his. To put it another way,
married familiars in this stage, though not necessarily enemies, are
just not friends.

They left the car by their respective doors, and the rain immediately
increased as if it had been cued from the wings. The sporadic wind died
completely and suddenly and water seemed to displace air altogether. It
ran down Yancey’s spine, it bashed at his eyelids, it threw gouts of mud
up to his knees. He felt his way along the fender and around the front
of the car until he collided with Beverly. They clung together, gasping
and waiting for some kind of light to penetrate the hissing deluge. Some
did, at last, a sodden skyglow with a dimmer echo from the lake, and
they began to wade up the shore along the line of cabins.

Visitors to the lake have been known to complain that the cabins were
built too close together. It is clear that such plaintiffs never walked
the row in the seething black of a summer rain. Each cabin boasted a
wooden post with a number, cut from plywood with a jigsaw, perched on
it. These could be read by water-wrinkled fingertips as they progressed,
and they seemed to be fully half a mile apart. Yancey and Beverly did
not attempt to talk; the only speech between them was a muttered number
when occasionally they investigated one of the posts to check their
progress. It was enough to make exasperation itself turn numb, not to be
reawakened until they found cabin 12, bypassed the next, and turned in
at what should therefore be 14, only to find it called 15.

“Fifteen, fifteen!” Beverly wailed wetly. “Where’s fourteen? It’s gone!”

“Gone, hell,” growled Yancey, uselessly wiping at the water streaming
over his mouth. “That’ll be it there, that we just passed. Afraid to
number a cabin thirteen. Superstition. Well, you know a woman runs this
place,” he added.

Beverly inhaled, a sharp gasp at this injustice, but took in as much
water as air and could only cough weakly. They backtracked and fumbled
their way up to the dark bulk of cabin 14. Yancey dropped the suitcase
noisily on the small porch.

“Yance! You’ll wake everybody up!”

He looked at her and sighed. The sigh transmitted, “What did we come
here for?”

He pounded on the door and they pressed close to it, trying to get some
shelter from the decorative gable over the door. A light showed, the
doorknob moved, and they stepped back into the rain. And nothing,
nothing at all told Yancey that in this second a line fell across his
life, so that forever his biography would consist of the parts
life-before-Lois and life-since-Lois, with nothing between them but a
sheet of rain and the opening of a door.

It opened altogether, fearlessly. He said, “I’m Yance Bowman, this is my
wife, and we—” and then he saw her face, and his voice failed him.
Quickly, effortlessly, Lois spoke into his sudden silence and made it
unnoticeable. “Come in, come in!” With one swift balanced movement she
took the suitcase from his hand, whirled around them to reach out in the
rain for the doorknob, and, closing the door, swept them in.

They stood panting and dripping, looking at her. She wore a maroon
hostess robe with a collar that stood up like an Elizabethan ruff; the
material fell away and draped from her wide flat shoulders with the
static fluidity of a waterfall, all movement even while she was still.
Her slight turn and bend as she set down the suitcase told him that
those wide shoulders were indeed shoulders and not padding, and the
flash of a bare foot declared that here was a woman who would stand and
look straight into his eyes.

Beverly spoke, or began to; he turned to her and saw that she was, by
comparison, dumpy and wet and exceedingly familiar. “We didn’t know
which cabin to—”

“Never mind that,” said Lois, “we’ll have two weeks to explain ourselves
to each other. First of all you’ve just got to get out of those wet
things, both of you. I’ll heat some coffee.”

“But-but-but we can’t—”

“But you can,” said Lois. “Not another word. Go on,” she said, crowding
them into the hall which led away to the left. “There’s the bath. Take a
shower. A hot shower.” Without pausing she scooped thick towels from a
shelf and dropped them into Beverly’s astonished hands. She reached past
them and turned on the bathroom light. “I’ll get your bag.”

She was gone and back before Beverly could get her mouth around another
syllable. “Hurry now, before the muffins get cold.”

“Muffins?” Beverly squeaked. “Oh now, please don’t go to that tr—” but
she was in the bathroom with Yancey, with the door closed, and Lois’s
swift light footsteps answering her like a laugh as they ran away down
the hall.

“Well I—” said Beverly. “Yancey, what can we do?”

“Like the lady says, I guess.” He gestured. “You first.”

“A shower? Oh, I _couldn’t!_”

He pulled her over in front of the basin and aimed her face at the
mirror. “Wouldn’t hurt.”

“Oh … oh dear, I’m a sight.” She had one more second of hesitation,
murmured, “Well …” and then pulled her soaking dress off over her head.

Yancey undressed slowly while Beverly splashed under the shower. About
the time the mirror was thoroughly steamed up she began to hum, high and
happy. Yancey’s numbed brain kept re-creating the vision of Lois as he
had first seen her, framed in lamplight which was in turn framed by a
hurtling silver halo of rain. His mind formed it and bounced away,
formed it again and again retreated. It would only look and look back;
it would not evaluate. His world contained nothing like this; he
doubted, at the moment, that it could. His only analytical thought came
as an academic question, not to be answered by any process he then knew:
how could a woman be so decisive, so swift, yet so extraordinarily
quiet? Her voice had come to him as through earphones, direct and with
fullest quality, yet seeming not to reach the walls. Anyone else in the
world, taking charge like that, would certainly have roared like a drill
sergeant. “Don’t turn it off,” he said to Beverly.

“All right.” She put a parboiled arm through the curtains and he dropped
a towel across it. “Mmm, good,” she said, rubbing briskly as she
emerged. “I feel as if we’d been kidnapped, but I’m glad.”

He stepped into the shower and soaped up. The scalding water was good on
his chilled skin; he felt muscles relax which he hadn’t known were taut.
It was far and away the best shower he had ever taken up to the point
when Beverly uttered a soft and tragic wail. He knew the sound, and
sighed. “What have you done _now?_” he inquired, his voice carrying a
labored patience. He turned off the shower and peered through the mists
at his wife. She had a towel round her head like a turban, and her pale
blue chenille beach robe hung from her shoulders. “The black one,” she
said.

“Give me a towel. What black what?”

“Suitcase. This is all the beach things. There isn’t a thing of yours
here but your bathing trunks.”

“This,” he said after a suitable silence, “is just your night.”

“Oh, Yance, I’m sorry.”

“I’m sorry too.” He stared fixedly at her until she wilted. “I’ll just
get back into those wet clothes.”

“You can’t!”

“Got a better idea? I’m not going out there in bathing trunks.”

There was a knock on the door. “Soup’s on!”

Before he could stop her, Beverly called out with a distressed bleat,
“Know what I did, I brought the wrong suitcase, there’s nothing here for
my husband to wear but his _bathing_ suit!”

“Good!” said the soft voice on the other side of the door. “Put it on
and come on out. The coffee’s poured.” When they did not respond, Lois
laughed gently. “Did you people come to the lake to be formal? Didn’t
you expect to be seen in bathing suits? Come on,” she added, with such
warmth that in spite of themselves they found some sheepish smiles and
put them on. “Coming,” said Yancey. He took the trunks out of the open
suitcase.

In the living-room a fire had been lit and was just beginning to gnaw on
the kindling and warm a log. A table was set, simply and most
attractively—gray place mats, black cups, wrought-iron candlesticks with
black candles. There was a steaming glass urn and an electric toaster
which clucked once and popped up two halves of an English muffin just as
they sat down. Lois came out of the kitchen carrying a black sugar bowl.
She glided up behind them as they sat at the table, leaning over them.
One long arm put the bowl down; her other hand touched Yancey’s bare
shoulder. Something—

Something _happened_.

In the other bed, Lois abruptly turned on her side, facing him. She
reached over to the night table between the beds, found a cigarette. The
wind died just then, taking a deep quiet breath for the next shriek; and
in the jolting silence a great sea smashed the cliff below. Lois struck
her match, and the light and the explosion of water together plucked
Yancey’s nerves in a single shattering chord. He steeled himself and did
not start. In the blinding flare of the match, Lois’s face seemed to
leap at him—a partial mask, centered on the arch of an eyebrow, the
smooth forehead over it, the forehead’s miniature counterpart in the
smooth lowered lid beneath. The arches were stable, flawless; things on
which could be built a strong and lovely structure if one could
only … only …

He lost the thought in the ballooning glow of her cigarette as she lay
back and puffed quickly, too quickly for her to enjoy it, surely. She
drew the glow into a ruddy yellow sharp-tipped cone, and the smoke must
have been hot and harsh to taste. Hot and harsh. He moistened his lips.

A surge of anger began to rise within him, matching again the sea
outside. With an approaching breaker, the anger mounted and swelled and
exploded. But the breaker could turn to foam and mist, and disperse, and
he could do nothing but clench his teeth and press his head back into
the pillow, for he must not wake Beverly.

This thing was so … _unjust!_ Beverly gave him everything he wanted. She
always had, especially since that time at the lake. Especially
since … Her capacity for giving amazed him, almost awed him. She gave
with everything she did. Her singing was an outpouring. She laughed with
all her heart. Her sympathy was quick and complete. She gave constantly,
to him more than to anyone or anything else on earth. They had—now—a
marriage that was as good as a marriage could be. How, then, could there
be room in him for this—this _thing_, this acute, compelling awareness
of Lois? Why must there be this terrible difference between “want” and
“need”? He didn’t _need_ Lois!

The anger subsided. He bent his arm and touched Beverly’s hair. She
moved, turning her head from side to side, burrowing closer in to his
shoulder. This won’t do, he thought desperately. Aren’t I the boy with
the Brain? The man who can’t be pushed around, who is never puzzled by
anything?

Go back, Yancey. Go back again to where your world was full of Lois and
you could control it. If you could do it then, with a tenth of the mind
you have now, then why … why can’t you … why is your heart trying to
break your ribs?

He closed his eyes against the shouting silver of the night and the
bloom of Lois’s cigarette. Back, he demanded, go back again. Not to the
hand on the shoulder. Afterwards. The rain’s letting up, and scurrying
through the puddles and the sky-drip to their own cabin, the one next
door. Hold it. Hold it right there … ah. He had it again; he was back
two years, feeling again what it was like to be able to keep Lois to
himself, and his heartbeat normal.

Impossible! But he had done it for almost two whole weeks. Lois on the
diving platform, then painted on the sky, forever airborne—forever
because awareness such as his photographed and filed the vision; in his
memory she hung there still against a cloud. And the square dance, with
the fiddle scratching away into an overloaded p.a. system and feet
clumping against the boards, and the hoarse, happy shouter: “Alamen
_lef_ an’ around we go, swing yore potner do-si-do … now swing somebody
else … an’ somebody _else_ … an’ somebody ELSE …” and ELSE had been
Lois, turning exactly with him, light and mobile in his arms, here and
gone before he knew completely that she was there, leaving him with a
clot in his throat and a strange feeling in his right hand, where it had
taken the small of her back; it seemed not to belong completely to him
any more, as if her molecules and his had interpenetrated.

Oh, and Lois breaking up a fight between one of the summer people and a
town man, drifting close, ruffling the hair of one and laughing, being a
presence around whom no violence could take place; Lois backing the
station wagon skilfully among the twisting colonnades of a birch
grove … And Lois doing unremarkable things unforgettably—a way of
holding her fork, lifting her head, ceasing to breathe while she
listened for something. Lois glimpsed through the office window, smiling
to herself. Lois reading the announcements at lunch, her voice just loud
enough for someone else on, say, a porch swing, yet audible to eighty
people.

Lois walking, for that matter, standing, writing, making a phone
call … Lois alive, that was enough to remember.

Nearly two weeks of this, waking with Beverly, breakfasting, swimming,
boating, hiking with Beverly, and his preoccupation cloaked in the
phlegmatic communications of familiarity. What difference did it make if
his silence was a rereading of Lois’s face instead of a reconsideration
of the sports page? He would not have attempted to share either one with
Beverly; then what was the difference? Earlier in their marriage she
might have complained that it was useless to have a vacation if he acted
just the same during it as he did at home; at this stage, however, he
was completely—one might say invisibly—Yancey. Just Yancey, like always.

But there was a line between possible and not-possible in Yancey’s
ability to contain his feelings about Lois. He did not know just where
it was or what would make him cross it; but cross it he did, and there
was no mistaking it once it happened.

It was a Thursday (they were to leave on Sunday), and in the afternoon
Yancey had asked Lois to come to their cabin that evening. He blurted it
out; the words hung between them and he stared at them, amazed. Perhaps,
he thought, he was being facetious … and then Lois gravely accepted, and
he fled.

He had to tell Beverly, of course, and he didn’t know how, and he made
up, in advance, seven different ways to handle her in anticipation of
the seven ways in which she might react. Each, of course, would result
in Lois’s coming. Exactly what the evening would be like he could not
predict, which was strange in a man who was so ready with alternatives
when it came to making a hostess out of Beverly.

“Bev,” he said abruptly when he found her pitching horseshoes back of
the lodge, “Lois is coming for a drink after dinner.”

Beverly tossed a horseshoe, watched it land, skip, and fall, then turned
to him. Her eyes were wide—well, they always were—and their shining
surfaces reminded him at that moment of the reflecting side of a one-way
mirror. What would she say? And which of the seven ripostes must he use
to overcome her resistance? Or would he have to make up an eighth on the
spur of the moment?

She dropped her eyes and picked up another horseshoe, and said, “What
time?”

So Lois came; her light, firm knock might just as well have been on the
base of his tongue, so immediately did he feel it. If, later on, his
will failed him a little, it was because now he sat still using it up,
and let Beverly go to the door.

Beverly, he thought, for Beverly’s sake, should not permit herself in
the same room with Lois. Lois came in and filled the room, but without
crowding; Lois went back and down into an easy chair as if carried by
flying things; Lois’s body grew up out of the cushions supported by what
she breathed like an underwater plant. And Beverly bounced about with
glasses and ice and talked … _talked_. What Lois did was something
different; Lois conversed. He sat dully, contributing little, watching
and thinking his own thoughts. He was achingly aware of many things, but
foremost was the realization that Lois was making an effort—a completely
successful one, as far as he could judge—to put Beverly at her ease. She
made no such effort for him, and he told himself with pride that this
was because she had no need to; they understood one another, and must
make things easy for poor Beverly.

He lay back almost drowsily, soaking in Lois’s presence as if she were
the sun and from her he were gradually acquiring a sort of tan.

Then they were alone in the room, when Beverly went to the kitchen, and
then Beverly was wailing something about ice, oh dear, but the Johnsons
in nine will have some, no don’t bother I’ll be right back; the screen
door in the kitchen slammed and Beverly’s quick feet went bam bam bam
down the back steps, and ceased to exist as they encountered pine
needles; all this in a brace of moments, and he was alone with Lois.

He rose and went to the couch and sat where its corner touched the arm
of the easy chair. It seemed to take all the energy he had; he wanted a
cigarette, he wanted to speak. He could do nothing.

After a silent time he felt Lois’s gaze on him. He turned to her quickly
and she dropped her eyes. He was glad, because their heads were so
close, and he had never examined her this way, slowly. He wet his lips.
He said, “Only ten days.”

She made an interrogative syllable.

“Knowing you,” he said. He rose suddenly and crossed in front of her. He
put one knee on the broad arm of her chair so that his foot was by the
back. He sat back on his heel, his other foot steadying him on the
floor. She stayed just as she was, looking down at her long brown hands.
“I want to tell you something, Lois.”

A small frown appeared and disappeared on her smooth forehead. She did
not raise her eyes.

“It’s something I’ve never told even to … never told anyone.”

Lois moved a little. She did not raise her face, but now he had a
three-quarter view of her profile. She waited, still as a dewdrop.

“The night when we arrived. You made coffee and I sat at the table. You
came up behind me to put something down.

“You touched me.”

He closed his eyes, and put his arm across his chest and his hand high
on his own shoulder. “Something … _happened_,” he said, with an
unaccountable difficulty.

Yancey was, in a small way, an engineer. He began abruptly to explain,
in didactic tones, “It wasn’t static electricity. It couldn’t have been.
It was pouring rain outside and the air was humid, not dry. You were on
the bare floor in your bare feet; it wasn’t one of those deep-pile-rug
phenomena. So it wasn’t anything …” He opened his eyes, swallowed.
“Static, or anything like that,” he managed. Then he was quiet, watching
her.

Her face, the flexible mask, was breaking up like an ice floe in a
sudden warm strong current. Her brow was like a snowbank with the marks
of a kitten’s claws on it. There was a tear drop on her left cheek, and
the streak of a tear on her right, and her teeth were driving into her
lower lip. The corners of her mouth were turned upward, precisely as
they would be in a smile, and there was a delicate pucker in the flesh
of her chin. She made not a sound. She rose, her eyes seizing his and
holding them as she backed to the door. There she turned and ran out
into the dark.

When Beverly came back he was still half-crouched, balancing on the arm
of the chair. “Why—where’s Lois?”

“She left,” he said heavily.

Beverly looked at him. She looked at his eyes, quickly at his hairline,
his mouth, and again at his eyes. Then she went into the kitchen and he
heard the ice she was carrying fall explosively into the sink. She
called out, “Is anything the matter, Yancey?”

“Nothing’s the matter,” he said, getting up.

She said, “Oh.” They cleared up the glasses and ashtrays and went to
bed. Lois was not mentioned. Nothing was mentioned. They went about the
ritual of retiring in silence. When the lights were out he said, “I’ve
had enough of this place. Let’s go home in the morning. Early.”

She was quiet for a long time. Then she said, “If you want to.”

He thought she slept badly. He did not sleep at all.

In the morning he drove furiously. For the first twenty miles he could
not understand what he felt; then he began to understand that it was
anger. For another fifty miles he could find no direction for the anger;
none of the people involved had, after all, done anything, so how could
there be anger?

Occasionally he glanced at Beverly. Ordinarily she sat back, looking
forward at the sky, sideways to scenery, or inward to whatever it was
she communed with during those silent times they spent together. This
morning, however, she sat straight and kept her eyes on the road ahead,
which made him aware that he was driving too fast and which annoyed him
beyond description. Childishly, he increased both his speed and his
anger.

And at last, with a feeling that approached relief, he found something
to be angry at.

Beverly.

Why wouldn’t she say, “Slow down!” Why had she agreed to let Lois come
to their cabin? Why had she gone on blandly being herself this whole
time, while he was tearing himself apart inside? Why hadn’t she even
questioned him when he decided so abruptly to leave? “If you want to,”
she’d said. “If you want to.” What kind of self-respect is that?

Or—maybe she just didn’t care.

_If you want to …_ for the first time he realized that this was her
code, her basic philosophy of life. They had red curtains in the
living-room. They had always had red curtains in the living-room. Well,
he liked red curtains. He’d said so. She had put up red curtains.

He glanced at her. She was watching the road tautly. He squeezed down a
bit more on the accelerator.

The place they lived in, the job he kept; the food they ate and probably
the clothes she wore; were they really chosen because they were what he
wanted?

_Were_ they what he wanted?

Should he have what he wanted?

Why not? Beverly had.

He laughed, making Beverly start violently. He shook his head at her,
which meant either “I won’t tell you” or “Mind your own business.” He
had disqualified himself from finding any flaw in this new and
breath-taking conclusion and it made him exultant. He enjoyed speed in
his exultation, and control. He sent the car howling through a deep cut
in the crest of a hill, and around the blind turn on the other side,
which is where he collided with the space ship and was killed.

As it will at times in the wake of a hurricane, the wind died. Less
tractable, the sea punished the cliff unabated. The night was as noisy,
but the noise was so different it was as shocking as sudden silence. In
it, Lois twisted and angrily rammed her cigarette into the ashtray on
the night table. With a crisp angry rustle of sheets, she turned her
back and then sighed. The sound was only half vocalized, but such a
voice propagates more like light than like sound. Beverly came hurtling
up out of slumber and flashed free like a leaping fish, only to fall
back and swirl near the under surfaces of sleep. She raised her head,
turning it as if seeking, but her eyes were closed. “Hm?” she said
sleepily. Then her face dropped to Yancey’s chest again and she was
still.

What I should do, thought Yancey wildly, is to sit her up and slap her
awake and say, “Look, Bev, you know what? I got killed that morning when
we had the accident, I was dead altogether, the late Yancey Bowman, r.
i. p., and when they put me back together I was different. For two years
now you’ve been living with a man with a mind that never sleeps and
never makes mistakes and does … can do … anything it wants. So you can’t
expect ordinary conduct from me, Bev, or rational behavior based on any
reason you can understand. So if I do anything that … that hurts you,
you mustn’t be hurt. Can’t you understand that?”

Of course she wouldn’t understand.

Why, he thought desperately, when they put me back together, didn’t they
iron out that little human wrinkle which made it possible for Pascal to
make that remark about the heart having “reasons which reason does not
know”?

He snorted softly. Heart. Heck of a name for it.

He lay on his back and watched the motion of surf-scattered moon on the
ceiling. He let his mind float into the vague shadows, be one with them
away from, above, beyond his insupportable, insoluble problem. And
gradually he found himself back there again, two years ago—perhaps
because of the momentum of his previous thinking, perhaps because, in
reliving a time when there was Lois (and he could stand it) and a time
when there was Lois (and he could not), it was a welcome thing to go
into a time where Lois, and Beverly, and for that matter Yancey Bowman,
had little significance.

As the space ship lifted, it retracted its berthing feet; it was one of
these which Bowman’s sedan struck. The car continued under the ship, and
the edge of the flat berthing foot sliced it down to the belt line,
leaving a carmine horror holding the wheel. The ship hovered
momentarily, then drifted over to the side of the road where the mangled
automobile had come to rest. Directly above the car, it stopped. An
opening appeared in the bottom of the ship and dilated like a camera
iris. There was a slight swirl of dust and leaves, and then what was
left of the car rose from the ground and disappeared into the ship. The
ship then slid away to the clearing in the woods where it had lain
hidden during its stay on Earth. Here it settled. It camouflaged itself
and lay outwardly silent.

Exactly what was done to him, Yancey could not know. He was made aware
of the end results, of course. He knew that what had been injured had
been repaired, and that in addition certain changes had been made to
improve the original. For example, his jaw hinges had been redesigned to
eliminate a tendency to dislocation, and a process was started which
would, in time, eliminate the sebaceous cysts which had kept forming and
occasionally inflaming ever since he was an adolescent. His vermiform
appendix was gone—not excised, but removed in some way which would
indicate, in the event of an autopsy, that it had never formed in the
first place. His tonsils had been replaced for reasons which he could
not understand except that they were good ones. On the other hand such
anomalies as his left little toe, which since birth had been bent and
lay diagonally across its neighbor, and a right eye which wandered
slightly to the right when he was fatigued—these were left as they had
originally been. The eye was one of the most interesting items, he
thought later; the toe had simply not been improved, but the eye had
been restored with its flaw. His teeth, too, were as irregular as
before, and contained fillings in the same places, though he knew there
had been little enough left of them. In sum, he had been altered only in
ways which would not show.

He did know, however, _why_ these things had been done. There was inside
that ship an aura of sympathy mixed with remorse unlike anything he had
ever felt. Another component was respect, an all-embracing respect for
living things. Somewhere near where he lay in the ship’s laboratory was
a small covered shelf containing a cicada, two grasshoppers, four summer
moths, and an earthworm, all casualties in his accident. Their cell
structure, organic functions, and digestive and reproductive processes
were under study as meticulous as that which was being lavished on him.
For them restitution was to be made also, and they would be released in
as good condition as this unthinkably advanced science could make them.
The improvements seemed to be in the nature of a bonus, an implemented
apology.

And, of course, there was no denying that as long as such repayment was
made the alien footsteps on Earth were fairly obliterated. Yet Yancey
was always certain that this was not a primary motive, and that the
aliens, whoever they were, wherever they came from, would have
sacrificed anything, themselves included, rather than interfere with
terrestrial life.

He was to find out later that they had done the same things with his car
as they had done with him. He had not the slightest doubt that if they
had wished they could have rebuilt the old sedan into a gleaming
miracle, capable of flight and operable forever on a teacup-full of
fuel. He found it looking as it had always looked, even to rust spots
and a crinkling around the windshield where moisture had penetrated the
laminations of the safety glass. Yet there was a little more pickup, a
little more economy; the brakes were no longer grabby in wet weather;
and the cigarette lighter heated up in fewer seconds than before.

Who were they? Where had they come from? What were they doing here and
what did they look like?

He was never to know. He knew precisely as much as they permitted. He
even knew why he knew as much as he did. They could restore his crushed
head and shoulder, and did. They could make slight improvements, and
did. But even they could not predict every situation in which he might
find himself in the future. It was deeply important to them, and it
would be to him, to conceal the changes which had been made, or the
reciprocal impacts between him and his society might greatly affect
both. The best concealment would be his full knowledge of what had been
done, and a solemn injunction to divulge nothing of it to anyone. That
way he could never innocently perform public miracles and then be at a
loss to explain.

What miracles?

Most miraculous, of course, was the lowered impulse-resistance of his
nervous system, including the total brain. He need no longer run over
and over a thought sequence, like a wheel making a rut, to establish a
synapse and therefore retain knowledge. He had super-fast physical
reactions. He had total recall (from the time of his release from the
ship) and complete access to his previous memory banks.

Yet a prime directive among his “surgeons” seemed to have been a
safeguarding of what his world called Yancey Bowman. Nothing—nothing at
all—was done to change Yancey Bowman into something or someone else. He
functioned a little better now, but he functioned as Yancey Bowman, just
as the changes in his digestive system were basically improvements
rather than replacements. He could get more energy out of less food,
even as he could breathe higher concentrations of CO₂ than he could
before. He could be, and was, Yancey Bowman more efficiently than ever
before. Hence nothing was changed … even (or especially) the turmoil
which was uppermost in his mind when he died.

So it was that after death had struck one Friday morning, the same
morning hour on Sunday revealed a strange sight (but only to some birds
and a frightened chipmunk). Slipping out of earth itself, the ship
spread topsoil where it had lain, covered it with a little snow of
early-fallen leaves, and shouldered into the sky. It wheeled and for a
moment paralleled the deserted highway below. The opening on its belly
appeared, and down through the shining air swept an aging two-door
sedan, its wheels spinning and its motor humming. When it touched the
roadway there was not so much as a puff of dust, so perfectly were
wheels and forward motion synchronized.

The car hurtled through a cut in a hilltop and around the blind turn on
the other side, and continued on its way, with Yancey Bowman at the
wheel, seething inwardly at the unreachable stupidities of his wife.

And was there a moment of shock when he found himself alive and on his
way unharmed, in his undamaged automobile? Did he turn and crane to see
the dwindling speck in which his life had ended and begun again? Did he
pull over to the side, mop his brow, and in a cascade of words exult
over his new powers? Did Beverly demand to know what had happened, and
would she not go out of her mind when she found that Friday was Sunday
now, and that for her there had been no Saturday this week?

No, and no, and no. There was no shock, because he was certain to his
marrow that this was the way it would be; that he would say nothing and
that he must not look back. As for Beverly, her silence on the matter
was proof enough that her convictions would suit the situation as well.

So he drove too fast and was too quiet, and his anger bubbled away until
at length it concentrated into something quieter and rather uglier. As
it formed, he drove more sensibly, and Beverly relaxed and leaned back,
turning now and again to inspect the shutters or the curtains in a house
they passed, watching the sky up ahead while she thought her own
thoughts.

If you could call them thoughts, he reflected.

The product of his anger was a cold projection, and took the form of an
unspoken dictum to Beverly. He found that with his new reflexes he could
give the matter his full attention, since now his hands seemed quite
able to drive by themselves, and even, it appeared, to read route signs.

So, echoing noiselessly in his mind, this structure built: This is not
the end, Beverly, because the end must have been long since. You are not
a woman living her life; you are a half-person living mine. Your
ambition could not push me ahead, your senses could not know when I was
in torture, your taste is not your own, and your abilities are limited
to a dull search for what might please me and a trial-and-error effort
to get it for me. But aside from me you are nothing. You do not and you
could not earn your own living. Cast out on your own resources you could
not so much as fill a receptionist’s chair, or even run a summer resort.
If nothing whatever had happened to me during these three days, what we
have could never be called “marriage” again, not by me. I have looked
into the sun, Beverly; I have flown; I can never crawl the mud with you
again. I was too much for you before; what then am I now?

So it ran, turning and elaborating itself but always returning to a
silent scornful chant, buoyed up by glimpses of freedom and far
horizons. After about an hour of this he sensed her gaze, and turned to
look at her. She met his eyes and smiled her old smile. “It’s going to
be a lovely day, Yance.”

He turned abruptly back to the road. Something in his throat demanded
attention, and he found that he could not swallow it. His eyes stung. He
sat, unwillingly examining his feelings, and slowly it came to him that
among his other traits, that characteristic called empathy—the slipping
on of other people’s shoes, the world seen through the eyes of
others—this quality too had suffered a sea-change and was heightened
more than was comfortable. What, to Beverly, had happened? Numbly,
perhaps, she had been aware that something was amiss at the lake. He
seriously doubted if she had identified the something. She’d known it
was important because she’d okayed their leaving so abruptly without
asking any questions. But what was this “lovely day” business? Did she
think that because their backs were turned to the unidentified threat,
it had ceased to exist? Why, that must be exactly what she thought!

Oh Beverly, Beverly, are you going to get a kick in the teeth!

But a day went by and no such thing happened. It didn’t happen the first
week, either, or in a month. Part of this was because of his work. He
went back to it with a new sense, an awareness. He became totally
sensitive to a condition called “integration,” himself with his job, his
job with his office, his office to the firm, and the firm itself in the
economic mosaic. He wasted no motion in his job, and found himself
spending his working day in pondering the structure of his surroundings.
His first new effort was expressed through the suggestion box. It was
perfect of its kind. It was an idea simple enough to have been thought
of by his pre-accident self, and unlikely to be advanced by anyone not
in this particular job. It eliminated the job and Yancey was advanced
two grades and given new work to do. So he was busy, immersed, engaged,
even at home. That in itself was enough to submerge his feelings about
Beverly.

But it was only a part of his procrastination. (He called it that at
first: sooner or later, he thought, there would be changes made.)
Largely, he delayed because of this accursed empathy. Beverly was so
_happy_. She was happy and proud. If he became unaccountably silent, she
tiptoed about the place, quite convinced that the great man was dreaming
up something else for the suggestion box. If he was short-tempered, she
forgave. If he bought her something, or approved something she had
bought, she was grateful. Home was harmonious; Beverly was so happy she
sang again. He realized that it had been a great while since she had
sung.

And all the while he knew how she felt. He knew it surely and painfully,
and was fully aware of the impact she would suffer if he broached to her
his inner thinking. He’d do it; oh yes, he’d do it, some day. Meanwhile,
it wouldn’t hurt anything if she got that new winter coat she had eyed
so wistfully in the Sunday paper.…

So a year went by and he did nothing about the matter. Actually, he
thought less about it after a year, though there were moments.… But work
was more engrossing than ever, and home was such a pleasure—though a
quiet one—and Beverly was fairly blooming. If a man has the virtue or
the curse of empathy, he has to be kind. He must, for the most selfish
of reasons: any time he kicks out at another human, he will find bruises
on his own shins.

Once, suddenly, he asked her, “Beverly, have I changed?”

She looked puzzled, so he enlarged it. “Since last year, I mean. Do I
seem different?”

She thought about it. “I don’t know. You’re—nice. But you were always
nice.” She laughed suddenly. “You can catch flies,” she teased. “Why,
Yance?”

“No reason. The new job, and all.” He passed the reference to flies. One
had been bothering her last fall and he had absently reached out and
caught it on the wing. It was the only time he had come near betraying
some of his new talents. She had been astonished; in eight years he had
never demonstrated coordination like that. She would have been more
astonished if she had noticed that he caught the fly between his thumb
and forefinger.

“The new job hasn’t gone to your head,” she said, “if that’s what you
mean.”

He maneuvered a situation in the office which required attention in an
out-of-town branch and arranged matters so that sending him out there
was only logical. He was gone two weeks. He had seen to it that it was
not the kind of task that required genius, just application and good
detail work. He met two girls while he was there, one brilliant and high
in the company, the other far better than anything the company would
ever be able to hire. He left them alone, disliking himself not a little
because he knew, in his heart of hearts, whom he was being faithful to.

And it was good, good to get home. Due to what he had done out of town,
he was raised another notch but had to reorganize his new office, so
there was no vacation that year. He could easily have analyzed this
development, and determined for himself whether he had purposely avoided
a vacation, but he did not. He’d rather not know.

There was a company picnic, and Beverly sang. People reacted so
enthusiastically—especially to Yancey, as if he had invented her—that he
coaxed and goaded her into auditioning for a television show. She won
the audition and appeared. She lost the audience vote to an
eight-year-old boy with an accordion, but she was incandescently happy
because Yancey had cared, Yancey had helped.

In the matter of Beverly, Yancey began to like himself.

That, in Yancey’s private code, was the Year of the Big Christmas. They
took a week off and went to a ski lodge in New Hampshire. They did a
number of things together, and nothing was wrong about any of it. And
one night they sat before a Christmas-card kind of fireplace with a
crowd of kindred souls, drinking _glögg_ and roaring carols, until they
were too sleepy to move. After everyone else had gone to bed, they sat
holding hands silently and watching the fire go out. As it will at such
moments, when one is living, not dying, his life whisked across his
inner eye and stopped here at this hearth, and on it was superimposed
the uneasy question _What am I doing here?_ Over him came a flood of
tenderness for Beverly, poor Beverly. For the first time it occurred to
him that the fantastic thing that had happened to him might have a grim
and horrible result. His metabolic efficiency, his apparent immunity to
everything from the common cold up, his outright inability to get too
little rest or too little food … suppose he should live—well, not
forever, but—

He glanced at his wife, and though she was young-looking for her age,
his quick mind vividly supplied a wrinkle here and there, a little sag.
He’d be able to conceal his feelings about it, of course, but would she?
Empathetically, he went through a brief torture with her future, seeing
her wither while he went on as he was.

He averted his face, and his eyes filled with tears.

Gently she disengaged her hand. He felt it stroking, stroking his wrist.
And she had the wit, or the luck, to say absolutely nothing as she did
it.

When he thought back on it, much later, he thought too that though there
were many women who could do many things Beverly couldn’t do, not one of
them would have done just that, just that way.

In the spring he turned down a promotion, sensitive as he was to the
feelings of his co-workers; this would benefit him far more in the long
run. And again it was summer, and this time there would be a vacation.

Well—where? He would choose a place, and Beverly would say, “If that’s
what you want, darling,” and off they’d go. He thought, and he thought
about it. With his total recall, he recreated a great many scenes for
himself. He all but decided, and then he hesitated; and then, sitting at
his desk in the office, he said aloud, “No! No, not yet,” and startled
some people.

They went to New England, to a place new to them, craggy, rugged,
sparkling, where sailboats notched the skyline and the wind smelled
clean and new and quite unused by anyone else. For four days they fished
and swam, danced, and dug littlenecks. On the fifth day they stayed
snugly indoors while the sky pressed down like a giant’s palm. At three
o’clock the small-craft warnings went up. At four the Coast Guard called
and warned them away from their rented shack; yes, it was a hurricane, a
real hurricane and not just a storm.

They loaded the car haphazardly and tumbled into it, and already there
was a blinding fog of spume blowing horizontally across the coast road.
They ground up the hill to the town and pulled into the hotel yard.

The hotel, of course, was full, with a bed laid in the linen room and a
cot set up behind the desk.

“What are we going to do?” Beverly wailed. It was not distress, not yet.
This was exciting.

“We’re going to have a drink. Then we’re going to have some hot chowder.
Then we’re going to think about what we’re going to do.”

With their lungs full of ozone and their eyes full of sparks, they went
to the dining-room.

There was a picture which, say, a year ago, Yancey used to call to mind
so often that it was as familiar as his safety razor. A slim back, wide
shoulders clad in rich brown moleskin: lamplight glancing from dark
obedient hair, and a long brown hand resting lightly against an ivory
cheek. When he saw it now, right before his eyes, he discounted it as an
unwelcome phantom, a trick of the charged air. But Beverly squeezed his
elbow and cried, “Yance—look!” and before he could draw a breath she
sprang away from him to the table.

“Lois! Lois, whatever in the world are you doing here?”

This, Yancey told himself heavily, just had to happen. He went forward.
“Hello, Lois.”

“Well …!” It was a single syllable, but it contained warmth and welcome
and … but how would you ever know, even when she smiled? A mask can
smile. “Sit down, please sit down, Beverly. Yancey.”

There was a rush of small talk. Oh, yes, she had sold the resort, last
spring. Worked for a while in town. Resigned, looking for something
better. Came up here to let the wind blow the smog out of her hair. “Now
I’m afraid it’ll take the hair too.” Oh yes, Beverly was saying, so
warmly, so proudly … two promotions … turned down another one too; he’ll
run the place in another year, just you watch … and a good deal more,
while Lois watched her hands and smiled a small smile. “What about you,
Lois, are you married or anything?”

“No,” said Lois huskily, “I’m not married”—and here Yancey dropped his
eyes; he couldn’t bear to meet hers while she said it—“or anything.”

They had a drink, and another, and then some superlative New England
chowder, and beer, and another drink. And then it was over, and Yancey,
paying the check, was telling himself glumly, “You did fine, boy; so if
you’re a little on the silent side for a day or two, what’s that? I’m
glad it’s over. But I wish …”

Rising, Beverly said, “You’re staying here?”

Lois smiled oddly. “There’s nothing they can do about it.”

Before he could stop himself Yancey said, “Now what exactly does that
mean?”

Lois laughed quietly. “I just got in an hour and a half ago. I never
dreamed I’d need a reservation—funny, isn’t it, after my experience?
Anyway, they’re full up. I shall just sit here until they want to close
the place. I will then be a problem, and it’ll be up to them to solve
it.” She laughed again. “I’ve solved worse ones in my time.”

“Oh, Lois, you can’t! They’ll make you sleep on the bar!”

She shrugged, really not caring.

“Yancey,” said Beverly. She was flushed and urgent. “Do you remember a
time when two wet strangers couldn’t find their beds, and what happened
to them?”

He did meet Lois’s eyes this time. This was when his heart began
hammering.

Beverly said, “It’s our turn. We’re going down the coast. We’ll find a
place. Come on. Come _on_, Lois!”

Yancey thought, listen to her, taking the bit in her teeth. Doesn’t she
usually find out first what I want? And he answered himself, no; most of
the time she just does what I want without asking. And he told himself
further, stop talking like a damn fool.

Ten miles south there was a town with a hotel. Full up. Four miles
further, a motel. Packed to the eaves. The next stretch was twenty
miles, and it was getting late. It was raining the kind of rain they had
slogged through to Lois’s cabin two years before, but this time they had
a howling gale along with it.

And by the time they reached the next town, the warnings were in; the
hurricane, true to its unpredictable breed, had swung east leaving rain
and a maddened sea, but no further danger. So they drove into the slick
shining streets of a city still quaking in its boots, but vastly
relieved.

Here and there a store was open. There were three hotels, two of them
full. They stopped at an all-night drugstore to ask directions to the
third and Lois bought cigarettes and Beverly found a bookclub edition of
_Anna Karenina_ and scooped it up with joy; she said she’d always wanted
to read it.

The third hotel had one double with bath.

“Twin beds?”

The clerk nodded. Yancey looked at Lois but her eyes were cloaked. He
looked at Beverly and she said, “Why not? We can fit in a twin bed. I’m
not very big.”

No, Bev, he thought, you’re not.

Lois said, “Beverly—”

“Shh,” said Beverly. “We’ll take it,” she said to the clerk.

Lois turned again. Now she was looking up at the ceiling with him. Think
of that! he thought acidly, here we are sharing some antiseptic
moonbeams.

His biting thought was protection for a very brief while. His heart
began again. It shook him with each beat. It shook the bed, the walls,
the building, the beaten cliff outside, making it hurl back the sea with
even greater violence.

There was the softest butterfly-wing touch on his chest. Beverly had
opened her eyes.

Yancey thought madly, it’s like one of those meaningless conjugations
they give you in first-year French. I stare up into the darkness, you
stare up into the darkness, she stares up into the darkness.…

Beverly moved. She wriggled up closer. She put her hand behind his head,
pulling it toward her. She put her mouth on his ear. He felt her warm
breath. Barely audible, her breath said, “Darling. What is it? What do
you want?”

What did he want? Nothing, of course. Nothing he could have. Nothing,
certainly, that he should have. He shook his head.

Beverly crept back until her head was on his shoulder again. She lay
still. She slid one hand over his chest, to rest lightly on his
hammering heart.

Lois sighed quietly and turned over, away from them. The wind laughed
and laughed outside, and another breaker smashed and spouted. The room
grew black, then silver again.

An hour-long five minutes passed.

Abruptly Beverly sat up. “I can’t sleep,” she said clearly.

Lois was silent. Yancey watched Beverly. The silver light made
everything in the room look like an overexposed photograph, but
Beverly’s flesh seemed pink—the only thing in the whole mad, pulsing
world that had any color but grey or black or silver.

Beverly swung her legs out, stood up, and stretched in the moonlight.
She was small and firm and—pink? Was she really pink, or was that a
memory too, like the reconstruction of the two kinds of darkness on
Lois’s pillow that to his mind looked like Lois’s face and hair?

What a beautiful complementation, he thought hotly; how balanced an
equation expresses this chaos! Beverly, small and fair; open, simple,
direct. Lois, tall, slender, dark, devious, complex. And each so clearly
lacking just what the other had.

Beverly said, “I have nineteen chapters of _Anna Karenina_ to read. Take
me about an hour.” She knelt on Yancey’s bed briefly, reached across to
the night table, and scooped something up. Then she went to the highboy
and got the book. She went into the bathroom. Yellow light appeared
starkly under the closed door.

Yancey lay quite still, looking at the line of yellow light. He heard
Lois’s sheets.

At last he rolled over and looked at her. He could see the sliver of
yellow again, across her eyes. She was half sitting, resting her weight
on one slender arm. She was looking at him, or past him, to the closed
door.

“What was it she picked up from the night table, Yancey?”

“Her watch.”

Lois made a sound, perhaps “Oh.” She sank down slowly, until she rested
on her elbow. She _was_ looking at him now. He would know that even if
he closed his eyes.

He lay still, wondering if Lois could hear his heart. She probably
could. Beverly probably could, through the door. He wondered, with
shattering inconsequentiality, whether Beverly liked red curtains.

Lois made a slight motion with her chin toward the yellow gleam. She
whispered, “I couldn’t do that.”

A great hungry yearning came over him, but at the moment, incredibly, it
seemed to have no direction. It yawned somewhere beneath him, waiting to
engulf him. A puzzlement plucked at him, and then, seeing the polished
yellow lines in Lois’s eyes, it came to him which of these women was
simple and direct, and which was subtle and deep and complex.

“I couldn’t do that,” Lois had said. How many other things could Beverly
do that Lois could not?

What kind of a woman was Beverly?

For the very first time Yancey Bowman asked himself what had happened to
Beverly the day he was killed. He’d assumed she was simply in cold
storage while they put him back together. He’d assumed … how could he
assume such a thing? He had never even asked about her. That was
impossible! Unnatural!

But of course—he wasn’t to ask. He would not have thought of it, and the
chances were that he could not have asked her even if he’d thought to.

Why could he think of it now?

It must be time to think of it. Something had happened to him,
permitting him to. Qualifying him to. But he hadn’t changed; he couldn’t
change. He was built and rebuilt and designed and redesigned, to be
Yancey-Plus. What change could …

Supposing, he told himself, they had a very young thing to rebuild.
Wouldn’t they build it so that it could go on growing? Then he could
have grown. How? How?

Well, what would he have done in this same mad situation, two years ago,
even after he left the space ship? He wouldn’t have lain here these
swift seconds, speculating; that was for sure.

“I couldn’t do that,” Lois had whispered. Supposing Beverly had been
killed too, and changed as he had been changed. He had never told her
what he knew; why would she have told him? Wasn’t the prime purpose to
improve a little, but to change nothing? He was Yancey-Plus, who went
right ahead ruling the roost, accepting his wife’s quiet variety of
slave labor. Wouldn’t she go right on being Beverly, giving him always
what he wanted?

And suppose she hadn’t been killed, hadn’t been changed. What kind of a
woman was she, who could do what Lois could not do, what—it painfully
occurred to him—he himself, with all his powers, could never do? Was the
original Beverly a bigger person than Yancey-Plus?

Then it was, with a surge of relief that made his head spin, that his
heart eased and he smiled. He knew now how he had changed, how he had
grown. He knew, all at once, what to do now and what to do for the rest
of his life with Beverly. Up to now he had not been able to ask her if
she was the same Beverly he had married. Now, by choice, he never would
ask her. Their marriage would be spiced and underscored and made most
beautiful by that one mystery between them, each held from the other.

All this in seconds, and he became aware again of the yellow lights in
Lois’s long eyes. Quite changing the subject, he used her exact words.
“I couldn’t do that,” he whispered.

Lois nodded slowly. She sank back on the pillow and closed her eyes. He
thought she trembled. He didn’t know. He didn’t much care. He turned
over and filled his lungs, as he had not been able to do for more than
an hour because of his leaping heart. “Beverly!” he bellowed.

The book fell on the tiles. There was silence for a moment, and then the
door opened.

“Yes, Yance.”

“Get back to bed, idiot. You can read that some other time. You need
your sleep.”

“I just—all right, Yance, if you want.”

She switched off the light and came in. A moonbeam swept across her face
as she approached. She was looking across him at Lois, her lips
trembling. She got into bed. He put his arms around her, gently, humbly.
She turned to him and suddenly held him so tight that he almost cried
out.



THAT LOW


THERE WAS A “psychic” operating on Vince Street. Fowler went to see her.
Not that he had any faith in mumbo-jumbo: far from it. He had been told
that this Mrs. Hallowell worked along strictly logical lines. That’s why
he went. He liked the sound of that, being what he was. He went to her
and asked her about killing himself. She said he couldn’t do it. Not
“You won’t,” or “shouldn’t.” She said, “You can’t.”

This Fowler was a failure specialist, in the sense that a man is a
carburetor specialist or a drainage specialist or a nerve specialist.
You don’t get to be that kind of specialist without spending a lot of
time with carburetors or sewers or nerves. You don’t stay nice and
objective about it either. You get in it up to the elbows, up to the
eyeballs. Fowler was a man who knew all that one man could know about
failure. He knew all of the techniques, from the small social failure of
letting his language forget what room of the house his mouth was in,
through his declaration of war on the clock and the calendar (in all but
style he was the latest), to the crowning stupidity of regarding his
opinions as right purely because they were his opinions. So he had
fallen and floundered through life, never following through, jumping
when he should have crept, and lying down at sprintingtime. He could
have written a book on the subject of failure, except for the fact that
if he had, it might have been a success … and he hated failure. Well,
you don’t have to love your specialty to be a specialist. You just have
to live with it.

It was understandable, therefore, that he should be impressed by Mrs.
Hallowell’s reputation for clarity and logic, for he truly believed that
here was a kindred spirit. He brought his large features and his flaccid
handshake to her and her office, which were cool. The office was Swedish
modern and blond. Mrs. Hallowell was dark, and said, “Sit down.”

“Your name?”

“Maxwell Fowler.”

“Occupation?”

“Engineer.”

She glanced up. She had aluminum eyes. “Not a graduate engineer.” It was
not a question.

“I would of been,” said Fowler, “except for a penny-ante political
situation in the school. There was a fellow—”

“Yes,” she said. “Married?”

“I was. You know, the kind that’ll kick a man when he’s down. She was
a—”

“Now, Mr. Fowler. What was it you wanted here?”

“I hear you can foretell the future.”

“I’m not interested in gossip,” she said, and it was the only cautionary
thing she said in the entire interview. “I know about people, that’s
all.”

He said, “Ever since I could walk and talk, people have been against me.
I can whip one or two or sometimes half a dozen or more, but by and
large I’m outnumbered. I’m tired. Sometimes I think I’ll check out.”

“Are you going to ask me if you should?”

“No. If I will. You see, I think about it all the time. Sometimes I—”

“All right,” she said. “As long as you understand that I don’t give
advice. I just tell about what’s going to happen.”

“What’s going to happen?”

“Give me a check.”

“What?”

“Give me a check. No—don’t write on it. Just give it to me.”

“But—”

“You wouldn’t pay me afterward.”

“Now look, my word’s as good as—” and then he looked into the eyes. He
got out his checkbook. She took a pen and wrote on the check.

She gave it back to him and he looked at it and said, “That’s foolish.”

“You have it, though.”

“Yes, I have, but—”

“Sign it, then,” she said casually, “or go away.”

He signed it. “Well?”

She hesitated. There was something—

“Well?” he rapped again. “What’ll I do? I’m tired of all this
persecution.”

“I take it you’re asking me what you _shall_ do—not what you should or
will do.”

“Lawyer’s talk, huh.”

“Laws,” she said. “Yes.” She wet her lips. “You shall live a long and
unhappy life.” Then she put away the check.

Maxwell looked after it, longingly. “It can’t be unhappier than it is.”

“That may well be.”

“Then I don’t want to live a long life.”

“But you shall.”

“Not if I don’t want to,” he said grimly. “I tell you, I’m tired.”

She shook her head. “It’s gone too far,” she said, not unkindly. “You
can’t change it.”

He got up. “I can. Anytime, I can. Then you’ll be wrong, won’t you?”

“I’m not wrong,” said Mrs. Hallowell.

“I’ll kill myself,” said Maxwell, and that was when she told him he
couldn’t. He was very angry, but she did not give him back his check. By
the time he thought of stopping payment on it, it had cleared the bank.
He went on living his life.

The amount of money he had paid Mrs. Hallowell dug quite a hole, but for
a surprisingly long time he was able to walk around it. However, he did
nothing to fill it up, and inevitably, he had the choice of facing his
creditors or killing himself. So he got a piece of rope and made a noose
and put it around his neck. He tied the other end to the leg of the
radiator and jumped out of the window. He was a big man, but the rope
held all right. However, the leg broke off the radiator, and he fell six
stories. He hit a canvas marquee, tore through it, and fell heavily to
the sidewalk. There was quite a crowd there, after a while, to listen to
the noises he made because of what was broken.

Fowler took a while to mend, and spent it in careful thought. He took no
comfort from his thoughts, for they were honest ones, and he did not
care at all for his conclusions, which drafted a portrait no one would
admire and an insight no one would want as a bedfellow. He got through
it, though, and put a list of his obligations down on paper and drew up
a plan for taking care of things. It was a plan that was within his
capabilities and meant chip, chip, chip for a long, long time before he
could ever call himself honestly broke again. The first person he tried
it out on was the business manager of the hospital, and to his immense
surprise it worked: that is, he wouldn’t get sued for the bill, and the
hospital would go along with him until it was all straightened out.
Nobody had ever given him that much of a break before; but then, he had
never tackled a problem this way before.

He got out of the hospital and began chipping.

Mrs. Hallowell had a bad moment over Fowler. She started up out of her
sleep one night, thinking about him.

“Oh, how awful,” she said. “I made a mistake!”

She phoned in the morning. Fowler was not there. Mrs Hallowell phoned
and phoned around until she got someone who could tell her about Fowler.
The tenant in the apartment next to Fowler’s had made a mistake about a
gas heater, and had a bad cold, and lit a match, and blew the end of the
building out. Fowler had been picked up from the wreckage, bleeding. The
someone said, “Is there any message I could send to him?”

“No,” said Mrs. Hallowell. “No. Not … now.”

They saved Fowler that time, too. It was a lot of trouble. They had to
take this and that off, and the other out. He was put, finally, in a
very short bed with a mass of equipment beside him, humming and
clicking. It circulated fluids, and another part of it dripped into a
tube, and there was a thing that got emptied a couple of times a day
without Fowler’s worrying about it.

That was the trouble with Mrs. Hallowell’s talent. It lay in such broad
lines. A mistake could cover a lot of territory. Fowler gradually became
aware of her mistake. It took him about two months.

People came by and clucked their tongues when they saw him. There was a
bright-eyed, dry-faced old lady who put flowers near him every week or
so. He didn’t have to go on with that chip, chip, pay, pay any more.
Everybody was sorry for him, and everybody always would be, as long as
he lived, which would be very nearly as long as the equipment could be
kept running. A long time. A long life. Mrs. Hallowell had been right,
dead right, about the long life.

Where she made her mistake was in thinking that he would be unhappy.



MEMORY


JEREMIAH JEDD STOOD in the igneous dust of the spaceport margin, staring
into the sky and shading his eyes with his arm. Occasionally he checked
the time by his ristkron, shaking it to make sure it was wound, craning
back toward the hunched Customs House and the great clock. The sign
there announced placidly that the _Pinnacle_ had reported, was overdue
and would discharge passengers at Gate Three.

Jeremy shook his head and took the letter from Mars out of his pocket
again. Slowly he unfolded it and read, in the manner of a man checking
his mnemonics. He was certainly familiar enough with it after so much
re-reading. The letter said:

_You must have heard by this time that General Export has installed a
fabricating plant here, just outside Fort Wargod. It cost them plenty in
time and money to get it set up—actually most of it was shipped as hand
luggage because of the shipping space situation_.

_Like a lot of other people, I thought it was a foolish move, because
the finished piping they could have shipped in the space is at such a
premium on Mars, and because their plant is going to require power—a
hard thing to get here. I didn’t worry too much, though. Why should we
care what our competitors do with their money?_

_But here’s the joker. In spite of the fact that the plant is small and
comparatively crude, it will fabricate pipe. And the material is
plastic, chum, and they can now ship it in sheets! I don’t have to tell
you what that means to us. We only got our cargo-space contracts from
General Export because the Government okayed our shipping system—nesting
the smaller diameters of pipe inside the larger ones. Genex’s own pipe
is shipped that way now, too. The idea isn’t patentable_.

_So unless we find a patentable way to ship pipe in less space,
finished, than Genex is taking for their sheet-stock, we’re done,
brother—wiped out. Genex means to get everything in the Colonial
System—you know that. They have all the ships now, and most of the goods
and services. I’m afraid we’re going on the long list of small operators
who have tried to buck them_.

Jeremy lowered the letter and rubbed his eyes again. They ached. Since
he had received it a week ago, he hadn’t slept much. Supplying pipe for
the Mars project was work enough without these long nights in the
laboratory trying to figure a way out of this spot. Everything he and
Hal had in the world was in this deal. They had worked together ever
since they left school, right up until the time Hal went up to handle
the Mars end.

Fervently he wished it were the other way around. If Hal were here, he’d
dope out something. He had always been the real brains of Jedd & Jedd.
And as a matter of fact, Hal already had doped out something. What an
irony! Whatever his process or system was, he couldn’t write it or wire
it. General Export carried the mails too, and if they wanted to find
something out, it would be only too easy.

Jeremy looked up again. There was a growing, gleaming dot in the sky. He
glanced at the building. Near it, men were manning the heatproof launch.
He turned back to the letter, to read the cryptic part about Phyllis
Exeter:

_I know a way to ship this, bud. I’m not telling you about it in a
letter—you know why. I’m hoping and praying that you’ll figure it out
yourself. The new hauling contracts are coming up, and priorities for
shipping space go to the pipe company that can pack the most in. My
process is very simple, really. It’s nothing that Budgie couldn’t have
told you. You have three weeks to figure it out after you get this note,
and don’t forget it takes ten days to file a patent application_.

_And in connection with this idea, Phyllis Exeter is due to arrive on
the_ Pinnacle. _I’d like you to meet her when the rocket-ship docks. She
really has what it takes. I got quite chummy with her while she was out
here in Thor City. She’ll probably have a lot to say about it. She’ll
have a lot to say, period. She talks more than Budgie. Be good, little
man_.

Jeremy’s brows matted together as he folded the note and put it away.
There was more than met the eye in those last two paragraphs—much more.
He got some of it. “Be good, little man.” And the references to
Budgie—he wasn’t too sure, but he had the idea they weren’t in there for
the purpose of using up ink. And the specific mention of Phyllis Exeter
and her arrival. Now _that_ was something.

If Hal wanted to be absolutely positive Phyllis Exeter would see him,
he’d sure picked the right way. Just that line in the letter would be
enough to have Phyllis hunt him up anywhere on Earth, even if he hid.
General Export carried the mails. But why Phyllis? After all, Hal and
Phyllis had been—He shrugged. If Hal wanted to throw them together
again, all right. He began to get the old, familiar feeling, just
thinking about it.

From overhead came the blowtorch susurrus of the _Pinnacle_’s braking
and hovering jets. Down she came on her bed of fire, until she hesitated
at five thousand feet. He distinctly heard the sudden shift to
cold-jets, and in another minute the dust-cloud was piled up to receive
her.

Jeremy stepped into the waiting room of Number Three Gate, just avoiding
the sudden angry gusts of dust-laden air. He shouldered past the
chattering crowd inside and got to a port, which was covered with a disc
of transparent plastic whirling at high speed to afford clear vision
through the mucky dust which hurtled so violently about the building.
From the spaceport central, the little heatproof drifted toward the
grounding liner, waiting its chance to settle on the huge hull and sink
its extensible airlock into the monster like an ovipositor.

Fifteen minutes later the heatproof whickered slowly down to the roof of
the gate building. The crowd pressed toward the elevators and was
shunted back by the pageboys and officials. Jeremy stood on the fringes,
trying to look indifferent and doing a very poor job of it.

The first load came down. A heavy-set man with a dark, rocky face. A
quick, slender, cold-eyed man. These two stood aside and let a woman
with two children and an aged couple pass them. And then Phyllis stepped
out.

He wondered again, looking at her, what a man would have to do to ruffle
that sleekness, to crumple the brilliant mask she seemed to wear. Throw
a kiss or a fist in that face, and there would be little difference. Her
hair was soft, and iridescent green, now. She smoked with a long holder
and the smoke matched her hair. Her voice was as lustrous, as colorful
as ever, when she saw him.

“Jeremy!” she said. “Jeremy Jedd! How are you, darling?”

“Don’t call me darling,” he said.

“Oh, these people won’t think anything of me that they don’t think
already,” she said.

“They might think it of me,” he said grimly. He took her arm, while she
laughed as if trying to find out whether she could. She could.

“Come on,” he said. “I need a drink. Before, I just wanted one.”

She hung back and pouted. “You seem quite sure I’ll come.”

“You’ve been reading my mail!” he quipped grimly. She stopped hanging
back. They moved toward the door and down the short path to the Customs
House. Jeremy glanced back. The two men he had noticed at the elevators
were following them. He gestured slightly with his head. “Yours?” She
shrugged. “Oh, you know how it is.”

“No,” he said, “I don’t. Not altogether. But I’ll learn the rest of it.”

She laughed again, and hugged his elbow close to her body. “Jeremy,” she
said cozily, “do you still feel the same way about me?”

He glanced down into her wide gray-green eyes. “Yup. Always will, I
guess. Worse luck.”

“Worse luck?”

“It gets in my hair,” he grumbled.” When I think of all the time I’ve
spent thinking about you when I could’ve been making pipe—”

“That’s what I like about you,” she flashed. “You make a person feel
so—welcome.” She released his arm. “What makes you think you can treat
me like that?”

“Several things. They all add up to the fact that you won’t walk away
from me until you find out what you think I know about stowing pipe. No
matter what I say or do to you, you’ll tag right along.”

“All right,” she said, in quite a new, matter-of-fact voice. “I’d just
as soon play that way then. All the cards face up, and such sordidness.
It could have been pleasant, too.”

“Not with me. Not with you and me.”

“That’s what I meant.”

Inside the building they turned to the right elevator bank and dropped
to the cafeteria two levels below. There was no conversation in the
elevator due to the silent presence of the two men who had followed them
from the gatehouse. Jeremy glared at them, but the younger man refused
to catch his eye and stared at the ceiling, whistling softly. The other
man gazed at Phyllis’s feet.

“I think,” Jeremy said, as they emerged, “that you have hired these pugs
just to bolster your ego. You’ll have men following you whatever you
have to do.”

“It isn’t necessary to hire them for that,” she said coldly. “I’m sorry
you find this unpleasant, Jeremy. But please don’t make it any more so
than you have to. Strangely enough, there are lots of places I’d rather
be than with you. Alone, for example.”

“You know,” he said, as he politely pulled out a chair for her, “I like
you like this. I mean, I could if I tried. This is the first time I have
ever seen you when you weren’t swinging the figurative female lasso
round and round.”

“Compliments from you are more unpleasant than anything else could be.
Light the menu, will you?”

He touched the stud that illuminated the menu screen. She studied it for
a moment, and then dialed the code numbers of the items she wanted.
Jeremy studied her as she did so.

She was an amazing girl, he admitted grudgingly. How she looked, what
she was—amazing. Her smooth brow was crinkled a bit now, between the
eyes. She used to look like that in college once in a while. It
generally signified she was out of her depth, and it also meant that she
was about to do something about it, like flapping her eyelids at a
vulnerable professor, or cribbing from someone else’s paper.

Frowning, Jeremy studied Phyllis for several minutes more. Then he
spoke.

“Tell me something,” he said. “Exactly how was this thing supposed to
go?”

“I don’t know what you mean.”

His voice tuned itself to his strained patience. “I mean, what was
supposed to happen here? You would meet me at the gate, or you would
hunt me up, and then what?”

“You seem to know everything. Answer your own questions.”

“All right. You were going to overcome my time-honored distaste of you
and give me the business—most likely the remorse angle. The time you
pulled that factory-lease out from under us for the benefit of a
cosmetic factory—and General Export, who were starting in the pipe
business—you are sorry about that. The time Hal fell for Dolly Holleson
and you told her so many lies about him that she up and married somebody
else—you’re sorry about that too. The time you—” His voice got thick
“—accepted my ring, all of my grand old ‘forgive and forget’ attitude,
and a third of our company stock, only to turn the stock over to Genex
and tell me to go fly it—that was an awful misunderstanding!

“You know, Phyl, if I had known when I gave you the stock that Hal had
phonied up the stock certificate, I’d have killed him, I think. He took
the chance. Felt that if you were on the up-and-up he could straighten
out the stock later. If you weren’t—well, nothing would be lost but a
little of mind. Mine.” He breathed very deeply, once. “Anyhow, Hal
thinks you’re poison, and I think you’re poison, and I don’t know what
in the universe you think you are, but certainly it isn’t anything that
will get a new pipe-stowage process out of me.”

“You really slug when you start, don’t you?” she whispered. He had never
seen her eyes so big, nor her face so white. “And you don’t mind
lowering your sights, to mix a metaphor.”

“I adjust to the most obvious target,” he said bluntly. “Why don’t you
get sore? Why don’t you leave?”

Slowly, with a small, tragic smile, she rose. “Watch,” she said.

She turned toward the door. At a far table, a man rose and sauntered
toward the exit. Behind Jeremy, there was a scraping of chairs on the
glossy flooring, and the two men who had followed her from the ship went
past.

The man at the door, a suave-looking individual, lean and white-templed,
folded his arms and leaned against the wall just out of range of the
photocell which opened the door. When Phyllis drew abreast he spoke
softly to her. She stopped and shook her head. He smiled then, and shook
his. She bit her lip, lowered her head a little and moved toward the
door again. So smoothly that it did not seem swift at all, he blocked
her.

The other two men reached them, greeted her effusively, took an arm each
and led her back toward their table, talking and laughing. When they
neared Jeremy’s place, they released her and went back to their own
table, leaving her standing alone, staring at Jeremy with angry and
terrified eyes. The whole thing was done so smoothly that no occupant of
the restaurant seemed to notice.

“I have just seen something very lovely,” said Jeremy happily. “A
pushing-around with you involved, where you are getting pushed for a
change. Now come and sit down and tell me all about it in a sisterly
fashion.”

She came. Again he was struck with the difference in her, the air of
being out of her depth. She sank into her chair, her eyes averted from
his. She put her hands tight together on the table, but they would not
stop shaking. She volunteered nothing.

He reached over the centerpiece of the table and opened the cold-chamber
on her side, removing the drink she had ordered. Pushing it across to
her, he said gently:

“Gulp some of that and for once in your life give me a straight story.
Whose side are you on besides your own? How did it happen? And why do
these dawn-men take such an interest in leaving you alone, providing
it’s with me?”

“Everything’s gone wrong. You—you know too much, Jeremy. And you don’t
know enough. All right, I’ll tell you. Telling you won’t help me—I mean,
you won’t help me, no matter what. I thought I could get what I wanted
out of you without your ever knowing that they—that I—”

“That they have the heat on you,” supplemented Jeremy. “Source, Genex.
Temperature, high.” He shook his head wonderingly. “That’s always been
the trouble with you, Phyl. So self-sufficient. Never asked anyone for
help in your life. There was always a way out, generally paved with
somebody’s face. I gather that Genex is as wise to you as I am.”

She nodded, with a submissiveness which wrung something within him. His
hand went out toward her. He drew it back without touching her.

He said, “Talk, now.”

“I was doing all right,” she said in a low voice. “I pulled lots of—of
deals for General Export. They want everything. They want the entire
Colonial trade—ships, supplies, personnel, everything. They’re getting
it, too, any and every way they can. They’ll have Mars when they’re
through.”

“Then what? They’re still under government authority.”

“Oh, it’s long-range, Jeremy. You remember your history. There’s a
colonial phase, after discovery and exploration. Colonizing is a job in
itself—development doesn’t really set in for quite a while. Nowadays, of
course, the whole process is enormously speeded up. You know the
potentialities of Mars. Uranium, iron, diamond-coal and drugs. Why, it’s
an unlimited opportunity for whoever controls it. For perhaps two
generations, Mars will look to Earth for government and guidance. But
then there will be patriots, Jeremy. Earth will find herself with a
competitor instead of a dominion. And the way that competitor will be
run will gradually swing the direction of control the other way—or else.
Genex isn’t out after a world. Genex wants two worlds—the system—the
galaxy, if you like. But it will be for Genex and its heirs; it won’t be
for the little guy.”

Jeremy sat back and stared at her amazed. “You figured all that out
yourself? I can’t believe it. No, by heaven, I don’t believe it. Whom
are you quoting?”

“Hal Jedd,” she said with an effort.

“Well, well, well!” He took out Hal’s letter and opened it. Her eyes
darted to it, to his face, and down again. “Don’t play,” Jeremy said
grimly. “I know you’ve seen this. You and every stooge Genex could put
on it.” He glanced through the letter, speared a sentence with his
finger, and read aloud: “ ‘Phyllis Exeter due. I got quite chummy with
her while she was out here in Thor City.’ ”

“That’s what put me in this spot,” she said with sudden bitterness.
“Yes, I saw him. Lots. The word got around that he had developed
something radical in the line of pipe stowage. He has a suitcase-size
lab back of his office, you know. Well, I was put on it.”

“You volunteered—isn’t that more like it? You said, ‘Let me at the
sucker. I’ve been able to wind him and his dopey brother around my
finger since we were kids; and besides, I have a little score to settle.
They’re one up on me.’ That right?”

She almost laughed. “I didn’t call him a sucker,” she said faintly. She
took a swallow of her drink. “Take care of the steak, will you, Jeremy?
I’m hungry.”

Jeremy took the raw steak out of the cold compartment. It was tenderized
and seasoned. He slid it into the induction-heater.

“How do you like it?” he asked.

“Seared and rare,” she answered.

He adjusted the controls and closed the drawer, while she continued.

“I saw a lot of Hal. He got under my skin, Jeremy. Not anything about
him personally—I don’t go for his type. These scholarly boys leave me
cold. I like big men with blond hair, strong enough to smack a gal down
when she deserves it, or even to keep their hands off her. And maybe
with a little cleft in a square jaw—”

Unconsciously fingering just such a concavity on his chin, Jeremy threw
back his blond head and snapped, “Baloney to you and your shopping
lists! Go on with the yarn. What did get under your skin?”

“What he had to say about Genex. I don’t know—maybe I never bothered to
take it apart before. Maybe my paychecks and bonuses kept me from
thinking. Whatever it was that happened, it happened so gradually that I
didn’t notice it. But the things he said about long-range thinking—well,
here I was on the inside and knowing even more about what went on with
Genex than he did. The more I looked at it, the less I liked it. Maybe I
should have left Hal alone. Maybe I should have tuned him out while he
talked. But, as I said before, he had me before I knew what was
happening.”

Jeremy smiled “Hal’s like that. He has a theory that a quiet voice in a
noisy room is louder than a shout. He thinks quietly and loud that way
too,” The centerpiece chimed softly and the drawer slid out. Jeremy took
the plate-tongs from the rack and lifted the steak and its perfectly
cooked side-dishes over to Phyllis.

“Thanks. Well, I met a boy at Fort Wargod. A blue-eyed innocent of a
cadet. Maybe it was moonlight. Moonlight’s twice as tricky on Mars, you
know. Maybe it’s because I’m a little crazy, and can’t resist trying
things out on people. Well, this kid needed to be impressed worse than
anyone I ever met. Before I knew it we were on the parapet looking at
Earth, hanging out there so bright and blue, and I was spilling all this
stuff about colonies, dominions, and the patriotism of the
second-generation Martian. Loose talk. Really, I don’t know how much of
it I believed myself.”

She shook herself suddenly, all over, as if trying to wriggle out of
something tight and hot. Pulling herself together with an effort, she
cut into her steak busily.

“Well,” she said after she had swallowed the first bite, “my blue-eyed
babe in the woods turned out to be a Genex man, put there for the
specific purpose of finding out where my indoctrination stood.”

Jeremy roared with laughter, a great cruel burst of it. He cut it off
instantly and leaned forward. “So it happened to you,” he said
viciously. “I’m mighty glad to hear it. Some sweet and gentle character
made you open up your heart, did he? Tell me something, slicker—did you
try to give him some of your company’s stock?”

This hit home. In sudden anger she stopped eating and cursed Jeremy.
Then all at once, she smiled and shrugged. It was an odd little gesture
and the resignation in it made that something within him flinch again.
Phyllis had tried so hard, for so long, to cover up that soft, lost part
of her. She had succeeded so well, until now. She was such a magnificent
product of her own determinations, and it hurt him to see such a product
spoiled, even though he hated everything it represented. So he said,
“I’m sorry,” and to his surprise, the words tasted good in his mouth.

“So here I am,” she said in a low voice. “I failed with Hal, as I should
have expected. I got quite a carpeting for it, and for that business
with the cadet. And then Hal wrote that letter. Genex carries the mails.
Every big brain in the place, and a lot of little ones, has been racking
over it ever since. And they put me on to you. This is supposed to be my
last chance—my double or nothing play. If I get that process from you, I
get back where I was. On probation, of course, but I’ll string along
with Genex. If I fail, I’m done. Outside of Genex there isn’t much
doing, and I don’t doubt that I’m pretty thoroughly blacklisted.”

“You are,” he said flatly. “I get the score now. These plugs around here
are supposed to keep you with me until you get the info. _Hmm_. Suppose
I leave?”

“I go with you. I keep after you, I catch up with you some way, I keep
trying.

“How long is this supposed to go on?”

“Until I get the process. Or until Genex gets the pipe hauling contract
from the Government. In which case I’m automatically out.”

“Suppose you quit trying?”

“Then I’m out, as of that moment.”

“In other words, your fate is in my hands, to corn a phrase.”

“I guess it is, Jeremy.” And to his utter astonishment, she began to cry
with her mouth open. For such an accomplished actress, she did it very
badly indeed. Her heart was in it.

Jeremy sat back and watched her, his brain racing. Hal’s letter had
taken on a few new meanings, but not enough. “Be good, little man.” The
rest of that old routine was “And if you can’t be good, be careful.”
Well, maybe he could have been more careful, but Phyllis seemed to have
responded well enough to the bulldozer treatment. Jeremy knew what was
the matter with her. She was scared. She had lived by her not
inconsiderable wits for a long time, and the clear picture of the end of
the line she was facing was a frightening one.

But what about the process? Now it was up to Jeremy to figure it out!

Hal had done his astute best to explain the process to Jeremy Jedd in
that letter. Somewhere in that letter, somewhere in the odd fact of
Phyllis’s being here—in these three places were components of the
process.

She was quieter now.

“Sorry,” she sniffled. “I’m in a bad way, I guess. Do you know why I was
crying? It was because you didn’t get up and leave when I told you all
this. You will help me, Jeremy? You will?”

“Help you? How can I?”

“Tell me the process.” She leaned closer, excitedly. “Or tell me
something almost as good as your process, but better than what Genex
has.

“You’re very flattering.” She really thought he had the process, then.
Be good, little man. He’d have to be. But _good_. “I gather Genex has
set up a welding plant on Mars. Why are they worried?”

“Power,” she answered. “There are only two power-piles on Mars, and
they’re worked to the limit. They’re so heavy, with the shielding and
all. Shipping space is so scarce, with foodstuffs, development equipment
and so on, that piles aren’t set up until they are absolutely essential.
Power is rationed, and it is costing Genex a fortune for the piddling
amount they need to process sheet stock into pipe. Their advantage, of
course, is to procure the space for themselves and get rid of one more
independent outfit.”

“Uh-huh. The fight is really over a much bigger thing than pipe. _Hmm_.
And the outfit that finds a way to ship pipe in less space than sheet
stock, gets the contract and for once has a solid footing against the
corporation’s expansion.”

“But how can you do it, Jeremy? How can you possibly ship pipe in less
space than stacks of plastic sheet?”

He smiled. “You really think I’ll tell you, don’t you? I have no reason
to trust you. You have thrown yourself on my mercy, more or less, and
given me the choice of saving your skin—your career, anyway—I suppose
you call it that—at the risk of having you hand the process to Genex and
not only kill off Jedd & Jedd but also kill the brightest chance in
fifty years of checking the monopoly. Nope. I’m telling you nothing.” I
wish someone would tell me, he added to himself.

“But you still stick around,” she said thoughtfully. “You met me at the
spaceport, you don’t throw me to the wolves when you have a chance,
you—why, you don’t know the process yourself!”

“On the contrary. I’m just sitting here cruelly amusing myself. I’ve
waited years to see you crawl.”

“I’m not going to listen to you,” she said tightly. “I think I’m right.
The only thing I can do is to help you to figure it out. That letter.
You. Me. The process is right here at this table, if we can only find
out how to put it together.”

“This is going to be very entertaining,” said Jeremy, far more jovially
than he felt. How could this girl, who in the long run operated so
stupidly, be so incredibly sharp in detail? “Where would you start?”

“With the letter,” she said promptly. She closed her eyes and her lips
moved. It dawned on him that she had thoroughly memorized the letter.
She opened her eyes wide and asked, “Who is Budgie?”

“A childhood companion,” he said, a little taken aback.

“That’s a lie. Every fairly close associate you have ever had in your
life has been checked.”

Jeremy’s mouth slowly opened. Then he brought a hand crashing down on
the table and bellowed with laughter.

“Do you mean to tell me,” he gasped, “that Genex’s investigators have
been gravely looking through lists of my schoolmates, cousins,
bartenders and dates looking for _Budgie?_”

“We—they tried everything,” she said, and added, “Stop that silly
cackling. Who was it?”

He held up an irritating forefinger. “Ah-ah! Manners, now. Let us act
like ladies and gentlemen, chicken, or I send you to the salt mines.”

“I’m sorry,” she said angrily. He set his mouth. “I’m sorry,” she said
with a great deal more sincerity.

“Better,” he said. “Now then, I don’t think it’ll hurt to tell you.
Budgie was a parakeet we used to have. He was around very nearly twenty
years. We gave him a fine funeral.”

The girl stared at him, her eyes glittering with disbelief.

“And yet, according to that letter, the process is nothing Budgie
couldn’t have told you. Jeremy, I don’t believe you. Who was Budgie?”

“So help me, the only Budgie I ever knew was that bird. He swore like a
soybean farmer in a urea factory, he did. We called him Budgie because
he was a budgerigar, or, to you, a Zebra Parakeet. A budgerigar is the
talkingest bird that ever lived.”

“What?” she said in disgust. “A creature with memory and no brains could
tell you what the process is?” Jeremy started, and she asked, “What’s
the matter? Have a rush of brains to the head?”

While he fumbled for an answer, she leaned back with narrowed eyes. “I
came awfully close to it that time, didn’t I? Come clean, Jeremy. You’ve
known about the process ever since you were a kid, now, haven’t you?”

“You’ve got it,” he mumbled. She’s got it? Who’s got what? He clapped
his hand to his head. “Memory without brains. That’s me.”

They stared at each other. “If only I knew a little more about
plastics,” she breathed. “Or even about your brother. I’ll bet if I knew
as much about the way Hal’s mind works as you do, I could sit right down
and write that process out.”

Jeremy stared at her and knew she told the truth. His was a quick mind
as well as an encyclopedic one, but she was his master at quick
intuitive reasoning. A wild plan flitted through his mind—to leap up and
rush out, to draw an attack from one of the Genex men who waited
patiently for Phyllis to do her work; to prefer charges against the
corporation, perhaps. But he rejected it instantly.

They were too clever for that. They would let him go. One of their
plastics engineers would work with Phyllis until some hunch she had
gotten made sense to him. Then what? Well, either he would figure it out
in time or he wouldn’t. If not, he was sunk. If so, Genex would so
radically underbid his pipe to drive him out that he would be sunk
anyway.

_“Hal!”_ The name slipped from his lips, so profound was his sudden wish
for his brother. Hal could set him straight with a word, if only he
could send the word.

“Me too,” whispered Phyllis. “If only I could see Hal once, only for a
minute, I’ll bet I could—” Suddenly she dived into her handbag, clawing
out a potpourri of feminine conglomerata. “Where is it? Where
is—oh—here.” She held a rectangular piece of plastic in her hand. It was
blue, smooth, heavy.

“What’s that?”

“Just a compact. A lighter. A torch. One of those things. But Hal gave
it to me. And I’m just mystic enough to think it’ll help me think. He
had his hands on it. Didn’t you know that all women—even modern
women—are witches?” She closed her eyes, clutching the compact, frowning
in concentration.

Staring at her, Jeremy frowned too, and thought harder than ever in his
life before. Something about memory without brains. Something—and then a
line in the letter swam before his mind’s eye.

_I’d like you to meet her when the rocket-ship docks. She really has
what it takes_.

“Give me that,” he spat, and snatched it roughly out of her grasp.
Instinctively, she reached for it. He batted her hand out of the way,
hard. She sat on the edge of her chair, her nostrils dilated, rubbing
her hand and watching him like a cat.

He turned it over and over, shook it, smelled it, felt it. He opened it,
shook out the tinted powders, cracked the mirror retainer with his thumb
and slid the glass out. There was nothing unusual about the compact. A
little expensive, perhaps, but not unique at all. There was no
trademark.

“Where did Hal get this?”

“He didn’t say. Bought it, perhaps. Maybe he made it. He has a little
outfit. Give it back to me!”

“I will not.” Jeremy fell to studying it again.

“Jereee,” she said sweetly.

He looked up. She was her old self. She was erect and beautiful and the
color was back in her cheeks. Somewhere in a side corner of his mind, he
deeply regretted the fact that he admired her so much. She put out her
hand. “Give.”

“Nope.”

She glanced around. “It’s evidence. I’ve been robbed. The property was
forcibly taken from me by that man, officer,” she said, mimicking a
sweet, wronged young thing. “There we were sitting peacefully over a
drink and a snack, when he went berserk and took it away from me and
began tearing it apart.” Her face went cold and direct again. “Would you
tell the nice policeman exactly _why_ you wanted to keep it, Jeremy?”

“Not while Genex and the police get along so nicely,” he said
grudgingly. “Okay. I’m open to compromise. You don’t know the
significance of this piece of plastic. You just might be wrong. If
Genex’s plastics division can’t find out anything about it, you’re away
out of luck.”

“Oh,” she said. She glanced around at the Genex watchdogs and shivered.
“What’s your proposition?”

“I have to find out something more. Just what, I’m not sure. Now think
carefully. Exactly what do you remember Hal’s saying about this
compact?”

“Why, he never said anything, much. Just some philosophical quip about
women, about me and plastics. I don’t remember it exactly.”

“Try.”

“It was—it was something like this.” She paused, and he knew she was
running over and over it in her mind, poking and prodding at it for
hidden meanings. Finally she shrugged, and quoted, “ ‘I like giving you
plastics, Phyl. Plastics are an analogical approach to women, and some
of ’em come pretty close. Some day maybe we’ll all be familiar with a
plastic that will react differently under the same stimulus, the way you
do. Laughter this time, tears the next, whichever seems to be expected.’
I didn’t think it was very flattering.”

Jeremy stared at her, comprehension sparking, flaming, coruscating in
his brain. He said hoarsely:

“Give me the compact. I’ve got to get it to a lab.”

“No,” she said firmly. She took it out of his unwilling hands. “Frankly,
I don’t know what you’ve figured out. But I will, if I kick it around
long enough. If I can’t, I know those who can. Well,” she purred,
arching her body, “I’d better run along, Jerry darling. Thank you _so_
much for everything.”

The hand that closed on her wrist seemed to be made of beryl steel.
“Don’t you move,” Jeremy said. He said it in a way which kept her from
moving. “You can’t take that chance. You don’t know enough. If you take
that away, I’ll never know either, and I’d see both of us dead first.
I’ll make a bargain. Once more. I must make a test on that compact. I
can do it right here. Let me do it. You can watch. Whatever happens,
your description will be enough for a plastics engineer. It will give us
both a break. And if there really is a secret there, you’ll have a
chance of getting what you want. You’ll _know_. You don’t know now—you
only guess.”

It was a long time before she nodded her head.

When she did, he took the compact and, with his knife, scraped off a
shaving and dropped it into the ash tray. He took a platehandler from
the warm rack and touched the shaving. Then he put his cigarette to it.
Then he held it with the platehandler and held it in the flame of his
cigarette lighter. Part of it burned. He sniffed the smoke, nodded, and
set the temperature regulator on the induction heater.

He dropped the compact in and closed the drawer.

“No!” she shouted. “You’re burning it! You’ve got the process, and
you’re destroying it so I won’t have a chance!” She lunged for the
drawer. He caught her wrists, transferred them both to one of his
powerful hands, and shook his head.

“Sit tight,” he snapped.

The centerpiece chimed, and the drawer popped open. Their heads cracked
together painfully as they bent to look inside. Neither noticed the
pain.

In the bottom of the pan lay a twisted piece of blue plastic. It spread
almost all the way across the roomy drawer. It was flat, and followed a
series of regular convolutions. It dawned on both of them at the same
moment what it was.

Script.

As if the plastic itself were the track of a writing-brush, it spelled
the two words:

I REMEMBER

“That’s for me,” breathed Phyllis. “And I’m a dope. The memory without
brains—even I know about that phenomenon. Now that I see it done, I
remember a demonstration in school, where a cube was compression-molded
into a spool-shape. When it was heated again, it slumped together and
formed the original cube. A little sloppy, but a cube nevertheless. With
a little refinement, I don’t see why extruded pipe shouldn’t be
compression-molded into rods, bricks, or bookends and still come out
pipe when it’s heated. Beats sheet-stock welding a mile. Jeremy, my boy,
you may have my melted-up old compact with my blessings. You may frame
it and hang it over your lab bench when you come to work for Genex, as
you must or starve. ‘I remember.’ I like that.”

“You don’t remember how badly you needed help, Phyllis,” he said
hoarsely. “My help.”

“Plastics and women, my boy. Remember?” She rose like a queen, gathered
up her belongings and drifted doorward, beckoning imperiously to the
watchdogs. Ignoring Jeremy Jedd completely, they followed her out.

Abruptly Jeremy came to his senses with an inarticulate, animal noise
and raced to the door. The lithe man with white hair at his temples
stepped in front of him.

“Want something, chum?” he asked softly.

Jeremy raised a hand to sweep the man aside but his eye fell on what the
man was holding in his hand. It was a rectangular leatherette needle
case. Jeremy had seen them before. A touch of the case, a little
pressure on a stud, and you were needled. And the variety of hypos used
was peculiarly horrible.

They stood there, frozen, for a long instant. Then someone passed.

A spaceport guard.

“Guard!” Jeremy rapped, leaping backward. “This man’s threatening me.
Needle!”

The guard bobbled a remarkable Adam’s apple at them and then strode
toward the white-templed man.

“Give it here, bud.”

The man smiled, raised the case, snapped it open and extracted a
cigarette. “A joke, guard. Perfectly harmless.”

“Ha-ha!” said the guard with his mouth only. He clicked his lips shut
and looked at Jeremy with one eyebrow raised. “You sure are jumpy,
Blondy,” he remarked, and strode off.

Jeremy controlled himself with a prodigious effort,. and swung on the
older man. “Listen, you—”

The man blew smoke at Jeremy. “Better cool down, son,” he said kindly.
“We joke often, but not always. _Hold it!_” he snapped, watching
Jeremy’s darkening face. “You can butter me up and down these walls, but
I’m only one of a couple of thousand that you’d have to whip afterward.
Better go on back now and have another drink.” And before Jeremy could
move so much as a lip, the man was striding up the corridor in that way
which did not seem to be swift.

Balked, frustrated, furious, Jeremy stood for a while and then turned
back into the restaurant. He slouched back to his table, kicked the
chair out and dropped into it. He could use that plastic memory stunt to
stow pipe. Sure. And when he thought of the low bid that Genex would put
up against him, his stomach turned over.

He glowered into the heater drawer where the blue plastic script told
him placidly what he would never forget:

I REMEMBER

And then he thought of Hal’s words to Phyllis.

The demonstrations supporting registered bids were made in a public
hearing, in the vast offices of the Shipping Space Priority Board. The
Space Commissioner, an oldster with a snowy lion’s mane and the eyes of
an eight-year-old child, had his wattles in his palm and his elbows on
his desk. He was flanked by the featureless protocolloids of his
well-peopled bureau.

In the wide area before him were three groups of people each hovering
over a tangle of apparatus. Behind them were the rows of seats, for the
interested public, one third of the seats occupied. The second
demonstration was in progress. The first demonstrator and his helpers
were dismantling their bulky machine—part brake, part automatic welder,
it had produced several hundred feet of inch-and-a-half pipe out of a
long and compact bale of sheet stock.

The galleries had regarded the performance as quite impressive, whether
or not they knew that Winfield and Shock, who presented the process, was
a General Export affiliate, brought in to establish a figment of
competition.

General Export’s management had shrewdly chosen a presentable
demonstration by a more than presentable demonstrator. She was slender,
poised, clear-eyed, clear-voiced, and her hair was green. She was
saying:

“—and in spite of the question of simultaneous patent application,
General Export will offer this pipe at a lower price per unit shipped
than any competitor could conceivably meet, due to a secret treatment of
the original plastic.”

“Due to the secret mistreatment of competition,” growled a man in the
gallery, who had once owned a space-line.

The demonstrator walked gracefully to a stack of long, slender plastic
rods beside her machine and lifted one. “Mr. Commissioner, this rod is
twelve feet long and one sixteenth of an inch square. As you will
observe, the rod is extremely flexible. Stowage of these rods will
therefore be compact and economical, since rectangular holds are not
necessary. Bundles of these rods will follow the curves, if any, of the
retaining bulkheads, and therefore use every cubic inch of space
economically. I shall now demonstrate the creation of usable seamless
pipe from these rods.”

She stepped over to her machine, slid the rod in at one end, and threw a
lever. “This is a very simple heater. On Earth or Mars, particularly on
Mars, it may be adequately operated by sun-mirrors, thereby tapping no
local power-source.”

There was a faint hiss. A small motor whined, and a twelve-foot length
of pipe shot out with a dry clatter. She repeated the performance twice
more and then bowed respectfully to the Commissioner, who said:

“Thank you very much, Miss Exeter. Next!”

A clerk sang, “Mr. Jeremy Jedd, of Jedd & Jedd! Process, pipe stowage,
interplanetary!”

Jeremy stood up, ran off the customary courtesies of the applicant, and
then said:

“I am deeply grateful to Miss Exeter for many things. One of these is
her concise and well-presented description of the advantages of General
Export’s plastic-memory process. She has saved me much explanation, for
my process is precisely the same. The difference lies in the plastic
treatment before and after the processing you see here. I will say at
the start that as regards price of the rods I am demonstrating, they
cost at least five times as much as those shown by Miss Exeter. I am,
apparently, drastically underbid.”

Jeremy had to pause then to duck under the wave of comment that swept
over the huge room. The Commissioner cleared his throat and raised a
forefinger without moving his hand from his chin. A clerk raised a gavel
without moving anything but his arm, and brought it down with a crash.

“Get on with it,” growled the Commissioner. His tone said, If you can’t
compete with the other bids, you idiot, why waste my time, or even that
of these thousand other people?

Jeremy stepped to his machine, which was almost a duplicate of the one
Phyllis Exeter had used, and lifted an end of one of his rods. He did
not attempt to lift it all at once; apparently it was quite heavy.

What followed was the same as the previous showing, with one noticeable
exception; the pipe came out in a twenty-foot length. Again the room
buzzed. This time Jeremy held up his hand. “The greater length of the
pipe is an advantage over these other methods, but not the greatest,” he
said calmly. He threw the heater-control over again—

Without loading in another rod!

A twenty-foot length of pipe joined its predecessor.

Again he pulled the control, and again. Each time a twenty-foot pipe was
produced, until six of them lay side by side on the floor. The air above
them shimmered very slightly. They were uniform and perfect.

“Mr. Commissioner, I ask that space for shipment of pipe to Mars be
allotted to my company because the stowage is as compact as any product
on the market, because I can ship approximately nine point three times
as much pipe per cube unit as my nearest competitor, and because I can
deliver pipe per unit length at eleven per cent cheaper than anyone else
on earth! And that in spite of the apparently prohibitively low bid of
Miss Exeter’s most altruistic firm. Thank you, gentlemen.”

“Just a minute, young man!” said the Commissioner. “You have a most
remarkable process. I—ah—hear comments to the effect that the pipe was
concealed in the machine. Can you give some layman’s explanation of this
extraordinary effect?”

Jeremy smiled as he glanced at the machine in front of him.

“Certainly, sir. My company, you may remember, secured a portion of the
space allotted to pipe shipments during your last session, by devising
the present method of nesting the smaller diameters of pipe inside the
larger ones—a method which was not patentable, which my competitors were
slow to discover, but quick to copy.

“In the present case, I very much fear that they have repeated their
lack of—if I may say it—logical thoroughness. You see, my pipe is still
nested, one inside the other, six taking the space of one, and the whole
compressed into the rods you see here.”

“You nest pipe of the same diameter?” said the Commissioner
incredulously; and that odd, mad, detached part of Jeremy’s mind noticed
hilariously that the oldster’s bright eyes blinked with repressed anger.

“Yes sir, I do, in effect. But it is a question of density. The inner
pipe is a condensed plastic—a patented process, by the way. This
plastic, while undergoing the “memorizing” phenomenon so beautifully
explained by Miss Exeter, restores its original density as well as its
original form. The inner pipe, then, is simply condensed more than the
one which surrounds it, and so on until the six are nested. Then the
whole is compressed, molded into rods of precisely the dimensions of
those admirably compact ones produced by General Export.

“Now, when heat treated, the outer pipe returns to its original form and
is automatically ejected from the machine. It has, of course, pre-heated
the next pipe, which pre-heats the one after. It takes, actually, far
less heat per unit length to restore my pipe than it does to restore the
pipe of—ah—any of my competitors. A small advantage, however, and merely
hair-splitting under the circumstances.”

“I feel you deserve many congratulations, Mr. Jedd. Purely as a matter
of personal interest, might I ask how you came to discover such a
remarkable effect?”

“Indeed you may, Mr. Commissioner. The process was developed by my
brother on Mars. He enlisted the courtesy and kindness of a messenger to
send me a sample. It was in the form of a compact—a lady’s compact—and
when heat treated it separated into a plastic sheet which formed in
script the words ‘I remember.’ ”

Jeremy grinned broadly. “It was some time before I realized that there
was anything more to be learned from the sample, for the words covered
the rest of it. When I put this—this message into my pocket, I saw the
rest of the plastic and, guided by a hint in a rather cryptic verbal
message concerning women and plastics, I again treated the sample. I got
more script. It read, ‘Density Two.’ Then I knew what he was driving at.
I treated it again and got ‘Density Three’ and still again and got”—he
smiled—“a length of pipe. After that it was little trouble for me to
analyze the plastic and develop the condensing treatment—I beg your
pardon. I think somebody had better get Miss Exeter a glass of water.…”

They met that evening, and perhaps it was by accident. She was standing
in the shadow near his apartment building when he came home from the
lab,

“Jerry?”

“Phyllis! I—I’m sorry.”

“Sorry? That’s what you say when you realize you did a wrong.

I don’t think you mean that. Isn’t it more of a kind of—pity?”

He did not deny it. He said, “What can I do for you?”

“I—I need a job now.”

He took her hand and drew her into the pale light. Her hand lay in his
like something asleep. “I couldn’t give you a job, Phyl.”

“Yes, I know, I know. I have never been—faithful. Jerry, I haven’t been
faithful to myself.”

“I don’t understand. You’ve always—”

“Always thought I could take ’em or leave ’em alone. Not so, Jeremy.”

“Oh,” he said. “Oh, that.” He squeezed her hand a little. “Your hands
are soft. Maybe that’s part of the trouble, Phyl.”

“I think I know what you mean. There are jobs for me, but—”

“—not jobs for your wit or your wits.”

“I see. I think I can—get there, Jerry.”

“I know you can. Goodbye, Phyllis.”

“Goodbye, Jeremy.”

There is one job which centuries of human progress has not done away
with. No one has developed a self-washing window. When one of mankind’s
monuments to himself reaches a thousand feet into the air, and its
windows must be washed, that washing is a job for a rare type of human.
He must be strong, steady, and brave. He must live, away from his job,
in ways which do not unfit him for it.

Jeremy was glad when he heard Phyllis was doing this work. He knew then
what he had always guessed—that some day she would “get there.” He knew
it in his heart.



THERE IS NO DEFENSE


CURSING FORMALITY, BELTER loosened his tunic and slouched back in his
chair. He gazed at each of the members of the Joint Solar Military
Council in turn, and rasped: “You might as well be comfortable, because,
so help me, if I have to chain you to this table from now until the sun
freezes, I’ll run off this record over and over again until someone
figures an angle. I never heard of anything yet, besides The Death, that
couldn’t be whipped one way or another. There’s a weakness somewhere in
this thing. It’s got to be on the record. So we’ll just keep at the
record until we find it. Keep your eyes peeled and the hair out of your
eyes. That goes for you too, Leess.”

The bottled Jovian shrugged hugely. The infrared sensory organ on its
cephalothorax flushed as Belter’s words crackled through the translator.
Glowering at the creature, Belter quenched a flash of sympathy. The
Jovian was a prisoner in other things besides the bottle which supplied
its atmosphere and gravity. Leess represented a disgraced and defeated
race, and its position at the conference table was a hollow honor—a
courtesy backed by heat and steel and The Death. But Belter’s glower did
not change. There was no time, now, to sympathize with those whose
fortunes of war were all bad ones.

Belter turned to the orderly and nodded. A sigh, compounded of worry and
weariness, escaped the council as one man. The lights dimmed, and again
the record appeared on the only flat wall of the vast chamber.

First the astronomical data from the Plutonian Dome, showing the first
traces of the Invader approaching from the direction of the Lyran
Ring—Equations, calculations, a sketch, photographs. These were dated
three years back, during the closing phases of the Jovian War. The
Plutonian Dome was not serviced at the time, due to the emergency. It
was a completely automatic observatory, and its information was not
needed during the interplanetary trouble. Therefore it was not equipped
with instantaneous transmissions, but neatly reeled up its information
until it could be visited after the war. There was a perfectly good
military observation base on Outpost, the retrograde moon of Neptune,
which was regarded as quite adequate to watch the Solar System area.
That is, there _had_ been a base there—

But, of course the Invader was well into the System before anyone saw
the Pluto records, and by that time—

The wall scene faded into the transcript of the instantaneous message
received by Terran HQ, which was rigged to accept any alarm from all of
the watch posts.

The transcript showed the interior of the Neptunian military
observatory, and cut in apparently just before the Sigmen heard the
alarm. One was sprawled in a chair in front of the finder controls; the
other, a rangy lieutenant with the burned skin of his Martian Colonial
stock, stiffened, looked up at the blinking “General Alarm” light as the
muted, insistent note of the “Stations” bell began to thrum from the
screen. The sound transmission was very good; the councilmen could
distinctly hear the lieutenant’s sharp intake of breath, and his voice
was quite clear as he rapped:

“Colin! Alarm. Fix!”

“Fix, sir,” said the enlisted man, his fingers flying over the segmented
controls. “It’s deep space, sir,” he reported as he worked. “A Jovian,
maybe—flanking us.”

“I don’t think so. If what’s left of their navy could make any long
passes at all, you can bet it would be at Earth. How big is it?”

“I haven’t got … oh, here it is, sir,” said the e.m. “An object about
the size of a Class III-A Heavy.”

“Ship?”

“Don’t know, sir. No heat radiation from any kind of jets. And the
magnetoscope is zero.”

“Get a chaser on him.”

Belter’s hands tightened on the table edge. Every time he saw this part
of the record he wanted to get up and yell, _“No, you idiot! It’ll walk
down your beam!”_ The chaserscope would follow anything it was trained
on, and bring in a magnified image. But it took a mess of traceable vhf
to do it.

Relaxing was a conscious effort. _Must be slipping_, he thought glumly,
_wanting to yell at those guys. Those guys are dead_.

In the picture recording, a projection of the chaserscope’s screen was
flashed on the observatory screen. Staring fearfully at this shadow
picture of a shadow picture, the council saw again the familiar terrible
lines of the Invader—squat, unlovely, obviously not designed for
atmospheric work; slab-sided, smug behind what must have been foolproof
meteor screens, for the ship boldly presented flat side and bottom
plates to anything which might be thrown at her.

“It’s a ship, sir!” said the e.m. unnecessarily. “Seems to be turning on
its short axi_s_. Still no drive emanations.”

“Range!” said the lieutenant into a wall mike. Three lights over it
winked on, indicating the batteries were manned and ready for ranging
information. The lieutenant, his eyes fixed on the large indicators over
the enlisted man’s head, hesitated a moment, then said, “Automatics!
Throw your ranging gear to our chaser.”

The three lights blinked, once each. The battery reporters lit up,
showing automatic control as the medium and heavy launching tubes bore
round to the stranger.

The ship was still on the screen, turning slowly. Now a dark patch on
her flank could be seen—an open port. There was a puff of escaping gas,
and _something_ appeared whirling briefly away from the ship, toward the
scanner. They almost saw it clearly—and then it was gone.

“They threw something at us, sir!”

“Track it!”

“Can’t sir!”

“You saw the beginning of that trajectory! It was coming this way.”

“Yes sir. But the radar doesn’t register it. I don’t see it on the
screen either. Maybe it’s a warper?”

“Warpers are all theory, Colin. You don’t bend radar impulses around an
object and then restore them to their original direction. If this thing
is warping at all, it’s warping light. It—”

And then all but the Jovian closed their eyes as the screen repeated
that horror—the bursting inward of the observatory’s bulkhead, the great
jagged blade of metal that flicked the lieutenant’s head straight into
the transmission camera.

The scene faded, and the lights went up.

“Slap in the next re—Hold it!” Belter said. “What’s the matter with
Hereford?”

The Peace delegate was slumped in his chair, his head on his arms, his
arms on the table. The Martian Colonial representative touched him, and
Hereford raised his seamed, saintly face:

“Sorry.”

“You sick?”

Hereford sat back tiredly. “Sick?” he repeated vaguely. He was not a
young man. Next to that of the Jovian, his position was the strangest of
all. He represented a group, as did each of the others. But not a
planetary group. He represented the amalgamation of all organized
pacifistic thought in the System. His chair on the Joint Solar Military
Council was a compromise measure, the tentative answer to an apparently
unanswerable question—can a people do without the military? Many thought
people could. Some thought not. To avoid extremism either way, the head
of an unprecedented amalgamation of peace organizations was given a
chair on the JSMC. He had the same vote as a planetary representative.
“Sick?” he repeated in a whispering baritone. “Yes, I rather think so.”
He waved a hand at the blank wall. “Why did the Invader do it? So
pointless … so stupid.” He raised puzzled eyes, and Belter felt a new
kind of sympathy. Hereford’s hollow-ground intelligence was famous in
four worlds. He was crackling, decisive; but now he could only ask the
simplest of questions, like a child too tired to be badly frightened.

“Yeah—why?” asked Belter. “Oh … never mind the rest of the record,” he
added suddenly. “I don’t know how the rest of you feel, but at the
moment I’m hypnotized by the jet-blasted thing.

“_Why_, Hereford wants to know. If we knew that, maybe we could plan
something. Defenses, anyway.”

Somebody murmured: “It’s not a campaign. It’s murder.”

“That’s it. The Invader reaches out with some sort of a short-range
disrupting bomb and wipes out the base on Outpost. Then it wanders into
the System, washes out an uninhabited asteroid beacon, drifts down
through the shield screening of Titan and kills off half the population
with a cyanogen-synthesizing catalyst. It captures three different
scanner-scouts, holding them with some sort of a tractor beam, whirling
them around like a stone on a string, and letting them go straight at
the nearest planet. Earth ships, Martian, Jovian—doesn’t matter. It can
outfly and outfight anything we have so far, except—”

“Except The Death,” whispered Hereford. “Go on, Belter. I knew it was
coming to this.”

“Well, it’s true! And then the cities. If it ever drops a disrupter like
that”—he waved at the wall, indicating the portion of the record they
had just seen—“on a large city, there wouldn’t be any point in even
looking for it, let alone rebuilding it. We can’t communicate with the
Invader—if we send out a general signal it ignores us, and if we send
out a beam it charges us or sends one of those warping disrupter bombs.
We can’t even surrender to it! It just wanders through the System,
changing course and speed from moment to moment, and every once in a
while taking a crack at something.”

The Martian member glanced at Hereford, and then away. “I don’t see why
we’ve waited so long. I saw Titan, Belter. In another century it’ll be
dead as Luna.” He shook his head. “No pre-Peace agreement can stand in
the way of the defense of the System no matter how solemn the agreement
was. I voted to outlaw The Death, too. I don’t like the idea of it any
more than … than Hereford there. But circumstances alter cases. Are we
going to sacrifice everything the race has built just for an outdated
principle? Are we going to sit smugly behind an idealistic scrap of
paper while some secret weapon chops us down bit by bit?”

“Scrap of paper,” said Hereford. “Son, have you read your ancient
history?”

The translator hissed. Through it, Leess spoke. The flat, unaccented
words were the barest framework for the anger which those who knew
Jovians could detect by the sudden paling of the creature’s sensory
organ. “Leess object phrase secret weapon. Man from Mars suggest Invader
Jovian work.”

“Cool down, Leess,” Belter said, reaching over and firmly putting the
Martian back in his seat. “Hey you—watch your language or you’ll go back
to the canals to blow the rust off supersoy. Now, Leess; I rather think
the delegate from Mars let his emotions get the better of him. No one
thinks that the Invader is Jovian. It’s from deep space somewhere. It
has a drive far superior to anything we’ve got, and the armament … well,
if Jupiter had anything like that, you wouldn’t have lost the war. And
then there was Titan. I don’t think Jovians would kill off so many of
their own just to camouflage a new secret weapon.”

The Martian’s eyebrows lifted a trifle. Belter frowned, and the
Martian’s face went forcibly blank. The Jovian relaxed.

Addressing the Council generally, but looking at the Martian, Belter
gritted: “The war is over. We’re all Solarians and the Invader is a
menace to our System. After we get rid of the Invader we’ll have time to
tangle with each other. Not before. Is that clear?”

“No human trust Jupiter. No man trust Leess,” sulked the Jovian. “Leess
no think. Leess no help. Jupiter better off dead than not trusted.”

Belter threw up his hands in disgust. The sensitivity and stubbornness
of the Jovian were well known. “If there’s a clumsy, flat-footed way of
doing things, a Martian’ll find it,” he growled. “Here we need every
convolution of every brain here. The Jovian has a way of thinking
different enough so he might help us crack this thing, and you have to
go and run him out on strike.”

The Martian bit his lips. Belter turned to the Jovian. “Leess,
please—come off your high horse. Maybe the Solar System is a little
crowded these days, but we all have to live in it. Are you going to
cooperate?”

“No. Martian man no trust Jupiter. Mars die, Jupiter die, Earth die.
Good. Nobody not trust Jupiter.” The creature creased inward upon
itself, a movement as indicative as the thrusting out of a lower lip.

“Leess is in this with the rest of us,” said the Martian. “We ought to—”

“That’ll do!” barked Belter. “You’ve said enough, chum. Concentrate on
the Invader and leave Leess alone. He has a vote on this council and by
the same token, he has the right to refrain from voting.”

“Whose side are you on?” flashed the Martian, rising.

Belter came up with him, but Hereford’s soft, deep voice came between
them like a barrier. The Peace delegate said: “He’s on the side of the
System. All of us must be. We have no choice. You Martians are fighting
men. Do you think you can separate yourselves from the rest of us and
stop the Invader?”

Flushed, the Martian opened his mouth, closed it again, sat down.
Hereford looked at Belter, and he sat down, too. The tension in the
chamber lessened, but the matter obviously relegated itself to the “For
Further Action” files in at least two men’s minds.

Belter gazed at his fingers until they would be still without effort,
and then said quietly: “Well, gentlemen, we’ve tried everything. There
is no defense. We’ve lost ships, and men, and bases. We will lose more.
If the Invader can be destroyed, we can be sure of a little time, at
least, for preparation.”

“Preparation?” asked Hereford.

“Certainly! You don’t think for a minute that that ship isn’t, or won’t
soon be, in communication with its own kind? Suppose we can’t destroy
it. It will be able to go back where it came from, with the news that
there’s a culture here for the taking, with no weapon powerful enough to
touch them. You can’t be so naive as to believe that this one ship is
the only one they have, or the only one we’ll ever see! Our only course
is to wipe out this ship and then prepare for a full-scale invasion. If
it doesn’t come before we’re prepared, our only safe course will be to
carry the invasion to them, wherever they may be!”

Hereford shook his head sadly. “The old story.”

Belter’s fist came down with a crash. “Hereford. I _know_ that Peace
Amalgamated is a great cultural stride forward. I _know_ that to
de-condition the public on three planets and a hundred colonies from the
peaceful way of life is a destructive move. But—can you suggest a way of
keeping the peaceful way and saving our System? Can you?”

“Yes … if … if the Invaders can be persuaded to follow the peaceful
way.”

“When they won’t communicate? When they commit warlike acts for
nothing—without plan, without conquest, apparently for the sheer joy of
destruction? Hereford—we’re not dealing with anything Solarian. This is
some life-form that is so different in its aims and its logic that the
only thing we can do is reciprocate. Fire with fire! You talk of your
ancient history. Wasn’t fascism conquered when the democratic nations
went all but fascist to fight them?”

“No,” said Hereford firmly. “The fruits of fascism were conquered.
Fascism itself was conquered only by democracy.”

Belter shook his head in puzzlement. “That’s irrelevant. I … think,” he
added, because he was an honest man. “To get back to the Invader: we
have a weapon with which we can destroy him. We can’t use it now because
of Peace Amalgamated; because the Solarian peoples have determined to
outlaw it forever. The law is specific: The Death is not to be used for
any purposes, under any circumstances. We, the military, can say we want
it until our arteries harden, but our chances of getting it are
negligible unless we have public support in repealing the law. The
Invader has been with us for eighteen months or more, and in spite of
his depredations, there is no sign that the public would support repeal.
Why?” He stabbed out a stumpy forefinger. “Because they follow _you_,
Hereford. They have completely absorbed your quasi-religious attitude
of … what was your phrase?”

“ ‘Moral Assay.’ ”

“Yeah—Moral Assay. The test of cultural stamina. The will power to stand
up for a principle in spite of emergencies, in spite of drastic changes
in circumstances. A good line, Hereford, but unless you retract it, the
public won’t. We could bulldoze ’em into it, maybe; and maybe we’d have
a revolution on our hands, get a lot of people killed, and wind up with
a bunch of dewy-eyed idealists coming out on top, ready to defend the
principles of peace with guns if they have to draft every able-bodied
Solarian in the System. Meanwhile the Invader—and perhaps, by that time,
his pals—will continue to circulate around, taking a crack at any target
he happens to admire. Already the crackpots are beginning to yell about
the Invader being sent to test their love of peace, and calling this the
second year of the Moral Assay.”

“He won’t back down,” said the Martian suddenly. “Why should he? The way
he is, he’s set for life.”

“You have a lousy way of putting things!” snapped Belter, wondering _How
much does personal power mean to the old saint?_

“Why this pressure?” asked Hereford gently. “You, Belter, with your
martial rationalizing, and our Martian colleague here, with his personal
insults—why not put it to a vote?”

Belter studied him. Was there a chance that the old man would accept the
wishes of the majority here? The majority opinion of the Council was not
necessarily the majority opinion of the System. And besides—how many of
the Council would go along with Hereford if he chose to vote against it?

He took a deep breath. “We’ve got to know where we stand,” he said.
“Informally, now—shall we use The Death on the Invader? Let’s have a
show of hands.”

There was a shuffling of feet. All the men looked at Hereford, who sat
still with his eyes downcast. The Martian raised his hand defiantly. The
Phoebe-Titan Colonial delegate followed suit. Earth. The Belt. Five,
six—eight. Nine.

“Nine,” said Belter. He looked at the Jovian, who looked back,
unblinking. Not voting. Hereford’s hands were on the table.

“That’s three-quarters,” Belter said.

“Not enough,” answered Hereford. “The law stipulates _over_
three-quarters.”

“You know what my vote is.”

“Sorry, Belter. You can’t vote. As chairman, you are powerless unless
all members vote, and then all you can do is establish a tie so that the
matter can be referred for further discussion. The regulations purposely
keep a deciding vote out of the Chair, and with the membership.
I … frankly, Belter, I can’t be expected to go further than this. I have
refrained from voting. I have kept you from voting. If that keeps The
Death from being used—”

Belter’s knuckles cracked. He thought of the horror at Outpost, and the
choking death on Titan, and what had happened to their asteroid. It and
its abandoned mine workings had flared up like a baby nova, and what was
left wouldn’t dirty a handkerchief. It was a fine thing for every
Solarian that at long last a terrible instrument of war had been
outlawed, this time by the unquestionable wish of the people. It would
be a bad thing for civilization if an exception should be made to this
great rule. It was conceivable that, once the precedent was established,
the long-run effects on civilization would be worse than anything the
Invader could do. And yet—all his life Belter had operated under a
philosophy which dictated action. Do something. It may be wrong,
but_—do_ something.

“May I speak with you alone?” he asked Hereford.

“If it is a matter which concerns the Council—”

“It concerns you only. A matter of ideology.”

Hereford inclined his head and rose. “This won’t take long,” said Belter
over his shoulder, as he let the peace delegate precede him into an
antechamber.

“Beat it, Jerry,” he said to the guard. The man saluted and left.

Belter leaned back against a desk, folded his arms and said: “Hereford,
I’m going to tear this thing right down to essentials. If I don’t, we
can spend the rest of our lives in arguing about social necessities and
cultural evolution and the laws of probability as applied to the
intentions of the Invader. I am going to ask you some questions. Simple
ones. Please try to keep the answers simple.”

“You know I prefer that.”

“You do. All right—the whole basis of the Peace movement is to prevent
fighting … on the grounds that there is always a better way. Right?”

“That is right.”

“And the Peace movement recognizes no need for violence in any form, and
no conceivable exception to that idea.”

“That is right.”

“Hereford—pay close attention. You and I are in here because of the
Invader, and because of the refusal of Peace Amalgamated to allow the
use of the only known counter-measure.”

“Obviously.”

“Good. Just one more thing. I hold you in higher regard than any other
man I know. And the same goes for the work you have done. Do you believe
that?

Hereford smiled slowly and nodded. “I believe it.”

“Well, it’s true,” said Belter, and with all his strength brought his
open hand across Hereford’s mouth.

The older man staggered back and stood, his fingers straying up to his
face. In his eyes was utter disbelief as he stared at Belter, who stood
again with his arms folded, his face impassive. The disbelief was slowly
clouded over by puzzlement, and then hurt began to show. “Why—”

But before he could say another word, Belter was on him again. He
crossed to Hereford’s chest, and when the Peace delegate’s hands came
down, he struck him twice more on the mouth. Hereford made an
inarticulate sound and covered his face. Belter hit him in the stomach.

Hereford moaned, turned, and made for the door. Belter dove, tackled
him. They slid into a thrashing heap on the soft carpeting. Belter
rolled clear, pulled the other to his feet and hit him again. Hereford
shook his head and began to sink down, his arms over his head. Belter
lifted him again, waited for just the right opening, and his hand
flashed through for still another stinging slap across the mouth.
Hereford grunted, and before Belter quite knew what was happening, he
came up with one great blasting right that landed half on Belter’s
dropped chin, half on his collar bone. Belter came up off the floor in a
cloud of sparks and fell heavily six feet away. He looked up to see
Hereford standing over him, big fists bunched.

“Get up,” said the Peace delegate hoarsely.

Belter lay back, put his hands under his head, spat out some blood, and
began to laugh.

_“Get up!”_

Belter rolled over and got slowly to his feet. “It’s all over, Hereford.
No more rough stuff, I promise you.”

Hereford backed off, his face working. “Did you think,” he spat, “that
you could resort to such childish, insane measures to force me into
condoning murder?”

“Yup,” said Belter.

“You’re mad,” said Hereford, and went to the door.

_“Stop!”_

There was a note of complete command in Belter’s voice. It was that
note, and the man behind it, which had put Belter where he was. Equally
startling was the softness of his voice as he said: “Please come here,
Hereford. It isn’t like you to leave a thing half understood.”

If he had said “Half finished,” he would have lost the play. Hereford
came slowly back, saying ruefully: “I know you, Belter. I know there’s a
reason for this. But it better be good.”

Belter stood where he had been, leaning against the desk, and he folded
his arms. “Hereford,” he said, “one more simple question. The Peace
movement recognizes no need for violence in any form, and no conceivable
exception to that idea.” It sounded like a recording of the same words,
said a few minutes before, except for his carefully controlled
breathing.

Hereford touched his bruised mouth. “Yes.”

“Then,” Belter grinned, “why did you hit me?”

“Why? Why did you hit _me?_”

“I didn’t ask you that. Please keep it simple. Why did you hit me?”

“It was … I don’t know. It happened. It was the only way to make you
stop.”

Belter grinned. Hereford stumbled on. “I see what you’re doing. You’re
trying to make some parallel between the Invader and your attack on me.
But you attacked me unexpectedly, apparently without reason—”

Belter grinned more widely.

Hereford was frankly floundering now. “But I … I had to strike you, or
I … I—”

“Hereford,” said Belter gently, “shall we go back now, and vote before
that eye of yours blackens?”

The three Death ships, each with its cover of destroyer escorts, slipped
into the Asteroid Belt. _Delta_, the keying unit, was flanked on each
side by the opposed twins _Epsilon_ and _Sigma_, which maintained a
rough thousand-mile separation from the key. Behind them, on Earth, they
had left a froth of controversy. Editorial comment on the air and in
print, both on facsimile and the distributed press, was pulling and
hauling on the age-old question of the actions of duly elected
administrators. We are the people. We choose these men to represent us.
What must we do when their actions run contrary to our interest?

And—do they run contrary? How much change can there be in a man’s
attitude, and in the man himself, between the time he is elected and the
time he votes on a vital measure? Can we hark back to our original
judgment of the man and trust his action as we trusted him at election
time?

And again—the old bugaboo of security. When a legislative body makes a
decision on a military matter, there must be news restrictions. The
Death was the supreme weapon. Despite the will of the majority, there
were still those who wanted it for their own purposes; people who felt
it had not been used enough in the war; others who felt it should be
kept assembled and ready, as the teeth in a dictatorial peace. As of
old, the mass of the people had to curb its speech, and sometimes its
thought, to protect itself against the megalomaniac minorities.

But there was one man who suffered. Elsewhere was anger and intellectual
discourse, ethical delvings and even fear. But in one man, supremely,
existed the struggle between ethics and expediency. Hereford alone had
the power to undo his own work. His following would believe and accept
when he asked them to make this exception. Having made it, they would
follow no more, and there was no place for him on Earth.

His speech had been simple, delivered without a single flickering of his
torture on the fine old face. Once the thing was done, he left Earth in
a way foreign to everything he had ever believed, or spoken, or
recommended. He, the leader of Peace Amalgamated, who regarded with
insistent disfavor the very existence of weapons, left Earth with
Belter, and shared the officer’s quarters of a warship. Not only was it
a warship, but it was the keying unit _Delta_, under the command of
“Butcher” Osgood, trigger man of The Death.

For months they tracked the Invader, using their own instruments and
information relayed to them by various outposts. Under no circumstances
did they use tracers. One observation post and seven warships had been
crushed because of that. The Invader’s reaction to a tight beam was
instant and terrible. Therefore, they were limited to light
reflection—what there was of it, even from the bold, bright flanks of
the marauder—and the detection of the four types of drive radiations
used by the ship at different accelerations.

The body of descriptive matter on the invader increased, and there were
certain irrefutable conclusions. The crew of the Invader were colloidal
life, like all known life, and would be subject to The Death. This was
deduced by the fact that the ship was enclosed, pressurized, and
contained an atmosphere of some sort, which precluded the theoretically
suggested “energy” and “crystalline” life-forms. The random nature of
the enemy’s vicious and casual attacks caused more controversy than
almost any other factor; but as time went on, it became obvious that
what the ship was doing was calling forth any attack of which the System
might be capable. It had been bombed, rayed, and attempts had been made
to ram. It was impervious. How long would it stay? When would its
commanders conclude that they had seen the worst and, laughing, go back
into the depths to bring reinforcements? And was there anything—anything
at all—besides The Death that could reach the Invader, or stop him, or
destroy him, or even let him know fear?

Right up until D-day—Death-day—the billions who had followed Hereford
hoped that some alternative could be found, so that at least their
earlier resolutions would be followed in letter if not in spirit. Many
of them worked like slaves to this end, and that was the greatest
anomaly of all, for all the forces of Peace were engaged in devising
deadly methods and engines for use as alternative to The Death. They
failed. Of course they failed.

There came a day when they had to strike. The Invader had all but
vanished into the celestial north, only to come hurtling back in a great
curve which would pass through the plane of the ecliptic just beyond the
orbit of Jupiter. The Invader’s trajectory was predictable despite his
almost unbelievable maneuverability—even for him there were limits of
checking and turning, which was another fact indicating colloidal life.
There was no way of knowing whether he was coming back to harass the
planets, or whether he was making one last observation before swinging
through the System and away from Sol, back to the unknown hell which had
spawned him. But whether it was attack or withdrawal he had to be
smashed. There might never be another chance.

The three Death ships moved out from the Belt, where they had lain quiet
amongst the other masses floating in that great ring of detritus. Still
keeping their formation, they blasted away with crushing acceleration,
their crews dopey with _momentomine_. Their courses were set to
intersect that of the Invader, or close enough to bring them well within
range of The Death—twelve to twenty thousand miles. Delicate, beamless
scanners checked the enemy’s course moment by moment, making automatic
corrections and maintaining the formation of the three ships.

_Delta_ was Earth-manned, _Epsilon_ a Martian ship, and _Sigma_ belonged
to the Colonials. Originally, the plan had been to scatter Colonials
through the three ships, and use a Jovian craft. But Leess, as the
Jovian representative, had vetoed any Jovian participation, an action
which had brought about a violent reawakening of antipathies toward the
major planet. Public feeling was so loaded against the use of The Death
that the responsibility must be shared. Jupiter’s stubborn and suicidal
refusal to share it was inflexible; the Jovian solidarity was as
thorough as ever.

Four days out, the master controls dropped the acceleration to 1G, and
the air conditioners blasted out enough superoxygen to counteract the
acceleration drug. Personnel came to full life again, and the command
gathered on the bridge of _Delta_. Hereford was there too, standing well
back, his face misleadingly calm, his eyes flicking from the forward
screen to the tactical chart, from Belter’s absorbed face to the
undershot countenance of Commander Osgood.

Osgood looked over his shoulder at the Peace leader. His voice was
gravel in a wire sieve as he said: “I still don’t like that guy hanging
around here. You sure he won’t be better off in his quarters?”

“We’ve been over that,” said Belter tiredly. “Commander, maybe I’m out
of order, but would it be too much trouble for you to speak directly to
him once in a while?”

“I am satisfied,” smiled Hereford. “I quite understand his attitude. I
have little to say to him, and much to say about him, which is
essentially his position as far as I am concerned. It is no more
remarkable that he is unfamiliar with politeness than that I should be
ignorant of spatial ballistics.”

Belter grinned. “O.K., O.K.—don’t mind me, I’m just a poor military man
trying to make peace. I’ll shut up and let you and the Butcher have your
inimical _status quo_.”

“I’ll need a little quiet here for a while, if it’s all the same to you,
Councilman,” said Osgood. He was watching the tactical chart. The red
spot representing _Epsilon_ was at the far right, the blur of _Sigma_ at
the left, and down at the bottom was _Delta_’s green spark. A golden bar
in the center of the chart showed the area on the ecliptical plane at
which the Invader could be expected to pass through, and just above it
was a white spot showing the Invader himself.

Osgood touched a toggle which added a diagram to the chart—a positioning
diagram showing the placement of the three Death ships in relation to
the target. _Sigma_ and _Epsilon_ were exactly in the centers of their
white positioning circles; _Delta_ was at the lower edge of the third
circle. Osgood made a slight adjustment in the drive circuit.

“Positioning is everything,” Belter explained to Hereford. “The Death
field is a resultant—a violent node of vibrations centering on the
contiguous focal points of the opposed fields from _Sigma_ and
_Epsilon_. The beam from _Delta_—that’s us—kicks it off. There’s an
enormous stress set up at that focal point, and our beam tears into it.
The vibration changes frequency at random and with violence. It has been
said that the fabric of space itself vibrates. That’s learned nonsense.
But fluids do, and gases, of course, and colloids worst of all.”

“What would happen if the positions were not taken exactly?”

“Nothing. The two focal points of the concentrated fields from _Epsilon_
and _Sigma_ would not coincide, and _Delta_’s beam would be useless. And
it _might_ have the unhappy result of calling the Invader down on us.
Not right away—he’s going too fast at right angles to our course—but I’m
not crazy about the idea of being hunted down by that executioner.”

Hereford listened gravely, watching Osgood, watching the chart. “Just
how great is the danger of The Death’s spreading like ripples in a
pool—out in every direction from the node?”

“Very little, the way it’s set up. The node moves outward away from our
three ships—again a resultant, strictly according to the parallelogram
of force. How long it lasts, how intense it gets, how far it will go—we
never know. It changes with what it encounters. Mass intensifies it and
slows it down. Energy of almost any kind accelerates and gradually seems
to dissipate it. And it varies for other reasons we don’t understand
yet. Setting it up is a very complicated business, as you have seen. We
don’t dare kick it off in such a way that it might encounter any of the
planets, if it should happen to last long enough. We have to clear space
between us and Outside of all shipping.”

Hereford shook his head slowly. “The final separation between death and
destruction,” he mused. “In ancient times, armies met on battlefields
and used death alone to determine the winner. Then, gradually,
destruction became the most important factor—how much of the enemy’s
material could you destroy? And then, with the Atomic Wars, and the
Dust, death alone became the end of combat again. Now it has come full
circle, and we have found a way to kill, to punish and torture, to
dissolve, slowly and insistently, colloidal cells, and still leave
machines unharmed. This surpasses the barbarism of jellied gasoline. It
takes longer, and—”

“It’s complete,” Belter finished.

“Stations!”

Osgood’s voice sliced raggedly through the quiet bridge. The
screen-studded bulkhead beside him winked and flickered with
acknowledgments, as tacticians, technicians, astrogators, ballistics
men, and crewmen reported in. All three ships were represented, and a
master screen collected and summarized the information, automatically
framing the laggards’ screen with luminous red. There was little of the
red showing, and in seconds it disappeared. Osgood stepped back, glanced
at the master screen and then at the chart. On it, the ship symbols were
centered in their tactical circles.

The commander turned away and for the first time in these weary months
he spoke directly to Hereford: “Would you like the honor of triggering?”

Hereford’s nostrils dilated, but his voice was controlled. He put his
hands behind his back. “Thank you, no.”

“I thought not,” said the Butcher, and there was a world of insult in
his scraping voice.

Before him was a triangular housing from which projected three small
levers with round grips. One was red, one blue. The third was set
between and in front of the others, and was green. He pulled the two
nearest him. Immediately a red line appeared on the chart, running from
_Epsilon_’s symbol to the golden patch, and a blue line raced out from
_Sigma_ to meet it. Just above the gold hovered the white spot
representing the Invader. Osgood watched it narrowly as it dipped toward
the gold and the junction of the red and blue lines. He rested his hand
on the green lever, made one last check of the screens, and snatched it
back. Obediently, a thin, bright green line appeared on the chart. A
purple haze clouded the gold.

“That’s it!” breathed Belter. “The purple, there—The Death!”

Hereford, shaking, leaned back against the bulkhead. He folded his arms,
holding tightly to his elbows, obviously trying to get a grip on much
more.

“Scan him!” spat Osgood. “This I’ve got to see!”

Belter leapt forward. “Commander! You don’t … you _can’t_ beam him!
Remember what happened at Outpost?”

Osgood swore. “We’ve got so much stuff between here and there already
that a scanning beam isn’t going to make that much difference. He’s
done, anyway!” he added exultantly.

The large scanning screen flicked into colors which swirled and fused
into the sharp image of the Invader. Since the beam tracked him exactly,
there was no sign of motion. “Get me a diagrammatic!” bellowed Osgood.
His small eyes were wide, his cheeks puffed out, his lips wet.

The lower quarter of the screen faded, went black, then suddenly bore a
reduced image of the Invader. Apparently creeping toward him was a
faint, ever-brightening purple mist.

“Right on the nose!” gritted Belter. “He’s sailing right into it!”

Startlingly, the large actual image showed signs of life. A stream of
blue-white fire poured out of the ship side.

“What do you know!” whistled Osgood. “He’s got jets after all! He knows
there’s something ahead of him, doesn’t know what it is, and is going to
duck it if he has to smear his crew all up and down the bulkheads!”

“Look!” cried Belter, pointing at the chart. “Why, he’s pulling into a
curve that … that—Man, oh man, he’s killing off all hands! He can’t turn
like that!”

“Maybe he wants to get it over with quickly. Maybe he’s run into The
Death somewhere before,” crowed Osgood. “Afraid to face it. Hey, Belter,
the inside of that ship’s going to be a pretty sight. The Death’ll make
jelly of ’em, and that high-G turn’ll lay the jelly like paint out of an
airbrush!”

“Ex … ex—” was as much as Hereford could say as he turned and tottered
out. Belter took a step after him, hesitated, and then went back to
stand before the chart.

Purple and gold and white, red and green and blue coruscated together.
Slowly, then, the white spot moved toward the edge of the puddle of
color.

“Commander! He’s still side-jetting!”

“Why not?” said the Butcher gleefully. “That’s the way his controls were
set when his command got emulsified. He’ll blow off his fuel in a while,
and we can board him.”

There was a soft click from the master communications screen and a face
appeared on it. _“Epsilon,”_ the man said.

“Good work, Hoster,” said Osgood, rubbing his hands.

“Thank you, sir,” said the captain of the Martian vessel. “Commander, my
astrogators report an extrapolation of the derelict’s change of course.
If he keeps jetting, he’s going to come mighty close.”

“Watch him then,” said Osgood. “If he comes too close, get out of his
way. I’ll stake my shoulder boards on your safety.” He laughed. “He’s a
dead duck. You’ll be able to clear him. I don’t care if it’s only by
fifty meters.”

The Martian saluted. Osgood checked him before he could fade. “Hoster!”

“Yes sir.”

“I know you Martians. Trigger happy. Whatever happens, Hoster, you are
not to bomb or ray that derelict. Understand?”

“Roger, sir,” said the Martian stiffly, and faded.

“Those Martians,” said Osgood. “Bloodthirsty bunch.”

Belter said: “Commander, sometimes I understand how Hereford feels about
you.”

“I’ll take that as a compliment,” said the Butcher.

They spent the next two hours watching the tactical chart. The Death
generators had long ago been cut out, and The Death itself showed on the
chart as a dwindling purple stain, headed straight Outside and already
fading. But the derelict was still blasting from its side jets, and
coming about in an impossible curve. The Martian astrogators had been
uncomfortably right, and Captain Hoster had been instructed to take
evasive action.

Closer and closer came the white spot to the red one that was _Epsilon_.
Viewers were clamped on both ships: the Martian had begun to decelerate
powerfully to get out of that ratiocinated curve.

“Doesn’t look so good,” said Belter, after a careful study of the
derelict’s trajectory.

“Nonsense,” said Osgood worriedly. “But it’d be more than a little silly
to lose a ship after we’ve whipped the enemy.” He turned to the control
bulkhead. “Get me _Epsilon_.”

He had started his famous monotone of profanity before the screen
finally lit up. Hoster’s face was flushed—blotched, really. “What’s the
matter?” snapped Osgood. “You take your own sweet time answering. Why
haven’t you taken any _momentomine?_”

Captain Hoster clutched the rim of his communicator. “Lissen,” he said
thickly. “ ’Nvader out t’ get us, see. Nobody push Martian around. ’S
dirty Jovian trick.”

“Acceleration disease,” said Belter quietly. “He must’ve had some crazy
idea of keeping away from the drug so he’d be able to keep on the
alert.”

“Hoster! You’re hopped up. You can’t take _momentomine_ for as many
years as you have and stay sober under deceleration without it. You’re
relieved. Take a dose and turn in. Put your second on.”

“Lissen, Butch, ol’ horse,” mouthed the Martian. “I know what I’m doin’,
see? I don’t want trouble with _you_. Busy, see? Now, you jus’ handle
your boat an’ I’ll handle mine. I’m gonna give that Jovian a case of
Titanitis ’f ’e gets wise with me.” And the screen went blank.

“Hoster!” the commander roared. “Sparks! Put that maniac on again!”

A speaker answered promptly: “Sorry, sir. Can’t raise him.”

In helpless fury Osgood turned to Belter. “If he so much as throws a
dirty look at that derelict, I’ll break him to an ammo passer and put
him on the sun side of Mercury. We _need_ that derelict!”

“What for?” asked Belter, and then wondered why he had asked, for he
knew the answer. Hereford’s influence, probably. It would be Hereford’s
question, if he were still here.

“Four drives we don’t know anything about. A warp-camouflaged disrupter
bomb. A chain-instigating ray, that blew up the asteroid last year. And
probably lots more. Man, that’s a warship!”

“It sure is,” said Belter. “It certainly is.” _Peace Amalgamated_, he
thought. _A great step forward_.

“Get ’em both on a screen,” Osgood rapped. “They’re close enough—Hey,
Belter, look at the way that ship is designed. See how it can check and
turn that way?”

“No, I—Oh! I see what you mean. Uses lateral jets—but what laterals!”

“Functional stuff,” said Osgood. “We could’ve had that a hundred years
ago, but for naval tradition. We put all our drive back aft. We get a
good in-line thrust, sure. But look what he’s got! The equivalent of ten
or twelve of our stern-tube assemblies. What kind of people were they,
that could stand that kind of thing?”

Belter shook his head. “If they built it that way, they could stand it.”
He looked thoughtfully up at the derelict’s trajectory. “Commander, you
don’t suppose—”

Apparently struck by the same awful thought, Osgood said uneasily,
“Certainly not. The Death. They went through The Death.”

“Yes,” said Belter. He sounded relieved, but he did not feel relieved.
He watched the screen, and then clutched Osgood’s arm.

Osgood swore and sprang to the control bulkhead. “Get _Epsilon!_ Tell
him to cease fire and then report to me! Blast the hub-forted fun of a
plistener! I’ll pry him loose from his—”

Belter grunted and threw his arm over his eyes as the screen blazed. The
automatic shields went up, and when he could see again, the screen
showed him the Invader. _Epsilon_ wasn’t there at all.

After the excitement had died down a little, Osgood slumped into a
chair. “I wish we’d had a Jovian ship out there instead,” he rasped. “I
don’t care what they did to us during the war, or anything else. They
could obey orders. When they say they’ll do a thing, you can bet on it.
What’s the score on that business of the Jovians’ electing themselves
out, anyhow?”

Belter told him how the Jovian delegate had been insulted at the
Council.

“Those hot-headed, irresponsible Martians!” said the Butcher. “Why in
time did that drunken cretin have to fire on the derelict?”

“What derelict?” Belter asked dryly.

Osgood stared at him. Belter pointed at the chart. The white spot was
slowly swinging toward the green—toward _Delta_. On the screen, the
Invader still gleamed. It was not blasting any more.

One of the technician’s screens flashed. “Detection reporting, sir.”

“Report.”

“Invader’s Type Two drive radiation showing strong, sir.”

“R-Roger.”

The screen winked out. Commander Osgood opened his mouth, held it open
silently for an unbearably long moment, and then carefully closed it
again. Belter bit the insides of his cheeks to keep from roaring with
hysterical laughter. He knew that the Butcher was trying to swear, and
that he had met a situation for which no swearing would he adequate. He
had shot his vituperative bolt. Finally, weakly, he said the worst thing
he could think of—a thing that until then had been unthinkable.

He said: “They’re not dead.”

Belter did not feel like laughing any more. He said: “They went through
The Death, and they’re not dead.”

“There is no defense against The Death,” said the commander
authoritatively. Belter nodded.

One of the screens flashed, and a voice said impersonally:
“Mathematics.”

“Go on,” said the Butcher.

“The derelict’s course will intersect ours, sir, unless—”

“Don’t say ‘derelict,’ ” whispered Osgood. “Say ‘Invader.’ ” He lay back
and, closing his eyes, swabbed his face with a tissue. Then the muscles
in his jaw clenched and he rose and stood erect before the control
bulkhead, pulling the wrinkles out of his tunic. “Batteries. Train
around to the Invader. Tech! Put the batteries on auto.
Everything—torpedoes, rays, artillery. Now give me all hands. All hands!
Prepare to abandon ship. _Delta_ will engage the enemy on automatics.
Life craft to scatter. Take your direction from your launching port and
maintain it until you observe some decisive action between _Delta_ and
the Invader. Fill up with _momentomine_ and give your craft everything
they can take. Over.” He swung to Belter.

“Councilman! Don’t argue with me. What I want to do is stay here and
fight. What I will do is abandon ship with the rest of you. My only
reason is so I can have another chance to take a poke at a Martian. Of
all the blundering, stupid, childish things for Hoster to do, taking a
pot shot at that killer out there was the most—”

Belter very nearly reminded the commander that Hoster had been
instructed to let the “derelict” pass within meters if necessary. He
swallowed the comment. It didn’t matter, anyway. Hoster and his crew had
been good men, and _Epsilon_ a good ship. All dead now, all smashed, all
gone to lengthen the list that had started on Outpost.

“You know your abandon-ship station, don’t you, Belter? Go to your
quarters and haul out that white-livered old pantywaist and take him
with you. I’ll join you as soon as everyone else is off the ship. Jump!”

Belter jumped. Things were happening too fast for him, and he found it
almost pleasant to use someone else’s intelligence rather than hunt for
his own.

Hereford was sitting on the edge of his bunk. “What’s the matter,
Belter?”

“Abandon ship!”

“I know that,” said the older man patiently. When they have an ‘all
hands’ call on one of these ships there’s no mistaking it. I want to
know what’s the matter.”

“We’re under attack. Invader.”

“Ah.” Hereford was very calm. “It didn’t work.”

“No,” said Belter. “It didn’t.”

“I’ll stay here, I think.”

“You’ll _what?_”

Hereford shrugged. “What’s the use? What do you think will happen to the
peaceful philosophy when news gets out that there is a defense against
The Death? Even if a thousand or a million Invader ships come, nothing
will keep us from fighting each other. I’m—tired.”

“Hereford.” He waited until the old man lifted his head, met his eyes.
“Remember that day in the anteroom? Do we have to go through that
again?”

Hereford smiled slowly. “Don’t bother, friend. You are going to have
trouble enough after you leave. As for me—well, the most useful thing I
can be now is a martyr.”

Belter went to the bulkhead and pressed into his personal storage. He
got his papers and a bottle of viski. “All right,” he said, “let’s have
a quick one before I go.” Hereford smiled and accepted. Belter put all
the _momentomine_ in Hereford’s drink, so that when they left the ship
he, Belter, passed out cold. From what he heard later he missed quite a
show. _Delta_ slugged it out with the Invader. She fought until there
was nothing but a top turret left, and it kept spitting away at the
enemy until a disrupter big enough for half a planet wiped it out. She
was a good ship too. The Invader went screaming up into the celestial
north again, leaving the terrified _Sigma_ alone. Belter regained
consciousness in the life craft along with the commander and Hereford.
Hereford looked like an illustration in the Old Testament which Belter
had seen when he was a child. It was captioned, “And Moses Threw Down
and Broke the Two Tablets of Stone.”

_Sigma_ picked them up. She was a huge old Logistics vessel, twice
reconverted—once from the Colonial Trade, once as the negative plant of
The Death. She had a main hold in her like a convention hall, and a
third of it was still empty in spite of the vast pile plant she carried.
Her cargo port was open, and _Delta_’s life craft were being warped in
and stacked inside, along with what wreckage could be salvaged for
study.

The place was a hive. Spacesuited crews floated the boats in, handling
them with telescoping rods equipped with a magnetic grapple at each end.
One end would be placed on the hull of a boat, the other on the deck or
bulkhead or on a stanchion; and then by contracting or expanding the rod
by means of its self-contained power unit, the boat would be pushed or
pulled to its stack.

The boats had completed their rendezvous after two days of signaling and
careful jetting. All were accounted for but two, which had probably
tangled with debris. The escape of so many was largely due to the fact
that there was very little wreckage large enough to do any damage after
the last explosion.

Osgood’s boat hovered outside until the last, and by the time it was
warped in all the others had unloaded and their crews were inboard,
getting refreshment and treatment. By the time the little “Blister” had
been racked, the cargo port was sealed and the compartment refilled with
air. _Sigma_’s captain opened the boat’s hatch with his own hands, and
Osgood crawled out, followed by a dazed Belter and a sullen Hereford.

“Your ship, sir,” said the captain of _Sigma_, formally, in the
traditional presentation of a ship and its facilities to a superior.

“Yeah. I need one at the moment,” said the Butcher wryly. He stretched,
looked around. “Get any parts of the Martian?”

“No, sir,” said the captain. He was a worried-looking, gangly specimen
from the Venusian Dome. His name had so many syllables that only the
first three were used. They were Holovik. “And little enough from
_Delta_, I’m sorry to say. Wh … what happened?”

“You saw it, didn’t you? What do you think?

“I’ll say it, if you can’t get it out,” said Osgood bluntly. “He has a
defense against The Death. Isn’t that fine?”

“Yes sir.” The horizontal lines across Captain Holovik’s forehead
deepened, and the corners of his mouth turned down. “Fine.”

“Don’t burst into tears!” snapped the commander. He looked around taking
stock of the salvage. “Get all available techs on that scrap. Find out
if any of it is radioactive, and if so how much of what type. What’s
that?”

“That” was a thirty-foot tapered cylinder with three short mast antennae
projecting at right angles to the long axis, near each rounded end.

“I don’t know for sure, sir,” said Holovik. “I knew that there
were … ah … weapons, new ones. We don’t get information the way we used
to during the war—”

“Stop mumbling, man! If that’s a secret weapon, it isn’t from _Delta_.”

Belter put in, “It isn’t from _Epsilon_ either. I went over the specs of
everything aboard all of these vessels.”

“Then where did—Oh!” His “Oh!” was echoed by Belter and two junior
officers who had overheard the conversation. It was a most respectful
sound. Also respectful was the unconscious retreat all hands took to the
inboard bulkhead.

Hereford, who had not spoken a word for nearly a day, asked: “What’s the
matter? What is it?”

“Don’t know,” breathed Belter. “but I’d like to see it out of here. Way
out. It’s the Invader’s.”

“G—get it out of here. _Jump!_”

They piled into the inboard section and sealed the cargo inspection
hatch behind them, leaving three spacesuited e.m. and an officer to
worry the object tenderly out of the port.

“You’re a cretin,” Osgood told the captain. “You’re a drooling
incompetent. Whatever possessed you to bring in an unidentified object?”

“I … it was … I don’t know,” stammered Holovik. Belter marveled at the
degree of worriment the man’s face could register.

A junior officer with communication pips spoke up. “That was the object
which didn’t register on the detectors until it was within a mile, sir,”
he reminded. “I still can’t understand it, commander. Our detectors—all
of ’em—are sensitive to fifty thousand at the very least. I’m ready to
swear our equipment was in order, and yet we had no sign of this thing
until it was right on top of us.”

“Somebody in Detection asleep,” growled the Butcher.

“Wait, commander,” Belter turned toward the young sigman.

“How was this thing bearing?”

“Right on the ship, sir. An intersection course from down left forrad,
as I remember. We deflected it and then brought it about with the short
tractors.”

“It just appeared out of nowhere, eh?” rasped Osgood. “And so you
invited it in.”

“There was a good deal of debris in that sector, commander,” said
Holovik faintly. “We were busy … tracers sometimes give resultant
indications when they pick up two separated objects simultaneously—”

“Yeah, and then they indicate something where nothing is. They _don’t_
indicate nothing where there is something. Why, I’ll break you to—”

“It seems to me,” said Belter, who had been pursuing his own line of
reasoning, “that what we have here is mighty similar to what hit
Outpost. Remember? They put a tracer on it as they saw it leave the
Invader. It blanked out. They got no radiation or radar reflection at
all. But it came in and wiped out the base.”

“The nonexistent, hypothetical ‘warper,’ said Hereford, with a wisp of
his old smile.

Osgood glanced at him coldly. “If you’re trying to tell me that the
Invader used a warper to protect himself from The Death, you’re showing
your ignorance. The Death is a vibration, _not_ a radiation. It’s a
physical effect, not an energy phenomenon.”

“Blast The Death!” spat Belter. “Don’t you see what we’ve got here? It’s
one of their disrupters. Short range—always short range. Don’t you see?
It _is_ a warper, and for some reason it can only carry a limited amount
of power. The Invader started popping away at _Delta_, and when she
fought back, he let loose with everything he had. This must’ve been one
of his disrupters which was launched while _Delta_ was in one piece and
arrived after she’d been blasted. Then it went right on seeking, but ran
out of fuel before it reached _Sigma_. That’s why it suddenly appeared
to the detectors.”

“Now, that makes sense,” said the Butcher, looking at Belter as if he
were seeing him for the first time. He creased his lower lip sharply
with his thumb and forefinger. “Warp camouflage, eh? H-m-m-m. I wonder
if we could get a look at that unit Maybe we could build something like
it and get close enough to that devil to do some good.” He turned to the
fretful Holovik. “Captain! See if you can get a couple of techs to
volunteer to de-fuse that thing. If you can’t get volunteers—”

“I’ll get them, sir,” said Holovik, for the first time looking a little
happier. It made him appear wistful instead of mournful.

It was easier to count those not volunteering, once the proposition went
out over the intercom. In a few minutes _Sigma_ lay off a couple of
hundred miles to stand by while a crack squad worked over the drifting
bomb. They carried three viewers, and the control bridge of the Death
ship was mobbed with experts. Every move was carefully discussed; every
possibility was carefully explored before a move was made.

They did it. It was slow, and suspense reached an agonized pitch; but
once it was done and could be reviewed, it was unbelievably simple. The
warhead was clamped to the main hull of the bomb. The activators were in
the head, controlled simply by a couple of rods. The seeking gear,
proximity circuits, power source, drive, and what was apparently the
camouflage unit were all packed into the hull.

A torch was clamped to the warhead, which was cast adrift. The precious
hull was towed a few miles with reaction-pistols and picked up by the
ship, which then got clear and rayed the virulent little warhead into
shocking, flaring extinction.

In shops and laboratories throughout the System, feverish work was
carried on over plans and mock-ups of the alien weapon. One of the first
things discovered about it was that the highly theoretical and very
popular term “warper” was a misnomer. The camouflage was an ingenious
complexity of wiring in concentric “skins” in the hull. Each impinging
radiation caused the dielectric constant of the hull to change so that
it reradiated that exact frequency, at the same intensity as received,
but a hundred and eighty degrees out of phase. The heart of the device
was what might have been the thousandth generation descended from a TR
tube. It hunted so constantly, and triggered radiations with so little
lag, that the device could handle several frequencies almost
simultaneously.

What used most of the power was the drive. It involved a magnetic
generator and a coil which carried magnetic flux. Induced in this was an
extremely intense gravitic field, self-canceling forward and on all
sides. The intensified “reverse” gravity pressure was, therefore, at the
stern. Maneuvering was accomplished by variations in field strength by
inductance-coupling of the mag-flux coils.

The hull was a totally absorbent black, and the missile was made of an
alloy which was transparent to hard radiation.

All information was pooled, and sub-projects were constantly assigned
from Science Center. Etherfac transmission was full of lastminute
reports on phases of the problem, interspersed with frequent communiqués
on the last known position of the Invader. He had indulged in an
apparently aimless series of convolutions for several weeks following
D-Day, evidently to assess his damage. After that he had maintained a
great circular course, parallel in plane to the solar ecliptic, and the
assumption was that he was undergoing repairs and engaging in
reconnaissance. Both were certainly indicated, for he must have
undergone an incredible strain in that wild curve on D-Day. And as
before, he was the symbol of terror. If he struck, where would he
strike? If not, he would leave. Then, would he be back? Alone, or with a
fleet?

Belter’s life was a continuous flurry of detail, but he found time to
wonder about several things. The Jovians, for example. They had been a
great help in the duplication of the camouflage device, particularly in
their modification of the fission power plant it carried. The Jovian
improvement was a disruption motor using boron, an element which
appeared nowhere in the original. It gave vastly more range to the
Solarian device. And yet—there was something about the Jovian
willingness that was not quite in harmony with their established
behavior patterns. The slight which Leess had suffered from the Martian
was not, after all, a large thing in itself, but the fact that Leess had
led his planet into a policy of noncooperation made it large. The sudden
reversal of this policy since D-Day was more than puzzling. A hundred
times Belter shrugged the question off, grunting “Jovians are funny
people,” and a hundred times it returned to him.

There was another unprecedented worry. The Martian delegate called
Belter aside one afternoon and presented it to him. “It’s that
Hereford,” the man said, scratching his sunburned neck. “He’s too quiet.
I know he lost a mess of ‘face’ over his vote on The Death, but he still
has a following. More than I like to think about.”

“So?”

“Well, when the big day comes, when we send a formation of the new
camouflaged boats out there, what’s to keep him from opening his trap
and making trouble for us?”

“Why should he?”

“You know what the pacifists are after. If we fitted out a bunch of
these new gadgets with disrupters and wiped the Invader out, they’d have
no kick. They don’t want that Death-defense to get back to the System.
You know that.”

“Hm-m-m. And how would you handle this on Mars?”

The Martian grinned. “Why, I reckon Brother Hereford would have a little
accident. Enough to keep him quiet, anyhow—maybe for a little while,
maybe for—”

“I thought as much.” Belter let himself burn for a luxurious second
before replying. “Forget it. Supposing what you say is true—and I don’t
grant that it is—what else can you think of?”

“Well now, I think it would be a bright idea to send a camouflage force
out without consulting the Council. That way, if Hereford is waiting for
the psychological moment to blow his mouth off, we’ll get what we’re
after before he knows what’s happening. _If_ we can keep the lid on it,
that is.”

Belter shook his head. “Sorry, friend. No can do. We can stretch a point
of security and take a military action without informing the people, but
there’s no loophole in the charter which will let any of us take
military action without the knowledge of the Council. Sorry. Anyway,
thanks for the tip.

This, like the Jovian matter, was a thing he shrugged off and
forgot—five or six times a day. He knew the case-hardened character
which lived behind Hereford’s dignified mien, and he respected it for
what it was and for what it could do.

There was a solution to these problems. He laughed when it occurred to
him, smiled when it recurred; but he frowned when he realized that he
had already decided. He must have, for he found himself slipping
Addison’s report into a private drawer of his desk. Addison was the Tech
in charge of the local camouflage project. It was top secret and had
been delivered, sealed, by an orderly. It invited him to inspect a
two-place craft which had been finished and tested, fueled and equipped.
The report should have gone to the Agenda.

He called Hereford, and when they were alone he asked, without
preliminary: “Are you interested in heading off a war?”

“A rhetorical question, certainly.”

“Nope. Question two. Have you anything special to do the next few
weeks?”

“Why I—nothing out of the ordinary,” said Hereford, sadly. Since his
historic “Exception” speech, he had had little enough to do.

“Well, clear your social calendar, then. No, I’m not kidding. This is
hot. How soon can you be ready for a little trip?”

Hereford studied him. “In about thirty minutes. I can tell by the way
you act that you’d want it that soon.”

“You’re psychic. Right here, then, in thirty minutes.”

Within two hours they were in space, aboard a swift scoutship. Behind
him Belter left a bewildered deputy-chairman with a brief authorization
in his hands, and an equally astonished Master-Tech, both of whom were
sworn to silence. In the scoutship were a swornin crew and the black
hulk of the camouflaged lifeboat.

For the first two days out he left Hereford to twiddle his thumbs in the
cramped recreation room of the ship, while he closeted himself with the
skipper to work out an approach course. It took him half of the first
day to convince the young man that he was in his right mind and that he
wanted to board the Invader—two facts that had been regarded, during the
past three years, as mutual incompatibilities.

The approach was plotted to permit the boat to overtake the Invader
using a minimum of power. The little craft was to be launched from the
scout at high speed on a course which would put it in an elliptical
orbit in respect to the sun. This ellipse was at right angles to the
plane of the circular course the Invader had been maintaining for the
past few weeks. The ellipse intersected this circle in two places, and
the launching time was set to synchronize these points of intersection
with the predicted position of the Invader on its own course. The big
_if_, naturally, was whether or not the Invader would maintain course
and speed. He might. He had, twice before, once for nine months and once
for over a year. If Belter watched his tables, and spent enough time
with his tetrant and calculex, it would require only an occasional nudge
of power to follow his course, or to correct it for any variations of
the Invader’s predicted position.

After the matter was settled, and he had slept, he rejoined Hereford.
The old man was apparently staring right through the open book on his
knee, for his eyes were wide and unmoving. Belter slumped down beside
him and expelled an expressive breath. “What a way to make a living!”

Amusement quirked the corners of Hereford’s mouth. “What?”

“Finding tough ways to die,” grinned the chairman. “I’m ready to tell
you about this thing, if you want me to.”

Hereford closed his book and put it by.

“It’s the Jovians, first of all,” said Belter, without preliminary.
“Those critters think so well, so fast, and so differently that it
scares me. It’s tough … no, it’s downright foolish to try to judge their
actions on a human basis. However, they pulled one stunt that was so
very human that it completely escaped me. If Mars had tried it, I’d have
been on to it instantly. It’s taken a long time for it to percolate,
since it concerns the Jovians. Do you remember how ready they were to
help out after D-Day? Why do you suppose that was?”

“I would judge,” said Hereford thoughtfully, “that they had awakened to
their responsibility as members of the System. The Invader had a defense
against the ultimate weapon, the emergency was intensified, and they
pitched in to help for the common good.”

“That’s what I thought, too. Has it occurred to you at all what would
probably happen if Jupiter—and only Jupiter—had a defense against The
Death?”

“Why, I don’t think they would—”

Belter broke in roughly. “Never mind what you would like to believe.
What would happen?”

“I see what you mean,” said Hereford. His face was white. “We came up
from almost certain defeat and won the war when we developed The Death.
If Jupiter had a defense, we would be no match for them!”

“That’s way understated,” said Belter.

“But … but they signed a peace treaty! They’re disarming! They won’t
break their word!” cried Hereford.

“Of course they won’t! If they get their hands on that defense, they’ll
calmly announce the fact, give us time to prepare, even, and then
declare war and wipe us out. There’s a great deal of pride involved, of
course. I’ll venture to say that they’d even help us arm if we’d let
them, to make the struggle equal to begin with. They’re bugs for that
kind of fairness. But the whole System knows that machine for machine,
unit for unit, Jovian for man, there is no equality. They’re too much
for us. It is only our crazy, ingrained ability to manufacture suicidal
weapons which gives us the upper hand. The Jovians are too wise to try
to conquer a race which insists on introducing murder-machines without
any due regard for their future significance. Remember what Leess said
when the Martian insulted him? ‘Earth dead, Jupiter dead, Mars dead.
Good.’ They know that unless we as a race are let alone, we will
certainly find a way to kill off our neighbors, because as a race we
don’t care if we get killed in the process.”

Hereford shuddered. “I’d hate to think you were right. It makes Peace
Amalgamated look so very useless, for all its billions of members.”

Belter cracked his knuckles. “I’m not trying to tell you that humans are
basically rotten, or that they are fated to be what they always have
been. Humanity has come very close to extinction at least four times
that I know of, through some such kind of mass suicide. But the
existence of Peace Amalgamated does indicate that it believes there is a
way out, although I can’t help thinking that it’ll be a long haul to get
us ‘cured.’ ”

“Thank you,” said Hereford sincerely. “Sometimes I think you might be a
more effective peace worker than I can ever hope to be. Tell me—what
made you suspect that the Jovians might be after the defense device for
themselves?”

“A very recent development. You must know that the one thing which makes
our use of the camouflage unit practicable is the new power plant. With
it we can run up to the Invader and get inside his detectors, starting
from far out of his range. Now, that was a Jovian design. They built it,
ergo they had it first.

“In other words, between the time of its invention and the time they
turned it over to us, they had the edge on us. That being the case,
there would be only one reason why, in their supreme self-confidence,
they would turn it over to us; namely, they didn’t need that edge any
more!”

“It fits,” said Hereford sorrowfully.

“Good. Now, knowing Jovians—and learning more every day, by the way—I
conclude that they gave us the drive, not because they had something
better, but because it had already served its purpose for them. I am
convinced that Jovian camouflage boats are on the way to the Invader
now—and perhaps they have even … but I’d rather not think about that.”
He spread his arms, dropped them. “Hence our little jaunt. We’ve got to
get there first. If we’re not first, we have to do what we can when we
get there.”

The boat, lightless, undriven, drifted toward the Invader. At this arc
of the chosen ellipse, its velocity was low, and suspense was as
ubiquitous a thing as the susurrus of the camouflage unit which
whispered away back aft. Hereford and Belter found themselves talking in
whispers too, as if their tense voices could carry through those
insulated bulkheads, across the dim void to the mysterious crew of the
metal murderer which hung before them.

“We’re well inside his meteor deflectors,” gritted Belter. “I don’t know
what to think. Are we really going to be able to get to him, or is he
playing with us?”

“He doesn’t play,” said Hereford grimly. “You will excuse the layman’s
question, but I don’t understand how there can be a possibility of his
having no detector for just this kind of approach. Since he uses bombs
camouflaged the way we are, he must have some defense against them.”

“His defense seems to be in the range of his deflectors,” answered the
chairman. “Those bombs were hunters. That is, they followed the target
wherever it moved. The defense would be to stall off the bomb by
maneuvering until it ran out of fuel, like the one we picked up. Then
his meteor-repellers would take care of it.”

“It was obviously the most effective weapon in his arsenal,” said
Hereford hopefully.

“As far as we know,” said Belter from the other end of the emotional
spectrum. Then, “I can’t stand this. I’m going to try a little drive. I
feel as if we’d been hanging here since nuclear power was discovered.”

Hereford tensed, then nodded in the dark. The boat was hardly the last
word in comfort. The two men could lie prone, or get up to a cramped
all-four position. Sitting was possible if the cheekbones were kept
between the knees and the occipital bones tight against the overhead.
They had been in that prison for more days than they cared to recall.

Belter palmed the drive control and moved it forward. There was no
additional sound from the power unit, but the slight accelerative surge
was distinctly felt.

“I’m going to circle him. No point being too careful. If he hasn’t taken
a crack at us by this time, I don’t think he’s going to.” He took the
steering lever in his other hand and the boat’s nose pulled “up” in
relation to the Invader’s keel-plane. There was no fear of
momentum-damage; the controls would not respond to anything greater than
a 5-G turn without a special adjustment.

Within four hours the craft was “over” the alien. The ugly,
blind-looking shape, portless and jetless, was infuriating. It went its
way completely unheeding, completely confident. Belter had a mad
flashback to a childish romance. She hadn’t been a very pretty girl, but
to have her near him drove him nearly insane. It was because of her
perfect poise, her mask. He did not want her. He wanted only to break
that calm, to smash his way into the citadel of her _savoir faire_. He
had felt like that, and she was not evil. This ship, now—it was
completely so. There was something unalive, implacable, inescapable
about this great murderous vessel.

Something clutched his arm. He started violently, bumped his head on the
overhead, his hand closing on the velocity control. The craft checked
itself and he bumped his head again on the forward port. He swore more
violently than Hereford’s grip on his arm called for, and said in
irritation: “What?”

“A—hole. A hatch or something. Look.”

It was a black shadow on the curve of the gray-shadowed hull.
“Yes … yes. Shall we—” Belter swallowed and tried again. “Shall we walk
into his parlor?”

“Yes. Ah … Belter—”

“Hm-m-m?”

“Before we do—you might as well tell me. Why did you want me to come?”

“Because you’re a fighting man.”

“That’s an odd joke.”

“It is not. You have had to fight every inch of the way, Hereford.”

“Perhaps so. But don’t tell me you brought me along for the potential
use of my mislaid pugnacities.”

“Not _for_ them, friend. Because of them. You want the Invader
destroyed, for the good of the System. I want it saved, for the good of
the System, as I see it. You could achieve your end in one of two ways.
You could do it through Peace Amalgamated, back at Central. It would
only need a few words to obstruct this whole program. _Or_, you could
achieve it yourself, here. I brought you to keep you from speaking to
Peace Amalgamated. I think having you here where I can watch you is less
of a risk to the procurement of the Death defense.”

“You’re a calculating devil,” said Hereford, his voice registering
something between anger and admiration. “And suppose I try to destroy
the ship—given, of course, the chance?”

“I’d kill you first,” said Belter with utter sincerity.

“Has it occurred to you that I might try the same thing, with the same
amount of conviction?”

“It has,” Belter replied promptly. “Only you wouldn’t do it. You could
not be driven to killing. Hereford, you pick the oddest times to indulge
in dialectics.”

“Not at all,” said Hereford good-humoredly. “One likes to know where one
stands.”

Belter gave himself over to his controls. In the back of his mind was a
whirling ball of panic. Suppose the power plant should fail, for
example. Or suppose the Invader should send out a questing beam of a
frequency which the camouflage unit could not handle. How about the
meteor deflector? Would they be crushed if the ship located them and
hurled them away with a repeller? He thought with sudden horror of the
close-set wiring in the boat. Shorts do happen, and sometimes oxidation
and vibration play strange tricks with wiring. _Do something_, his inner
voice shouted. _Right or wrong, do something_.

They drifted up to the great silver hull, and the hole seemed to open
hungrily to them as they neared it. Belter all but stopped the craft in
relation to the ship, and nosed it forward with a view to entering the
hatch without touching the sides.

“In the visirecord, didn’t the camouflage disrupter at Outpost show up
for a moment on the screen as it left the ship?” Hereford whispered.

“Yeah. So what? Oh! You mean the cam unit was shut off until the bomb
was clear of the ship. You have something there, Hereford. Maybe we’d
better shut it off before we go in. I can see where it would act like
something less than camouflage, enclosed in a metal chamber and
reradiating all the stray stuff in there plus the reflections of its own
output.” He put his hand out to the camouflage control. “But I’m going
to wait until we’re practically inside. I don’t relish the idea of being
flung off like a meteorite.”

Handling the controls with infinite care, touching them briefly and
swiftly with his fingertips, Belter tooled the boat through the hatch.
He switched off the camouflage effect and had the boat fully inboard of
the Invader before he realized he was biting his tongue.

Surprisingly, the chamber they entered was illuminated. The light was
dim, shadowless, and a sickly green. The overhead and bulkheads
themselves, or a coating on them, accounted for the light. There was a
large rack on the forward partition containing row on row of the
disruption bombs, minus their warheads. Above each ended a monorail
device which ran to a track ending in a solid-looking square
door—obviously the storage space for the warheads. Another hoist and
monorail system connected the hulls themselves with the open hatch. This
trackage, and the fact that the chamber was otherwise untenanted,
indicated that the bomb assembly, fuse setting, and dispatching were
completely automatic.

“Camouflage again,” gritted Belter. “This boat is enough like those
bombs to fit sort of cozily in one of those racks. In this crazy light
no one would notice it.”

“This light is probably not crazy to those on board,” said Hereford.

“We’ll worry about that later. Slip into your suit.”

From the after locker they drew the light pressure suits around
themselves and secured them. Belter demonstrated the few
controls—oxygen, humidity, temperature, magnetism, and gravity, to be
quite sure the old man was familiar with them all. “And this is the
radio. I think it will be safe to use the receivers. But don’t transmit
unless it’s absolutely necessary. If we stick close together we can talk
by conduction—touching our helmets.”

It was the work of only a few minutes to grapple the weightless craft
into the rack. It was a fair fit. When they had finished, Belter reached
in and took out two blasters. He secured the escape hatch and turned to
Hereford, handing him one of the guns. Hereford took it, but leaned
forward to touch his transparent helmet to Belter’s. His voice came
through hollowly but clearly.

“What’s this for?”

“Morale,” said Belter briefly. “You don’t have to use it. If we’re
watched, ‘Two armed men’ sounds better than ‘Two men, one armed.’ ”

They groped to the inboard partition and followed it cautiously aft. The
touch of the metal under his gloves brought a shocking realization to
Belter of where he actually was, and for a moment his knees threatened
to give way. Deep inside him, his objective self watched, shaking its
figment of a head in amazement. Because he had secured a lifeboat
equipped for the job, he had come. Because he had gotten inside the
Invader’s screens, he had approached the ship itself. Because he was
close enough and a hatch was open, he had come in. _Just the way I got
into the Army, and the way I got into politics_, he grinned.

They found a ladder. It led upward through a diamond-shaped opening in
the overhead. The rungs were welded to the bulkhead. They were too
narrow and too close together. There were dragging scuffmarks on each
side, about eighteen or twenty centimeters on each side of the rungs.
What manner of creature ambulated on its centerline, dragging its sides?

A Jovian.

He looked at Hereford, who was pointing at the marks, so he knew that
Hereford understood, too. He shrugged and pointed upward, beckoning.
They went up, Belter leading.

They found themselves in a corridor, too low to allow them to stand
upright. It was triangular in cross-section, with the point down and
widened to a narrow catwalk. A wear-plate was set into each side and
bore the same smooth scuffs. The deck, what there was of it between the
sharply sloping sides, was composed of transverse rods. A creature which
could grip with claws and steady itself with the sides of a carapace
could move quite freely in such a corridor regardless of gravitic or
accelerative effects, within reason.

_“Damn!”_

Belter jumped as if stabbed. Hereford tottered on his magna-grips and
clutched at the slanted bulkhead for support. The single syllable had
roared at them from inside their helmets. The effect was such that
Belter all but swallowed his tongue. He pointed at himself in the dim
green light and shook his head. Hereford weakly followed suit. Neither
of them had spoken.

“Lousy Jovians—”

Belter, following a sudden hunch, laid his hand on Hereford’s shoulder
to suggest that he stay put, and crept back to the bomb bay opening. He
lay down, and cautiously put his head over the lip.

A long, impossibly black _something_ was edging across the deck down
there. Belter squeezed his eyes tightly closed and opened them wide,
trying to see through the foggy green radiance. At last, he discerned a
small figure pulling and hauling at the shadow, the bomb, the … the
lifeboat.

A human figure. A man. A man who must have come through the Invader’s
defenses, even as he had. A man with a camouflaged boat.

But no one except a few Techs even knew that the boats had been
completed. And the Council, of course.

The man below reached inside his boat and touched a control. It sank
down to the deck next to the bomb rack as its magnetic anchors were
activated. The man shut the escape hatch and shuffled toward the inboard
partition, his blaster in hand, his head turning as he came.

Belter watched him until he discovered the ladder. Then he scrambled to
his feet and, as fast as the peculiar footing would allow him, he
scurried back to Hereford. His helmet receiver registered an angry gust
of breath as the man below saw the short-paced ladder and the
scuffmarks.

Belter slammed his helmet against Hereford’s. “It’s a Martian,” he
gritted. “You might know it’d be a blasted Martian. Only a Martian’d be
stupid enough to try to climb aboard this wagon.”

He saw Hereford’s eyebrow go up at this, but the peace-man did not make
the obvious comment. He was silent as he followed Belter forward to the
nearest turn in the corridor. They slipped around it, Belter conning its
extension carefully. There was still, incredibly, no sign of life.

Just around the turn there was a triangular door, set flush into the
slanted wall. Belter hesitated, then pressed it. It did not yield. He
scrabbled frantically over its surface, found no control of any kind.
Hereford grasped his arm, checked him, and when Belter stepped back, the
old man went to his knees and began feeling around on the catwalk floor.
The door slid silently back.

Belter slipped in, glanced around. But for a huddled, unmoving mass of
some tattered matter in the corridor, there was nothing in the room,
which was small. Belter waved the old man in. Hereford hopped over the
sill, felt on the floor again, and the panel slid shut.

“How did you know how to open that door?” he asked when their helmets
touched.

“Their feet … claws … what-have-you … are obviously prehensile or they
wouldn’t have floors that are nothing more than close-set rungs.
Obviously their door handles would be in the floor.”

Belter shook his head admiringly. “See what happens when a man thinks
for a living?” He turned to the door, set his head against it. Very
faintly, he could hear the cautious steps of the Martian. He turned back
to Hereford. “I suppose I ought to go out there and pin his ears back.
Martians have nothing in their heads but muscles. He’ll walk right up to
the skipper of this ship if he has to wade through the crew to do it.
But I’m mighty interested in just what he’s up to. We couldn’t be much
worse off than we are. Do you suppose we could follow him close enough
to keep him out of trouble?”

“There is no need for caution,” said Hereford, and his voice, distorted
by the helmets, was like a distant tolling bell.

“What do you mean?”

Hereford pointed to the huddled mass in the corner. Belter crossed to
it, knelt, and put out a hand. Frozen substance crumbled under his touch
in a way which was familiar to him. He shrank back in horror.

“It’s—dead,” he whispered.

Hereford touched helmets. “What?”

“It’s dead,” said Belter dully. “It’s—homogenized, and frozen.”

“I know. Remember the three Jovian capital ships?”

“They couldn’t stand The Death,” Belter murmured. “They opened all the
locks.”

He stood up. “Let’s go get that fool of a Martian.”

They left the room and followed the corridor to its end. There was
another ladder there. They climbed it, and at the top Belter paused. “I
think we’d better try for the control central. That’ll be the first
thing he’ll go after.”

They found it, eventually, before the Martian did, possibly because they
were not being as cautious. They must have passed him en route, but such
was the maze of corridors and connecting rooms that that was not
surprising. They still eschewed the use of their transmitters, since
Belter preferred to find out exactly what the Martian was up to.

They had just opened a sliding door at the end of a passageway, and
Belter was half through it when he stopped so suddenly that Hereford
collided with him.

The room which spread before them was unexpectedly large. The bulkheads
were studded with diamond-shaped indicators, and above them and over the
ceiling were softly-colored murals. They glowed and shimmered, and since
they were the first departure from the ubiquitous dim green, their
immediate effect was shocking.

In the center of the chamber was a pair of control desks, a V pointing
forward and a V pointing aft, forming another of the repeated diamond
forms. There was a passage space, however, between the two V’s. In their
enclosure was a creature, crouching over the controls.

It was alive.

It stirred, heaving itself up off the raised portion of the deck on
which it lay. It was completely enclosed in a transparent, obviously
pressurized garment. As it rose, Belter and Hereford shrank back out of
sight. Belter drew his blaster.

But the creature was apparently not aware of them. It turned slowly to
face the opposite corner of the room, and the sensory organ on its
cephalothorax blushed pink.

There was a bold clanking from the corner of the room, which Belter felt
through his shoes. Then the wall began to glow. A small section of it
shone red which paled into white. It bellied momentarily, and then
sagged molten. The Martian, blaster in hand, leapt through the opening.
_And he could have opened that door_, thought Belter disgustedly. _Why
does a Martian always have to do it the hard way?_

The Martian stopped dead when he was clear of the simmering entrance. He
visibly recoiled from the sudden apparition of color, and stood awed
before those magnificent murals. His gaze dropped to the center of the
room.

“So there is a defense,” he snarled. His transmitter was still blatantly
operating. “Come on, Jupiter. I was wise to this whole stunt. Who did
you think you fooled by poisoning your own forces on Titan? Invader,
huh? Some stuff! Get out of there. Move now! I know you can understand
me. I want to see that Death defense and the controls. And there’s no
sense trying to call your buddies. I’ve seen them all over the ship. All
dead. Something saved you, and I mean to find out what it is.”

He raised his blaster. The Jovian quivered. Belter crossed his left arm
across his body and grasped the edge of the door. He rested his blaster
across his left forearm and squinted down the barrel. Hereford reached
over his shoulder and drew the muzzle upward.

Belter turned furiously to him, but the old man shook his head and,
astonishingly, smiled. His hand went to his belt. He threw his
transmitter switch and said in his deep, quiet voice:

“Drop that blaster, son.”

The effect on the Martian was absolutely devastating. He went rod stiff,
dropping his weapon so quickly that he all but threw it. Then he
staggered backward, and they could hear his frightened gasping as he
tried to regain his breath.

Belter strode out into the room and backed to the left bulkhead,
stopping where he could cover both the Martian and the Jovian. Hereford
shuffled over and picked up the blaster.

“P-peace Amalgamated!” puffed the Martian. “What in time are _you_ doing
here?”

Belter answered. “Keeping you from using your muscles instead of your
brains. What do you think you’re doing?”

“Recon,” said the Martian sullenly.

“For who?”

“What do you think?”

“I think you’re doing it for Mars,” said Belter bluntly. “It would be
just dandy if Mars had the Death defense now, wouldn’t it? You guys have
been chafing at the bit for a long time.”

“We’re not crazy,” flashed the Martian. “We never did make peace with
Jupiter, remember? We knew better. And now look.” He gestured at the
Jovian. “What a pretty way to knock slices out of all the Solarian
defenses. Just play Invader for a few years and scare the bedizens out
of humanity. Wipe out what looks tough, and take advantage of the panic.
Heh! Treaties with Jupiter! Why in blazes didn’t you exterminate them
when you had the chance? Now, if Mars gets the Defense, we’ll handle the
thing right. And maybe when the smoke clears away we’ll be magnanimous
enough to let Earth and the Colonies work for us.”

“All blast and brawn,” marveled Belter. “The famous Martian mouth.”

“Don’t you brag about brains. I know for a fact that our councilman
tipped off that camouflage boats were being made in secret. If you
didn’t act on it, it’s your hard luck.”

“In a way he did,” said Belter. “Enough, I imagine, to keep his little
conscience clear. I’m here, for all that.”

“Not for long,” snapped the Martian, making a long sliding step.

“Look out, Hereford!”

Belter snapped a fine-focus shot at the Martian but he was late. The
Martian was behind Hereford, grappling for the blaster which the Peace
delegate still held in his hand. Hereford tried to spin away but was
unsure of his footing in the gravitic shoes and succeeded only in
floundering. The Martian suddenly shifted his attack to the blaster at
Belter’s hip. He got it and danced clear. “I know the pantywaist won’t
shoot,” he said, and laughed. “So it’s you first, Belter, and then old
‘Peace-in-our-Time.’ Then I’ll get the Death defense with or without the
aid of the spider yonder.”

He swung the weapon on Belter, and the chairman knew that this was it.
He closed his eyes. The blaster-flash beat on the lids. He felt nothing.
He tried to open his eyes again and was astounded to discover that he
could. He stood there staring at Hereford, who had just shot the Martian
through the head. The man’s magna-grips held him upright as the air in
his suit whiffed out, to hang in a mist like a frozen soul over his
tattered head.

“I killed him, didn’t I?” asked Hereford plaintively.

“To keep the peace,” said Belter in a shaking voice. He skated over to
the old man and took the blaster, which was still held stiffly out
toward the dead man. “Killing’s a comparative crime, Hereford. You’ve
saved lives.”

He went to the control table and put his hands on it, steadying himself
against the broken sounds Hereford was making. He stared across the
table at the great jelly-and-bone mass that was a Jovian. He would have
given a lot for a translator, but such a machine had never yet been made
portable.

“You. Jovian. Will you communicate? Spread that membrane for ‘yes.’
Contract it for ‘no.’ ”

_Yes_. The creature was perfectly telepathic, but with humans it had to
be one way. A translator could convert its emanations into minute
electronic impulses and arrange them into idea-patterns for which words
were selected.

“Is there anything on this ship which can resist The Death?”

_Yes_.

“You understand it?”

_Yes_.

“Will you share your knowledge with the Council?”

_Yes_.

“Can you deactivate all automatics on this ship?”

In answer the Jovian extended one of its four pseudoclaws, and placed it
next to a control on the table. It was a small square housing, set so as
to repeat the diamond motif. An orange pilot light glowed in its center,
and next to it was a toggle. On the forward side of the toggle was an
extremely simple symbol—two dots connected by two lines, each two-thirds
of the distance between the dots, so that for the middle third they lay
parallel, contiguous. On the after side of the toggle, the symbol
differed. The dots were the same, but the lines were separated. It was
obviously an indication of “open” and “closed” positions. The toggle
slanted forward. Belter put his hand on it, looked at the Jovian.

The membrane spread affirmatively. Jovians did not lie. He pulled the
toggle back and the pilot went out.

“This General Assembly has been called,” Belter said quietly into the
mike, “to clear up, once and for all, the matter of the Invader and the
contingent wild and conflicting rumors about a defense against The
Death, about interstellar drives, about potential war between members of
the Solar Federation, and a number of other fantasies.” He spoke
carefully, conscious of the transmission of his voice and image to
government gatherings on all the worlds, in all the domes, and on ships.

“You know the story of my arrival, with Hereford, aboard the Invader,
and the later arrival of the Martian, and his”—Belter cleared his
throat—“his accidental death. Let me make it clear right now that there
is no evidence that this man was representing the Martian General
Government or any part of it. We have concluded that he was acting as an
individual, probably because of what might be termed an excess of
patriotism.

“Now, as to the presence of the Jovian on the ship—that is a perfectly
understandable episode. Jupiter is a defeated nation. I venture to say
that any group of us in the same situation would commit acts similar to
that of this Jovian. I can say here, too, that there is no evidence of
its representing any part of the Jovian Government. What it might have
done with, say, a Death defense had it found one aboard is conjecture,
and need not enter into this discussion.

“I have before me a transcript of this Jovian’s statement. You may rest
assured that all facts have been checked; that fatigue and crystalline
tests and examinations have been made of metallic samples taken from the
vessel; that the half-lives of radioactive byproducts in certain fission
and disruption machinery have been checked and substantiate this
statement. This is the transcript:

“ ‘For reasons consistent with Jovian philosophy, I took a Jovian-built
camouflaged boat and departed with it before the improved drive had been
submitted to the Joint Solar Military Council. I approached the Invader
cautiously and found the camouflage successful. I boarded him. I put my
boat in the Invader’s bomb rack, where it was well hidden in plain
sight, being the same size and general shape as the Invader’s bombs. I
went inboard, expecting a great deal of trouble. There was none. Every
port and hatch was open to space except the warhead storage, which was
naturally no hiding place due to radioactivity. I proceeded to the
control chamber. I found the master control to all the ship’s armament.

“ ‘But my most important discovery was a thought record. The Invaders
were, like Jovians, of an arthropodal type, and their image patterns
were quite understandable after a little concentration. I shall quote
from that record:

_“ ‘We are of Sygon, greater of the two planets of Sykor, a star in
Symak. The smaller planet, known to us as Gith, is peopled by a mad
race, a mistake of nature—a race which fights and kills itself and wars
on its neighbors; a race which aspires to conquer purely for the sake of
conquest, which hunts for hunting’s sake and kills for pleasure. While
it progresses, while it cooperates, it bites itself and fights itself
and is never done with its viciousness_.

_“ ‘Its planet was large enough to support it, but it was not satisfied.
Sygon was no place for these vicious animals, for they had to bring
their atmosphere in bubbles for breathing, and Sygon’s mass crushed them
and made them sicken. Not needing Sygon still they were willing to fight
us for it_.

_“ ‘We killed them by the hundreds of thousands, and still they kept
coming. They devised incredible weapons to use against us, and we
improved on them and hurled them back. They improved on these,
completely ignoring the inevitability of their end_.

_“ ‘The ultimate weapon was theirs—a terrible thing which emulsified the
very cells of our bodies, and there was no defense against it. The first
time it was used it killed off most of our race. The rest of us threw
all our resources into this, the Eternal Vengeance—this ship. It is
designed to attack anything which radiates, as long as the radiations
exhibit the characteristics of those produced by intelligent life. It
will stay in Sykor’s system, and it will attack anything which might be
Gith or of Gith. Gith will strike back with its terrible weapon, and all
of us on the ship will die. But the ship will go on. Gith will loose its
horror and agony on Sygon, and our race will be dead. But the ship will
go on. It will attack and attack, and ultimately will destroy Gith_.

_“ ‘And if Gith should die and be born again and evolve a new race, and
if that race shall reach a stage of culture approaching that of its
cursed forebears, the ship will attack again until it has destroyed
them. It will attack all the more powerfully for having rested, for
between attacks it will circle Sykor, drinking and storing its energy_.

_“ ‘Perhaps there will come a time when Sykor will cool, or flare up and
explode, or become subject to the influence of a wandering star. Perhaps
then the ship will cease to be, but it is possible that it will go
wandering off into the dark, never to be active again. But if it should
wander into a similar system to that which bore it, then it will bring
death and horror to that system’s inhabitants. If this should be, it
will be unjust; but it will be only an extension of the illimitable evil
of Gith.’ ”_

Belter raised his head. “That is what we were up against. What passed in
that Jovian’s mind when we burst in on it, with our quarreling and our
blasters and our death-dealing, I can only imagine. It made no move to
harm us, though it was armed. I think that it may have been leaving us
to the same inevitable end which overcame Gith. Apparently a Jovian is
capable of thinking beyond immediate advantage.

“I have one more thing to tell you. According to star photographs found
in a huge file on the Invader, and the tests and examinations I
mentioned, the Invader is slightly over fourteen million years old.

“There is a defense against The Death. You can’t kill a dead man. Now,
in more ways than one, I give you over to Hereford.”



THE PROFESSOR’S TEDDY BEAR


“SLEEP,” SAID THE monster. It spoke with its ear, with little lips
writhing deep within the folds of flesh, because its mouth was full of
blood.

“I don’t want to sleep now. I’m having a dream,” said Jeremy. “When I
sleep, all my dreams go away. Or they’re just pretend dreams. I’m having
a real dream now.”

“What are you dreaming now?” asked the monster.

“I am dreaming that I’m grown up—”

“Seven feet tall and very fat,” said the monster.

“You’re silly,” said Jeremy. “I will be five feet, six and three eighth
inches tall. I will be bald on top and will wear eyeglasses like little
thick ashtrays. I will give lectures to young things about human destiny
and the metempsychosis of Plato.”

“What’s a metempsychosis?” asked the monster hungrily.

Jeremy was four and could afford to be patient. “A metempsychosis is a
thing that happens when a person moves from one house to another.”

“Like when your daddy moved here from Monroe Street?”

“Sort of. But not that kind of a house, with shingles and sewers and
things. _This_ kind of a house,” he said, and smote his little chest.

“Oh,” said the monster. It moved up and crouched on Jeremy’s throat,
looking more like a teddy bear than ever. “Now?” it begged. It was not
very heavy.

“Not now,” said Jeremy petulantly. “It’ll make me sleep. I want to watch
my dream some more. There’s a girl who’s not listening to my lecture.
She’s thinking about her hair.”

“What about her hair?” asked the monster.

“It’s brown,” said Jeremy. “It’s shiny, too. She wishes it were golden.”

“Why?”

“Somebody named Bert likes golden hair.”

“Go ahead and make it golden then.”

“I can’t! What would the other young ones say?”

“Does that matter?”

“Maybe not. Could I make her hair golden?”

“Who is she?” countered the monster.

“She is a girl who will be born here in about twenty years,” said
Jeremy.

The monster snuggled closer to his neck.

“If she is to be born here, then of course you can change her hair.
Hurry and do it and go to sleep.”

Jeremy laughed delightedly.

“What happened?” asked the monster.

“I changed it,” said Jeremy. “The girl behind her squeaked like the
mouse with its leg caught. Then she jumped up. It’s a big lecture-room,
you know, built up and away from the speaker-place. It has steep aisles.
Her foot slipped on the hard step.”

He burst into joyous laughter.

“Now what?”

“She broke her neck. She’s dead.”

The monster sniggered. “That’s a very funny dream. Now change the other
girl’s hair back again. Nobody else saw it, except you?”

“Nobody else saw,” said Jeremy. “There! It’s changed back again. She
never even knew she had golden hair for a little while.”

“That’s fine. Does that end the dream?”

“I s’pose it does,” said Jeremy regretfully. “It ends the lecture,
anyhow. The young people are all crowding around the girl with the
broken neck. The young men all have sweat under their noses. The girls
are all trying to put their fists into their mouths. You can go ahead.”

The monster made a happy sound and pressed its mouth hard against
Jeremy’s neck. Jeremy closed his eyes.

The door opened. “Jeremy, darling,” said Mummy. She had a tired, soft
face and smiling eyes. “I heard you laugh.”

Jeremy opened his eyes slowly. His lashes were so long that when they
swung up, there seemed to be a tiny wind, as if they were dark weather
fans. He smiled, and three of his teeth peeped out and smiled too. “I
told Fuzzy a story, Mummy,” he said sleepily, “and he liked it.”

“You darling,” she murmured. She came to him and tucked the covers
around his chin. He put up his hand and kept the monster tight against
his neck.

“Is Fuzzy sleeping?” asked Mummy, her voice crooning with whimsy.

“No,” said Jeremy. “He’s hungering himself.”

“How does he do that?”

“When I eat, the—the hungry goes away. Fuzzy’s different.”

She looked at him, loving him so much that she did not—could not think.
“You’re a strange child,” she whispered, “and you have the pinkest
cheeks in the whole wide world.”

“Sure I have,” he said.

“What a funny little laugh!” she said, paling.

“That wasn’t me. That was Fuzzy. He thinks you’re funny.”

Mummy stood over the crib, looking down at him. It seemed to be the
frown that looked at him, while the eyes looked past. Finally she wet
her lips and patted his head. “Good night, baby.”

“Good night, Mummy.” He closed his eyes. Mummy tiptoed out. The monster
kept right on doing it.

It was nap-time the next day, and for the hundredth time Mummy had
kissed him and said, “You’re so _good_ about your nap, Jeremy!” Well, he
was. He always went straight up to bed at nap-time, as he did at
bedtime. Mummy didn’t know why, of course. Perhaps Jeremy did not know.
Fuzzy knew.

Jeremy opened the toy-chest and took Fuzzy out. “You’re hungry, I bet,”
he said.

“Yes. Let’s hurry.”

Jeremy climbed into the crib and hugged the teddy bear close. “I keep
thinking about that girl,” he said.

“What girl?”

“The one whose hair I changed.”

“Maybe because it’s the first time you’ve changed a person.”

“It is not! What about the man who fell into the subway hole?”

“You moved the hat. The one that blew off. You moved it under his feet
so that he stepped on the brim with one foot and caught his toe in the
crown, and tumbled in.”

“Well, what about the little girl I threw in front of the truck?”

“You didn’t touch her,” said the monster equably. “She was on roller
skates. You broke something in one wheel so it couldn’t turn. So she
fell right in front of the truck.”

Jeremy thought carefully. “Why didn’t I ever touch a person before?”

“I don’t know,” said Fuzzy. “It has something to do with being born in
this house, I think.”

“I guess maybe,” said Jeremy doubtfully.

“I’m hungry,” said the monster, settling itself on Jeremy’s stomach as
he turned on his back.

“Oh, all right,” Jeremy said. “The next lecture?”

“Yes,” said Fuzzy eagerly. “Dream bright, now. The big things that you
say, lecturing. Those are what I want. Never mind the people there.
Never mind you, lecturing. The things you say.”

The strange blood flowed as Jeremy relaxed. He looked up to the ceiling,
found the hairline crack that he always stared at while he dreamed real,
and began to talk.

“There I am. There’s the—the room, yes, and the—yes, it’s all there,
again. There’s the girl. The one who has the brown, shiny hair. The seat
behind her is empty. This must be after that other girl broke her neck.”

“Never mind that,” said the monster impatiently. “What do you say?”

“I—” Jeremy was quiet. Finally Fuzzy nudged him. “Oh. It’s all about
yesterday’s unfortunate occurrence, but, like the show of legend, our
studies must go on.”

“Go on with it then,” panted the monster.

“All right, all right,” said Jeremy impatiently. “Here it is. We come
now to the Gymnosophists, whose ascetic school has had no recorded equal
in its extremism. Those strange gentry regarded clothing and even food
as detrimental to purity of thought. The Greeks also called them
_Hylobioi_, a term our more erudite students will notice as analogous to
the Sanskrit _Vana-Prasthas_. It is evident that they were a profound
influence on Diogenes Laërtius, the Elisian founder of pure skepticism.…

And so he droned on and on. Fuzzy crouched on his body, its soft ears
making small masticating motions; and sometimes when stimulated by some
particularly choice nugget of esoterica, the ears drooled.

At the end of nearly an hour, Jeremy’s soft voice trailed off, and he
was quiet. Fuzzy shifted in irritation. “What is it?”

“That girl,” said Jeremy. “I keep looking back to that girl while I’m
talking.”

“Well, stop doing it. I’m not finished.”

“There isn’t any more, Fuzzy. I keep looking and looking back to that
girl until I can’t lecture any more. Now I’m saying all that about the
pages in the book and the assignment. The lecture is over.”

Fuzzy’s mouth was almost full of blood. From its ears, it sighed. “That
wasn’t any too much. But if that’s all, then it’s all. You can sleep now
if you want to.”

“I want to watch for a while.”

The monster puffed out its cheeks. The pressure inside was not great.
“Go on, then.” It scrabbled off Jeremy’s body and curled up in a sulky
huddle.

The strange blood moved steadily through Jeremy’s brain. With his eyes
wide and fixed, he watched himself as he would be, a slight, balding
professor of philosophy.

He sat in the hall, watching the students tumbling up the steep aisles,
wondering at the strange compulsion he had to look at that girl,
Miss—Miss—what was it?

Oh. “Miss Patchell!”

He started, astonished at himself. He had certainly not meant to call
out her name. He clasped his hands tightly, regaining the dry stiffness
which was his closest approach to dignity.

The girl came slowly down the aisle steps, her wideset eyes wondering.
There were books tucked under her arm, and her hair shone. “Yes,
Professor?”

“I—” He stopped and cleared his throat. “I know it’s the last class
today, and you are no doubt meeting someone. I shan’t keep you very
long … and if I do,” he added, and was again astonished at himself, “you
can see Bert tomorrow.”

“Bert? Oh!” She colored prettily. “I didn’t know you knew about—how
_could_ you know?”

He shrugged. “Miss Patchell,” he said. “You’ll forgive an
old—ah—middle-aged man’s rambling, I hope. There is something about you
that—that—”

“Yes?” Caution, and an iota of fright were in her eyes. She glanced up
and back at the now empty hall

Abruptly he pounded the table. “I will _not_ let this go on for another
instant without finding out about it. Miss Patchell, you are becoming
afraid of me, and you are wrong.”

“I th-think I’d better …” she said timidly, and began backing off.

_“Sit down!”_ he thundered. It was the very first time in his entire
life that he had thundered at anyone, and her shock was not one whit
greater than his. She shrank back and into a front-row seat, looking a
good deal smaller than she actually was, except about the eyes, which
were much larger.

The professor shook his head in vexation. He rose, stepped down off the
dais, and crossed to her, sitting in the next seat.

“Now be quiet and listen to me.” The shadow of a smile twitched his lips
and he said, “I really don’t know what I am going to say. Listen, and be
patient. It couldn’t be more important.”

He sat a while, thinking, chasing vague pictures around in his mind. He
heard, or was conscious of, the rapid but slowing beat of her frightened
heart.

“Miss Patchell,” he said, turning to her, his voice gentle, “I have not
at any time looked into your records. Until—ah—yesterday, you were
simply another face in the class, another source of quiz papers to be
graded. I have not consulted the registrar’s files for information about
you. And, to my almost certain knowledge, this is the first time I have
spoken with you.

“That’s right, sir,” she said quietly.

“Very good, then.” He wet his lips. “You are twenty-three years old. The
house in which you were born was a two-story affair, quite old, with a
leaded bay window at the turn of the stairs. The small bedroom, or
nursery, was directly over the kitchen. You could hear the clatter of
dishes below you when the house was quiet. The address was 191 Bucyrus
Road.”

“How—oh yes! How did you know?”

He shook his head, and then put it between his hands. “I don’t know. I
don’t know. I lived in that house, too, as a child. I don’t know how I
knew that you did. There are things in here—” He rapped his head, shook
it again. “I thought perhaps you could help.”

She looked at him. He was a small man, brilliant, tired, getting old
swiftly. She put a hand on his arm. “I wish I could,” she said warmly.
“I do wish I could.”

“Thank you, child.”

“Maybe if you told me more—”

“Perhaps. Some of it is—ugly. All of it is cloudy, long ago, barely
remembered. And yet—”

“Please go on.”

“I remember,” he half whispered, “things that happened long ago that
way, and recent things I remember—twice. One memory is sharp and clear,
and one is old and misty. And I remember, in the same misty way, what is
happening now and—and what will happen!”

“I don’t understand.”

“That girl. That Miss Symes. She—died here yesterday.”

“She was sitting right behind me,” said Miss Patchell.

“I know it! I knew what was going to happen to her. I knew it mistily,
like an old memory. That’s what I mean. I don’t know what I could have
done to stop it. I don’t think I could have done anything. And yet, down
deep I have the feeling that it’s my fault—that she slipped and fell
because of something I did.”

“Oh, no!”

He touched her arm in mute gratitude for the sympathy in her tone, and
grimaced miserably. “It’s happened before,” he said. “Time and time and
time again. As a boy, as a youth, I was plagued with accidents. I led a
quiet life. I was not very strong and books were always more my line
than baseball. And yet I witnessed a dozen or more violent, useless
deaths—automobile accidents, drownings, falls, and one or two—” his
voice shook—“which I won’t mention. And there were countless minor
ones—broken bones, maimings, stabbings … and every time, in some way, it
was my fault, like the one yesterday … and I—I—”

“Don’t,” she whispered. “Please don’t. You were nowhere near Elaine
Symes when she fell.”

“I was nowhere near any of them! That never mattered. It never took away
the burden of guilt. Miss Patchell—”

“Catherine.”

“Catherine. Thank you so much! There are people called by insurance
actuaries, ‘accident prone.’ Most of these are involved in accidents
through their own negligence, or through some psychological quirk which
causes them to defy the world, or to demand attention, by getting hurt.
But some are simply present at accidents, without being involved at
all—catalysts of death, if you’ll pardon a flamboyant phrase. I am,
apparently, one of these.”

“Then—how could you feel guilty?”

“It was—” He broke off suddenly, and looked at her. She had a gentle
face, and her eyes were filled with compassion. He shrugged. “I’ve said
so much,” he said. “More would sound no more fantastic, and do me no
more damage.”

“There’ll be no damage from anything you tell me,” she said, with a
sparkle of decisiveness.

He smiled his thanks this time, sobered, and said, “These horrors—the
maimings, the deaths—they were _funny_, once, long ago. I must have been
a child, a baby. Something taught me, then, that the agony and death of
others was to be promoted and enjoyed. I remember, I—almost remember
when that stopped. There was a—a toy, a—a—”

Jeremy blinked. He had been staring at the fine crack in the ceiling for
so long that his eyes hurt.

“What are you doing?” asked the monster.

“Dreaming real,” said Jeremy. “I am grown up and sitting in the big
empty lecture place, talking to the girl with the brown hair that
shines. Her name’s Catherine.”

“What are you talking about?”

“Oh, all the funny dreams. Only—”

“Well?”

“They’re not so funny.”

The monster scurried over to him and pounced on his chest. “Time to
sleep now. And I want to—”

“No,” said Jeremy. He put his hands over his throat. “I have enough now.
Wait until I see some more of this real-dream.”

“What do you want to see?”

“Oh, I don’t know. There’s something.…”

“Let’s have some fun,” said the monster. “This is the girl you can
change, isn’t it?”

“Yes.”

“Go ahead. Give her an elephant’s trunk. Make her grow a beard. Stop her
nostrils up. Go on. You can do anything.” Jeremy grinned briefly, and
then said, “I don’t want to.”

“Oh, go on. Just see how funny …”

“A toy,” said the professor. “But more than a toy. It could talk, I
think. If I could only remember more clearly!”

“Don’t try so hard. Maybe it will come,” she said. She took his hand
impulsively. “Go ahead.”

“It was—something—” the professor said haltingly, “—something soft and
not too large. I don’t recall … ”

“Was it smooth?”

“No. Hairy—fuzzy. _Fuzzy!_ I’m beginning to get it. Wait, now … A thing
like a teddy bear. It talked. It—why, of course! It was alive!”

“A pet, then. Not a toy.”

“Oh, no,” said the professor, and shuddered. “It was a toy, all right.
My mother thought it was, anyway. It made me dream real.”

“You mean, like Peter Ibbetson?”

“No, no. Not like that.” He leaned back, rolled his eyes up. “I used to
see myself as I would be later, when I was grown. And before. Oh. Oh—I
think it was then—Yes! It must have been then that I began to see all
those terrible accidents. It was! It was!”

“Steady,” said Catherine. “Tell me quietly.”

He relaxed. “Fuzzy. The demon—the monster. I know what it did, the
devil. Somehow it made me see myself as I grew. It made me repeat what I
had learned. It—it ate knowledge! It did; it ate knowledge. It had some
strange affinity for me, for something about me. It could absorb
knowledge that I gave out. And it—it changed the knowledge into blood,
the way a plant changes sunlight and water into cellulose!”

“I don’t understand,” she said again.

“You don’t? How could you? How can I? I know that that’s what it did,
though. It made me—why, I was spouting my lectures here to the beast
when I was four years old! The words of them, the sense of them, came
from me _now_ to me _then. And_ I gave it to the monster, and it ate the
knowledge and spiced it with the things it made me do in my real dreams.
It made me trip a man up on a hat, of all absurd things, and fall into a
subway excavation. And when I was in my teens, I was right by the
excavation to see it happen. And that’s the way with all of them! All
the horrible accidents I have witnessed, I have half-remembered before
they happened. There’s no stopping any of them. What am I going to do?”

There were tears in her eyes. “What about me?” she whispered—more,
probably, to get his mind away from his despair than for any other
reason.

“You. There’s something about you, if only I could remember. Something
about what happened to that—that toy, that beast. You were in the same
environment as I, as that devil. Somehow, you are vulnerable to it
and—Catherine, Catherine, I think that something was done to you that—”

He broke off. His eyes widened in horror. The girl sat beside him,
helping him, pitying him, and her expression did not change.
But—everything else about her did.

Her face shrank, shrivelled. Her eyes lengthened. Her ears grew long,
grew until they were like donkey’s ears, like rabbit’s ears, like
horrible, long hairy spider’s legs. Her teeth lengthened into tusks. Her
arms shrivelled into jointed straws, and her body thickened.

It smelled like rotten meat.

There were filthy claws scattering out of her polished open-toed shoes.
There were bright sores. There were—other things. And all the while
she—it—held his hand and looked at him with pity and friendliness.

The professor—

Jeremy sat up and flung the monster away. “It isn’t funny!” he screamed.
“It isn’t funny, it isn’t, it isn’t, it _isn’t!_”

The monster sat up and looked at him with its soft, bland, teddy-bear
expression. “Be quiet,” it said. “Let’s make her all squashy now, like
soft-soap. And hornets in her stomach. And we can put her—”

Jeremy clapped his hands over his ears and screwed his eyes shut. The
monster talked on. Jeremy burst into tears, leapt from the crib and,
hurling the monster to the floor, kicked it. It grunted. “That’s funny!”
screamed the child. “Ha ha!” he cried, as he planted both feet in its
yielding stomach. He picked up the twitching mass and hurled it across
the room. It struck the nursery clock. Clock and monster struck the
floor together in a flurry of glass, metal, and blood. Jeremy stamped it
all into a jagged, pulpy mass, blood from his feet mixing with blood
from the monster, the same strange blood which the monster had pumped
into his neck.…

Mummy all but fainted when she ran in and saw him. She screamed, but he
laughed, screaming. The doctor gave him sedatives until he slept, and
cured his feet. He was never very strong after that. They saved him, to
live his life and to see his real-dreams; funny dreams, and to die
finally in a lecture room, with his eyes distended in horror while
horror froze his heart, and a terrified young woman ran crying, crying
for help.



A WAY HOME


WHEN PAUL RAN away from home, he met no one and saw nothing all the way
to the highway. The highway swept sudden and wide from the turn by
Keeper’s Rise, past the blunt end of the Township Road, and narrowed off
to a distant pinpoint pricking at the horizon. After a time Paul could
see the car.

It was new and long and it threw down its snout a little as the driver
braked, and when it stopped beside him it seesawed easily, once, on its
big soft springs.

The driver was a large man, large and costly, with a gray Stetson and a
dove-colored topcoat made of something that did not crease in the bend
of his arms but rolled and folded instead. The woman beside him had a
broad brow and a pointed chin. Her skin had peach shadings, but was
deeply tanned, and her hair was the red gold called “straw color” by a
smith as he watches his forge. She smiled at the man and she smiled at
Paul almost the same way.

“Hi, son,” the man said. “This the old Township Road?”

“Yes, sir,” said Paul, “it sure is.”

“Figured it was,” said the man. “A feller don’t forget.”

“Reckon you don’t,” said Paul.

“Haven’t seen the old town in twenty years,” said the man. “I guess it
ain’t changed much.”

“These old places don’t change much,” said Paul with scorn.

“Oh, they ain’t so bad to come back to,” said the man. “Hate to get
chained down in one all my life, though.”

“Me too,” agreed Paul. “You from around here?”

“Why sure,” said the man. “My name’s Roudenbush. Any more Roudenbushes
around here that you know of, boy?”

“Place is full of ’em,” said Paul. “Hey, you’re not the Roudenbush kid
that ran away twenty years ago?”

“The very one,” said the man. “What happened after I left?”

“Why, they talk about you to this day,” said Paul. “Your mother sickened
and died, and your pa got up in meetin’ a month after you left an’ asked
forgiveness for treatin’ you so mean.”

“Poor old feller,” said the man. “I guess it was a little rough of me to
run out like that. But he asked for it.”

“I bet he did.”

“This is my wife,” said the man.

The woman smiled at Paul again. She did not speak. Paul could not think
up what kind of a voice she might have. She leaned forward and opened up
the glove compartment. It was cram-full of chocolate-covered cherries.

“Been crazy about these ever since I was a kid,” said the man. “Help
yourself. I got ten pounds of them in the back.” He leaned into the
leather cushions, took out a silver cigar case, put a cigar between his
teeth, and applied a lighter that flamed up like a little bonfire in his
hand. “Yes, sir,” said the man. “I got two more cars back in the city,
and a tuxedo suit with shiny lapels. I made my killing in the stock
market, and now I’m president of a railroad. I’ll be getting back there
this evening, after I give the folks in the old town a treat.”

Paul had a handful of chocolate-covered cherries. “Gee,” he said. After
that he walked on down the highway. The cherries disappeared and the man
and the lady and the car all disappeared, but that didn’t matter. “It’ll
be like that,” said young Paul Roudenbush. “It’ll be just like that.”
Then, “I wonder what that lady’s name’ll be.”

A quarter of a mile down the pike was the turn-off to the school, and
there was the railroad crossing with its big X on a pole that he always
read RAIL CROSSING ROAD. The forenoon freight was bowling down the
grade, screaming two longs, a short, and a long. When he was a kid, two
years or so back, Paul used to think it saluted him:
_Paul … Roud … n’Bush-h-h_ … with the final sibilant made visible in the
plume of steam on the engine’s iron shoulder. Paul trotted up to the
crossing and stood just where the first splintered plank met the road
surface. Engine, tender, Pennsylvania, Nickel Plate, T.&N.O., Southern,
Southern, Pennsylvania, Père Marquette, Canadian Pacific. Cars from all
over: hot places, cold places, far places. Automobiles, automobiles,
cattle, tank. Tank tank cattle. Refrigerator, refrigerator, automobiles,
caboose. Caboose with a red flag flying, and a glimpse at the window of
a bull-necked trainman shaving, suds on his jowls like a mad dog. Then
the train was a dwindling rectangle on the track, and on its top was the
silhouette of a brakeman, leaning easily into wind and velocity, walking
on top of the boxcars.

With the train in one ear and dust in the other, Paul faced the highway.
A man stood at the other side of the tracks. Paul gaped at him.

He was wearing an old brown jacket with a gray sheepskin collar, and
blue dungarees. These he was dusting off with long weather-beaten hands,
one of which—the right—looked like a claw. There was no ring finger or
little finger, and a third of the palm’s breadth was gone. From the side
of the middle finger to the side of the wrist, the hand was neatly
sealed with a type of flexible silvery scar-tissue.

He looked up from his dusting at Paul. “Hi, bub.” Either he had a beard
or he badly needed a shave. Paul could see the cleft in his square chin,
though. The man had eyes as pale as the color of water poured into a
glass after the milk had been drunk.

Paul said, “Hi,” still looking at the hand. The man asked him what that
town was over there in the hollow, and Paul told him. He knew now what
the man was—one of those fabulous characters who ride on freight trains
from place to place. Ride the rods. Catch a fast freight out of Casey,
which was K.C., which was Kansas City. They had been everywhere and done
everything, these men, and they had a language all their own. Handouts
and line bulls, Chi and mulligan and grab a rattler to Nollins.

The man squinched up his eyes at the town, as if he were trying to drive
his gaze through the hill and see more. “The old place hasn’t growed
none,” he said, and spat.

Paul spat too. “Never will,” he said.

“You from there?”

“Yup.”

“Me too,” said the man surprisingly.

“Gosh,” said Paul. “You don’t look like you came from around here.”

The man crossed the single track to Paul’s side. “I guess I don’t. I
been a lot of places since I left here.”

“Where you been?” asked Paul.

The man looked into Paul’s open eyes, and through them to Paul’s open
credulousness. “All over the world,” he said. “All over this country on
freights, and all over the oceans on ships.” He bared his right forearm.
“Look there.” And sure enough he had a tattoo.

“Women,” said the man, flexing his claw so that the tattoo writhed.
“That’s what _I_ like.” He closed one pale eye, pushed his mouth
side-wise under it, and clucked a rapid _chick-chick_ from his pale
cheek.

Paul wet his lips, spat again, and said, “Yeah. Oh, boy.”

The man laughed. He had bad teeth. “You’re like I was. Wasn’t room
enough in that town for me.”

“Me either,” said Paul. “I ain’t going back there _no_ more.”

“Oh, you’ll go back. You’ll want to look it over, and ask a few
questions around, and find out what happened to your old gals, and see
how dead everything is, so’s you can go away again knowin’ you done
right to leave in the first place. This here’s my second trip back.
Seems like every time I go through this part o’ the world I just got to
drop by here and let the old burg give me a couple laughs.” He turned
his attention right around and looked outward again. “You really are
headin’ out, bub?”

“Headin’ out,” nodded Paul. He liked the sound of that. “Headin’ out,”
he said again.

“Where you bound?”

“The city,” Paul said, “unless I hit somethin’ I like better ’fore I get
there.”

The man considered him. “Hey. Got any money?”

Paul shook his head cautiously. He had two dollars and ninety-two cents.
The man seemed to make some decision; he shrugged. “Well, good luck,
bub. More places you see, more of a man you’ll be. Woman told me that
once in Sacramento.”

“The—oh!” said Paul. Approaching the grade crossing was a maroon coupé.
“It’s Mr. Sherman!”

“Who’s he?”

“The sheriff. He’ll be out lookin’ for me!”

“Sheriff! Me for the brush. Don’t tag, you little squirt! Go the other
way!” and he dived down the embankment and disappeared into the bushes.

Frightened by the man’s sudden harshness, confused by the necessity for
instant action, Paul shuffled for a moment, almost dancing, and then ran
to the other side. Flat on his stomach in a growth of fireweed, he
stopped breathing and peered at the road. The coupé slowed, all but
stopped. Paul closed his eyes in terror. Then he heard the grate of
gears and the rising whine as the car pulled over the tracks in second
gear and moaned on up the highway.

Paul waited five minutes, his fear leaving him exactly as fast as his
sweat dried. Then he emerged and hurried along the highway, keeping a
sharp watch ahead for the sheriff’s returning car. He saw no sign of the
man with the claw. But then, he hadn’t really expected to.

It could be like that, he thought. Travel this old world over. Gramps
used to say that men like that had an itching foot. Paul’s feet itched a
little, if he thought about it. Hurt a little, too. He could come back
years from now with a tattoo and a mutilated hand. Folks’d really take
notice. The stories he could tell! _“I run down the bank, see, to haul
this tomato out o’ th’ drink. She was yellin’ her blond head off. No
sooner got my hooks on her when_ clomp, _a alligator takes off part o’
me hand. I didn’t mind none. Not when I carried this babe up the bank.”_
He shut one eye, pushed his mouth sideways, and clucked. The sound,
somehow, reminded him of chocolate-covered cherries.…

Another half mile, and the country became more open. He flicked his eyes
from side to side as he trudged. First sign of that maroon coupé and
he’d have to fade. _Sheriff! Me for the brush!_ He felt good. He could
keep ahead of the law. Bet your life. Go where you want to go, do what
you want to do, come back for a laugh every once in a while. That was
better, even, than a big car and a tuxedo suit. Women. A smooth-faced
one in the car beside you or, _chick-chick_, women all over, Sacramento
and every place, to tell you what a man you are, because of all the
places you’ve been. Yup, that was it.

There was a deep drone from overhead. Paul looked up and saw the
plane—one of the private planes that based at the airport forty miles
away. Planes were no novelty, but Paul never saw one without an
expressed wish that something would happen—not necessarily a crash,
though that wouldn’t be bad, but much rather something that would bring
the plane down for a forced landing, so he could run over and see the
pilot get out, and maybe talk to him or even help him fix the trouble.
“Let me know next time you’re at the field,” the pilot would say.

Paul slowed, stopped, then went to the shoulder and sat down with his
feet in the dry ditch. He watched the plane. It dipped a wing and
circled, went off and came lower, made a run over the meadow. Paul
thought he was going to—well, of course, he was going to land!

The wheels touched, kicked up a puff of yellow dust that whisked out of
existence in the prop-wash. They touched again and held the earth; the
tail came down, bounced a little, and then the plane was carrying its
wings instead of being carried. The wings were orange and the fuselage
was blue, and it was glossy in the sun. The wings wobbled slightly as
the plane taxied over the lumpy meadow, and Paul knew that if he held
out his arms and wobbled them like that he would feel it in his
shoulders.

The motor barked, and the propeller blades became invisible as the pilot
braked one wheel and turned the ship in its own length. The propeller,
in profile, was a ghostly band and then a glass disc as the plane swung
toward Paul. It snorted and wobbled across the meadow until it was
within twenty feet of the fence and the ditch. Then, with a roar, it
swung broadside to him and the sound of the motor dwindled to an easy
_pwap-tick-tickety-pwap_, while the pilot did knowledgeable things at
the controls. Paul could see him in there, plain as day, through the
cabin doors. The plane was beautiful; standing still it looked as if it
were going two hundred miles an hour. The windshield swept right back
over the pilot’s head. It was fine.

The pilot opened the door and vaulted to the ground. “Glory be! You’d
think they’d have a field built in town after all these years.”

“They never will,” said Paul. “Nice job you got there.”

The pilot, pulling off a pair of high-cuffed gloves, looked briefly at
the plane and grinned. He was very clean and had wide shoulders and
practically no hips. He wore a good soft leather jacket and tight
breeches. “Know anybody in town, son?”

“Everybody, I guess.”

“Well, now. I can get all the news from you before I go on in.”

“Say—ain’t you Paul Roudenbush?”

Paul froze. _He_ hadn’t said that. There were sudden icy cramps in the
backs of his knees. The plane vanished. The pilot vanished. Paul sat
with his feet in the dry ditch and slowly turned his head.

A maroon coupé stood by the ditch. Its door was open, and there, one
foot on the running-board, was Mr. Sherman. _Sheriff! Me for the brush!_

Instead, he licked his lips and said, “Hi, Mr. Sherman.”

“My,” said Mr. Sherman, “you give me a turn, you did. Saw you sitting
there so still, figured you’d been hit by a car or some such.”

“I’m all right,” said Paul faintly. He rose. Might as well get it over
with. “I was just … thinkin’, I guess.”

Thinking—and now he was caught, and the thoughts raced through him like
the cars of the forenoon freight; thoughts from hot places, cold places,
far places. Stock market, car, claw claw plane. Women, women, cigarette
lighter, landing field. Thoughts that were real, thoughts that he made
up; they barreled on through him, with a roar and a swirl, and left him
standing, facing the highway and Mr. Sherman, who had caught him.

“Thinking, eh? Well, I’m right relieved,” said Mr. Sherman. He got back
in the car, slammed the door, stepped on the starter.

“Mr. Sherman, ain’t you—”

“Ain’t I what, son?”

“Nothin’, Mr. Sherman. Nothin’ at all.”

“You’re a weird one,” said Mr. Sherman, shaking his head. “Hey, I’m
heading back into town. Want a lift? It’s near eating time.”

“No, thanks,” said Paul immediately and with great sincerity.

Paul watched the maroon coupé move off, his mind racing. The car was
going into town. Without him. Mr. Sherman did not know he was running
away. Why not? Well, they hadn’t missed him yet. Unless … unless they
didn’t care whether he came back or not. No. No, that couldn’t be! The
car would go right past his house, soon’s it got in town. Wasn’t much of
a house. In it, though, was his own room. Small, but absolutely his own.

The trouble with the other ways to go back, it took time to make a
killing in the stock market and get married. It took time to acquire a
plane. It probably took quite a while to get part of your hand cut off.
But this way—

Suddenly he was in the road screaming, “Mr. Sherman! Mr. Sherman!”

Mr. Sherman didn’t hear him but he saw him in the rear-view mirror. He
stopped and backed up a bit. Paul climbed in, gasped his thanks, and sat
still, working on his wind. He got it all back just about the time they
turned into the Township Road.

Mr. Sherman glanced abruptly at the boy. “Paul.”

“Yes, sir.”

“I just had a thought. You, ’way out there on the pike; were you running
away?”

Paul said, “No.” His eyes were more puzzled than anything else. “I was
coming back,” he said.



STORY NOTES
BY PAUL WILLIAMS


“MATURITY”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, February
1947. Written before March 25, 1946 (when he told his mother, in a
letter, that he had already sold it and been paid, $367.50).
Substantially rewritten in early 1948, for inclusion in Sturgeon’s first
book, the story collection _Without Sorcery_ (Prime Press, 1948). The
version included in this volume is the later version, which the author
strongly preferred. The text of the second half of the original magazine
version is included here as an appendix, for scholars and the curious.

Sturgeon’s introduction to the story in _Without Sorcery_ follows:
_Robin English, one of the most captivating characters ever to take a
fictional bit in his teeth, appeared in an earlier version of
“Maturity.” Let the reader be enjoined, if he has read this earlier
effort, to forget it; if he has not, to leave it alone_.

_Halfway through the original version, I found that I had by the tail a
very large beast indeed. Finding myself suddenly with neither
information nor convictions, I completed the story by merely tying up
plot-threads, and not by saying anything at all_.

_I have attempted here to erase this reprehensible act. The story now
says much and concludes nothing. It may now, I earnestly hope, serve to
generate a certain amount of directive thought on this curious subject_.

Sturgeon’s other major public statement about the story appeared in a
book entitled _Maturity_ (subtitled: _Three Stories by Theodore
Sturgeon_) published in a limited edition of 750 copies to commemorate
TS’s appearance as Guest of Honor at a science fiction convention in
Minnesota in April 1979. In the Editors’ Notes to that book (Rune Press,
1979), editors Scott Imes and Stuart W. Wells III explain that, “Scott
called Sturgeon and he agreed [to the idea of a limited edition book].
He had just the story for the book. He would rewrite and expand
‘Maturity.’ There was plenty of time, but he would start right away.… A
few months come and go and February arrives. Deadlines draw nearer and
nearer. How is the story coming? Sturgeon is reached and reveals that he
started to rewrite the story but likes the original better.… The book is
now too short. Sturgeon suggests that two stories be added on the same
theme: ‘Bulkhead’ and ‘The Graveyard Reader.’ ”

The first 60 percent of Sturgeon’s 1979 Introduction to his book
_Maturity_ (the balance concerns the other two stories) follows:

_“Maturity” was written in 1946, and appeared in_ Astounding
Science-Fiction _under the editorship of the great John W. Campbell, Jr.
It was preceded by two years of research—research which consisted of
asking everyone I met—young people, old ones, rich, poor; strangers,
loved ones, even faceless voices over the telephone: “What is
maturity?”_

_This story was, I think, the emergence of the “thing I say.” James
Blish and Damon Knight once produced the hypothesis that every writer
has a thing he says, and he says it over and over again (in different
ways, of course) every time he writes. I think they were right. Though I
have since rephrased and refocused the “thing I say,” this story is a
good beginning. I’ll tell you at the end of the book what it is now_.

_One interesting aspect my research unearthed is that a certain category
of human beings backed off from my question. They were women over
thirty-five. It wasn’t until I pushed one of them into a wall and
demanded to know where the reluctance came from that I learned that it
had leaked out from ads in the newspapers and women’s magazines. “For
the mature figure” meant either fat, or old, or both_.

_The story tumbled into being without much effort until I was about
two-thirds through, and then I began to have some doubts about my own
definition of maturity. For a while I bogged down completely, and at
last just finished writing the story, because by then I knew how to
finish writing a story. But I was profoundly dissatisfied with it_.

_It appeared in the magazine in ’47. In 1948, along came Jim Williams of
Prime Press, wanting to do a collection. It would be my first, but the
chief reason I jumped to say yes was that it would be a chance to
rewrite this story. I did, and was better pleased, but not altogether_.

_In 1952 I became father of my firstborn son, and so I named him Robin,
after the protagonist of this story; he is my “second rewrite.” I
thought he would either mature in ways where I could observe him, day by
day, or he would not, and I’d find out why; either way, I could refine
my concept of the nature of maturity. I write this on Robin Sturgeon’s
27th birthday, and I can say with pride that the second rewrite is
better than the first one. Tall, strong, talented, with a fifty-thousand
candle-power smile, he plays guitar and trumpet, sings, composes,
arranges, in and around Woodstock, New York. He is self-actualized and
very alive, and he has done this for my definition of maturity: it isn’t
a condition, it isn’t a place-to-arrive; like everything else in this
universe, it’s a way of going rather than a way of being. It’s movement,
flux, growth, change, development. This is the one thing that the first
Robin couldn’t quite grasp_.

The relevant paragraphs of Sturgeon’s Postscript to the 1979 book
follow:

_Maturity is not, after all, the name of my quest, the “thing I say.” I
look rather for the nature of the optimum human being—not a freak like
Robin English or Superman, engaging as they may be, but humanity with a
spleen and eyeballs and eardrums and all the other parts each working at
the top of its capacity and in absolute harmony—a kind of perfect
internal ecology. And along with that, of course, goes the optimum
brain; and I deeply believe that there is no upper limit there_.

_Only the optimum human can save the species and populate the universe_.

When Sturgeon spoke with David Hartwell in 1972 about his “preoccupation
with the optimum man,” he affirmed that: _“Maturity” is the blueprint
for this whole thing I’ve been talking about_.

In view of the plot of “Maturity,” it is interesting to note that on
April 29, 1938, noted bacteriologist Paul de Kruif wrote to Theodore
Sturgeon (clearly in response to a letter from the young man), “Dear Mr.
Sturgeon: Your spirit is certainly a laudable one, but at the present
time I know of no institution which could avail itself of a human guinea
pig for any of the diseases you mention.” (Source: the papers of
Theodore Sturgeon in the possession of his Literary Trust)

On Feb. 3, 1947, just after “Maturity” was first published, Ray Bradbury
wrote TS a letter that began: “Ted, I hate you! Having just read your
story ‘Maturity,’ I have every reason to hate you. It is a damned nice
story. Your sense of humor, sir, is incredible. I don’t believe you’ve
written a bad story yet; I don’t think you ever will. This is not
log-rolling, by God; I only speak the truth. I predict you will be
selling at least six stories a year to _Collier_’s and _The Post_ before
long. You have the touch.”

Also on Feb. 3, 1947, Robert Heinlein wrote, “Ted, my respectful
congratulations on ‘Maturity.’ I recognized some of the autobiographical
touches. You are probably the most accomplished Peter Pan ever to have
survived three decades, more or less (except me, maybe, he added with a
churlish pout). But don’t let anyone monkey with your thymus gland; we
like you the way you are. No kiddin’, it was a swell story.” One
autobiographical touch: the biographical note in the back of Sturgeon
books published by Ballantine in the 1950s says Sturgeon spent six years
in high school and quotes him as saying, “I didn’t graduate; I was
released”—precisely what Robin tells Peg in “Maturity.”

Two years after reading “Maturity,” Heinlein began working on the novel
that would become _Stranger in a Strange Land_. It is not difficult to
see traces of Robin English’s influence in the character of Michael
Valentine Smith.

Sturgeon wrote to his mother (Christine Hamilton Sturgeon) on Feb. 9,
1947: _I am sending you the current_ Astounding _and the current_ Weird
[with his story “Fluffy”]. _Both yarns have received quite a flurry of
comment. I would particularly like a careful comment on “Maturity” from
you. I’ve quite lost perspective on the yarn, and rather urgently want
it back. (The perspective, not the magazine!) Maturity is, as I may have
remarked to you before, a thing on which I am qualified to make
objective observations_.… (He also asked his ex-wife for her written
comments on the story.)

Clifford Simak, a great science fiction writer who had been writing
longer than Sturgeon, wrote TS on 2/14/47, “I’m sorrier than I can tell
you, but I didn’t care for ‘Maturity.’ … The idea was a honey. It
developed well up to about the middle of the yarn, although it seemed to
me that you were holding yourself back, that you were positively
laboring to make it subjective, determined that you would allow no
dramatics and no overtones.… And the ending. By God, Ted, you didn’t
believe that yourself. A mature man, a really mature man would have done
something other than follow the footsteps of normal humans.… I hope you
aren’t angry with me.…” A further letter from Simak indicates that TS
responded immediately, although no carbon survives in his papers.

Philip Klass (William Tenn) wrote TS on 12/30/48: “I have just finished
reading the rewritten version of ‘Maturity’ which appears in your book.…
Ted, accept my congratulations on your masterpiece.”

Noted SF anthologist Groff Conklin wrote in 1954, about the second
version of “Maturity”: “In [my] opinion, this is one of the most
poignantly real stories about the tragedy of a superman in our midst
that has ever been written.”

John W. Campbell’s blurb on the first page of the story in _Astounding:_
IT’S BEEN SAID THAT A MAN NEVER GROWS UP. THERE’S CONSIDERABLE EVIDENCE
FOR THE LITERAL TRUTH OF THIS—AND A FASCINATING PROBLEM IN WHAT THE
BEHAVIOR OF A TRULY MATURE HUMAN BEING WOULD BE.

“TINY AND THE MONSTER”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
May 1947. Probably written in the fall of 1946 (judging from the amount
of time that usually elapsed between _Astounding_ buying a story and
getting it into print) or in February and March 1947 (based on a comment
in a March letter that he “got a good start on the dog story”).

In an interview with Paul Williams in February 1976, Sturgeon said,
_“Tiny and the Monster” came out of a weekend I spent with_ [science
fiction writers] _Henry Kuttner and C. L. Moore, and that was the house
that I visualized_ [in that story]. _It was up in Hastings-on-Hudson. I
really loved that house; I thought that was such a nice place to be. And
the mother-in-law, who kind of took over the story … she was a
subsidiary character who took the bit in her teeth and just ran away
with it. It’s one of the many instances where one of my subsidiary
characters has become so dimensional that I can’t change it or eliminate
it, and I’m not going to waste 6000 words of hard-earned copy, so I have
to march up and down the road for a couple of weeks or months, or
whatever it takes, to readjust the entire story to embrace this
character without changing it. Which is nice, because if the author
doesn’t know how a story’s going to come out, a reader couldn’t possibly
know. But that old lady and her little blue car, that was my mother and
her funny little blue car that she had down in Jamaica. It was a fun
story … and it really had something to say, too, about ugliness as such.
The monster itself was so hideous, and knew it, and didn’t show itself,
not only for reasons of security but because it knew the human reaction
to it would be so violent_. [Arthur C.] _Clarke has used that_ [in
_Childhood’s End_, written five years later, where the aliens hide
themselves because they look like devils].

In July 1947, TS wrote his mother about showing an old friend his
“treasures”; first on the list were: _the_ [Edd] _Cartier originals_
[drawings done to accompany the story in _Astounding] for “Tiny and the
Monster.”_

Of course, the St. Croix elements in the story derive from Sturgeon’s
residence on St. Croix in the Virgin Islands in 1944.

Magazine blurb: TINY WASN’T TINY—BUT THE MONSTER WAS DEFINITELY
HORRIFIC. TINY, ON THE OTHER HAND, DISPLAYED A QUITE INCREDIBLE
INTELLIGENCE FOR A DOG, AFTER ONE ENCOUNTER—

“THE SKY WAS FULL OF SHIPS”: first published in _Thrilling Wonder
Stories_, June 1947. Probably written in the fall of 1946. This has also
been published (in _The Ancient Mysteries Reader_, 1975, and _Encounters
with Aliens_, 1968) under the title “The Cave of History.”

A radio adaptation of this story was broadcast on the _Beyond Tomorrow_
program, April 11, 1950, under the title “Incident at Switchpath.”

Your editor can’t resist noting that it seems possible Bob Dylan read
this story (or heard it on the radio) as a young man, which would
explain the closing image in his 1968 song “Drifter’s Escape”: “Just
then a bolt of lightning struck the courthouse out of shape/And while
everybody knelt to pray, the drifter did escape.”

“The Sky Was Full of Ships” can also be seen as a precursor of and
possible influence on Arthur C. Clarke’s 1951 story “The Sentinel,”
which in turn became the basis of _2001: A Space Odyssey_.

The angry prospector at the end of the story who says, _“I have a kid
reads that kind of stuff, an’ I never did like to see him at it. Believe
me, he’s a-goin’ to cut it out as of right now,”_ is reminiscent of
Sturgeon’s often-told-tale of his stepfather’s hostility to science
fiction. TS to Williams, 11/75: _My stepfather regarded them_ [science
fiction magazines] _with total scorn, and finally he forbade me to bring
those things into the house_.

“LARGO”: first published in _Fantastic Adventures_, July 1947. Probably
written late 1946.

The setting of this story is drawn from Sturgeon’s experience at age 20
working for a month at a summer resort in Andover, New Jersey. His job
and some things that happened to him there turn up in Vernon Drecksall’s
saga. On June 13, 1938, TS wrote to his mother (from the Hudson Guild
Farm): _I am working as pot-walloper, vegetable groom, fire-tender, and
general kitchen and dining-room factotum, from 6:15 A.M. until 7:30
P.M.… The pay is microscopic, but all in all I don’t care. I have a
splendid opportunity to regain and improve on my swimming, diving and
tumbling; I have time to write, and best of all I can observe and enjoy
a thousand and one types of the human animal_.

A month later, back in Manhattan, he wrote his mother about the people
he met at the Farm, including _Patsy Freeman, the darkest white girl
alive, and with the reddest cheeks and the blackest eyes, with whose
understanding and whose casualness I fell in unprecedented violent love,
so that I could hardly bear to be near her or touch her or speak to
her … who, when she left me, cried openly and unashamed, and then
climbed into the truck and was gone, and I plunged off into the woods in
an agony of emptiness with my guitar, and lay on the reservoir dam and
beat the strings and played as never before; played her into a moaning
swing composition I have called “Slip into a Minor Key” and another
which is exactly suited to the phenomenal piano-style of her friend and,
I think, fiancé; a Hungarian, Otmar Gyorgy, a man I am proud to know,
and who led me to an immense emotional-ethical battle through the
strength of my friendship for him and that of my love for Pat; his
style … rolling minor basses, treble cascading poundingly; that which I
composed for him I doubt that he will ever play, for it is so much
mine_.…

Lucy Menger, in her biographical/critical chapbook _Theodore Sturgeon_
(Ungar, 1981) cites “Largo” in a discussion of Sturgeon’s “love of the
English language,” pointing out examples of “poetic devices” such as
alliteration, consonance, assonance, and repetition in the paragraph
that begins “Each night after Drecksall had scoured the last.…”

Gretel in “Largo” bears a distinct resemblance to Cordelia in Sturgeon’s
1948 story “The Martian and the Moron.”

“THUNDER AND ROSES”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
November 1947. Written in January and February 1947.

TS wrote an introductory note called “Why I Selected ‘Thunder and
Roses’ ” for an anthology titled _My Best Science Fiction Story_
(Margulies, Friend, editors, 1949):

_There is good reason to believe that, outside of the top men in the
Manhattan District and in the Armed Forces, the only people in the world
who fully understood what had happened on August 6, 1945, were the
aficionados of science fiction—the fans, the editors, and the authors.
Hiroshima had a tremendous effect on me. I was familiar with nuclear
phenomena; I sold a story in 1940 which dealt with a method of
separating Isotope 235 from pure uranium_ [“Art-nan Process”]. _Years
before the Project, and before the war, we had used up the gadgets and
gimmicks of atomic power and were writing stories about the
philosophical and sociological implications of this terrible new fact of
life_.

_“Thunder and Roses” is the result of nearly a decade of preoccupation
with the idea of atomic energy. It was written in 1947 out of a black
depression caused by the uncaring reception of books like_ One World or
None _by a public happy to goad the United Nations into a state of
yapping uselessness_.

_I wrote the words and music to the song in this story when I was
seventeen. Mary Mair sang it at the Philcon in ’47_—_remember?_

The Philcon was the World Science Fiction Convention in Philadelphia in
August, 1947; Mary Mair was a showgirl who became, briefly, Theodore
Sturgeon’s second wife, in 1949. The words to “Thunder and Roses” first
appear in Sturgeon’s work as a poem in a 1939 story called “Thanksgiving
Again” (included in _The Ultimate Egoist_, Vol. I of _The Complete
Stories of Theodore Sturgeon_). In late 1947 TS wrote to his mother that
he was hoping that a phonograph record would be made of the song
(_lyrics by THS_, he told her, _music by THS_).

Before “Thunder and Roses” was published in _Astounding_ August Derleth
read it in manuscript and selected it for his anthology _Strange Ports
of Call_, published early in 1948. This contributed to the considerable
impact the story had on science fiction readers at the time. William
Lindsay Gresham (whose novel _Nightmare Alley_ had been made into a film
in 1947) wrote Sturgeon a very enthusiastic letter about “Thunder and
Roses” in May 1948, after reading it twice in two days: “I couldn’t do
any of my own stuff all day for thinking about it. I think it stands
with the great short stories of our time, up there with Kipling’s
‘Without Benefit of Clergy’ and Paul Gallico’s ‘Testimony.’ For one
thing, you have done something so rarely attempted in fiction, and that
is to hand the big slice of heroism to the girl.”

James Gunn, in _Alternate Worlds, The Illustrated History of Science
Fiction_ (1975) notes that “Thunder and Roses” was a particularly
poignant and powerful (and early) articulation of what the nuclear
threat would come to mean to the human psyche for the rest of the
century: “Here is science fiction pointing out the ultimate horror of
holocaust—the horror is not just that so many will die so horribly and
so painfully, but that they destroy the future of mankind—all the
unachieved potential, all the untested possibilities, all the art and
love and courage and glory that might be; it is not just that some idiot
kind of total warfare might destroy the present, but that it might
destroy eternity. In a metaphorical sense, science fiction might be
considered letters from the future, from our children, urging us to be
careful of their world.”

(One wonders to what extent Carl Sagan’s energetic campaigning to
educate the public in the 1980s about the dangers of “nuclear winter”
was influenced by his reading of “Thunder and Roses” as a young man.)

Although it’s a very tiny part of the story and unrelated to its
powerful theme, your editor notes that the lines—” ‘What kind of a
reproducer have you got?’ ‘Audiovid.’ ‘A disk.’ ”—now seem prophetic.

Magazine blurb: ATOMIC WAR CAN PRODUCE STRANGE SITUATIONS—FOR AN ATOMIC
BOMB CAN EXPLODE MORE THAN ONCE. AND IT MAY BE THAT THE VICTIM OF THE
ATTACK DARE NOT REPLY!

“IT WASN’T SYZYGY”: first published in _Weird Tales_, January 1948,
under the (editor’s) title “The Deadly Ratio.” Written January-February
1947.

In April 1953 Theodore Sturgeon wrote to Redd Boggs, editor of an
excellent science fiction “fanzine” called _Skyhook_, to respond to an
article in the previous issue by William Atheling, Jr. (James Blish), in
which Atheling said, “I wonder what has happened to Sturgeon’s gift for
invention. Every story he has contributed to the field over the past two
years has dealt in one way or another with syzygy.…” Atheling was
commenting on a Sturgeon story called “The Sex Opposite” and asserted
that Sturgeon had already handled the subject of syzygy “definitively”
in his 1948 story “The Perfect Host.” With Sturgeon’s permission, Boggs
edited his letter into an article called “Why So Much Syzygy?” which was
published in the Summer 1953 issue of _Skyhook_, and reprinted in a 1977
book edited by Damon Knight called _Turning Points, Essays on the Art of
Science Fiction_.

In his letter (and the article, but the quotes here are from the letter,
a carbon of which survives in Sturgeon’s papers), TS wrote: _Your
(SKYHOOK’s, that is) remarks on an apparent preoccupation I have with
syzygy came as something of a jolt. One needs to be told about such
things. No one knows what he thinks until it’s crystallized for
shipment, unspoken thoughts being the formless, tintless things they
are. My first reaction is to deny such an allegation and say loftily
that you guys haven’t been reading enough Sturgeon, or you never could
say such a thing.… My first-and-a-half reaction is to list some recent
stories just to show you how wrong you are, and when I do, I find by God
you have something there. It isn’t the something you state, but it_ is
_something, and I hadn’t realized it before: so thanks, see?_

He goes on to talk about other “thematic repetitions” he has been
“accused” of, and says, _let’s see if we can get an LCD_ [lowest common
denominator] _out of the tangle.… I think that in “Bianca’s Hands” and
“The Perfect Host” and_ [“The World Well Lost”] _we have sufficient
material for the tentative establishment of that denominator.… I think
what I’ve been trying to do all these years is to investigate this
matter of love, sexual and asexual. I investigate it by writing about
it, because, as stated above, I don’t know what the hell I think until I
tell somebody about it. And I work so assiduously at it because of a
conviction that if one could understand it completely, one would have
the key to cooperation itself: to creative inspiration: to the marvelous
orchestration which enables us to keep ahead of our own
destructiveness_.

_In order to do this I’ve had to look at the individual components. In
“The Deadly Ratio”_ (that, _by the way, was the “definitive” syzygy
story; its original title was “It Wasn’t Syzygy”) I had two lovers, only
one of whom was real. In “Bianca’s Hands” only one of them was human. In
“Rule of Three” and “Synthesis”_ [“Make Room for Me”] _I had (in reverse
order) a quasi-sexual relationship among three people, and one among six
so’s it could break down into three couples and be normal. In “The Stars
Are the Styx” I set up several (four, as I remember) different kinds of
love motivations for mutual comparisons. In “Two Percent Inspiration” it
was hero-worship, a kid and a great scientist; in “Until Death Do Us
Join” it was the murderous jealousy between two personalities in a
schizophrenic, both in love with the same girl. In “Killdozer” it was a
choked-up worship for the majesty of a machine. By this time you get the
idea_.

_Now if we can … return to the original question: why so much
syzygy?—well, it’s pretty obvious why a clear-cut method of
non-reproductive exchange should be so useful in such an overall
investigation. It’s beautifully open to comparison and analog. It
handles all sorts of attachments felt by any sensitive person which
could not conceivably be sexually based. It does this almost as well as
the general theme of symbiosis, of which I think you’ll find more in my
stuff than syzygy_.

_If you can understand non-reproductive love you’ll be able to
understand—and convey—those two kinds of awe, the one for Boulder Dam or
an atom bomb, and the other for Grand Canyon or a nova. You’ll
understand_ why _Casals and Segovia and Landowska work with such
exquisite devotion, and what’s with the GI who falls on the live grenade
to save his squad. A guy who could understand things like that could get
to be a pretty fair writer_.

The opening lines of “It Wasn’t Syzygy” are another striking example of
Sturgeon’s gift for projecting his readers into unexpected, unusual
narrator-listener relationships. The scene that follows is another
(probably the best) of his evocative tributes to love-at-first-sight.
The first of many autobiographical tidbits sprinkled throughout this
first-person tale of the ultimate love-induced identity crisis comes
with the waitress who used to call Leo “The Hungry Fella.” In an
interview Dec. 6, 1975, Sturgeon told me, about his life in New York
City in early 1945: _I went into some kind of funk at the time, it must
have been a severe depression. I just slept all the time. Finally I got
a job.… And then I went through another thing where I couldn’t get
enough to_ eat. _I remember they used to call me at the restaurant the
hungry fella. Anything I ordered they brought double orders of, and they
served it on a platter instead of a plate_.

One of my favorite examples of Sturgeon prose-poetry occurs when Leo
asserts his reality by describing memories he carries around that are
“intimately my own.” At my suggestion, Charlie Brown published this
alongside Sturgeon’s obituary in _Locus_ (“The Newspaper of the Science
Fiction Field”). Inevitably, some of Leo’s “memories” seem to be drawn
from his creator’s own memory banks. Sturgeon was indeed “on the beach”
in Port Arthur, Texas during his Merchant Marine days in 1937–39. He
“pulled ropes” for the Barnes Circus in the summer of 1934. He did play
guitar, though not professionally. The memories from Jamaica and Puerto
Rico are presumably from the author’s experiences when he lived on those
islands in the early 1940s. And he did have a brother, Peter, who was
slightly older than he.

In a letter (written but not sent) to his ex-wife soon after writing “It
Wasn’t Syzygy,” Sturgeon said, _I was in love last December—hurriedly,
deeply in love, with an urgency that was new to me_. Perhaps this brief
relationship, with a woman named Marcia, played a part in inspiring this
story.

When the story first appeared in a Sturgeon collection, _E Pluribus
Unicorn_, in 1953, TS restored his original title in place of “The
Deadly Ratio,” which had been imposed against his will.

“THE BLUE LETTER”: unpublished until now. Written January-February 1947,
during a productive month at a friend’s home in Newcastle, Pennsylvania.
On March 10, 1947, the day he got the exciting news that his 1939 story
“Bianca’s Hands” had won the thousand-dollar _Argosy_ prize, TS wrote
his ex-wife, Dorothe: _I spent a month away from New York, being by
myself and writing. I wrote “Wham Bop” and “The Blue Letter” and
“Thunder and Roses”_ [which he’d begun before leaving New York] _and “It
Wasn’t Syzygy” and “The Place,” and got a good start on the dog story.
Two of these have sold; the rest are slicks_ [aimed at
non-science-fiction, better-paying markets] _and my agent_ [Scott
Meredith, as of 1/47] _tells me they’re sure things. But they haven’t
sold yet. I got so I couldn’t write, for waiting_. Later in the same
letter he said, _I have written well since then_ [last December]_—better
than ever, notably in “Thunder and Roses” and “The Blue Letter,” just
because “Bianca’s Hands” had been rewritten_.

The manuscript for this story was in the cache of papers Noël Sturgeon
and I found in Woodstock in 1993, amidst a set of story fragments and
pages on which TS talked to himself trying to develop story plots. The
manuscript is untitled (but I feel certain it is the story referred to
in the letter quoted above), and has pencil notes on the back indicating
TS was considering rewriting or extending the story (_Tomorrow nite is
different_). Amongst the many notes in this set of papers is one that
says: _Work the Blue Letter into a yarn: the guy, in this hassle, is
thrown into a different moral matrix … maybe made to explain his
emotions to aliens_. Sturgeon did successfully rework another 1947
mainstream story, “Hurricane Trio,” in this manner in 1954.

(No manuscript for or other trace of “The Place” has yet been found.)

In spring 1945 Sturgeon did indeed receive an unexpected letter from his
wife, after a separation of eight months and two thousand miles, asking
for a divorce.

In Sturgeon’s papers is a 15-page manuscript for an unfinished, untitled
story about a man named Hamilton who, like Sturgeon, _decided it would
be a good idea to go back East and get a job, and then send for his
wife.… In the first week of the eleventh month of their separation, he
got the short note asking for a divorce_. Also like Sturgeon, he moves
into the apartment of a friend who is a ham radio operator. The
unfinished story does introduce alien observers who are attempting to
understand _the paradoxes in the moral code_ of earthlings. One plot
thread involves the mysterious atomic blasting of Newcastle, PA, which
suggests the fragment was written during or after Sturgeon’s month in
Newcastle. Hamilton is described as _going to pieces_ not just because
of the divorce but because of his paralysis and that fact that _he would
have to live with the memory of doing nothing about it_.

“WHAM BOP!”: first published in _Varsity_ (“the young men’s magazine,”
published by Parents Institute, apparently for high school boys),
November 1947. This is its first book publication. Special thanks to
Kyle McAbee who located this very rare Sturgeon story in the Library of
Congress. Written January-February 1947.

This was the first (and one of the few) Sturgeon stories published in a
non-science-fiction-or-fantasy magazine other than the early McClure
Syndicate stories. He did sell a story called “Clock Wise” in early
1946; I believe this is probably the story published in _Calling All
Boys_, apparently in 1948, under the title “The Clock.” I have been
unable to locate a copy of this or “Smoke” (which also appeared in
_Calling All Boys_). If anyone is able to supply either of these
stories, or any other story that seems to have been overlooked in these
volumes, please do send us a copy and it will be included,
out-of-chronology, in a future volume.

In April 1946 in a letter to his mother, TS wrote, _I met a fellow in
Puerto Rico_ [in 1943–44] _called Jeff. I picked him up because he
played exquisite swing trumpet to my electric guitar_.

Magazine blurb: MANUEL HAD EVERYTHING IT TAKES TO BEAT THE SKINS IN THE
BIG TIME—AND HE WAS SMART ENOUGH TO KNOW THAT YOU CAN’T GET AHEAD
PLAYING SOMEONE ELSE’S DRUMS.

“WELL SPICED”: first published in _Zane Grey’s Western Magazine_,
February 1949. Written in mid-1947.

Don Ward, in his introduction to the 1973 collection _Sturgeon’s West_,
wrote: “When I suggested to a leading practitioner of science-fiction
and fantasy that he write a Western story little did I suspect what
would result. At the time I was editing _Zane Grey’s Western_, a monthly
magazine that enjoyed a substantial acceptance among the followers of
the genre. I was also an enthusiastic reader of science-fiction. One
night I read a wondrous tale, ‘Maturity,’ and its author was Theodore
Sturgeon. I liked the humor and the significance, and, above all, the
sheer humanity of it, so much that I wrote a letter to Sturgeon. I told
him how much I enjoyed ‘Maturity’ and made that suggestion, wistfully—it
would be a special pleasure for _ZGW_ readers if he would do a story
with some of those elements for that magazine. Several weeks later, the
mail brought to my desk a Western story by Theodore Sturgeon: ‘Well
Spiced.’ ”

On July 4th, 1947, TS wrote to his mother: _I have just sold a
swing-music story to a new Parents’ Institute rag called_ Varsity _and,
at editorial request a western story to_ Zane Grey Western Magazine. _I
am very pleased with these two sales, as they represent complete
departures from the sci-fantasy field. And about time. Don’t worry—I
shall never stop writing fantasy. But at the same time I am a commercial
writer with enough on the ball, I think, to be able to write
bread-and-butter stuff for many other markets. It’s the only way I can
stop living hand-to-mouth, and the only way I can hit the slicks, even
though my friend Heinlein has sold four stf numbers to the_ Satevepost
_at something over a thousand per each.… In short, I think I am due for
a flock of sales_.

“HURRICANE TRIO”: first published in _Galaxy Science Fiction_, April
1955. Substantially written in summer or fall 1947; later revised and
expanded, probably in 1954 or early 1955.

In a letter to his mother, Jan. 2, 1948, TS wrote, _Margaret Cousins of_
Good Housekeeping, _which pays a minimum of $750 per story, has been
profoundly impressed by my work. “The Professor’s Teddy-Bear,” a horror
story which my agent sent to her for fun, scared the hell out of her; it
was followed immediately by a slick story called “Hurricane Trio,” which
had three characters, two women and a man, and the entire action took
place in bed … all in the best of taste, of course, and very lushly
written. She wanted to meet me after that, and did; I had a nice long
chat with her; she gave me a collection of twenty-five_ Good
Housekeeping _stories and begged me to write something for her_.

_Good Housekeeping_ never did buy a story from him; unfortunately. Ray
Bradbury’s prediction that TS would soon start selling a lot of stories
to “the slicks,” the high-paying magazine markets—see “Maturity”
notes—never came true, despite Sturgeon’s frequently expressed desire
for success of that sort. Science fiction critic and author James Blish
alluded to this frustrating circumstance in a 1961 review of Sturgeon’s
novel _Venus Plus X_ by saying, “[the] short sketches of contemporary
life [included in the novel] are good enough to show, as did ‘Hurricane
Trio,’ how expertly Sturgeon could write mainstream fiction given just
one editor in that field with the wit to recognize the fact.”

In his introduction to Sturgeon’s 1955 collection _A Way Home_, Groff
Conklin wrote: “The author has said that in its original form this story
[‘Hurricane Trio’] contained no element of science fiction, and perhaps
some will consider that it should finally have been written that way.
Mr. Sturgeon’s point, however, is not that he used an alien _deus ex_—or
rather, _in—machina_ to resolve his plot, but rather to heighten the
basic reality of the terrible human dilemma with which the story is
concerned and its slow solution by the three people involved.”

Science fiction author and anthologist Judith Merril, in her forthcoming
memoir _Better to Have Loved_ (quoted here by kind permission of the
author), speaks of her affair with Sturgeon in the early months of 1947
and the week when he (and Merril) met Sturgeon’s future wife Mary Mair:
“On the 15th, Ted wrote to tell me Mary was still there, and he had made
love to her. He was big on monogamy in those days and could hardly
believe he now wanted both of us. He was, actually, in torment.”

Poet Ree Dragonette, a childhood friend of Sturgeon’s who lived with him
in New York in 1946, told me in an interview in 1976 that a difficult
moment in their relationship occurred when they were visiting Cape Cod
in the summer of 1946 and found themselves confined indoors by the wind
and rain of a nearby hurricane.

“THAT LOW”: first published in _Famous Fantastic Mysteries_, October
1948. Written in summer or fall 1947.

Fowler’s need to _chip, chip, chip for a long, long time before he could
ever call himself honestly broke again_ is an echo of TS’s own financial
circumstances at the time. He wrote his mother in 1/48: _Mary and I want
to marry. We decided at first to wait until my debts were paid, or at
least until I was within a thousand or two of being honestly broke_.

“MEMORY”: first published in _Thrilling Wonder Stories_, August 1948.
Written in summer or fall 1947.

“THERE IS NO DEFENSE”: first published in _Astounding Science Fiction_,
February 1948. Written in summer or fall 1947.

In the “In Times to Come” section in _Astounding_ for 1/48, editor
Campbell wrote, “The feature novelette next month is by a fellow we’ve
heard from before—Ted Sturgeon. It’s called ‘There Is No Defense,’ but
it is _not_ about atomic bomb warfare. It _does_ contain a nice
proposition, and it makes a fascinating yarn. There’s an old saying ‘It
takes two to make a quarrel’; that isn’t so at all. The fact that it
takes only one to make a quarrel is proven in the beginning of this
yarn—and in the end they find it takes nobody at all to make a quarrel!”

Sturgeon was not a newcomer to issues of militarism versus pacifism. In
1975, in a talk at a Unitarian church, he said: _Back in the late ’30s,
when I was a high school kid, I was organizing peace marches and
condemning the armaments maker and so on. We used to march around to_
[the song] _“Joe Hill” all the time_.

“THE PROFESSOR’S TEDDY BEAR”: first published in _Weird Tales_, March
1948. Written in fall 1947.

The first piece of “horror” fiction written by Sturgeon after his
long-rejected early story “Bianca’s Hands” won the $1000 first prize in
a prestigious short story contest in England in March 1947.

“A WAY HOME”: first published in _Amazing Stories_, April 1953 (under
the title “The Way Home”). Written in fall 1947.

In his 1/2/48 letter to his mother quoted in the “Hurricane Trio” notes,
TS said that the _Good Housekeeping_ editor had also been shown:
_another of my stories called “A Way Home,” which was written
immediately after the “Teddy Bear” to prove that one person could write
two stories so extremely different from one another that they couldn’t
possibly have been written by the same person_.

This became the title story of Sturgeon’s 1955 short story collection _A
Way Home_. In his introduction to that collection, Groff Conklin wrote:
“There is one tale in this book that is not science fiction at all. The
title story, ‘A Way Home,’ originally appeared in a science-fiction
magazine, but it is in reality a poignant study of boy psychology. Since
boys and girls are by nature spinners of fantasy, dreamers by day as
well as night, the story carries with it an atmosphere of fantasy, but
closer examination will reveal that it is a thoroughly real incident in
a child’s development.

The About the Author page in the back of the book concludes: “Of his
writing, Mr. Sturgeon says, _I write what I write to find a way home.
“Home” in this sense is what one wants. It is what one wants to be. In
one context it is love; in another, truth. It can twist itself about and
simply be an other-place; a place any time away from here. A way home
can be a long way or a very short way. Sometimes it is a long way of
finding out what the short way is. Home is also what one believes, and
those very other things, what one believed and what one is coming to
believe now, for later. So I write long stories and short stories and
angry stories and funny ones so that they can be homes for me, that I
had, that I have, that I wish.”_

Corrections and addenda:

_The story “August Sixth, 1945” included in_ Killdozer!, _Vol. III of_
The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon _was described in the Story
Notes for Vol. III as “unpublished.” This is incorrect. I have since
learned that the full text was published as a letter from Theodore
Sturgeon in the “Brass Tacks” letter column in the December, 1945 issue
of_ Astounding Science-Fiction. _My thanks to Charles Morris for
providing this information_.



APPENDIX
THE ORIGINAL SECOND HALF OF “MATURITY”


[BECAUSE THE SECOND half of “Maturity” was substantially rewritten for
Sturgeon’s first book in 1948, the original text is made available
below. There are no significant changes in the book version prior to the
paragraph that begins this appendix (see this page in the rewritten
version).]

But not from the thoughts of a few people. Drs. Wenzell and Warfield
compiled and annotated Robin English’s case history, with as close a
psychological analysis as they could manage. Ostensibly, the work was
purely one of professional interest; and yet if it led to a rational
conclusion as to where he was and what he was doing, who could say that
such a conclusion was not the reason for the work? In any case, the book
was not published, but rested neatly in the active files of Mel
Warfield’s case records, and grew. And then there was one Voisier,
himself a mysterious character about whom little was known except his
aquiline features and unbuttoning eyes and his wealth, all of which were
underestimated. Voisier thought about Robin a great deal; and because he
was Voisier, he was able to gain scraps of information not available to
most people. The conclusions he drew from two or three of these, one
afternoon, led to the ringing of Peg’s phone.

“Dr. Wenzell?”

“Yes?”

“Voisier speaking. Do you know Robin English?”

“Voisier, the producer? Oh, how do you do? Yes, I—have met Robin
English.”

“Do you happen to know where he is?”

“Does anyone?” she countered. “I understand that his lawyers—”

Voisier’s soft chuckle slid over the wire and came out of the receiver
like little audible smoke rings. “I have encountered his lawyers. Dr.
Wenzell, I have to find out where he is.”

“What has that to do with me?” Peg asked cautiously.

“There is some connection between you and Robin English,” said Voisier
smoothly. “Just a moment—I’m not trying to find out what it is, and I
don’t care. I know only that it is a matter of professional interest to
you and a Dr. Mellet Warfield; and I _don’t_ care what it is. I’ll be
frank with you; I must see him purely on a business matter. It will be
to his advantage—all of his dealings with me have been, you know. After
all, I discovered him.”

“You discovered him the way the atom bomb was discovered by the mayor of
Hiroshima,” said Peg tartly.

Voisier laughed urbanely. “Very good.” Peg was figuratively conscious of
the swing of his boom as he changed his conversational tack. “Please,
Dr. Wenzell—let’s not get off on the wrong foot. I’m sorry if I seem to
pry. Will you take lunch with me tomorrow?”

“I’m sorry. I’m busy tomorrow.”

“Dinner this evening, then. That would be better.”

“I am completely tied up, thank you,” said Peg, over the rustle of silk
in his voice. “And besides, I do not know where Robin English is or what
he is doing. Goodb—”

“I know what he is doing,” said Voisier quickly.

“You—”

Through a smile, Voisier’s easy voice said, “Of course. I don’t know
where he is, that’s all. I thought that with what I know and what you
know we might be able to locate him. For his own good, of course. I
gather that you would like very much to know where he is.”

“What’s he doing?”

“I _can’t_ tell you over the phone!” he said, in the voice in which one
says “You _mustn’t_ play with Daddy’s watch!”

“I wish you—” said Peg sharply, and then sighed. “When can I see you?”

“Thank you _very_ much, doctor,” he said abjectly, and was that a touch
of relief in his voice? “Dinner tonight, then—unless you are busy, in
which case … ah … cocktail time is practically here. I could meet you
this afternoon, if you could—”

“Thank you,” she said, and startlingly, she blushed at the eagerness she
heard in her own voice. “How soon can you get here?”

“Very soon. I know where it is. I’ll see you in a moment. And thanks
again.”

He hung up, and Peg sat looking at the bland cornerless bulk of her
cradled telephone. Robin, Robin English. She formed his name with silent
lips, and smiled a little. “Robin,” she whispered, “I’m going to catch
you by the ear and stand you in a corner for doing this to me.” Robin
was a child—such a child.

Her assistant came in. “A Mr. Voisier to see you doctor.”

“Thank you, Helen. Ask him—_Voisier!_ Good heavens, I didn’t expect him
so quickly! Yes, show him in. Show him right in!”

Voisier appeared at the door, rather as if he had been projected there.
He looked over the office, more rapidly than he appeared to be doing it,
and then let his gaze slide to rest on her face. He smiled.

“Mr. Voisier?”

“I am very glad to meet you, doctor.” He came forward, and she noticed
that the Homburg he carried was not black, but a very dark brown. Like
his eyes.

“You got here very quickly, Mr. Voisier.”

“I was just downstairs when I called.”

She frowned briefly, realizing that she had been told that he had come
to the hospital perfectly confident that he could talk her into seeing
him. She wondered why she didn’t mind too much. “Sit down a moment,” she
said, “I’ll be ready to leave in a second.”

He thanked her, and surprised her by not taking the chair she indicated
at the end of her desk and close to her, but one in the corner. He sat
down, ignoring the magazines on the end table next to him, and rested a
part of the weight of his eyes on her as she worked, stacking the
reports on her desk and putting them away.

When her desk was clear she paused a moment, thinking, and then dipped
into the file drawer and brought out her copy of Robin’s case history.
She did not open it—she knew every line in it—but sat running her
fingers over the binding, wondering whether to bring it with her.

“Bring it along,” said Voisier, his eyes on the ceiling.

“I knew someone else who acted telepathic,” said Peg with a little quirk
of the lips. “All right.”

The way he helped her on with her coat and handed her through the door
made her feel like reaching for a lace trim to drape over her arm as she
walked. They did not speak as they went down in the elevator. She wanted
to study his face, but he was studying hers, and strangely, she did not
want to meet his eyes.

Parked in front of the hospital was a low-slung limousine, beautifully
kept, not too new. A chauffeur with a young, impassive face opened the
door and Peg got in, feeling the lack of a velvet carpet and a fanfare
or two. Voisier followed, and the car slid silently into traffic.
Voisier gave no orders to the chauffeur, which was another indication to
Peg of how sure he had been that she would come out with him. She
wondered if he had made reservations wherever they were going. She never
knew, because they pulled up in front of Lelalo’s, and both the doorman
and the head waiter greeted Voisier effusively and she realized that
they would at any time, reservation or no reservation. They were shown
to a very comfortable corner table. Peg asked for an Alexander; Voisier
did not order at all, but a silvery cocktail was brought and set down
before him.

Finally she met his eyes. He seemed relaxed, but watchful, and his gaze
was absolutely unswerving. She gritted her teeth and said lightly, “Have
you read any good books lately?”

His eyes dropped to the case history lying on the table between them.
“No,” he said.

“Tell me what you know.”

He drummed idly on the table with long, flexible fingers. “Robin is in
the trucking business,” he said.

“Oh?”

“Yes. And in insurance. Air freight. Distilling. Drugs. A few others.”

“For goodness sake! But that doesn’t sound like Robin!”

“What doesn’t sound like Robin?”

“Robin is almost exclusively a creative person. Business—organizing,
money-making itself—these have never had any interest for him.”

“They have now,” said Voisier in a slightly awed tone.

“If he did go into business,” said Peg carefully, “it would be like
that—diversification, and excellent results in everything he tried. That
is, if he’s still … I mean, if he hasn’t changed. How do you know this?”

“I can’t understand how he’s doing, it,” Voisier said, ignoring her
question. “He has bought out a bunch of independent truckers, for
example. Standardized their equipment, rerouted and scheduled them, put
in the latest equipment for servicing all the way, so that he has
practically delay-proof service. He pays his employees eight per cent
more than … than other firms, and works them four less straight-time
hours per week. Yet his rates are twelve per cent per hundredweight
under those of any of his competitors. Am I boring you?”

“You are not.”

“He has hit the insurance business in an unusual way. He has a
counseling service made up of insurance men so carefully chosen and so
highly paid that his agency is a factor to be reckoned with by every
company in the East. His specialty is in advising clients—the
thousand-dollar policyholder to banking insurance—on ways and means of
combining policies to get the maximum coverage from the smallest
premium. His charge is nominal; it doesn’t seem to be a money-making
proposition, much, at all. But he is getting an increasing power to
throw large blocks of insurance business any way he wants to. He does it
to the benefit of the policyholder and well within the law. In other
words, what he is machinating for is influence. And since nobody can
possibly predict what he is going to do next, the agency is a
Damocletian sword over us … uh … over the insurance companies.”

“Mr. Voisier—wait. How do you know all this?”

“The most amazing thing of all is what he is doing in the drugs
business. He has tapped a source of hard-to-get biochemicals that is
something remarkable. Some sort of synthesis … never mind. I’m running
along like a _Wall Street Journal_ excerpt and I’m not going to start
reciting things from the _Journal of the Chemical Institute_.”

“Have you seen him?”

“I have a picture of him. He spoke at a trucker’s union meeting with his
independent chain proposal recently. It’s a good shot, and though he’s
changed a little since I last saw him, there’s no mistaking him. He was
using the name of Reuben Ritter—not that that’s a matter of any
importance, since elsewhere he is known as Schwartz, Mancinelli, Walker,
Chandler, and O’Shaughnessy. Where he goes after the meetings and an
occasional dinner he attends, no one knows. He only goes out on business
and he always leaves a highly competent authority behind to handle the
details.”

“May I see the picture?”

“Certainly.” Voisier took out a fine-tooled Moroccan wallet and leafed
through it. He pulled out a four-by-five print and handed it to her.

“It _is_ Robin,” she said instantly, shakily; and then she pored over
the picture, her eyes tearing down into it. A slight sound from Voisier
made her look up; he was regarding her with a quizzical grin. She went
back to the picture.

It was Robin, all right; and he stood before a flat table obviously in a
loft which was converted to a meeting hall. He was half-leaning against
the table, and his head and one arm were raised, and his face was turned
to the right of the camera.

Yes, it was Robin, all right; but Robin subtly changed. His features
were—was it older? They were the features of a young man; but there was
a set of purpose about the profile that was unfamiliar to her. Two
slightly out-of-focus faces in the background, watching him with
something approaching raptness, added to the completely authoritative,
unselfconscious pose of the speaker. And Peg knew that from that picture
alone, something within her would never again let her speak of Robin as
“that child.” It was a jarring realization, for “Robin” and
“Childishness” were all but inseparable associations in her mind.

She became conscious of Voisier’s long white hand hovering in front of
her. She looked up and clutched the picture. “You want it back?”

“I’d … oh, I have the negative. Go ahead.” The quizzical smile appeared
again.

Peg slipped the picture into her pocketbook, closed it tightly, and only
when she felt Voisier’s amused eyes on her hands did she relax her grip
on the clasp. She said, “How do you think I can help you locate him?”

Voisier put the tips of his fingers together and eyed her over them. “In
that book of yours,” he said, indicating the thick binder of prognosis
carbons, “you probably have information which would help us to predict
at least what sort of surroundings Robin English would find for himself.
I know what businesses he’s in, and pretty much how he’s conducting
them. Certainly we could draw some pretty shrewd conclusions.” He
paused, and looked thoughtfully at the second joints of his fingers, one
after the other. “All I have to do is see him once. Just once,” he said
as if to himself. “When I do, I can find out where he is living, what he
is doing every hour, where he is liable to str … ah … jump next.”

“You almost said ‘where he will strike next,’ ” Peg said.

“Did I? I didn’t know. That’s ridiculous, of course.”

“I suppose it is,” she said slowly, watching his face. “Mr. Voisier, you
have a remarkably easy way about you.”

“I? Thank you.”

“You’re easy to talk with, and you talk easily. You divert the
conversation to your chosen ways so _very_ easily. You have still not
told me why you want to locate Robin English.”

“Everyone wants to know where Robin English is. Don’t you read the
papers?”

“I doubt, somehow, that you are motivated by intellectual curiosity. I
don’t think you want to produce another play of his, particularly, or
sell a story to the press and scoop the town, or—obviously not this—give
him pointers on his new business ventures. I hate to be blunt with
anyone,” she said with a sudden rush of warmth, “but I must ask you—what
are you after?”

He spread his hands. “I like the boy. Brilliant as he is, he is getting
himself into a little hot water with certain of the interests with which
he is competing. In the business world, as in the world of nations,
there is room enough for everybody, providing everybody will cooperate.
It is impossible to cooperate with a man who cannot be reached.”

“It is impossible to retaliate, also.”

Voisier held up a deploring hand. “Retaliate is too strong a term.
Active as he is, it is inconceivable that he can keep himself hidden
much longer. It is infinitely more desirable that I get to him before
any of the others—I who have demonstrated so conclusively that I have
his interests at heart. I like the boy.”

“You like the boy.” The picture of Robin in the union hall rose before
her eyes. That was no boy. “Mr. Voisier, you are telling me that he is
in danger, aren’t you?”

He shrugged. “He _is_ playing a dangerous game.”

“Dangerous game? Danger from what?”

“I have not made up a roster, doctor.”

She stared at him. “Mr. Voisier—just what business are you in?”

“I’m a producer. Surely you know that.”

“Yes. I have just remembered that I heard you once mentioned in
connection with the trucking business, and again, there was something to
do with drugs—”

“You have a proclivity,” said Voisier casually, “of connecting yourself,
in one way or another, with remarkable people. I, like Robin English, am
a man of some diversification.”

She sat quietly for a moment, and thought. As Voisier had predicted,
little pieces were beginning to fit here and there. Robin’s progress had
been so carefully charted, and prognosis made in such detail, that the
information Voisier had given her was highly indicative. If she could
talk it over with Mel—

“I can’t piece all this together on the spot,” she said.

“Why don’t you get in touch with your associate, Dr. Warfield?”

“You _must_ be psychic,” she said wryly. “Let me phone him.

Without seeming to move quickly, Voisier was on his feet and assisting
her out of the chair before she knew she was moving. “By all means,” he
said. “And if you can impress the urgency of the matter on him, it will
be to Robin’s benefit.”

“I’ll see,” she said.

She went to the phone booth and called, and Mel was out, and when she
returned to the table Voisier was gone. So was his limousine. So was
Robin’s case history.

“Mel, I don’t know how I could have been such a fantastic idiot,” she
said brokenly.

She was in his office, hunched up in a big wing chair, and for the first
time in years looking small and childish and frightened.

“Don’t blame yourself, Peg,” said Warfield gently. “No one would expect
that kind of prank from a man like that.”

“It w-was awful,” she almost whispered. “He made such a _fool_ of me! I
called the waiter immediately, of course, and he acted surprised to see
me at all. He absolutely denied having seen such a thing as that case
book at all. So did the head waiter. So did the doorman, They simply
looked at me as if I were crazy, exchanging wondering glances at each
other in between times. Mel … Mel, I don’t _like_ that man, that
Voisier!”

“I wouldn’t wonder.”

“No—aside from that slick little piece of larceny. There’s something
evil about him.”

“That’s an understatement, if ever I heard one,” Mel said. “I don’t know
much about that man—no one does—but the things I know aren’t too good. I
wonder if you knew that Chickering Chemical was his?”

“That drug firm that was peddling hashish as a tonic?”

“Not a tonic. A facial—mud pack, I think it was. It didn’t harm the
skin. Didn’t do it any good, either. It was sold in small and
adulterated quantities at a fantastic price, but it was hashish all
right.”

“But all the officers of that company are in jail?”

“All they could get anything on.”

“How do you know this?”

“One of their lab assistants went to pharmaceutical school with me.
Silly fool he was, but a very likable character. He could be bought, and
he was. He was paid well, and he didn’t care. I did what I could to help
him when the whole mess happened, but he was in too deep. He had no
cause to lie to me, and he told me that Voisier was the man behind the
whole rotten deal.”

“Why didn’t he give some evidence against Voisier?”

“No evidence. Not a scrap. Voisier’s much too clever to leave loose ends
around. Witness the trick he pulled on you. And besides—my imbecile of a
friend rather admires him.”

“Admires him—and Voisier got him into the penitentiary?”

“He blames only himself. And it seems that Voisier has a certain likable
something about him—”

Peg thought of that saturnine face, and the compelling eyes of the man.
She remembered his tactile glance, and the incredible flexibility of his
voice. “Oh.” She shook herself. “I can’t afford the luxury of sitting
here and saying how awful it all is,” she said firmly, putting away her
handkerchief. “What are we going to do?”

“Why do anything? Robin English is no longer our responsibility, if it’s
Robin you’re worried about. As far as the book is concerned, I have the
original, so that’s a small loss.”

“When does your responsibility to a person end?” she demanded hotly.

“That depends,” he said, looking at the ceiling, “on what the person in
question means to you. If it’s a patient, and that patient, of sound
mind, decides to go to another doctor or to stop treatment altogether,
there is no law or ethic which demands that I try to hold him. If, on
the other hand, the person is a … well, of personal interest, it’s a
different matter.”

“And you feel that Robin can look out for himself?”

“He’s demonstrated that pretty well so far, He must include
self-preservation and the ability to act on it among his other talents.”

“Mel—this isn’t like you!”

“Isn’t it, though!”

“Mel!” she cried, shocked. “If it weren’t for us he wouldn’t be in all
this trouble! He’s hooked up with Voisier in some way, and—”

Mel put his hands on her shoulders and pushed her back in her chair. He
looked at her somberly and then sighed. “Peg,” he said finally, “I’ve
got to say this. I deeply regret the day I ever set eyes on Robin
English. You haven’t been yourself since the day you met him.”

She thought of the extraordinary statement Robin had made at tea that
day, about Mel Warfield’s desire to kill him. She looked up at Warfield
with horror in her face.

“Listen to me,” he said. “You’re all tangled up in your emotions, and
you can’t think straight. You think Robin’s mixed up with Voisier in
some business way. Isn’t it obvious what Robin is doing? You know that
Voisier is mixed up in a dozen different businesses, two-thirds of which
are shady in some way or another. You were told by Voisier himself that
Robin is engaged in some of these same fields. I think you’ll find that
Robin is engaged in all of them. I think that if you are fool enough to
mix yourself into anything this big and this dirty, you’ll discover
Robin is out to undercut everything the man is doing.”

“Why? Why on earth should he do that?”

“I wouldn’t know. Probably because he recognizes Voisier as his own
brand of genius, with many years’ start on him. Without doubt he feels
crushed by Voisier—feels that the world isn’t big enough for both of
them. The ‘why’ of it isn’t important. The fact remains that if he is
not doing such a fantastic thing, he isn’t in any danger and you needn’t
worry about him. If he is, then he must be outdoing Voisier on the
dirtiest of his rackets.”

“No, Mel—no! Robin wouldn’t do that!”

“Someone is. How many new addiction cases has your hospital admitted in
the past three months?”

“Well, there is a decided upswing, but what has that—”

“Robin _could_ be responsible. It would have to be a one-source
deal—someone previously unknown, without a record that can be checked,
with a tremendous organizing ability and personal compulsion, and a lot
of scientific skill. Most of the drugs found on these poor devils are
synthetic.”

“But Robin never did an evil thing in his life!”

“He has done many things recently he never did in his life. I tell you,
Peg, the responsibility I feel in this matter is a far greater one than
anything that could happen to Robin English. If I’m right in all this, I
have been instrumental in loosing something rather terrible in the
world. And if I’m right and he’s tackling Voisier by playing the man’s
own game, the odds are pretty strong that Voisier’s too big for him. In
which case—good riddance.” He lowered his voice. “I’m sorry, Peg. Truly
I am. I’ve been going round and round in smaller and smaller circles
over this thing, and I’ve had enough.”

Peg was feeling absolutely bewildered. “But I have only just told you
about Voisier and this—”

“I’ve known about it for weeks, Peg. Let the thing take its course.”

She rose, trembling. “You’re wrong, Mel,” she whispered. “You’ve _got_
to be wrong.”

“I’m afraid not,” he said sadly. “I sincerely wish I were.”

“I’ve got to see him.”

“No, Peg! He might … he … can’t you see that he’s turned into a man who
takes what he wants?”

“Does that make a difference?” Peg asked in a strange voice. “I can’t
let this happen to him. I’m going to find out where he is and see him.
I’m responsible for this whole horrible thing and so are you. But
through your stupid mulish jealousy you’ve argued yourself into blaming
him!”

Warfield went white. “Responsible? He had the seed of this in him all
along. He simply never had the courage to do an honestly evil thing
until we so generously matured him. Maturity is a strange thing, Peg.
Like other riches, it is dangerous in unskilled hands. It isn’t
something that can be achieved all in a lump. We gave him a kind of
maturity which gathered all the loose threads of his personality into
something monolinear—something productive. But we didn’t give him the
power to use the years of experience he had had before we got to him.
He’s a bulldozer with a skilled idiot at the controls. But he is no
longer a glandular case. If you want me to change my attitude at all,
prove to me that he is still suffering from imbalance of any kind.
That’s in my field. That I can handle.”

“I’ll have to see him.”

“Do you know where he is?”

“Nobody does. But I’ll find him.”

“I know where he is. But I will certainly not tell you.”

“_You_ know?”

“He came to see me four months ago.” Warfield wet his lips. “He—had a
word or two to say about you. He was apparently suffering from some sort
of a delusion. He explained carefully to me that he had no use for you,
that there was no longer any reason for me to want to … to kill him,
and … you don’t seem surprised.”

“He told me about that the last time I saw him,” she said, shaken.

“You _knew_ about that?”

“Did you try to kill him, Mel?”

“It was an accident, Peg. Really it was. And he compensated for it.
Splendidly. I don’t know how he found out about it—the man’s incredibly
sharp.”

Peg felt turned to ice, and her voice was ice as she said, “It was the
post-pituitrin excess, wasn’t it?”

“Yes, but that couldn’t have anything to do with this Voisier business.
I tell you it was an accident. I didn’t realize that I’d made a mistake
in the solutions until after he’d left the office that particular day.
It didn’t affect his progress, except temporarily; and when he stopped
his treatments, he was practically normal.” He stopped and wet his lips
again, and then suddenly ran to her. “Peg! Peg, what’s the matter?” For
she had suddenly turned white, and was rocking on her feet. He put an
arm about her shoulders and led her back to her chair. She slumped down,
shook herself, and looked up at him with a swift, scornful glance that
was almost a physical force.

“How do you _dare_ to call yourself a doctor?” she breathed. She opened
her handbag with shaking fingers and took out the photograph Voisier had
given her. She handed it to him without glancing at it. “Look at that
and tell me he’s not still glandular,” she said.

He looked, and then stared. “It’s Robin, all right,” he said, and then,
with a ghost of his old grin, “Getting to be quite a glamour boy in his
old age, hm-m-m?”

“He is? Have you noticed why?”

“What am I supposed to look for?”

“Look at his jaw.”

“Nice jaw.”

“You don’t remember Robin. You don’t remember that round baby face.”

“I wasn’t in love with the man,” Warfield said nastily.

“He didn’t have much jaw,” she said, her voice quivering. “Can’t you see
what’s happening? That used to be _Robin_, with the charming, chinless
face!”

Warfield’s breath sucked sharply. He walked over to the window and for a
long moment stood with his back to her, staring out.

“What do you diagnose, doctor?” she said acidly.

“Ac—” he began, and couldn’t make it. He swallowed and coughed. He
cleared his throat. He said, “Acromegaly.”

“Acromegaly,” she echoed sweetly. “His pre-pituitary has gone wild, he’s
suffering from hypertrophy of the chin and probably of the hands, and
you say he’s not glandular.” Suddenly she was across the room, had spun
him about and was clutching his lapels. “What are you going to _do?_ Are
you going to let him go on doing whatever crazy thing a glandular
imbalance is forcing him to do, so that he’ll be killed by Voisier? Or
are you going to stand by while he gets around Voisier some way and then
turns into a monster and dies?”

“I have to think,” said Warfield. “Oh, Peg. Peg—”

“You can’t think,” she said wildly. “Why do you suppose Voisier stole
that book? With what he knows, and with what that book contains, he’ll
track Robin down in a matter of hours! Do you really know where he is?”

“Yes,” Warfield whispered. “A piece of his strange kind of braggadocio.
He was defiant, and yet he seemed afraid of me. He promised to keep in
touch with me whatever he did, so that if I ever wanted to … kill him I
could come and face him with whatever it was. He swore to keep away from
you. He has moved four times since he stopped taking the treatments, and
each time he has called or written to give me the address. I don’t know
why.” Warfield raised his eyes to hers. “I don’t know anything about any
of this,” he said brokenly. “It’s all mad. We’re being played like
chessmen, Peg, by a lunatic against a devil.”

“Is he in town?”

Warfield nodded.

“Well?”

Warfield looked at her. She was a statue now, a dark-crowned bloodless
figure. “I’ll go with you.”

“I’ll see him alone.”

“I’ll go with you all the same, then, and wait.”

“Very well. Only hurry.”

Warfield slipped out of his laboratory smock and into a coat without
another word. Outside the office he stopped and said, “Peg … please—”
but she walked steadily down to the elevators, and he shrugged and
followed her.

They caught a cab almost immediately, and Warfield gave the driver a
Riverside address. Peg sat staring blindly ahead of her. Mel slumped in
a corner and looked at his wrists, dully.

Peg broke the silence only once—to ask in a deceptively conversational
voice if anything had been learned that she didn’t know about the
treatment of acromegaly. Warfield shook his head vaguely. She made a
sound, then, like a sob, but when Warfield looked at her she still sat,
dry-eyed, staring at the driver’s coat collar.

They pulled up in front of one of those stately old cell-blocks of
apartment houses that perch on the slanted, winding approaches to the
Drive. They got out, and a doorman, a bit over life-size, swung open
both leaves of a huge plate-glass-and-bronze door to let them into the
building.

“Mr. Wenzell,” said Warfield to a wax-faced desk clerk.

“What?” said Peg

“He … it amuses him to use your name,” said Warfield, as if he were
speaking out of a mouthful of sal ammoniac.

“Mr. Wenzell is out,” said the clerk. “Can I take a message?”

“You can take a message right to Mr. Wenzell, who is not out,” said
Warfield. “Tell him his two doctors are here and must see him.”

“Tell him,” said Peg clearly, “that Margaretta Wenzell is here.”

“Yes, Mrs. Wenzell,” said the clerk with alacrity.

“Why must you make this painful as well as unpleasant?” gritted
Warfield. Peg smiled with her teeth and said nothing.

The clerk returned from the phone looking as if he had learned how to
pronounce a word he had only seen chalked on fences before. “Fourteen.
Suite C. The elevators—”

“Yes” growled Warfield. He took Peg’s elbow and walked her over to the
elevators as if she were a window-dummy.

“You’re hurting me.”

“I’m sorry. I’m—a little upset. Do you have to go through with this
weird business?”

She didn’t answer. Instead she said, “Stay down here, Mel.”

“I will not!”

She looked at him, and said a thousand words—hot-acid ones—in the sweep
of her eyes across his face.

“Well,” he said, “all right. All right. Tell you what. I’ll give you
fifteen minutes and then I’m coming up.” He paused. “Why are you looking
at me like that? What are you thinking about?”

“That corny line about the fifteen minutes. I was thinking about how
much better Robin would deliver it.”

“I think I hate you,” said Warfield hoarsely, quietly.

Peg stepped into the elevator. “That was _much_ better done,” she said,
and pushed the button which closed the doors.

On the fourteenth floor she walked to the door marked “C” and touched
the bell. The door swung open instantly.

“Come in!” grated a voice. There was no one standing in the doorway at
all. She hesitated. Then she saw that someone was peering through the
crack at the hinge side of the door.

“Come in, Peg!” said the voice. It was used gently now, though it was
still gravelly. She stepped through and into the room. The door closed
behind her. Robin was there, with a gun. He put it away and held out
both hands to her. “Peg! It’s _so_ good to see you!”

“Hello, Robin,” she whispered. Just what gesture she was about to make
she would never know for she became suddenly conscious of someone else
in the room. She wheeled. There was a girl on the chesterfield, who rose
as Peg faced her. The girl didn’t look, somehow, like a person. She
looked like too many bright colors.

“Janice,” said Robin. It wasn’t an introduction. Robin just said the one
word and moved his head slightly. The girl came slowly across the room
toward him, passed him, went to the hall closet and took out a coat and
a hat and a handbag with a long strap. She draped the coat over her arm
and opened the door; and then she paused and shot Peg a look of such
utter hatred that Peg gasped. The door closed and she was alone with
Robin English.

“Is _that_ the best you can do,” she said, without trying to keep the
loathing out of her voice.

“The very best,” said Robin equitably. “Janice is utterly stupid. She
has no conversation, particularly when I want none. What she has to
recommend her, you can see. She is a great convenience.”

A silly, colorful little thought crept into Peg’s mind. She looked
around the room.

“You’re looking for a smörgasbord tray,” chuckled Robin, sinking into an
easy-chair and regarding her with amusement. “Why won’t you look at me?”

Finally, she did.

He was taller, a very little. He was much handsomer. She saw that, and
it was as if something festering within her had been lanced. There was
pain—but oh the blessed relief of pressure! His face was—_Oh yes_, said
Dr. Wenzell to herself, _pre-pituitary. Acromegaly_. She said. “Let me
see your hands.”

He raised his eyebrows, and put his hands in his pockets. He shook his
head.

Peg turned on her heel and went to the hall closet. She dipped into the
pockets of an overcoat, and then into a topcoat, until she found a pair
of gloves. She came back into the room, examining them carefully. Robin
got to his feet.

“As I thought,” she said. She held up the left glove. The seam between
the index and second fingers was split. And they were new gloves. She
threw them aside.

“So you know about that. You would, of course.”

“Robin, I don’t think this would have happened if you had continued your
treatments.” He slowly took out his hands and stared at them. They were
lumpy, and the fingers were too long, and a little crooked. “A
phenomenal hypertrophy of the bony processes, according to the books,”
he said. “A development that generally takes years.”

“There’s nothing normal about this case. There never was,” said Peg, her
voice thick with pity. “Why did you let it go like this?”

“I got interested in what I was doing.” Suddenly he got to his feet and
began to stride restlessly about the room. She tried not to look at him,
at his altered face, with the heavy, coarse jaw. She strained to catch
the remnants of his mellow voice through the harshness she heard now.

He said, “It was all right during those months when I wrote _Too
Humorous To Mention_ and _Festoon_ and invented the back out drills and
all that. But everything got too easy. I could do anything I wanted to
do. All of the things I had ever dreamed about doing I could do—and so
easily! It was awful. I tried harder things, and they came easy too. I
couldn’t seem to apply myself on anything that couldn’t be seen or
touched, though perhaps, if I had been able to go into higher
mathematics or something purely abstract like that, I wouldn’t be—well,
what I am now.

“I began to be afraid. The one thing I couldn’t whip was Mel Warfield. I
was afraid of him. He hated me. I don’t think he knew it, but he hated
me. I wanted you. There was a time when I could have—but I was afraid of
him. He had too much power over me. Too much thumb-pressure on that
hypodermic of his, or the addition of some little drop of something in a
test tube, and he could do anything he wanted with me. I’d never been
afraid for myself before. Maybe it was part of that maturity you were
talking about.”

“I imagine it was.”

Robin sat down heavily, clasped his hands, stared at them, put them in
his pockets again. “I was glad to take the risk, mind you. It wasn’t
that. Anything in my condition that was suddenly too much for his skill
to cope with—any accident like that couldn’t frighten me. It was knowing
that he hated me, and somewhere underneath he wanted me out of the
way—preferably dead. Anyway—I got out. I kept him informed as to where I
was, because I was ready for him. I was ready to kill him first if he
came after me. But no hypodermics. No solutions. So—I went on with my
work, and then it all got old, right away. I could do anything I wanted
to do. Peg—can you imagine how horrible that can be? Never to know you
might fail? To have such a clear conception of what the public wants in
a play or a poem or a machine, that you can make it and know from the
start that it will be a success? I knew a man once, who had photography
for a hobby. He got to be so good that he stopped printing his
negatives. He’d _know_ they were perfect. He pulled ’em out of the hypo
and dried ’em and filed ’em. Often he sold them without looking at them.
It killed his hobby. He took up electronics, which was more his speed.
But I’m that way about everything.”

“You got bored.”

“Bored. Oh, Peg, if you only knew the things I tried! Finally I dropped
out of sight. I got a kick out of the papers then. For a while. Know
what I was doing when the whole world thought I was doing something
fantastic? I was reading. I was holed up in the back room of my
Westchester place with all the books I had ever wanted to read. That’s
all. They let me get out of myself—for a while. For a while.” He stopped
and wiped sweat off his lip. “But it happened again. It got so that a
page or two would tell me an author’s style, a paragraph or two told me
his plot. Technical books the same; once I got the basics the whole
thing was there. Or maybe I thought it was. Maybe I just lost interest.
It was as if I were being pursued by a monster called Understanding. I
understood everything I looked at or thought about. There was nothing I
could see or say or do or read or think about where I couldn’t predict
the end result. I didn’t want to give anything any more, either, the way
I did with the Whirltoy. Do you know what I wanted? I wanted to fail. I
didn’t think I could. I don’t think so now. If I purposely botched a
thing up, that would be a success of a sort. So for a long time I did
nothing.”

He fell silent. Peg waited patiently. She had had dozens of questions to
ask, and half of them were already answered.

“Then I began to think about Voisier. You know Voisier?”

She nodded. “Robin—wait a minute. You hate Voisier. I think you’re
trying to ruin him. But you hated Mel Warfield. Why didn’t you try to—”

“Warfield? By then, he wasn’t big enough. Voisier was the only man I
ever met whom I thought could beat me.” He sighed. “Now I think he won’t
do it.” And suddenly, Robin smiled. The smile sat badly on that heavy
face. “Peg, there’s an alternative to unquenchable, inevitable success.
That is to play a game in such a way that you never can know how it
ends. That’s what I’m doing.”

“Voisier’s trying to find you.”

“Is he now? How do you know?” For the first time Robin’s face and voice
showed real animation. All the twisted ravings of the past few minutes
had come out of him like toothpaste out of a tube.

Peg told him about Voisier’s calling the hospital, and what had happened
at Lelalo’s, where he had stolen the case history.

“Good,” said Robin. “Oh, fine. This means that things are shaping up
better than I thought. Faster. Uh—excuse me a moment.”

He went to the desk in the corner, sat down, and began to write rapidly.

“This maturity thing,” he said, phrasing between the lines he was
writing, “I think you and Warfield overlooked something. I’m the
patient. Do doctors listen to patients?”

“They do.”

“You realize, don’t you, that humans die before they’re fully mature?”

“You mean in the sense that their bones do not completely ossify?”

“That’s it. And there’s a psychological factor, too.” He paused, thought
a while, wrote for a moment, and then went on. “Puppies and kittens and
lion cubs—they’re terribly foolish, in a pretty kind of way. They have
their mock battles and they chase their balls of paper and get wound up
in milady’s yarn, don’t they?”

“They do, but—”

“Humans, with few exceptions, _always_ are puppyish, to a degree. There
is even a parallel in the proportions of head to body, even allowing for
the larger brain pan of _homo sapiens_. An adult human being has
proportions comparable to a half-grown colt or dog in that respect.
Now—did you ever hear of a full-grown gorilla acting kittenish? Or a
bison bull, or a lion? Life for them is a serious business—one of sex,
hunger, self-preservation and a peculiar ‘don’t tread on me’ kind of
possessiveness.

“Peg—let’s face it. That’s what’s happened to me. I can’t go back. I
don’t see how I can go on this way. I’m mature now. But I’m mature like
an animal. However, I can’t stop being human. A human being has to have
one thing—he has to be happy, or he has to think he knows what happiness
is. Happiness for me is unthinkable. There is nothing for me to work
toward. All of my achievements are here”—he tapped his head—“as good as
done when I think of them, because I know I can do them. No goal, no
aspiration—the only thing left is that little game of mine, the one
where, according to the rules, I can’t ever really know the result.”

“Voisier?”

“Voisier.” He picked up the phone, dialed rapidly. He listened. “Come on
back,” he said. He hung up. “That was Janice. She’ll be here in fifteen
minutes. You’d better go, Peg.”

The door buzzer began to shrill. Robin leaped across the room; the gun
was in his hand again. He opened the door and stood behind it, peering
out at the hinge side as he had before. Mel walked in.

“Peg—are you all right?”

“A little bewildered.”

“Of course she’s all right,” said Robin in a tone that insulted both of
them. Mel stared at him. Robin went over to the desk, picked up the
sheets he had written and, folding them, handed them to Peg. “Promise me
you won’t read these until you get back to Mel’s office.”

“I promise.”

Mel spoke up, suddenly—and with great effort. “English—You know what
that condition is?” He indicated Robin’s face.

“He does, Mel,” said Peg. “Don’t—”

Warfield pushed her hand off his arm impatiently. “Robin, I’m willing to
do what I can to arrest it, and there’s a chance … not much, you
understand—”

Robin interrupted him with a sudden, thunderous guffaw—quite the most
horrible sound Peg had ever heard. “Why sure, Mel, sure. I’ll be a bit
busy this afternoon, but say tomorrow, if we can get together?”

“Robin!” said Peg joyfully. “You _will?_”

“Why not?” He chuckled. “Don’t make an appointment today.

Call me tomorrow.” He took the note back from Peg, and scribbled on it.
“Here’s the number. Now go on. Beat it, you two. Maybe I ought to say
something like ‘Bless you, my children’ but I—Oh, beat it.”

Peg found herself in the hall and then at the door. “But Robin—” she
said weakly; but by then the door was closed and Mel was guiding her
into the elevator.

At Mel’s office a few minutes later, she unfolded Robin’s note with
trembling fingers. It read:

Peg dear,

Here is where a mature human being gets kittenish, if he has to kill
himself in the attempt.

What I have been doing to Voisier is to drive him crazy. He’s a bad
apple, Peg. Very few people realize just how bad. I knew today would be
the payoff when you told me how he had stolen the book and all that. He
played you for bait. I told you he was almost as clever as I am. He knew
that if he could worry you enough, you’d find me some way. My guess is
that he simply had you followed until you found me. Then he’d wait until
you had gone—he’s waiting as I write this. When he’s sure there are no
witnesses, he’ll come and finish his business with me.

This is my game, Peg. The only one I can think of where I’ll never know
who won. If you call the police about now, chances are they’ll find him
here. Make it an anonymous tip, and _don’t_ use this note as evidence of
any kind. Voisier is going to get his; Janice is here and besides, the
place is equipped with a very fine wire recorder. I’ll handle all the
dialogue. I’m sorry about all those dope fiends I had to supply to
undercut his rotten racket. Take care of ’em.

And down in the corner, where he had ostensibly written his phone
number, were these words: “Sorry I can’t keep that appointment. The
condition is already arrested.”

Peg phoned the police. The police found Robin English dead. Robin
English left everything he had to Peg and Warfield equally. And in due
course Voisier was electrocuted for the murder. The recording found in
his apartment, coupled with the testimony of one Janice Brooks, was
quite sufficient. Voisier’s defense, that Robin was torturing him, held
no water; for where is a law that specifies mental torture as grounds
for justifiable homicide?

[]
