[]

[]

_Theodore Sturgeon, back row far right, at twenty-three years old, with
his maternal grandmother and grandfather Dicker, other members of the
Dicker family, his first wife, Dorothé, and their first child, Patricia,
in Jamaica, 1941_.

[]

Copyright © 1995 the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials copyright © 1940, 1941, 1942, 1943, by Theodore
Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Foreword copyright ©
1995 by Samuel R. Delany. All rights reserved. No portion of this book,
except for brief review, may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise—without the written
permission of the publisher. For information contact North Atlantic
Books.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover art: _Returning Home_, © 1992 by Jacek Yerka. All rights reserved.
Cover design by Paula Morrison

_Microcosmic God_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native
Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are
to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

eISBN: 978-1-58394-746-3

THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGED THE PRINTED EDITION AS FOLLOWS:

Sturgeon, Theodore.

    Microcosmic god : the complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon / edited
by Paul Williams : foreword by Samuel R. Delany.
       p.   cm
    Contents: v. 2 1940–1941
    I. Williams, Paul.    II. Title
PS3569.T875U44    1995
813′.54—dc20

94-38047

v3.1



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

_Editor’s Note_

Foreword by
Samuel R. Delany

Cargo

Shottle Bop

Yesterday Was Monday

Brat

The Anonymous

Two Sidecars

Microcosmic God

The Haunt

Completely Automatic

Poker Face

Nightmare Island

The Purple Light

Artnan Process

Biddiver

The Golden Egg

Two Percent Inspiration

The Jumper

Story Notes by Paul Williams

Microcosmic God (Unfinished Early Draft)

_Other Books by This Author_



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the second of a series of volumes that will collect his
short fiction of all types and all lengths shorter than a novel. The
volumes and the stories within the volumes are organized chronologically
by order of composition (insofar as it can be determined). This second
volume contains stories written between April 1940 and June 1941. Two
are being published here for the first time; several others are
appearing for the first time in book form.

For invaluable assistance in the preparation of this volume, the editor
would like to thank Noël Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary
Trust, Marion Sturgeon, Jayne Sturgeon, Ralph Vicinanza, Lindy Hough,
Richard Grossinger, Debbie Notkin, Tom Whitmore, Samuel R. Delany, Dixon
Chandler, Jeannie Trizzino, David G. Hartwell, Jonathan Lethem, Charles
N. Brown, T. V. Reed, Cindy Lee Berryhill, Gordon Van Gelder, Sam
Moskowitz, Robert Silverberg, Frank Robinson, and all of you who have
expressed your interest and support.



FOREWORD



THEODORE STURGEON
BY SAMUEL R. DELANY


SOMETIME IN THE early fifties when I was ten or eleven, in a fat
anthology of science fiction tales I read my first Theodore Sturgeon
story—“Thunder and Roses.”

Understand, I was a bright and profoundly unimaginative child: Much of
what passes for intelligence in children is a stark deafness to metaphor
coupled with a pigheaded literal-mindedness.

Roses didn’t have much to do with thunder, so it was kind of a silly
title. The story was largely about a singer named Starr Anthim, who
mostly wasn’t there and, when she was, sang a kind of anthem, which only
made you think about the word itself, its sounds, and the way it kept
fitting in with other words, instead of what was happening. And what
_was_ happening? Well, the tale was full of ordinary guys doing ordinary
things like shaving and taking showers, all of which, for some reason,
seemed disturbingly more vivid than I would have thought anyone could
make such commonplace actions seem in a story, because it described the
feel of warm water down the back of your neck between your shoulder
blades and what it felt like, after the shower, when your clean foot
landed on the bathroom tile half in and out of a puddle and a crinkled
toothpaste tube lay on the glass shelf under the mirror. And the only
other thing about it was that the world was coming to an end and
everyone felt as powerless as a ten-year-old boy to stop it. And when I
finished, I was crying …

It couldn’t have been very good, because that wasn’t what
stories—especially science fiction stories—were supposed to do …

By the time I was twenty-one, Theodore Sturgeon was my favorite fiction
writer of any genre, literary or paraliterary. And for all my lack of
imagination at ten, Sturgeon’s tales had taught me, as much as or more
than those of any other writer, the incredible range of effects words
could whip up, sharp and electric, in the human psyche.

Twenty-three years later, I _met_ Sturgeon—in 1975. One afternoon while
I was signing books at the Science Fiction Shop (then on Hudson Street
in New York City), someone at the front desk called back, “Hey, there’s
a phone call for you, Chip,” and, when I got there and lifted the
receiver to my ear, for the first time I heard that tenor voice with a
quality like the middle register of an A-flat clarinet and a pacing I
want to call a drawl—only “drawl” connotes region and class, while what
I heard over the phone that afternoon was much more a considered and
personal rhythm, overlaid on a speech with such geographical variety
lingering under its L’s and R’s and over the length of its O’s and U’s,
that its articulate U.S. ordinariness put to shame the whole notion of
“Midwestern Standard.”

“Chip Delany … ? This is Ted Sturgeon …” He’d called to thank me for a
passage I’d written in a novel, set some four thousand years in the
future, in which a young poet speaks about a wonderful Twentieth Century
writer.

The passage reads: “There was one ancient science fiction writer,
Theodore Sturgeon, who would break me up every time I read him. He
seemed to have seen every flash of light on a window, every leaf shadow
on a screen door that I had ever seen; done everything I had ever done,
from playing the guitar to laying over for a couple of weeks on a boat
in Aransas Pass, Texas. And he was supposedly writing fiction, and that
four thousand years ago. Then you learn that lots of other people find
the same things in the same writer, who have done none of the things
you’ve done and seen none of the things you’ve seen. That’s a rare sort
of writer …” (_Empire Star_, p. 83).

Sturgeon’s comment to me about it? “That somebody might be reading
something I’ve written forty—much less four thousand—years from now,
that’s the sort of thing a writer like me is afraid even to let himself
_think_ about.” But he seemed very pleased that _I_ had thought about
it. And the fact is, if I had a single vote as to which SF writer from
the decades of Sturgeon’s finest productions would be read in the
centuries to come, that vote would have to go to Sturgeon.

A few weeks after the signing, during a Lunacon SF convention, as I was
walking through the hotel lobby, whose decor vacillated between scarlet
and orange, Wina Sturgeon—Ted’s diminutive then-companion—took my arm
and said, “Chip, Ted would like to actually meet you. Why don’t you come
up for a few minutes? The kids are all there, of course. But if you
don’t mind … ?” and gave me a room number and left.

Minutes later, I took the elevator up, turned down the hall, knocked on
the wood beside the painted metal laundry bin that hung outside, and
inside heard kids laughing.

Someone said, “Come in.” Then someone opened the lock.

Yes, the room was filled with Sturgeon children: Robin, Tandy, Noël,
Timothy, Andros … and Wina and a couple of other friends.

Sturgeon sat on the bed, back against the headboard, wearing some
handmade embroidered pants—maybe sandals, I don’t remember. A
medium-height man and deeply tanned, he was on the upper side of
middle-age, with gray hair grizzled on a thin chest. The only picture
I’d ever seen of him was the portrait in the Ed Emsh fantasia that
formed the cover for the special Sturgeon issue of _The Magazine of
Fantasy and Science Fiction_ for September, 1962. What I saw, there in
the hotel room, was that face, with its beard and fine bones—described
in one or another article I’d read as “Puckish” or “pixie-ish.” But it
was that face aged a decade. Sturgeon gave out a measured calm that
glimmered through the confusion of the children’s questions and
visitors’ comments, very natural and very winning. An impossible
situation for conversation?

Not at all.

It was a pleasant and friendly evening, with lots of mutual good
feeling; but all saying it makes me want to do is take the cliché
“pleasant and friendly” and figure out some way to retrieve the meanings
that have worn off the words from overuse: because what pleased that
evening started like a warmth behind the knees and rose through the body
till it reached the shoulders, letting loose—now at a bemused chuckle
from Ted, now with someone’s conversation about some situation two
thousand miles way, now with a sterner word to a child and a hug to the
same child a moment later—all the tensions that comprise what Freud
called “unpleasure” (that includes those states where we do not feel
good without actually being in pain), so that the expectation and
nervousness and awe I’d brought with me could settle finally into the
simpler and more intense feeling of friendliness. (Indeed, if, in vivid
visual descriptions of the natural and social world, Sturgeon is
surpassed—now and again just barely—by Nabokov or Gass—_no_ other writer
describes so accurately what it feels like to _have_ a feeling—how
feelings sit in or move through the body, tangling in its muscles,
playing its nerves, wriggling under the skin or jarring its sensitive
tissues.) A pleasant, friendly evening.

Sadly, it seemed a long time before I saw Ted again.

Our acquaintanceship—and I know Ted would have let me call it a
friendship—was limited to the last decade of his life, during which I
met him perhaps five times. Once he showed me the silver Q he wore on a
chain around his neck—with the arrow through it. His personal emblem, it
stood for, “Ask the next question”—his motto. I have two brief, warm
letters from him, in answer to two of mine. Once I spent an afternoon
with him while he recorded some of his stories at a midtown recording
studio. Twice we made plans to get together, sit down and really
talk—even going so far, the last time I saw him in Vancouver in June of
’84, as to fix a summer date.

But somehow summer came and went. So did winter.

Then Ted was dead.

If I may strain a metaphor: Language is a sky we all live under. It’s a
total surround, both to thought and to action. “Poetry makes nothing
happen,” Auden wrote of Yeats. But once in a while, by luck or by skill,
in poetry or in prose, a writer puts words together so that, if they
_don’t_ make things happen, they make us _see_ and _sense_ things
happening. The range of Sturgeon’s work is an immense and astonishing
galaxy of such dazzling and precise lights shining out against the
twilight of ordinary rhetoric.

Theodore Sturgeon was the single most important science fiction writer
during the years of his major output—the forties, fifties, and sixties.
He was by no means the best known. He was popular—from time to time,
greatly so—but he never had the crossover appeal of a Robert Heinlein,
Arthur Clarke, or Isaac Asimov. But the “crossover” machinery that took
up the first two of these was film: Heinlein in 1950, with _Destination
Moon_, and Clarke in 1968 with _2001: A Space Odyssey_. And Asimov’s
popular science books and official textbooks had far more to do with
establishing him as a household name than did his science fiction—which,
not counting reprints, comprises only some thirty-five titles out of his
more than 300 volumes. But though on occasion _More Than Human_ came
close to reaching the sound stages, no film based on a Sturgeon story
ever got done.

In no way am I suggesting that he displaces the other indubitable
artists of our field … Stanley Weinbaum, Alfred Bester, Philip Dick, or
Cordwainer Smith. But if we can read Sturgeon, read him deeply,
carefully, and with the nuance and insight his texts invite, then we can
read any of these others; and our readings will be enriched by what we
learn of science fictional language possibilities _from_ Sturgeon.

This is not, however, a commutative proposition. For if we do _not_ read
Sturgeon, our readings of all these others will be deeply, and possibly
irrevocably, impoverished: What our greatest SF artist—Sturgeon—does for
the broader range of our art is takes what in other writers becomes dead
convention or trope and, within a shared historical context, infuses it
with life and demonstrates its vital use.


II

Sturgeon’s theme was love. At least one of his methods was to
physicalize the emotions and move them through the body, describing
their weight and resistance, their frictions and trajectories. He
articulated the ripplings in the tapestry of day that enwraps us
all—articulated it with an economy and accuracy that again and again
impinges on his reader with electric insistence. He loved the physical
world of weather and scents, and, especially, machines—glittering in the
sun, glimpsed through a laboratory window, rising blackly to block the
stars, or rusting behind an old garage. He loved the commonsensical
demands of the body—and, as well, had vast patience with the intricate
excuses the mind raises against them.

More than half a dozen years ago, I first wrote:

Right now there is a yawning fourfold need in Sturgeon scholarship.
First, we must have a reasonably and responsibly edited edition of
Theodore Sturgeon’s near 150 stories (more than a hundred of which are
superb) as well as his half-dozen-plus novels.

Second, someone must undertake a major, scholarly biography of Sturgeon.

Third, efforts must be marshaled to preserve his letters, ephemera, and
other writerly remains.

Fourth, we must establish a Sturgeon Society and Sturgeon Newsletter to
distribute information and inform those scholars and readers of Sturgeon
of what is going on in Sturgeon studies.

The book you hold now, the second volume in a projected ten volume set
of Sturgeon’s complete short fiction, reflects on all four of those
exhortations.

Spearheaded by Paul Williams and Noël Sturgeon (the fifth of Sturgeon’s
children and the Trustee of his literary estate), The Sturgeon Project
is an incipient Sturgeon Society. No regular newsletter exists yet. But
I know that will be coming. And anyone who has looked at the first
volume of these tales (_The Ultimate Egoist_ [1994]) will be aware of
how much the story notes for this series already depend on the letters:
the whole set will certainly have to be at the center of any future
biographical study.

Sturgeon was a superb artist: we’ve seen that from his writing from the
forties and fifties. But with the first volume of his earliest work now
available, we can see, with the rediscovered stories and letters from
his late adolescence, an artist who, in his commitment to his work and
in his perseverance, has much about him of the hero.

Robert Heinlein may be responsible for more technical innovations, more
rhetorical figures that have been absorbed into the particular practice
of science fiction writing; his influence is certainly greater. But if
this is so, it is at an extremely high cost, both ethically and
aesthetically. (I use the terms in the same sense that allowed the young
Ludwig Wittgenstein to jot in his notebook, on the 24th of July, 1916,
almost two years before Sturgeon was born, “Ethics and aesthetics are
one and the same”—the very sense, I presume, that allowed the young
Georg Lukacs to write, only a year before that, in his _Theory of the
Novel_, that fiction is “the only art form in which the artist’s ethical
position _is_ the aesthetic problem.”) And if Alfred Bester’s _The Stars
My Destination_ (1956) is regarded by many as the single greatest SF
novel and therefore minimally outshines Sturgeon’s _More Than Human_
(1953), it is because Bester’s book _is_ a novel, whereas Sturgeon’s is
three connected novellas, two of which are superb and the third of which
is merely fascinating.

To talk about science fiction with any sophistication, however,
especially to talk about that science fiction which flowered in the
forties and fifties, we must locate coequal forms. One, near-future
science fiction, posits a familiar landscape, familiar social patterns,
and familiar social surfaces. Into it the author intrudes one or a
limited number of marvels. The game is to explore the resultant
alterations in behavior. The other form, far-future science fiction,
begins the game with a landscape where behavior patterns, social
texture, and societal workings are already highly altered. Here, as the
text proceeds, the game is to recognize which patterns of behavior—or,
in the more sophisticated versions of this form, which abstracts of
these behavior patterns—remain constant despite material reorganization.
In this form of science fiction the question is: What is the human
aspect of the structure of behavior—no matter how much the behavioral
content or the context alters?

The newcomer to science fiction (often a young newcomer to science as
well) is usually more at home with the near-future sort. The long-time
reader, especially one at home with the technical underpinnings that
support the multiple distortions of landscape in the far-future variety,
often finds the second type the greater intellectual challenge.

When near-future science fictions fails, we usually dismiss the failure
as “a gimmick story.” When far-future science fiction fails, we usually
call its degenerate form “space opera.” But if we accept the division
and acknowledge the fine and faulty examples on both sides, then we can
go on to say that Sturgeon is _the_ master of near-future science
fiction (whereas _The Stars My Destination_ is considered by many to be
the pinnacle of the far-future variety).

Sturgeon was born February 26th, 1918, and grew up first on Staten
Island, then in Philadelphia with his mother, his stepfather, and his
older brother Peter. An adolescent career as a gymnast was ended by a
bout of rheumatic fever. By and large to get away from a fraught
relationship with his stepfather, Sturgeon, while still a teenager,
entered the merchant marine. But his burning desire was to be a writer.
His first fiction sale that we know about (for five dollars—on
publication) was a short-short story called “Heavy Insurance” that
appeared in the McClure Newspaper Syndicate, in _The Milwaukee Journal_,
July 16th, 1938, when he was twenty. His story “A God in a Garden,”
written the following spring, marks Sturgeon’s first sale to John W.
Campbell, the great science fiction (and fantasy) editor, for whom
Sturgeon was to become one of the prime members in his stable of writers
during the later thirties and all through the forties. A contemporary
fantasy, “A God in a Garden” appeared in the October _Unknown_—that
extraordinary journal which, over the five years of its life, all but
created the genre of contemporary urban fantasy. Sturgeon’s first
science fiction story, also sold to Campbell, was “Ether Breather.” It
appeared in _Astounding Science Fiction_, September 1939.

The Sturgeon _oeuvre_ is magnanimous and expansive. If its verbal
texture almost everywhere approaches the exquisite, its edges positively
sprawl. The core of that work has been, to date, his four science
fiction novels: _The Dreaming Jewels, More Than Human, Venus Plus X_,
and _The Cosmic Rape_. And clearly on the SF border territory is his
1960 novella (published as a separate volume), _Some of Your Blood_. He
also wrote an historical spoof, _I, Libertine_ (1956) under the
pseudonym of Frederick R. Ewing, a novel the tale of whose creation, at
the inspiration of WOR-AM disc jockey Jean Shepherd, is a small fifties
period comedy in itself. There is an Ellery Queen mystery that he
ghosted, as well as some other film and TV novelizations to his credit.
(_The King and Four Queens_ [1956]; _Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_
[1961]). His final novel, _Godbody_, originally written at the end of
the sixties for a publisher of erotica who eventually went out of
business, only appeared posthumously in 1986 and is somewhere between
fantasy, science fiction and erotic mysticism. At various times and in
various circles, _More Than Human_—really a concatenation of three
interconnected long stories—has been considered the greatest science
fiction novel (certainly of the near-future variety) ever written, in
spite of the weakness of its ending. But Sturgeon at his strongest is
finally revealed—again and again—in the torrent of wonderful stories,
which Paul Williams, in this series, has organized and annotated so
brilliantly.

With the current project, the number both of the ordinary _and_ the
extraordinary tales has only risen. As far back as the special 1962
special issue of _The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction_ devoted
to Sturgeon’s work, Judith Merril wrote: “[a] quality of voice makes the
most unevenly composed Sturgeon story compellingly readable.” But it is
astonishing to find that voice clear and recognizable in the very first
handful of short-short stories he sold McClure as a twenty-year-old, who
(after his first sale) had just broken away from the merchant marine.

One of the great paradoxes to me has always been that the general flaws
one finds in commercial fiction are invariably in the line of plot and
structure: The progression of incident in the vast majority of
paraliterary fictions is simply and wholly unbelievable. Having done or
felt A, it is simply unbelievable that character X would proceed to do B
or C. What makes this paradoxical is simply that the explicitly stated
esthetic of the writers of these stories is one that holds up craft over
art, that says that surface is of a wholly secondary importance as to
craft—which, by this esthetic is wholly a matter of a well-structured,
well-motivated plot. If craft—specifically the structuring of believable
fictions—can be learned, why can so few commercial writers learn it?
Equally paradoxical is the fact that without exception, every truly
memorable commercial writer, from Chandler and Hammett to Bradbury and
Vance, Cordwainer Smith and Alfred Bester and—yes—Sturgeon is memorable
because of a specific writerly surface that is so easily called “style.”

These paradoxes have produced their share of critical embarrassments.


III

In the 1970s, for example, in the pages of _Science Fiction Studies_,
Polish writer Stanislaw Lem attacked Sturgeon’s story “Maturity,” one of
the most respected stories in the greater Anglo-American science fiction
community. During the late forties, this story greatly excited the SF
community of both readers and writers. It was much talked about and
several times anthologized, quickly gaining a reputation as a “science
fiction classic.” Lem proceeded to point out the story’s very real
structural weaknesses. On the strength of those weaknesses, Lem
proceeded to dismiss the story, Sturgeon, and the critical community
that had held the story to be of value. Though Lem purposely skirted the
story’s good points, the flaws he picked out were—again—certainly there.
But what Lem seemed wholly unaware of was the underlying cause of the
excitement around the story in the first place. And that is: Sturgeon
rewrote it.

SF stories had of course been rewritten before. Editors had often asked
for changes, and even the sort of rewriting Sturgeon did is suggested in
the memoirs of Isaac Asimov and others from the fine old days. All the
same, in 1947 a draft of “Maturity” was published in _Astounding_.
Sturgeon was not satisfied with it. (Presumably it wasn’t mature
enough … ?) The story was reworked, and a new draft (mainly the ending
differs) was published in an anthology. News of the whole process became
generally known throughout that small and volatile group of writers,
editors and fannish readers that composed the SF community (a tenth the
size, in the late forties, of what it is today.) And the interest
suddenly sparked. People wanted to see what an SF story rewritten by
someone among them already acknowledged as a master wordsmith _looked_
like.

To understand why they were so intrigued, however, we have to have some
understanding of science fiction as a commercial writing field in the
decade after the Second World War. We have to remember that the current
respectability of science fiction is less than twenty-five years old.
Many writers whose careers extend back before that period—among them
many of our best—can still be heard to boast: “Me? No, I never rewrite.
It all comes out first draft.” Visitors from the world of mundane
fiction, where the paradigms for fictive labor are the legendary
travails of Joyce and Flaubert, tend to frown here. They _believe_ these
writers (though too frequently the writers who assert these first draft
miracles are, to put it politely, overstating things); what bewilders
mundane visitors (from a world where a boastful writer is much more
likely to talk about how _much_ work went into the text) is the
underlying assumption to the boast. They miss the subtext that gives the
boast its meaning. As one graduate English student once whispered to me
a decade ago at a Science Fiction Writers of America party, where a
number of our most eminent practitioners were deep in a round of
I-work-less-on-my-best-stories-than-thou: “What enterprise do these men
[the writers in question were all men] think they are involved in that
_not_ revising is something to _brag_ about?”

The answer is not so difficult, however, as the graduate student might
think.

Science Fiction is a highly affective mode of writing. Our audience
gasps, applauds, rises stunned from its seats, falls back limp with
hanging jaw—so that the writerly stance of the virtuoso is a valid one
for us. The SF writer leaps up, momentarily casts a silhouette against
the stars, effects a few breathtaking turns and recoveries, then lightly
sets down, bows, and saunters off; and the little postperformance
gesture—“See, it was nothing”—is, of course, just the final _part_ of
the performance.

Now there are literary writers—Nabokov, Borges—who are as pyrotechnic in
their local effects as, well, Sturgeon—or, to cite another underrated
star in our galaxy, Alfred Bester. But although they make our hearts
leap as high in our breasts or our breath catch as sharply in our
throats, all by a mere dazzle of words, we tend to express our
appreciation of those effects by knowing smiles rather than by, as SF
readers so often do, falling all over the floor.

We have all seen the SF reader at an SF convention, two o’clock in the
morning, run shrieking from a hotel room, paperback waving, to halt,
staggering, among the fans around the ice machine, gasping and panting:
“_Read_ that! Just _read_ that paragraph there! I mean, isn’t that
_amazing_!” This is a very intense reaction.

For the SF writer to take on the public image of either a Borges (the
rare work, produced over a vast period of time under the no doubt
exquisitely painful pressure of a doubly distilled aesthetic sensibility
and not a little political oppression) or a Nabokov (the rich novel
written out on innumerable index cards, each individually and endlessly
revised, interminably sorted over and, no doubt, cross-indexed, so that
the text is finally the result of an unimaginable and eyestraining
amount of sheer _work_) would seem, in light of such intense reader
reaction, unseemly. The writer of literary fiction is traditionally the
writer ignored or misunderstood. (Borges’s work must wait twenty or
twenty-five years for the world recognition we now consider its due;
Nabokov becomes famous only through the fluke best-sellerdom of his
tenth or so novel, because the public mistakenly considers it obscene.)
Somehow it is meet for literary writers (or whoever proselytizes for
them) to stress the pain and labor necessary to bring these writers’
valuable works to the world. But that meetness is still proscribed by
the career models of Joyce and Flaubert, both writers whose works were
tried in court, the one waiting too long for recognition, the other too
quickly forgotten.

SF writers and other practitioners of the paraliterary, within their
circumscribed world, get all the recognition they can use and then some.
And although recognition is not money, within the paraliterary world of
SF writers, editors, and convention goers, those writers who do not
start to establish reasonable reputations in their twenties are usually
those who do not start writing till their thirties. With a background of
such volatile appreciation, to downplay the pain and labor that goes
into the work is simply a kind of good manners. The readers are quite
impressed enough with the texts already. And though they clamor
endlessly to ask, “Where do you get your ideas?” (a question I have
never heard any SF writer worth her or his salt seriously try to
answer), the question, “How do you put these ideas together?” (which,
with a little thought and analysis, _is_ sometimes answerable) is much
rarer. I believe an SF reader asking, “Where do you get your ideas?” is
simply the audience asking to be reassured that the hat is really empty
and the rabbit really gone. But by and large in science fiction, the
readers appreciate the trick enough to realize just how much (different
for each of us) might be lost if the writer were to reveal how it was
done. By comparison, the literary writer is continually in the position
of having to say to a rather listless audience, “Well, you may not think
much of the trick, but if you could only see what its mechanics are
you’d appreciate it a lot more.” And whether the mechanics to be
explicated are the subtle recomplications of the textual surface itself,
or a catalogue of the rigors, triumphs, traditions, or even personal
tragedies that underlie the artist’s personal training, the template is
the same. Thus, what looks like befuddled vulgarity from the perspective
of the literary world appears as a laudable aesthetic reticence from the
perspective of the paraliterary landscape—the world of science fiction.
But although this is the synchronic situation that contours such
behavior from within the field, there is a diachronic (that is,
historical) pressure as well from without, working toward the same end.

Literary fiction rises out of (or, more accurately, has since the early
19th century successfully appropriated) what Professor Stanley E. Fish
calls “The Aesthetic of the Good Physician”: literary fiction is good
for you; its goal is a greater understanding of the world and of the
passions, which understanding will make you a better person. If you are
educated well enough, or lucky enough already to possess the proper
temperament, the whole process may even give pleasure … although more
serious readers are chary of holding out even this much enticement. And
with reason. Satisfaction, yes—but _pleasure_… ? In the last few years
at least two perfectly intelligent persons have told me, with a
polemical glitter in their eye, “I never read for pleasure.” One was an
Oxford graduate specializing in Italian literature of the Resorgiamento.
The other was the chairman of the comparative literature department for
an upstate New York university. On the one hand, I can say that this
sentence, as it concerns these two readers and as most SF readers would
interpret it, is simply untrue. I have seen the first of these folk
laugh aloud over one 17th-century lyric and be struck to wet-eyed
muteness by another; the second, twenty-five minutes after he made the
statement, was (as we shared the comparative privacy of Buffalo’s
Albright-Knox cafeteria) in tongue-tied rapture over an ironic trope in
the third chapter of _Bouvard et Pécuchet_. On the other hand, their
point on not reading _for_ pleasure _is_ polemical. I understand it, and
I agree with its polemical intent. To have read and responded to the
written word at a depth great enough to experience
satisfaction/pleasure/rapture is _to have worked_. And if you are a
writer, teacher, or critic, that work had best be done with a certain
degree of conscientiousness, if not self-consciousness. Pleasure in
reading is _not_ innate. It is a learned response, as reading itself
(i.e., all the conventions that contour pleasure in a text, from the
meanings of individual words to the significance of larger fictive
figures) is learned.

Fans—whether they are science fiction fans or opera fans—are people who,
through education or exposure, have simply been able to establish the
good working habits without really trying necessary to respond to the
work. But unless fans keep up that work by fairly rigorous application,
their enthusiasm falls away. They are able to enjoy less and less varied
kinds of writing within their desired precincts; and finally none at
all. And this atrophy of response is what the reader who reads “only for
pleasure”—the reader who says, “I will make no conscious effort over any
work aside from what my temperament and my education to date have
rendered spontaneous”—always risks, always falls victim to. In this
sense a reader must read _for_ the work rather than for the pleasure, if
pleasure is to be a rich and continuing experience in reading. The
reader is rather like a dancer: s/he must be as committed to the
practice session as s/he is to the performance to produce specular
delights in either—a delight that even so laborious a reader as the
author of _S/Z_, Roland Barthes, finally consents to call _The Pleasure
of the Text_.

Now, as we have said, science fiction fans risk the same falling away if
they do not work at their reading as do any other fans. But, because of
the social matrix around science fiction (of which its extensive fandom,
myriad fanzines, and hundred-odd yearly SF conventions are only the most
conspicuous emblems), there is a much greater social pressure on SF fans
to _do_ the work than there is on most readers of literary fiction.
(Outside the university, _where_ is the pressure …?) From science
fiction’s initial self-presentation as an “intellectual” entertainment,
to the various fictive conventions that must be learned for the reader
to make any headway with the texts, to organized fandom, and finally to
the rather flamboyant image most readers have of the delights to be
achieved, everything allows us to take it on faith that in science
fiction the work, to a surprising extent, is _done_ by a large number of
science fiction readers. Thus, in discussions of the field set within
its borders, we are not so constrained to polemicize for that work by
decrying the pleasure as are either our reader of 17th-century Italian
or our Comp. Lit. chairman.

The larger point of all this is, of course, that science fiction does
not grow out of “The Aesthetic of the Good Physician.” It grows out of
quite a different aesthetic, an aesthetic we could easily call
Faustian—or even that of the Evil Charlatan.

It grows out of the dime novel, the pulp tradition, the borderline
pornography of violence and romance. It grows out of a tradition that,
for most of its history, was not only considered to be Not Good for You,
but for much of its existence was considered to be downright
deleterious. The Platonic ideal was—and still is—the dominant model by
which art is judged, especially art for the young: Art is supposed to
supply models for correct behavior. Thus, by definition, anything with
too great an element of fantasy, anything that distorts the world, any
text with any sort of larger-than-life romanticism, tends to be
considered dangerous. This was especially true during the hardship years
of the Great Depression, when brilliant men like Sturgeon’s stepfather,
William Dicky Sturgeon (whom Sturgeon and his older brother Peter called
Argyll), master of half a dozen languages and a crack mathematician,
were working well below their capacity at various elementary and high
school teaching jobs, simply to hold a family together. It was a time
when the good child was the silent child, the scared child, the child
wholly intimidated by authority—the child who would do what he was told
and could not possibly get into any sort of trouble. Sturgeon learned
about this aesthetic at the hands of his stepfather, brutally and
painfully. He describes the event in an autobiographical essay he wrote
for a therapist, Jim Hayes, in 1965.

It was about this time that I discovered science fiction; a kid at
school sold me a back number (1933 _Astounding_) for a nickel, my lunch
money. I was always so unwary! I brought it home naked and open, and
Argyll pounced on it as I came in the door. “Not in _my_ house!” he
said, and scooped it off my schoolbooks and took it straight into the
kitchen and put it in the garbage and put the cover on. “That’s what we
do with garbage,” and he sat back down at his desk and my mother at the
end of it and their drink (_Argyll_, 36).

At the same time, Argyll was reading to his stepson from such volumes as
“The _Cloister and the Hearth, The White Company, Anthony Adverse,
Vanity Fair, Tess of the D’Urbervilles_, Homer, Aristophanes, Byron
_(Childe Harold), The Hound of Heaven, War and Peace, Crime and
Punishment, Dead Souls_, God knows what all” (_Argyll_, 29). And young
Sturgeon “got most of it.”

But Sturgeon also continued to read the forbidden pulp stories. He
sought for a way to collect the magazines, and he expended a good deal
of ingenuity figuring out a way to read them—in his desk drawer, while
he was doing his homework, the sides waxed with a candle to keep them
from squeaking—and to store them: Finding a trap door in the roof of his
closet, young Sturgeon (he describes himself then as “twelve or
fourteen”) placed his magazines, two deep, between the attic
beams—starting five beams away. He even went so far as to replace the
dust on the beams after he had crawled across them, and did everything
else to cover up the traces.

Two weeks later, however:

I breezed home from school full of innocence and anticipation, and
Argyll looked up briefly and said, “There’s a mess in your room I want
you to clean up.” It didn’t even sound like a storm warning. He could
say that about what a sharpened pencil might leave behind it.

The room was almost square, three windows opposite the door, Pete’s bed
and desk against the left wall, mine against the right. All the rest,
open space, but not now. It was covered somewhat more than ankle deep by
a drift of small pieces of newsprint, all almost exactly square, few
bigger than four postage stamps. Showing here and there was a scrap of
glossy polychrome from the covers.… This must have taken him hours to
do, and it was hard to think of him in a rage doing it because so few of
the little bits were crumpled. Hours and hours, rip, rip, rip.

It is hard to recapture my feelings at the moment. I went ahead and
cleaned it all up and put it outside; I was mostly aware of this cold
clutch in the solar plexus which is a compound of anger and fear (one
never knew when one of his punishments was over, or if any specific one
was designed to be complete in itself or part of a sequence).…

I do feel, however, that this episode had a great deal to do with my
becoming a science fiction writer, and should be taken into account when
evaluating the special interest that field has had for me (_Argyll_,
38).

But like many parents of the time who forbade their children to read
“such trash,” Argyll no doubt thought he was protecting his stepson from
the pernicious influence of an evil antiart. But the larger point (in
terms of writers like Sturgeon, who, through such first-hand encounters,
knew this aesthetic to function at a strength that, say, someone like
myself—whose childhood fell on the other side of the Second World War,
in a time of greater affluence and general relaxation of moral
rigidities—never had to deal with. When my parents walked in on me as an
eight-year-old and found me reading a Batman comic, sometime in 1946, my
father was, indeed, appalled. But my mother’s response was: “But at
least he’s reading _something …_ !” And so comics—and later science
fiction—were allowed in the house with only comparatively minimal
policing) is the effect of this aesthetic on the self-presentation of
commercial SF writers at the time:

If I am doing something good for you that you must work hard to benefit
from (the Good Physician Aesthetic speaking), then it is reasonable for
me—or someone else, if I am too modest—to stress the work I have had to
do, if only to urge you to do your part.

If, however, I am doing something bad for you—and, what’s more, you have
already worked hard to get hold of it (and in the early pulp years this
meant not only the clandestinely purchased magazines, the parental
disapproval, and—on my side of the War—the flashlight under the covers,
the secret stash in the crawl space, but also _reading_ all those texts,
learning one’s way around in a confusing and ill-set jargon, and
learning to respond to a procession of conventions that were just
forming and often in flux; so that whenever one of them was called up by
no matter what distant or however fragmented metonymy, you knew what
that convention meant, the way you know a word’s meaning [rather than
the way you know how to exegete a law or define a word—or explain a
literary convention], in short, it meant work, a kind of work not so
different in its basic form from that required of a scholar to become
comfortable with the work of another century) then I have none of the
privileges of the Good Physician. If I can get a consensus that, while
what I am doing is bad for you, it’s not all _that_ bad (and, besides, I
just tossed it off without much thought), then there is a possibility I
may be judged a more or less forgivable scamp. If, however, not only is
what I am doing bad for you, but it also becomes known that I worked on
it, calculated its every effect, indulged dreams of glory over its
possible success and sweated in agony over its possible failure, planned
it endlessly and revised it incessantly, and, finally exhausted, let it
go from me, sick over where it falls short of perfection and grimly smug
over where it approaches it, then I am no longer a scamp.

I am a criminal.

This is the historical reason SF writers must play down the work that
goes into their texts. Along with the synchronic reasons outlined above
it, this is the historical background—far stronger in the thirties than
it was in 1947 (and all but vanished today—though there is always the
possibility for a resurgence), the date of “Maturity”—against which
Sturgeon actually _revised_ a story, revised it because of his own
dissatisfaction with some Lukacsian ethical/aesthetic interface. This
was the virtuoso stance suddenly cast aside. This was Faust admitting
that the formula for his potion was really more complicated than the
artificial sweeteners and fruit colorings listed in small print at the
bottom of the label. This was not a commercial writer’s acquiescence to
some editorial exhortation to tone this down for propriety’s sake or
beef that up for excitement’s. It was the acrobat, after the trick had
been performed for all practical purposes successfully, as much a
virtuoso as ever (it had been published, had it not?), suddenly shaking
his head, going back into the ring, and doing it again—not for some
effect of the performance, but out of commitment to what was being
performed.

The effect—on a good deal of the audience—was stunning.

The temptation was, no doubt, to see this as simply an importation of
“mainstream” behavior into science fiction. That some of Sturgeon’s
contemporaries saw it as such and thought it inappropriate no doubt
added energy to the dialogue—which is why we can recall it today.
Nevertheless, meanings are matters of context and metonymy: Faust, no
matter the caduceus he wave aloft nor the bedside manner he assume, is
_not_ the Good Physician. And the whole occurrence was not
caduceus-waving—it was real (that is, it was something the field _had_
to deal with); it was perceived as authentic. What it did was to clear
an area in that conceptual space that is science fiction (the texture of
particular moments in that space expressed in—and as—particular SF
texts) in which such commitment could now be recognized to exist and
could continue to exist, if not with a terribly sophisticated critical
vocabulary for talking about it then at least with a vocabulary of
actions, situations, and responses through which it could be thought
about dramatically. Such a clearing and defining reorganized the
structure of a conceptual space in such a way that the structure
recomplicates and expands through that space until the mental space of
construction for the actual text (and thus the texture of the text) is
changed.

A personal example, if it will help: My basic working method has been
(at least up until the time of word processors) not extraordinary for an
SF author making a living by writing. I instituted it with my first SF
novel and, with minor variations, it remains my working method today: I
write a longhand draft; from this I make a rough typescript, specifying,
expanding, toothbrushing out redundancies, excising unnecessary
adjectives and phrases, clarifying parallels as I go. From this I make a
polished typescript, in which I can catch any missed details as well as
do any doctoring necessary on those details thrown out of sync between
the first and second layers. In my personal vocabulary this tri-layered
process _is_ my “first draft.” Anything beyond this is “revision.” And
should that revision run over a sentence or two, it goes through the
same tri-layered process. It is a highly utilitarian method: it makes
for prose that stays in print. (Word processors have simply expanded the
tri-layered process into a ten-or-more layered one.) Also, it
acknowledges that the cleverest of us is extremely fallible, that a
story is a very complex engine, and that in the best of them far too
much is going on for even the author to keep all parts spinning in the
air at any one time. Why not allow a minimum of three?

This relates to Sturgeon in two ways. First, I probably would not have
wanted to write science fiction if Sturgeon’s work had not affected me
the way it did. Second, I probably would not have hit on my working
method—and certainly not hit on it for my first book—if the “Maturity”
episode had not been part of our field’s history, so that as a
19-year-old, twelve years after the fact, I could still be aware of its
excitement, its energy, its message: science fiction _can_ be revised,
_can_ command commitment, _can_ strive for a stylistic clarity,
concision, and invention beyond that of mere journalism. For science
fiction to mature, this awareness had to grow out of science fiction’s
own space. It couldn’t be imported—for the conceptual space of science
fiction is finally far closer in organization to the performance space
of the circus (with its extraordinary vertical as well as horizontal
organization recalling science fiction’s spaceships and alien worlds;
with its audience surround and its oddly fuzzy distinction between
backstage and performance area recalling SF writers’ relation to their
vociferous and ever-present fans; and the circus was the first art to
insist openly that more must go on in the performance space than can
possibly be seen at once) than it is to the staid divisions of the
theater (backstage, stage, and audience), which, since Shakespeare, has
constrained our view of “Literature.” For it is precisely in the circus
space that the virtuoso gesture is held out to tempt novices to trip
over themselves in the rush to achieve it; whereupon they become victims
of a derision far sharper and crueler than that which greets the clowns,
who first lured them from their seats and into the ring with their
parodic versions of all the splendor passing and twirling, roaring and
soaring.

Looking back on the “Maturity” episode, two other general points might
be made. First, this clearing of the conceptual space for this
commitment could only have happened with a writer of the reputation
Sturgeon had already garnered within the field by 1947. Second, given
this late ’40s setting, it could probably only have occurred around a
story as profoundly safe as “Maturity”: Any signs of daring or protest
in the text itself would have immediately slanted the general
interpretation of the supposed motivation for that subsequent revision
away from one of pure ethical/aesthetic commitment. For we are talking
of mythology now—not an actual writer with actual paper in an actual
typewriter. But these myths, frustrating as they are for the man or
woman at their core, have their formal importance. And “Maturity” is
about as well-mannered a tale, by the conventions of ordinary ’50s
fiction, as someone is likely to find in the Sturgeon _oeuvre;_ and the
later version is slightly more well-mannered than the former. Anyone
acquainted with the context, if not the text itself, should have been
able to predict this. Certainly they should not have been, as Lem was,
surprised by it. For that matter, all great writers have been concerned
with good manners as their times define them. But to seek Sturgeon’s
greatness in a tale achieving notice in such circumstances and then to
declare oneself put out at not finding it, as, in effect, Lem does,
seems almost willfully obtuse. The careful analysis of a public success,
however small that public, is always instructive. But by the same
token—accepting public opinion as an essential given of someone’s
analytic insight, because public opinions are myths, and myths, as
Cassirer and others have noted, are invariably conservative “if only
through the committee nature of their composition”—the worst one can say
of Lem is that, coming from a country with no pulp tradition of its own,
he had no feel for the context and simply ignored or misread the
contextual signs. The best one can say is that, well, giants will
wrangle.


IV

But it is often the Sturgeon stories that gained notice, if not
notoriety, in their day that seem now on the thin side. “The World Well
Lost,” for example, which despite its powerful picture of homophobia
brushes rather pastel fingers over the subject of male homosexuality
itself, was for a while frequently mentioned as an example of science
fiction’s growing “liberality” in matters sexual, along with Philip José
Farmer’s “The Lovers.” Today the Farmer tale seems, at best,
intriguingly troglodytic, and the Sturgeon only a step from rank
conservatism—although it certainly made my eyes water when I first read
it at fifteen. Another Sturgeon story much discussed in the few years
after its publication was “Affair with a Green Monkey”: however artful
its opening, today we have to admit that its whole thrust is toward a
rather trivial one-liner. A contemporary reader, finding the excited
references to it that litter the fanzines and magazine letter columns of
its day, is likely to ask: What was all the fuss? The only way to
understand the fuss is, again, to reconstruct the surrounding situation,
i.e., a social moment in which not only were the actions involved in
these stories considered a sin, a sickness, and a crime by law, but the
words themselves were forbidden to print. We can take an example from
Sturgeon’s science fiction novella, “To Marry Medusa” (1958—which
Sturgeon later expanded into his briefest science fiction novel, _The
Cosmic Rape_ [1958]): “ ‘… an’ him runnin’ out an stickin’ his head back
in an’ callin’ me a—’ Sanctimoniously, Al would not sully his lips with
the word. And the rye-and-ginger by the door would be nodding wisely and
saying, ‘Man shouldn’t mention a feller’s mother, whatever,’ ” or, later
on, from the novel’s Chapter 12, “ ‘… Pop. Hey, Pop! Carol’s sayin’
summon a bish.’ And Tony would say, ‘Don’t say that, Carol,’ whereupon
the lights of the oncoming vehicle would be upon him and in dedicated
attention he would slit his eyes, set his jaw, and say precisely what
Carol was trying to repeat.” In light of today’s realistic novel and
film dialogue, readers tend to see these now as coy gestures toward a
vanished piety. But what such passages actually are is ironic commentary
on their epoch’s very real and absolutely enforced (by law and threat of
imprisonment) printing conventions—conventions that would not begin to
relax till nearly a decade after the tales carrying such lines had been
first published. Here we are again left with two points to make: first,
verbal tropes such as the one-liner of “Affair with a Green Monkey” or
the pastel touch in “The World Well Lost” are what that decade
substituted for sex (of whatever persuasion) in print, while piously
insisting that the clear discomfort these substitutions caused was
precisely what was being avoided by eliding the sex itself.

We cannot be surprised if Sturgeon, the writer most sensitive to those
years, was also, in the work of this period, very much of those years
himself. But we should also note that when, for example in his Western
story “Scars,” Sturgeon dealt with some of the same material both
“Affair With a Green Monkey” and “The World Well Lost” had focused on
(i.e., men’s dubiousness about masculine sexual expectations), he did so
with much less heavy hands, to produce one of his strongest and most
compassionate stories by today’s standards.

But it is not in Sturgeon’s well-mannered stories (be they
conservatively or shockingly well-mannered) that today’s reader is
likely to find what is most interesting, most stimulating, most
impressive, most obsessive, and most simply and awesomely beautiful in
Sturgeon. The ten-year delay in finding a publisher for one of
Sturgeon’s earliest written stories (then the thousand-dollar first
prize from _Argosy_ magazine—a story by Graham Greene took second
place—the vindication, the reputation: the story is “Bianca’s Hands” [in
_The Ultimate Egoist_, Volume I of The Complete Stories]) does not speak
of well-mannered fiction as the times defined—although the story is
beautifully wrought, and any nineteen-year-old (Sturgeon was nineteen
when he wrote it) could be justly proud of it. “Die, Maestro, Die!,”
with its guitarist’s amputated fingers (a passing obsession for
Sturgeon? Compare this with the extraordinary self-mutilation scene
involving the guitar-playing protagonist from _The Dreaming Jewels_
[1950]) is not a polite tale at all. And while this second volume of
stories contains a goodly number of Sturgeon stories that were
particularly popular in their day (“Microcosmic God,” “Shottle Bop,” and
“Poker Face” are all tales that came in for special praise when they
first appeared—as did “Killdozer!”, the story that will open the
subsequent Volume III), the delight of this volume is that it contains
so many stories that today’s reader is bound to find even richer and
_more_ rewarding. Nor are “The Sex Opposite,” “It Wasn’t Syzygy,” “The
Other Celia,” “Bright Segment,” “A Way of Thinking,” or “Mr. Costello,
Hero” well-mannered stories by anybody’s standards. And _these_ are the
tales in which a modern reader begins to encounter the unsurpassed, the
incomparable, the magnificent Sturgeon.

The long-time Sturgeon reader has no doubt been patiently waiting
through all this historical retrieval with a question. We ask it now:
What are we to do with Sturgeon’s frequently quoted assertion, “All my
work is about love”? Well, I take the assertion seriously—but in the
manner that I take seriously the innumerable strategies devised over the
centuries by innumerable artists to reach into the centers of their own
creativity. Such a statement may well represent Sturgeon’s own key to
working. But there is no necessity for it to be my key into the work.
Where do I go for such a key? Where I go for the key into any other
writer’s work: to the text—and, because in science fiction there is such
lively reader response, to the readers … with a large margin for
caution, translation, and evaluation.

Some six years before Heinlein’s _Stranger in a Strange Land_ (1961)
supplied the term _grok_ to the counterculture for a brief currency,
Sturgeon’s SF novel _More Than Human_ gave a word to a circle of young
readers (which included me) meant to combine aspects of blending and
meshing: _blesh_. Perhaps it was simply because of my age, but
_grok_—especially after someone (James Blish?) noted that its meaning
was practically identical to the then-current meaning (it changes
yearly) of the jazz term _dig_—somehow never entered my vocabulary.

_Blesh_ did.

I still have to stop myself, now and then, from writing it down in the
flow of the most formal nonfiction. And forty-five years after the
publication of the novel in which it first appeared, a few friends of
mine still use the term in conversation.

But I think this sound-image, bleshing, this order of _communitas_
always on the verge of communion, expresses an inchoate need in the
American psyche; as well, it relates to a gallery of images that recur
through Sturgeon’s texts. And the other single word—the biological image
that the Sturgeon reader (and apparently for a while Sturgeon as well)
most easily groups that gallery of images around as a metaphorical
center—is, of course, the word denied in the title of one tale,
explained in the text of another, and referred to in passing in any
number of others: “syzygy.”

Sturgeon himself describes it for one-celled organisms in “It Wasn’t
Syzygy”: “Two of these organisms let their nuclei flow together for a
time. Then they separate and go their ways again. It isn’t a
reproductive process at all. It’s merely a way in which each may gain a
part of the other.” For biological accuracy, we can add that the cell
walls merge and that cytoplasm as well as nucleoplasm, exchanges. After
they separate, both cells quickly undergo fission twice (resulting in
eight organisms). Although syzygy is not a reproductive process, besides
allowing genetic mixing it triggers reproduction through two
generations.

Looking at the range and power of this communion as it is presented
again and again throughout Sturgeon’s work, certainly I see love as one
of its most important forms. Yet what has always struck me _vis-á-vis_
Sturgeon’s assertion is how much larger than love—love in any form I can
recognize it—this communion is always turning out to be. It is almost
always moving toward the larger-than-life, the cosmic, the mystical. In
a number of places in Sturgeon’s work—_More Than Human, The Cosmic
Rape_—it comes to be one with evolution itself.

Dealing with such an awesome communion, Sturgeon might well want to keep
himself oriented toward love. It would be rather heady, if not
horrifying, to explore that communion without such a fixed point to home
on—though a few times Sturgeon has given us a portrait of this communion
with the orientation toward hate (“Die, Maestro, Die!” and “Mr.
Costello, Hero”), and these are among his most powerful stories.
Certainly the relationships presented in “Bianca’s Hands” and “Bright
Segment” begin as love; but although neither ever loses the name, both,
by the end of their respective tales, have developed into something far
more terrifying. Yet the intensity of effect, finally, allies that dark
version to the brighter one of such tales as, say, “The (Widget), the
(Wadget), and Boff’ or “Make Room for Me.”

Artists outgrow their terminology (not to mention their metaphors), and
Sturgeon would soon leave syzygy behind—first as a word, then as a
concept. But for the reader, the image of merging cells, fused in some
imponderable union, closer than sex, with many aspects of sex about it
but ultimately a replacement for sex among the essentially asexual, is a
microstructure rich enough to begin organizing around it readings of the
larger and more varied communions Sturgeon presents in one form or
another in almost every tale.

Sturgeon wanted a world that worked differently from the one we live in;
and that difference was that it had a place for love and logic both.
What seemed to bolster him and give him personal patience and also
artistic perseverance was his apprehension of the interconnectedness of
all life’s varied and variegated aspects.

For all the brilliance of its accomplishment, Sturgeon’s career was by
no means smooth or easy. He had three marriages (the second was
annulled), two more long-term relationships, and seven children.
Financially, there were times when he approached the level of middle
class comfort, but not many. And his writing was broken by several
extended periods when he could not write at all—even so much as a
letter. Such periods were financially disastrous and deeply painful to
the man—even as they troubled his readers. Because Sturgeon was as
popular as he was, at the merest mention of a story or book idea from
him, editors would rush into print with an announcement of a book or a
story forthcoming, that finally would never appear. (The long, late tale
“When You Care, When You Love” was trumpeted as the first section of a
novel—never finished. And a tale called “Tandy’s Story” that appeared in
_Galaxy_ in 1961 was supposed to be one of a series, one named for each
of his children—never completed.)

There’s a story that Sturgeon has told about himself and that others
have repeated.

In the early fifties, during the midst of one of Sturgeon’s several
blocked periods, _Galaxy_ editor Horace L. Gold finally broke through
it. Sturgeon had explained to Gold that he was worrying so much about
the terrifying oppression and fear emanating from Senator Joseph
McCarthy, who was investigating “un-American” activity and destroying
lives and reputations left and right in the process, Sturgeon couldn’t
bring himself to write a story that was simple entertainment. Unless it
was something that told the world exactly how he felt about this evil
madman, Sturgeon asked, how could he write anything. But a good story,
he knew, couldn’t simply be a sermon or a political Jeremiad.

Gold thought a moment, then responded: “You write me a story about a man
who goes to meet his wife at a bus station to surprise her and who sees
her come through the gate smiling at another man—and every _Galaxy_
reader in the country will know exactly how you feel about that
Washington demagogue.”

The story with which Sturgeon responded, the story that ended his
blocked period, was “Mr. Costello, Hero”—a beautifully indirect, yet
scapularly astute, examination into the workings of “political” evil.
But what Gold had perceived was, of course, precisely the
interconnectedness (the communion) I referred to—the historically
sensitive web on which the finest art plays its times in order to sound
the richest music.

Sturgeon told the tale as a lesson on how to end writer’s block.

But what he was too modest to say, and what I’m happy to be able to add,
is that, for all its truth, I doubt there are very _many_ writers to
whom Gold would have given this advice.

Myself, I can only think of one.

And that is certainly one reason why, to us, today, Sturgeon is of such
pristine and gemlike value.

Samuel R. Delany
New York, 1995



CARGO


I HEARD SOMEBODY SAY she was haunted. She wasn’t haunted. There’s
another name for what ailed her, and I’ll tell you about it if you like.
I was aboard her when it started, and before. I knew every sheared rivet
on her. I knew her when she was honest, a drab and prosaic member of our
merchant marine. I saw what happened to her.

She was one of those broad-shouldered old hulks built by the dozen
during War I. Her sisters lay rotting and rusting and waiting for a
national emergency to prove their unseaworthiness. O.K. They make good
shrapnel. Her name was _Dawnlight_, she was seven thousand tons, a black
oil tanker, limped like a three-legged dog, and was as beautiful as a
wart. She could do nine knots downhill with a fair wind and an
impossible current. When she was loaded she steered well until the loss
of weight from burned fuel in the after bunkers threw her down by the
head, and then she proceeded as will any tanker with a loss back aft;
when she was light she drew seventeen feet aft and nothing forward, so
that when the wind blew abeam she spun on her tail like a canoe.

Yes, I knew her of old. She used to carry casing-head. That’s airplane
gas that makes explosive vapors at around 40° F. So one day a fireman
found casing-head seeping through the seams of No. 9 tank into the
fireroom and evaporating there. He fainted dead away, and the crew took
to the boats during the night. The Old Man woke up at noon the next day
screaming for his coffee, put two and two together, and with the help of
two engineers and a messman, worked her into a cove in a small island
off Cuba.

It so happened that a very wealthy gentleman thereabouts turned up with
a nice offer, with the result that the Old Man and his three finks made
for Havana in a lifeboat with their pockets full of large bills and the
ship’s log, which contained an entry describing her explosion and
sinking. After that she carried crude oil for the wealthy gentleman to
war zones. Great sport.

What made it such great sport was that not only did the _Dawnlight_ have
no business being afloat, but she had no business being in her
particular business. Her nationality was determined by the contents of
the flag locker, and her current log looked like a set of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica. They’d run up one flag or another, and pick a
log to suit.

But she paid well and she fed well, and if you could keep away from the
ocean floor and the concentration camps, you’d find her good shipping.
If you must commit suicide, you might as well get rich doing it.

I caught her in a certain drydock that makes a good thing of doing quick
work and asking few questions. Her skipper was a leathery old squarehead
whose viscera must have been a little brown jug. Salt cracked off his
joints when he moved. He was all man back aft and all devil on the
bridge, and he owned our souls. Not that that was much of a possession.
The crew matched the ship, and they were the crummiest, crustiest,
hard-bitten bunch of has-been human beings ever to bless the land by
going to sea. Had to be that way.

Any tanker is a five-hundred-foot stick of dynamite, even if she isn’t
an outlaw. If she’s loaded, she’ll burn forever and a week; and if she’s
light she’ll go sky-high and never come down. All she needs is a spark
from somewhere. That can happen easily enough any time; but imagine
dodging subs and pocket battleships on both sides of the martial
fence—swift, deadly back-stabbers, carrying many and many a spark for
our cargoes. We had nothing for protection but luck and the Old Man. We
stuck to him.

The _Dawnlight_ was the only ship I’d have taken, feeling the way I was.
Once in a while the world gangs up on a guy, and he wants an out. The
_Dawnlight_ was mine—she’d pulled me through a couple of dark spots in
the past—once when a certain dope fell and cracked his silly skull in a
brawl over a girl, and I had to disappear for a while, and once when I
married the girl and she took to blackmailing me for a living. Aside
from all this, though, the _Dawnlight_ was the only ship I _could_ get
aboard. I carried an ordinary seaman’s certificate, indorsed for wiper.
The Department of Commerce was very lenient with me and let me keep
those ratings after I ran a naval auxiliary tanker on the rocks. Passed
out drunk on watch. Anyhow, the Old Man gave me the eight-to-twelve
watch as third mate, papers or no papers. It was that kind of ship. He
was that kind of a skipper. He had the idea I was that kind of a sailor.

We left the drydock (it’s up North somewhere—that’ll do!) and headed
east and south. We were in ballast, carrying only two hundred big cases
of farm machinery in the two dry cargo holds. Farm machinery with
steel-jacketed noses and percussion caps. Nice chunky crates of tractors
with rifled barrels. We followed the coastline pretty much, but stayed
far off, out of the southbound steamer lanes. This wasn’t long after the
beginning of the war, when all hands ashore and afloat were excited
about neutrality zones, so we wanted to keep our noses clean. However,
we weren’t too worried. We weren’t the only gray-painted unidentified
hulk at sea by any means, and anyway, we had the skipper.

We dropped down to about 33° and headed due east. It was early fall—the
hurricane season—but the weather was fine and mellow. We kept the
morning sun a point off the starboard bow, and in the evening we tore up
the base of the shadow we threw ahead. The black gang talked of an
unheard-of sixty-three revolutions per minute from the engine, when she
hadn’t done better than fifty-seven in the last twelve years. Every time
I shot the sun or a star on my watch, the ship stood still and waited
for me to get it, and I navigated as if I had a radio beam in my pocket.
It didn’t seem like the old _Dawnlight_ any more, with her rotten gear
and her chewing-gum calking. It was a pleasure to work her. Even Cajun
Joe’s sea bread stopped giving me heartburn.

Yes, it was too good to be true, so in the long run it didn’t turn out
to be true. After we reached longitude 30° everything about that ship
went haywire. Nothing was really wrong, only—well, there was the matter
of the sextants, for instance. Four of them—mine, and the first’s, and
the second’s, but worst of all, the Old Man’s ancient binocular-type
monster. They all went just a little bit off—enough to throw us eight or
ten degrees off course. You see, after we passed 30°, we changed course
a shade north to head us up toward Gibraltar; and no sooner had we done
that than clouds popped up from nowhere and the weather got really
thick.

Nights we sailed in a black soup, and days we sailed in a white one, and
the compass was the only thing that would even admit where we might be.
Things got screwy. The revolution counter said we were making a wabbly
seven point two knots. The patent log claimed an even six. But it wasn’t
until the third day of fog, about five bells on my morning watch, that
we really found out that we were being led astray. About the sextants, I
mean.

There was a hole in the clouds, high on the starboard beam; I saw it
coming up, figured it would show the sun, and whistled up the Old Man
and the mate. I was right; it was a small hole, and as the three of us
lined up on the wing of the bridge with our sextants, the second came
bumbling sleepily up with his. Old Johnny Weiss was at the wheel,
steadying the lubberline onto the compass card the way only an old
shellback trained in sail can steer a ship.

“Watch the clock, Johnny,” I said and got the image of that cloud hole
on my mirror.

“Hi,” he said, which was the nearest any of us came to “Aye-aye, sir” on
that scow.

We froze there, the four of us, each sextant steady as a rock, waiting
for the gleam. It came, and the Old Man said “Hup!” and we fixed our
arcs.

We got the time from Johnny—the old clock in the wheelhouse was
chronometer enough for us—and we broke out our tables. Our four sights
came out close enough. Position, 31°17′N, 33°9′40″W—which landed us
about four hundred miles due east of the Madeiras. We found that if we
split the distance between the distance-run given by the deck and engine
logs, we’d reach that position by dead reckoning. It looked good—too
good. The _Dawnlight_ was balky steering, what with her outmoded
hydraulic telemotor and her screw-type steering engine. She’d never
performed that way.

As soon as I was alone in the chart house I went over my figures.
Everything was jake, but—the primary mirror on my sextant was askew.
Slipped down a bit in its frame. Why, a thing like that could prove us a
hundred and fifty miles off course! It had never happened before—it was
a new sextant, and I took care of it. Now how in—

I slipped down to the Old Man’s office and went in. He and the mate were
bent over the desk. They straightened as I came in.

“Cap’n I—”

“Vot reading dit you get on your sun gun?” he asked me before I could
finish my speech. I told him. He scratched his head and looked at the
mate.

The mate said: “Yeah, me, too.” He was a Boston Irishman named Toole;
four foot eleven in his shoes. He was wanted for four very elaborate
murders. He collected seventeenth-century miniatures. “I got the same
thing, only my sextant’s on the bum. That couldn’t be right. Look—the
eyepiece on the ‘scope is off center.”

“Look now here.” The Old Man took down his behemoth and showed me a
gradation plate sliding around loosely over its pulled rivets. “Yust py
accident I gat the same.”

“My gosh! That’s what I came down to tell you, skipper. Look at this.” I
showed him the loose mirror on my instrument.

Just then Harry, the second mate, edged into the room. He always edged
through doors on the mistaken assumption that he was thinner fore and
aft than he was across the beam. It was hard to tell. Harry saw
everything and said nothing, and if he was as innocent as he hugely
looked, he would not have been aboard the _Dawnlight_. He said:

“Cap, m’ readin’ on that sight was off. My sextant—”

“—hass gone gebrochen. Don’t tell me dis too.”

“Why … yeh. Yeh.”

“Four sextants go exactly the same amount off at the same time for four
different reasons,” said Toole, examining a bent arc track on Harry’s
sun gun. The captain sighed.

No one said anything for a minute, and we hardly noticed it when the
captain’s deck lamp winked off. The engine room speaking tube shrieked
and I answered it because I was the nearest. I heard:

“Skipper?”

“Third mate.”

“Tell the Old Man that No. 2 generator just threw its armature. Cracked
the casing all to hell.”

“What’s the matter with No. 1?”

“Damfino. Fused solid two hours ago. And no spares for anything, and no
cable to wind a new armature.”

“O.K.” I turned and told the skipper.

He almost laughed. “I vas yust going to say dot ve’d haf to take a radio
bearing on Gibraltar and Feisal. Heh. Didn’t y’u tell me, ‘Arry, dot
dere vas no acid for the batteries on the radio?”

“I did.”

“Heh.” The skipper drummed for a moment on his desk, looking at me
without seeing me. Then he saw me. “Vot de dirty hell are y’u duing down
here ven y’u’re on vatch? Gat up dere!”

I got—there were times when you couldn’t play around with the old boy.

Up on deck the weather looked the same. The sea was slick and the air
was warm, and I had to fumble around to locate the bridge ladder. Johnny
was steering steadily, easily, a couple of spokes each way every couple
of minutes. He was the only man aboard that had the feel of that crazy
ship, with her warped keel and her scored and twisted propeller. He
looked up at me as I stepped into the wheelhouse and grunted.

“What’s up, Johnny?”

“Reckon you know where we are, huh?”

“I reckon.”

No sense in getting the crew talking. Sailors gossip like a bridge club,
and for the same reason—grouped people with the same basic interests.
I’ve seen three-quarters of a crew packed up and ready to leave because
some wiseacre started the rumor that a ship was to be sold for scrap at
the next port.

Johnny grunted, and I went into the chart room to monkey with that
slipped glass in my sextant. The way the weather looked, I’d never have
a chance to use it again, but then you can’t tell about an African
coastwise fog. What had made Johnny so quizzical? The more I tried to
think of something else, the more that bothered me. About ten minutes
later, working on the theory that the last word said before a long pause
is the one that sticks, I went back into the wheelhouse and asked:

“Why do you want to know?”

“Oh, nothin’.” He spat, and the tobacco juice rang a knell on the
cuspidor. “Jest thinkin’.”

“Come on—give.”

“Waal—seems to me we been steering east b’ nor’east about two
days—right?”

“So?”

“Youse guys was so busy peekin’ through yer sextants at the Big Light
that you didn’t see it was in the wrong place.”

“The sun? In the wrong place?”

“Yep. Steerin’ east b’ nor’east this time o’ year, hereabouts, seems to
me the sun’d show about broad on the bow at ten thirty in th’ mornin’.”

“Well?”

“So it shows up high an’ dead abeam. Don’t seem right, somehow.”

He was right. I went and sat down on the pilot’s stool. Radio dead,
sextants haywire; all we have is the compass and good old Bowditch’s
dead-reckoning tables. And now—the compass?

“Johnny, are you sure you were on course when we took that sight?”

His silence was eloquent. Old Johnny Weiss could steer anything with a
rudder unless it had a steering oar, and then he was better than most.
If we had a radio, we could check the compass. We had no radio. If we
could get a sun sight, we wouldn’t need the radio. We couldn’t get a sun
sight. We were lost—lost as hell. We were steering a rock-steady compass
course on a ship that was pounding the miles away under her counter as
she had never done before, and she was heading bravely into nowhere.

An ordinary seaman popped in. “Lost the patent log, sir!”

Before I could say, “Oh, well, it didn’t work, anyway,” the engine room
tube piped up.

“Well?” I said into it, in the tone that means “Now what?”

It was the third engineer again. “Is the skipper up there?”

“No. What is it?”

“A lot of things happen,” wailed the third. “Why do they all have to
happen to _me?_”

“You don’t know, shipmate, you don’t know! What’s up?”

“The rev-counter arm worked loose and fell into the crank pit. The I.P.
piston grabbed it and hauled counter and all in. Goddlemighty, what goes
on here? We jinxed?”

“Seems as though,” I said, and whistled down the captain’s tube to
report the latest.

Everything depended on our getting a sun sight now. We might have
calculated our speed at least from the revolution readings, a tide chart
and propslip table. The admiralty charts don’t give a damn about this
particular section of sea water. Why should they? There’s supposed to be
a deep around the Madeiras somewhere, but then again there’s flat sand
aplenty off Africa. Even the skipper’s luck wouldn’t pull us out of
this. I had a feeling. Damn it, we couldn’t even hail a ship, if we met
one. It would be bound to turn out a q-ship or a sub-chaser, tickled to
death to pinch our cargo. Farm machinery. Phooey!

The saloon messman came up carrying clean sheets for the chart-room cot.
I knew what that meant. The bridge was going to be the skipper’s little
home until we got out of this—if we did. I was dead beat. Things like
this couldn’t happen—they _couldn’t!_

We had a council of war that night, right after I came on watch, the
captain and I. Nothing had happened all day; the sun came out only once,
on the twelve to four, and ducked in again so quickly that Harry
couldn’t get to his sextant. He did set the pelorus on it, but the ship
rolled violently because of some freak current just as he sighted, and
the altitude he got was all off. There’d been nothing else—Oh yes; we’d
lost three heaving lines over the side, trying to gauge our speed with a
chip. The darnedest thing about it was that everything else was going as
well as it possibly could.

The cook had found nine crates of really fancy canned goods in the linen
locker—Lord knows how long they’d been there. It was just as if they’d
been dropped out of nowhere. The engines ran without a hitch. The
low-pressure cylinder lost its wheeze, and in the washrooms we got hot
water when we wanted it instead of cold water or steam. Even the
mattresses seemed softer. Only we just didn’t know where we were.

The Old Man put his hand on my shoulder and startled me, coming up
behind me in the darkness that way. I was standing out on the wing of
the bridge.

“Vot’s de matter; vorried about de veather?” he asked me. He was funny
that way, keeping us on our toes with his furies and his—what was
it?—kindnesses.

“Well, yes, cap’n. I don’t like the looks of this.”

He put his elbows on the coaming. “I tell y’u boy, ve ain’t got nodding
to fret about.”

“Oh, I guess not, but I don’t go for this hide-’n’-go-seek business.” I
could feel him regarding me carefully out of the corners of his eyes.

“I vant to tell y’u something. If I said dis to de mate, or Harry, or
vun of de black gang, dey vould say: ‘I t’ink de ol’ squarehead is
suckin’ vind. He must be gettin’ old.’ But I tell y’u.”

I was flattered.

“Dis is a old ship, but she is good. I am going to be sorry to turn her
over to sumvun else.”

“What are you talking about, skipper? You’re not quitting when we get
back?”

“No; before dat. Dass all I vorry about, y’u see. Dis vill be de first
command I lost half a trip out. I vass master of thirty-two ships, but I
alvays left dem in der home port. It von’t be like dat now.”

I was more than a little taken aback. I’d never seen the stringy old gun
runner sentimental about his ship before. This was the first time I’d
ever heard him mention it in printable terms. But what was all this
about losing his command?

“What’s the matter, cap’n—think we’ll go to camp?” That was a
_Dawnlight_ idiom and meant being picked up by a warship of some kind.

“No boy—nodding like dat. Dey can’t touch us. Nobody can touch us now.
Ah—hear dat?”

He pointed far out to port. The night was very still, with hardly a
sound but the continual seethe of millions of bursting bubbles
slithering past the ship’s side. But far out in the fog was an insistent
splashing—that heavy smacking splash that every seaman knows.

“Porpoise,” I said.

The skipper tugged at my elbow and led me through the wheelhouse to the
other wing. “Listen.”

There it was again, on the starboard side. “Must be quite a few of ’em,”
I said laconically, a little annoyed that he should change the subject
that way.

“Dere is plenty, but dey are not porpoises.”

“Blackfish?”

“Dey is not fish, too. Dey is somet’ing y’u have seen in books. Dey is
vimmin with tails on.”

“_What?”_

“O.K., I vas kidding. Call me ven y’u are relieved.”

In the green glow from the starboard running light I saw him hand me a
piercing gaze; then he shambled back to the chart room. A little bit
short of breath, I went into the wheelhouse and lit a cigarette.

The cuspidor rang out, and I waited for Johnny to speak.

“The skipper ain’t nuts,” he said casually.

“Somebody is,” I returned. “You heard him, then.”

“Listen—if the skipper told me the devil himself was firing on the
twelve to four, then the devil it would be.” Johnny was fiercely loyal
under that armor of easy talk. “I’ve heard them ‘porpoises’ of yours for
three days now. Porpoises don’t follow a ship two hundred yards off.
They’ll jump the bow wave fer a few minutes an’ then high-tail, or
they’ll cross yer bow an’ play away. These is different. I’ve gone five
degrees off to port an’ then to starboard to see if I could draw ’em.
Nope; they keep their distance.” Johnny curled some shag under his lip.

“Aw, that’s … that’s screwy, Johnny.”

He shrugged. “You’ve shipped with the Old Man before. He sees more than
most of us.” And that’s all he’d say.

It was about two days later that we began to load. Yeah, that’s what I
said. We didn’t dock, and we didn’t discharge our farm machinery. We
took on—whatever it was our cargo turned out to be. It was on the four
to eight in the evening when the white fog was just getting muddy in the
dusk. I was dead asleep when the ship sat down on her tail, stuck her
bow up and heeled over. The engines stopped, and I got up from the
corner of my room where the impact had flung me.

She lay still on her side, and hell was breaking loose. Toole had
apparently fallen up against the fire-alarm button, and the lookout
forward was panicky and ringing a swing symphony on the bell. A broken
steam line was roaring bloody murder, and so was the second mate. The
whistle, at least, was quiet—it had fallen with a crash from the “Pat
Finnegan” pipe.

I leaned against the wall and crouched into a pair of pants and
staggered out on deck. I couldn’t see a blasted thing. If the fog had
been thick before, it was twenty times as thick now.

Someone ran into me, and we both went skittering into the scuppers. It
was the mate on his way down to the captain’s room. Why the Old Man
wasn’t on the bridge, I couldn’t savvy, unless it had to do with that
peculiar attitude of resignation about his imagined loss of command.

“What the hell?” I wanted to know.

Toole said: “Who is that—third mate? Oh. I don’t know. We’ve hit
something. We’re right up on top of it. Ain’t rocks; didn’t hear any
plates go. Isn’t sand; no sand bank this size could stay this far from
land.”

“Where’s the skipper?”

“In his room, far as I know. C’mon, let’s roll him out.”

We groped our way to the alleyway door and into the midship house. Light
was streaming from the skipper’s room, and as we approached the door we
heard the rare, drawn-out chuckle. I’ll never forget the shock of seeing
this best of captains, a man who had never dented a bilge plate in his
life, sprawled back in his tilted swivel chair with his feet on a tilted
desk, chuckling into a tilted bottle of Scotch.

Toole squawked: “Cap’n! We’ve struck something!”

The skipper giggled. He had a terrific load on. I leaned past Toole and
shook him. “Skipper! We’ve struck!”

He looked at us blearily. “Heh. Sid-down, boyss, de trip iss over. Ve
have not struck. Ve is yust finished. Heh!”

“Clear the boats,” Toole said aside to me.

The skipper heard him. “Vait!” he said furiously, and lurched to his
feet. “I am still in command here! Don’t lower no boats. Ve are not in
distress, y’u hear? Heh! Ve are loading. I know all about it. Go an’ see
for y’uselfs, so y’u don’t belief me!”

Toole stared at the captain for a moment. I stood by. If Toole decided
the Old Man was nuts, he’d take over. If not, then the squarehead was
still running the show. Suddenly Toole leaned over and cut the master
switch on the alarm system. It had a separate little battery circuit of
its own, and was the only thing electrical aboard that still operated.
The silence was deafening as the alarm bells throughout the ship
stilled, and we could hear a bumble of voices from back aft as the crew
milled about. They were a steady bunch; there would be no panic. Toole
beckoned me out of the room and left. Once we were outside he said:

“What do you think?”

“I think he’s—I dunno, Toole. He’s a seaman first and a human being
afterward. If he says we’re not in distress, it’s likely true. Course,
he’s drunk.”

Toole snorted. “He thinks better when he’s drunk. Come on, let’s look
around.”

We dropped down the ladder. The ship lay still. She was careened,
probably with her starboard side under water and the starboard rail
awash.

Toole said: “Let’s go to port. Maybe we can see what it is we’ve hit.”

We had to go on all fours to get up there, so steeply was the deck
canted. It did us no good; there was nothing to be seen anywhere but
fog.

Toole clung with one arm to the chain rail and puffed, “Can’t see a
thing down there, can you?”

I hung over the edge. “Can’t even see the water line.”

“Let’s go down to the starboard side. She must be awash there.”

She was. I stepped ankle deep into sea water before I knew where I was.
The sea was dead calm, and the fog was a solid thing; and something was
holding the ship heeled over. I tell you, it was a nasty feeling. If
only we knew what was under us! And then—we saw the ship being loaded.

May I never see another sight like that one. As if to tease and torture
us, the fog swirled silently away from the ship’s side, leaving a little
dim island of visibility for us to peer into. We could see fifty or
sixty feet of deck, and the chain rails fore and aft dipping into the
sea at our feet; and we could see a round patch of still water with its
edges wetting the curtain of fog. And on that patch of water were
footprints. We both saw them at the same time and froze, speechless.
Coming toward us over the water they were—dozens of them. The water was
like a resilient, glossy sheet of paving, and the impression of
dozens—hundreds—of feet ran across it to the ship. But there was nothing
making the footprints. Just—footprints. Oh, my God!

There were big splay ones and big slow ones, and little swift ones and
plodding ones. Once something long and invisible crept with many legs up
to the ship, and once little pointed feet, high-arched, tripped
soundlessly over the chains and _something_ fell sprawling a yard from
where we stood. There was no splash, but just the indentation in the
water of a tiny, perfect body that rolled and squirmed back onto its
feet and ran over to the deck and disappeared. I suddenly felt that I
was in the midst of a milling crowd of—of people. Nothing touched me,
and yet, all around me was the pressure of scores of beings who jostled
each other and pushed and shoved, in their eagerness to get aboard. It
was ghastly. There was no menace in it, nor anything to fear except that
here was a thing that could not be understood.

The fog closed down suddenly, and for a long moment we stood there,
feeling the pressure of that mob of “passengers”; and then I reached out
and found the mate’s arm and tugged him toward the midship house. We
crawled up the canted ladder and stood by the glow from the lamp in the
captain’s room.

“It’s a lot of goddam nonsense,” I said weakly.

“H-m-m.”

I didn’t know whether or not Toole agreed with me.

The skipper’s voice came loosely from the porthole. “Heh! I cert’n’y
t’ank y’u for de Scotch, I du. Vat a deal, vat a deal!” And he burst out
into a horrible sound that might have been laughter, in his cracked and
grating voice. I stared in. He was nodding and grinning at the forward
bulkhead, toasting it with a pony of fire water.

“He’s seein’ things,” said the mate abruptly.

“Maybe all the rest of us are blind,” I said; and the mate’s dazed
expression made me wonder, too, why I had said that. Without another
word he went above to take over the bridge, while I went aft to quiet
the crew.

We lay there for fourteen hours, and all the while that invisible
invasion continued. There was nothing any of us could do. And crazy
things began happening. Any one of them might have happened to any of us
once in a while, but—well, judge for yourself, now.

When I came on watch that night there was nothing to do but stand by,
since we were hove to, and I set Johnny to polishing brass. He got his
polish and his rag and got to work. I mooned at the fog from the
wheelhouse window, and in about ten minutes I heard Johnny cuss and
throw rag and can over the side.

“What gives, Johnny?”

“Ain’t no use doin’ this job. Must be the fog.” He pointed to the
binnacle cover. “The tarnish smells the polish and fades off all around
me rag. On’y where I rub it comes in stronger.”

It was true. All the places he had rubbed were black-green, and around
those spots the battered brass gleamed brilliantly! I told John to go
have himself a cup of coffee and settled down on the stool to smoke.

No cigarettes in the right pocket of my dungarees. None in the left. I
_knew_ I’d put a pack there. “Damn!” I muttered. Now where the—what was
I looking for? Cigarettes? But I had a pack of cigarettes in my hand!
Was I getting old or something? I tried to shrug it off. I must have had
them there all the time, only—well, things like that don’t happen to me!
I’m not absent-minded. I pulled out a smoke and stuck it in my chops,
fumbling for a match. Now where—I did some more cussing. No matches.
What good is a fag to a guy without a—I gagged suddenly on too much
smoke. Why was I looking for a match? My cigarette was lit!

When a sailor starts to get the jitters he usually begins to think about
the girl he left behind him. It was just my luck to be tied up with one
I didn’t want to think about. I simply went into a daze while I finished
that haunted cigarette. After a while Johnny came back carrying a cup of
coffee for me.

Now I like my coffee black. Wet a spoon in it and dip it in the sugar
barrel, and that’s enough sugar for me. Johnny handed me the cup, and I
took the saucer off the rim. The coffee was creamed—on a ship that means
evaporated milk—and sweet as a soft caramel.

“Damn it, Johnny, you know how I like my coffee. What’s the idea of
this?”

“What?”

I showed him. When he saw the pale liquid he recoiled as if there had
been a snake curled up on the saucer instead of a cup. “S’help me,
third, I didn’t put a drop of milk in that cup! Nor sugar, neither!”

I growled and threw cup and saucer over the side. I couldn’t say
anything to Johnny. I _knew_ he was telling the truth. Oh, well, maybe
there happened to be some milk and sugar in the cup he used and he
didn’t notice it. It was a weak sort of excuse, but I clung to it.

At six bells the second heaved himself up the ladder. “O.K.—you’re
relieved,” he said.

“At eleven o’clock? What’s the idea?”

“Aw—” His huge bulk pulsed as he panted, and he was sweating. “I
couldn’t sleep, that’s all. Shove off.”

“I’ll be damned! First time I ever heard of you rolling out before you
were called, Harry. What’s the matter—this canting too much for you?”
The ship still lay over at about 47°.

“Naw. I c’n sleep through twice that. It was—Oh, go below, third.”

“O.K. Course ’n’ speed the same—zero-zero. The wind is on the weather
side, an’ we’re runnin’ between the anchors. The bow is dead ahead and
the smokestack is aft. The temperature—”

“Dry up, will ya?”

“The temperature is mighty hot around the second mate. What’s eatin’
you, Harry?”

“I’ll tell you,” he said suddenly, very softly, so Johnny couldn’t hear.
“It was my bunk. It was full of spikes. I could feel ’em, but I couldn’t
see ’em. I’ve got the blue willies, third.” He mopped his expansive
face.

I slapped him on the back and went aft laughing. I was sorry I had
laughed. When I turned in to my bunk it was full of cold, wet worms that
crept and crawled and sent me mooning and shuddering to the deck, to
roll up in the carpet for some shut-eye. No, I couldn’t see them.

We left there—wherever “there” was—about fourteen hours after we struck.
What it was that had stopped the ship we never did find out. We took
soundings all around and got nothing but deep water. Whatever it was
that the ship was lying on was directly underneath the turn of the
bilge, so that no sounding lead could strike it. After the first
surprise of it we almost got used to it—it and the fog, thick as banked
snow, that covered everything. And all the while the “loading” went on.
When it began, that invisible crowding centered around the section of
the starboard well deck that was awash. But in a few hours it spread to
every part of the ship. Everywhere you went you saw nothing and you
actually felt nothing; and yet there was an increasing sense of being
crowded—jostled.

It happened at breakfast, 7:20. The skipper was there, and the mate,
though he should have been on the bridge. Harry rolled in, too, three
hundred pounds of fretful wanness. I gathered that there were still
spikes in his bunk. Being second mate, his watch was the twelve to four,
and breakfast was generally something he did without.

The captain lolled back in his chair, leaning against the canted deck
and grinning. It made me sore. I refused the bottle he shoved at me and
ordered my eggs from the messman.

“Na, don’t be dat vay,” said the skipper. “Everyt’ing is under control.
Ve is all going to get a bonus, and nobody is going to get hurt.”

“I don’t savvy you, cap’n,” I said brusquely. “Here we are high and dry
in the middle of an African pea-souper, with everything aboard gone
haywire, and you’re tickled to death. If you know what’s going on, you
ought to tip us off.”

The mate said, “He’s got something there, captain. I want to put a boat
over the side, at least, and have a look at what it is that’s grounded
us. I told you that last night, and you wouldn’t let a boat leave the
chocks. What’s the idea—don’t you want to know?”

The captain dipped a piece of sea bread into the remains of four eggs on
his plate. “Look, boyss, didn’t I pull y’u out of a lot of spots before
dis? Did I ever let y’u down yet? Heh. Vell, I von’t now.”

The mate looked exasperated. “O.K., O.K., but this calls for a little
more than seamanship, skipper.”

“Not from y’u it don’t,” flared the captain. “I know vat goes on, but if
I told y’u, y’u wouldn’t believe it. Y’u’ll make out all right.”

I decided to take matters into my own hands. “Toole, he’s got some silly
idea that the ship is out of our hands. Told me the other night. He’s
seeing ghosts. He says we were surrounded by ‘vimmin mit tails on.’ ”

The mate cocked an eyebrow at the Old Man. The captain lurched to his
feet.

“Vell, it’s true! An’ I bat y’u y’ur trip’s pay against mine dat I gat
one for myself! Ve is taking on a cargo of—” He swallowed noisily and
put his face so close to mine that our foreheads nearly touched. “Vare
de hell y’u t’ink I got dis viskey?” he bellowed. “Somebody has
chartered dis ship, and ve’ll get paid. Vot y’u care who it is? Y’u
never worried before!” He stamped out.

Harry laughed hollowly, his four pale chins bobbing. “I guess that tells
you off, third.”

“I’ll be damned,” I said hotly. “I trust the Old Man as much as anyone,
but I’m not going to take much more of this.”

“Take it easy, man,” soothed Harry. He reached for the canned milk. “A
lot of this is fog and imagination. Until the skipper does something
endangering crew, ship or cargo we’ve got no kick.”

“What do you call staying in his room when the ship rams something?”

“He seems to know it’s all right. Let it go, mate. We’re O.K., so far.
When the fog clears, everything will be jake. You’re letting your
imagination run away with you.” He stared at Toole and upended the milk
can over his cup.

Ink came out.

I clutched the edge of the slanting table and looked away and back
again. It was true enough—black ink out of a milk can I’d seen the
messman open three minutes before. I didn’t say anything because I
couldn’t. Neither Toole nor Harry noticed it. Harry put the can on the
table and it slid down toward Toole.

“All right,” said Toole, “we’ll keep our traps shut until the skipper
pulls something really phoney. But I happen to know we have a cargo
consigned to a Mediterranean port; and when and if we get off this
sandbank, or whatever it is, I’m going to see to it that it’s delivered.
A charter is a charter.” He picked up the can and poured.

Blood came out.

It drove me absolutely screwball. He wouldn’t watch what he was doing!
Harry was working on a pile of scrambled eggs, and the mate was looking
at me, and my stomach was missing beats. I muttered something and went
up to the bridge. Every time there was some rational explanation
developing, something like that had to happen. Know why I couldn’t pipe
up about what I had seen? Because after the ink and the blood hit their
coffee it was cream! You don’t go telling people that you’re bats!

It was ten minutes to eight, but as usual, Johnny Weiss was early. He
was a darn good quartermaster—one of the best I ever sailed with. A very
steady guy, but I didn’t go for the blind trust he expressed in the
skipper. That was all right to a certain extent, but now—

“Anything you want done?” he asked me.

“No, Johnny, stand by. Johnny—what would you do if the officers decided
the captain was nuts and put him in irons?”

“I’d borry one of the Old Man’s guns an’ shoot the irons off him,” said
my quartermaster laconically. “An’ then I’d stand over him an’ take his
orders.”

Johnny was a keynote in the crew. We were asking for real trouble if we
tried anything. Ah, it was no use. All we could do was to wait for
developments.

At eight bells on the button we floated again, and the lurch of it threw
every man jack off his feet. With a splash and a muffled scraping, the
_Dawnlight_ settled deeply from under our feet, righted herself, rolled
far over to the other side, and then gradually steadied. After I got up
off my back I rang a “Stand-by” on the engine room telegraph, whistled
down the skipper’s speaking tube, and motioned Johnny behind the wheel.
He got up on the wheel mat as if we were leaving the dock in a seaport.
Not a quiver! Old Johnny was one in a million.

I answered the engine room. “All steamed up and ready to go down here!”
said the third engineer’s voice. “And I think we’ll have that generator
running in another twenty minutes!”

“Good stuff!” I said, and whistled for the skipper. He must have felt
that mighty lurch. I couldn’t imagine why he wasn’t on the bridge.

He answered sleepily: “Vell?”

“We’re afloat!” I spluttered.

“So?”

“What do you want to do—lay here? Or are we going some place?”

There was silence for a long time—so long that I called and asked him if
he was still on the other end of the tube.

“I vas getting my orders,” he said. “Yes, ve go. Full speed ahead.”

“What course?”

“How should I know? I’m through now, third. Y’u’ll get y’ur orders.”

“From Toole?”

“No!”

“Hey, if you ain’t captain, who is?”

“I vouldn’t know about dat. Full speed ahead!” The plug on his end of
the tube clicked into place, and I turned toward Johnny, uncertain what
to do.

“He said full ahead, didn’t he?” asked Johnny quietly.

“Yeah, but—”

“Aye, aye, sir,” he said with just a trace of sarcasm, and pulled the
handle of the telegraph over from “Stand-by” to “Full ahead.”

I put out my hand, and then shrugged and stuck it in my pocket. I’d tell
Toole about it when I came off watch. “As you go,” I said, not looking
at the compass.

“As she goes, sir,” said Johnny, and began to steer as the shudder of
the engines pounded through the ship.

The mate came up with Harry at noon, and we had a little confab. Toole
was rubbing his hands and visibly expanding under the warmth of the
bright sun, which had shone since three bells with a fierce brilliance,
as if it wanted to make up for our three days of fog. “How’s she go?” he
asked me.

“Due west,” I said meaningly.

“_What?_ And we have a cargo for the Mediterranean?”

“I only work here,” I said. “Skipper’s orders.”

Harry shrugged. “Then west it is, that’s all I say,” he grunted.

“Do you want to get paid this trip?” snapped Toole. He picked up the
slip on which I had written the ship’s position, which I’d worked out as
soon as I could after the sun came out. “We’re due south of the Madeiras
and heading home,” he went on. “How do you think those arms shippers are
going to like our returning with their cargo? This is the payoff.”

Harry tried to catch his arm, but he twisted away and strode into the
wheelhouse. The twelve-to-four quartermaster hadn’t relieved Johnny
Weiss yet.

“Change course,” barked the mate, his small, chunky body trembling.
“East-nor’east!”

Johnny looked him over coolly and spat. “Cap’n changes course, mate.”

“Then change course!” Toole roared. “The squarehead’s nuts. From now on
I’m running this ship!”

“I ain’t been told of it,” said Johnny quietly, and steadied on his
westerly course.

“Well, by God, I’m the mate!” Toole said. “You’ve had no orders from
that lunatic to disregard a command of a superior officer. Steer east!”

Weiss gazed out of the wheelhouse window, taking his time about thinking
it over. The mate had made his point; to refuse further would be rank
insubordination. Though Johnny was strong in his loyalty to the skipper,
he was too much of a seaman to be pig-headed about this until he knew a
little better where he stood.

“East it is, sir,” he said, and his eyes were baleful. He hauled at the
wheel, and a hint of a grin cracked his leathery face. “She—won’t
answer, sir!”

I saw red. “Go below!” I growled, and butted him from behind the wheel
with my shoulder. He laughed aloud and went out.

I grasped the two top spokes, hunched my shoulders and gave a mighty
heave. There was suddenly no resistance at all on the wheel, and my own
violence threw me heels over crupper into the second mate, and we spun
and tumbled, all his mass of lard on top of me. It was like lying under
an anchor. The wind was knocked out of him, and he couldn’t move. I was
smothering, and the mate was too surprised to do anything but stare.
When Harry finally rolled off me it was a good two minutes before I
could move.

“Damn that quartermaster,” I gasped when we were on our feet again.

“Wasn’t his fault,” wheezed Harry. “He really tried to spin the wheel.”

Knowing Johnny, I had to agree. He’d never pull anything like that. I
scratched my head and turned to the mate. He was steering now,
apparently without any trouble at all. “Don’t tell me you can turn the
ship?”

He grinned. “All it needed was a real helmsman,” he ribbed me. And then
the engines stopped, and the telegraph rang and spun over to “Stop,” and
the engine room tube squealed.

“Now what?”

“I dunno,” came the third’s plaintive voice. “She just quit on us.”

“O.K.; let us know when you’ve shot the trouble.” The engineer rang off.

“Now what the hell?” said the mate.

I shrugged. “This is a jinxed trip,” I said. I verified the “Stop”
signal on the telegraph.

Harry said: “I don’t know what’s got into you guys. The skipper said
somethin’ about a new charter. He don’t have to tell us who gave it to
us.”

“He don’t have to keep us in the dark, either,” said Toole. Then,
glancing at the compass, he said, “Looka that! She’s swingin’ back to
west!”

I looked over his shoulder. Slowly the ship was turning in the gentle
swell, back to due west. And just as she came to 270° on the card—the
engines began to pound.

“Ah!” said the mate, and verified the “Full ahead” gong that had just
rung.

The third whistled up again and reported that he was picking fluff off
his oilskins. “I’m going on the wagon,” he said. “She quits by herself
and starts by herself, an’ I’m gonna bust out cryin’ if it keeps up!”

And that’s how we found out that the ship, with this strange cargo,
insisted on having her head. For every time we tried to change course,
the engines would stop, or a rudder cable would break, or the steering
engine would quit. What could we do? We stood our watches and ran our
ship as if nothing were the matter. If we hadn’t we’d have gone as mad
as we thought we already were.

Harry noticed a strange thing one afternoon. He told me about it when we
came off watch.

“Y’know that box o’ books in the chart room?” he asked me.

I did. It was an American Merchant Marine Library Association book
chest, left aboard from the time the ship was honest. I’d been pretty
well all through it. There were a few textbooks on French and Spanish,
half a dozen detective novels, a pile of ten-year-old magazines, and a
miscellaneous collection of pamphlets and unclassifiable.

“Well, about three o’clock I hear a noise in the chart room,” said
Harry, “an’ I have a look. Well, sir, them books is heaving ’emselves up
out of the chest and spilling on th’ deck. Most of ’em was just tossed
around, but a few was stackin’ in a neat heap near the bulkhead. I on’y
saw it for a second, and then it stopped, like I’d caught someone at the
job, but I couldn’t see no one there.” He stopped and licked his lips
and wheezed. “I looks at that pile o’ books, an’ they was all to do with
North America an’ the United States. A coupla history books, an atlas, a
guidebook to New York City, a book on th’ national parks—all sech. Well,
I goes back into the wheelhouse, an’ a few minutes later I peeks in
again. All them books on America was open in different places in the
chart room, an’ the pages was turnin’ like someone was readin’ them,
only—there just wasn’t nobody there!”

What the _hell_ was it that we had aboard, that wanted to know about the
United States, that had replaced our captain with a string of
coincidence, that had “chartered” the ship? I’d had enough. I firmly
swore that if I ever got back to the States, police or no, I’d get off
this scow and stay off her. A man can just stand so much.

About three days out the torpedo boat picked us up. She was a raider,
small and gray and fast and wicked, and she belonged to a nation that
likes to sink arms runners. One of the nations, I mean. I had just come
off watch, and was leaning on the taffrail when I saw her boiling along
behind us, overtaking.

I ran forward, collaring an ordinary seaman. “Run up some colors,” I
said. “I don’t give a damn what ones. Hurry!”

Pounding up the ladder, I hauled Toole out of the wheelhouse, pointed
out the raider and dived for the radio shack, which was some good to us
now that the generator was going again.

I sat down at the key and put on a headset. Sure enough, in a second or
two I heard: “What ship is that? Where from? Where bound?” repeated in
English, French, German and Spanish. I’d have called the skipper, but
had given him up as a bad job. Toole came in.

“They want to know who we are,” I said excitedly. “Who are we?”

“Wait’ll I look at the flag the kid is running up,” he said. He went to
the door, and I heard him swear and whistle. “Give a look,” he said.

Flying from the masthead was a brilliant green flag on which was a
unicorn, rampant. I’d seen it—where was it? Years ago—oh, yes; that was
it! In a book of English folk tales; that was supposed to be the
standard of Oberon and Titania, King and Queen of … of the fairies, the
Little Folk!

Dazed, I turned to the key and began pounding. I didn’t even realize
what I was sending. Some imp controlled my hand, and not until it was
sent did I realize I had said, “S.S. _Princess of Birmingham_,
Liverpool, bound for Calais with a load of airplane parts.”

“Thank you!” said the raider, and put a shell across our bow. Toole had
gone back to the bridge, and I sat there sweating and wondering what the
hell to do about this. Of all stupid things to say to an enemy raider!

The engine vibration suddenly became labored and the ship slowed
perceptibly. Oh, of course, the old wagon would pick a time like this to
become temperamental! I beat my skull with my fists and groaned. This
was curtains.

The raider was abeam and angling toward us. “Heave to!” she kept buzzing
through my phones. Through the porthole beside me I could already see
the men moving about on her narrow decks. I turned to my key again and
sent the commander of the raider some advice on a highly original way to
amuse himself. In answer he brought his four swivel guns to bear on us.

The bridge tube whistled. Toole said, “What the hell did you say to him?
He’s fixin’ to sink us!”

“I don’t know,” I wailed. “I don’t know nothing!”

I ripped off the headset and put my elbows on the port ring across the
room, staring out to sea with my back to the swiftly approaching raider.
And there in the sunny waves was a conning tower, periscope and all!

Now get this. Here we were, lying helpless, going dead slow with
crippled engines between a surface raider and a sub. We were meat for
anyone working for any government. Most of us were Americans; if the
raider took us it would mean an international incident at a time when no
one could afford one. If the sub took us, it was the concentration camp
for us. Either might, and probably would, sink us. We were outlaws.

I went up on the bridge. No sense doing anything now. If we got into
boats, we’d likely be cut down by machine-gun bullets. Toole was
frantically tugging at the handle of the engine room telegraph.

“I’m trying to stop her!” he gasped. “She’s going dead slow; there’s
something wrong with the engines. They’re making such a racket back
there that the first assistant can’t hear the tube whistle. The
telegraph is jammed! The helm won’t answer! Oh, my God!”

“Where’s your quartermaster?”

Toole jerked a thumb toward the bridge ladder. “I sent him aft to run
down to the engine room, and he tripped and fell down to the boat deck!
Knocked himself out!”

I ran to the port wing and looked out at the sub. True to her kind, she
was attacking without asking questions. There was a jet of spume, and
the swift wake of a torpedo cut toward us. At the rate we were going, it
would strike us just between the after dry-cargo hold—where the “farm
machinery” was stowed—and the fire room. It would get both the
explosives and the boiler—good night nurse!

And then our “coincidental commander” took a hand. The crippled,
laboring engines suddenly raced, shuddered and took hold. Grumbling in
every plate, the _Dawnlight_ sat down on her counter, raised her blunt
nose eight feet, and scuttled forward at a speed that her builders would
have denied. In fifty seconds she was doing fourteen knots. The torpedo
swept close under our stern, and the raging wash of the tanker deflected
it, so that it hurtled—straight toward the raider!

It struck just aft the stem piece, blowing away the gunboat’s bow and
turning her on her beam ends. She righted slowly lying far down by the
head, and lay helpless. The sub, seeing her for the first time, came to
the surface and men tumbled out of the hatches to man her four-incher.
She began blasting away at the torpedo boat as fast as she could load,
and the raider answered her, two shots to the sub’s one. And there we
left them, and for all I know they are blasting away yet, far too busy
to pay attention to a crummy old tankship. And Toole and I—well, we
cried on each other’s shoulders for twenty minutes, and then we laughed
ourselves sick.

The next four days were straight sailing, but for the pranks that were
played on us. The skipper stuck to his cabin; we found out why later,
and I can’t really blame him. There was still no sign of the mob of
beings that could be felt aboard, but for—again—the pranks that were
played on us. We stood our watches and we ate our meals and we painted
and chipped and scraped as usual. But for the—but I said that before.

Like the time the buff-colored paint the day gang was laying on the
after bulkhead turned the steel transparent for forty-eight hours.
Behind the bulkhead was the crew’s washroom. The view from up forward
was exquisite. As the four-to-eight fireman expressed it: “I wouldn’t
give a damn if the washroom was just fer washin’.”

And lots of little things, like a spoonful of salt turning to thumbtacks
in the Cajun’s best gumbo soup, and live lobsters in the linen locker,
and toadstools in the bos’n’s stores, and beautiful green grass, an acre
of it, with four concentric fairy rings, growing on a flaked hawser in
the forward cargo hold; and then there were the dice that, in the middle
of a crap game, developed wickedly humorous caricatures of the six
ship’s officers—including me. That might not seem like much to you; but
when you remember how clever they were, and when you could never meet
one of your crew without his bursting into fits of laughter when he saw
your face—well, it wasn’t the best thing in the world for discipline.

About the captain—We got curious, Toole and I, about how he was getting
on. He had locked himself in his room, and every once in a while would
whistle for more food. He ate fish almost exclusively, in enormous
quantities. We decided to do something about it. Some minor pretext to
get a peek into his room. He wouldn’t come to the door if we knocked;
the portholes were the answer. Now, how could we get the curtain off
from the outside without the irascible old man’s coming out with a gun
in each hand? We finally hit on something ideal. We’d get a broken spar
with a snaggy end from somewhere, carry it past his porthole, and
“accidentally” stick it in, tearing off the curtain and giving us a good
look.

I’m sorry we did. We’d no business looking into the Old Man’s private
life that way. After all, we decided when we batted the wind about it
afterward, the Old Man had a right, if he wanted to, to have a … a
mermaid in his room! We saw her without being seen, and the skipper must
have been in the inner room. She was very lovely, and I got a flash of
scales and golden hair, and felt like a heel for looking.

Toole and I talked it over one afternoon as we neared the coast. The two
of us had seen more of the whole screwy business than anyone else, and
besides, Toole was an Irishman. No one will ever know if he was right or
not, but his explanation is the only one that will fit all the facts.
Pieced together from a two-hour conversation, this is about what he
said, and now—I believe him:

“Third, this is a silly trip, hey? Ah, well. There are many things that
you or I can’t understand, and we’re used to them, like the northern
lights and the ways of a woman. I think that the skipper sold us out.
No; no harm to us.” He dragged on his cigar and stared out to sea as he
talked. “Something, or somebody, made a deal with him the day after we
sailed. Listen; hear that?”

Far out on the beam sounded the steady _smack-splash_ of huge schools of
porpoise. Oh, yes; they _might_ have been porpoise.

“You told me what the skipper said to you about those critters. And they
don’t act like porpoises. I don’t know if it was one of them or not;
maybe it was something we couldn’t see that talked. I think the skipper
could. He’s a squarehead, and they’re seagoing people, and they know the
sea from ’way back. He’s been to sea half again as long as the oldest
sailor aboard; you know that. I don’t have to tell you that the sea is
something that we’ll never really understand. You can’t know _all_ about
anything, even an atom; and the sea is so _damn_ big.

“Well, he was made an offer; and it was probably a lifetime supply of
whiskey and a week or so with that m-mermaid we—thought we saw in his
room. What was the deal?

“That he should turn over his ship, and the crew to work it, to whatever
party it was that wanted it for a trip from the African coast to
America. There must have been provisions, if I know the skipper; he’s a
downy bird. He must have provided that the ship was to be protected
against weather and bullets, mines and torps. He must have stipulated
that no one aboard was to be harmed permanently, and—I’m sure of
this—that ship and cargo were to be returned to him at the end of the
trip. Everything else I’ve guessed at has turned out, hasn’t it? Why not
that? The only thing that really bothers me is the loss of time, because
time is really big money in this racket. But you can bet that the
squarehead wasn’t beaten down. We’ll find out—I’m certain of it.

“Now, about the passengers. Laugh at me and I’ll dry up like a clam; but
I believe I have the answer. The old country has inhabitants that men
have dreamed and sung and written and told about a great deal, and seen
more than seldom. I’ve spent a lot of time off watch reading about ’em,
and my mother used to tell me—bless her! Anyway, there was ghosts and
pixies, goblins and brownies, and dervishes and fairies and nymphs and
peris and dryads and naiads and kelpies and sprites; gnomes and imps and
elves and dwarves and nixies and ghouls and pigwidgeons, and the legion
of the leprechauns, and many another. And some were good and some were
not, and some helped and some hindered; but all were mischievous as
hell. They weren’t too bad, any more than are the snakes and spiders
that eat mosquitos, and many were downright beneficial.

“There’s hell to pay in Europe now, third. You can’t expect a
self-respectin’ pixie to hide in a shell hole and watch a baby torn to
shreds. They sickened of it, and their boss man, whoever he is, got ’em
together and made arrangements to ship ’em someplace where there’s a
little peace and quiet once in a while, where they can work their
harmless spells on a non-aggressive populace. They can’t swim worth a
damn, and you couldn’t expect the sea folk to ferry ’em over; they’re an
unreliable lot anyway, to all accounts.

“I read a book once about Ol’ Puck, and how the Little People were
brought to the British Isles from the Continent. They couldn’t swim even
that, and they got a blind man to row and a deaf mute to stand lookout,
and never a word was said of it until Puck himself told of it. This is
the twentieth century, and it’s a big ocean they’ve got to cross, and
there are many more of them. Did ye notice, by the way,” he broke off
suddenly, “that though our tanks are empty an’ we’ve used fuel and water
and stores for near two weeks, that we’re _low in the water_?” He
laughed. “We’ve many and many of ’em aboard.

“We’ll unload ’em, and we’ll get our pay for the job. But this I’ll tell
you, and now you may laugh, for you’re in the same boat. We’re r’arin’,
tearin’ lawbreakers aboard here, third, and we don’t give a damn, or we
wouldn’t be here. But if there’s any kind of a good place for us to go
at the end of the voyage, then we’ll go there for this week’s work. It
was always a good thing to help a war refugee.”

I didn’t laugh. I went away by myself and chewed and swallowed that, and
I thought about it a bit, and now I believe what I believe, and maybe a
little bit more. It’s a big world, and these are crazy times.

Well, almost as we expected, we unloaded, but it only took us three
hours instead of fourteen. Yes, we struck fog off the Carolinas, and the
ship nosed up and heeled over in it, and we could feel the pressure
getting less aboard. And when the _thing_ under the ship sank and
floated us again, and the sun came out—

Well, this is the part that is hard to explain. I won’t try it. But
look: It was the twenty-third day of September when we sailed from the
drydock. And when we lay off the coast that way, just out of the fog, it
was the twenty-fifth. And it would have taken just three days for us to
reach there from the drydock. Somewhere we lost a week. Yeah.

And the bunkers were full of fuel. And the lockers were full of stores.
And the fresh-water tanks were full of water, just as they had been.
But—there’s a difference. Any fuel we use is—or acts like—high-grade
stuff. And our food tastes better, and the work is easier. Yeah, we’re
lawbreakers—outlaws. But we take our ship where we please, when we
please, and never a warship do we see, and never a shell or mine touches
us. Oh, yeah; they say she’s haunted. No; there’s another word for it.
She is_—enchanted_. We’re paid, and we’re being paid. And we’ll go
anywhere and do anything, because we have the best skipper a man ever
sailed under, and because, more than any other men on earth, we need not
be afraid of death.

But I can’t forget that there’ll be hell an’ all to pay ashore!



SHOTTLE BOP


I’D NEVER SEEN the place before, and I lived just down the block and
around the corner. I’ll even give you the address, if you like. “The
Shottle Bop,” between Twentieth and Twenty-first Streets, on Tenth
Avenue in New York City. You can find it if you go there looking for it.
Might even be worth your while, too.

But you’d better not.

“The Shottle Bop.” It got me. It was a small shop with a weather-beaten
sign swung from a wrought crane, creaking dismally in the late fall
wind. I walked past it, thinking of the engagement ring in my pocket and
how it had just been handed back to me by Audrey, and my mind was far
removed from such things as shottle bops. I was thinking that Audrey
might have used a gentler term than “useless” in describing me; and her
neatly turned remark about my being a “constitutional psychopathic
incompetent” was as uncalled-for as it was spectacular. She must have
read it somewhere, balanced as it was by “And I wouldn’t marry you if
you were the last man on earth!” which is a notably worn cliché.

“Shottle Bop!” I muttered, and then paused, wondering where I had picked
up such oddly rhythmic syllables with which to express myself. I’d seen
it on that sign, of course, and it had caught my eye. “And what,” I
asked myself, “might be a Shottle Bop?” Myself replied promptly, “Dunno.
Toddle back and have a look.” So toddle I did, back along the east side
of Tenth, wondering what manner of man might be running such an
establishment in pursuance of what kind of business. I was enlightened
on the second point by a sign in the window, all but obscured by the
dust and ashes of apparent centuries, which read:

WE SELL BOTTLES

There was another line of smaller print there. I rubbed at the crusted
glass with my sleeve and finally was able to make out

_With things in them_.

Just like that:

WE SELL BOTTLES

_With things in them_.

Well of course I went in. Sometimes very delightful things come in
bottles, and the way I was feeling, I could stand a little delighting.

“Close it!” shrilled a voice, as I pushed through the door. The voice
came from a shimmering egg adrift in the air behind the counter,
low-down. Peering over, I saw that it was not an egg at all, but the
bald pate of an old man who was clutching the edge of the counter, his
scrawny body streaming away in the slight draft from the open door, as
if he were made of bubbles. A mite startled, I kicked the door with my
heel. He immediately fell on his face, and then scrambled smiling to his
feet.

“Ah, it’s good to see you again,” he rasped.

I think his vocal cords were dusty, too. Everything else here was. As
the door swung to, I felt as if I were inside a great dusty brain that
had just closed its eyes. Oh yes, there was light enough. But it wasn’t
the lamp light and it wasn’t daylight. It was like—like light reflected
from the cheeks of pale people. Can’t say I enjoyed it much.

“What do you mean, ‘again’?” I asked irritably. “You never saw me
before.”

“I saw you when you came in and I fell down and got up and saw you
again,” he quibbled, and beamed. “What can I do for you?”

“Oh,” I said. “Well, I saw your sign. What have you got in a bottle that
I might like?”

“What do you want?”

“What’ve you got?”

He broke into a piping chant—I remember it yet, word for word.

_For half a buck, a vial of luck_

   _Or a bottle of nifty breaks_

_Or a flask of joy, or Myrna Loy_

   _For luncheon with sirloin steaks_.

_Pour out a mug from this old jug_,

   _And you’ll never get wet in rains_.

_I’ve bottles of grins and racetrack wins_

   _And lotions to ease your pains_.

_Here’s bottles of imps and wet-pack shrimps_

   _From a sea unknown to man_,

_And an elixir to banish fear_,

   _And the sap from the pipes of Pan_.

_With the powdered horn of a unicorn_

   _You can win yourself a mate;_

_With the rich hobnob; or get a job—_

   _It’s yours at a lowered rate_.

“Now wait right there!” I snapped. “You mean you actually sell dragon’s
blood and ink from the pen of Friar Bacon and all such mumbo-jum?”

He nodded rapidly and smiled all over his improbable face.

I went on—“The genuine article?”

He kept on nodding.

I regarded him for a moment. “You mean to stand there with your teeth in
your mouth and your bare face hanging out and tell me that in this day
and age, in this city and in broad daylight, you sell such trash and
then expect me—me, an enlightened intellectual—”

“You are very stupid and twice as bombastic,” he said quietly.

I glowered at him and reached for the doorknob—and there I froze. And I
mean froze. For the old man whipped out an ancient bulb-type atomizer
and squeezed a couple of whiffs at me as I turned away; and so help me,
_I couldn’t move!_ I could cuss, though, and boy, did I.

The proprietor hopped over the counter and ran over to me. He must have
been standing on a box back there, for now I could see he was barely
three feet tall. He grabbed my coat tails, ran up my back and slid down
my arm, which was extended doorward. He sat down on my wrist and swung
his feet and laughed up at me. As far as I could feel, he weighed
absolutely nothing.

When I had run out of profanity—I pride myself on never repeating a
phrase of invective—he said, “Does that prove anything to you, my cocky
and unintelligent friend? That was the essential oil from the hair of
the Gorgon’s head. And until I give you an antidote, you’ll stand there
from now till a week text Neusday!”

“Get me out of this,” I roared, “or I smack you so hard you lose your
brains through the pores in your feet!”

He giggled.

I tried to tear loose again and couldn’t. It was as if all my epidermis
had turned to high-carbon steel. I began cussing again, but quit in
despair.

“You think altogether too much of yourself,” said the proprietor of the
Shottle Bop. “Look at you! Why, I wouldn’t hire you to wash my windows.
You expect to marry a girl who is accustomed to the least of animal
comfort, and then you get miffed because she turns you down. Why does
she turn you down? Because you won’t get a job. You’re a no-good. You’re
a bum! He, he! And you have the nerve to walk around telling people
where to get off. Now if I were in your position I would ask politely to
be released, and then I would see if anyone in this shop would be good
enough to sell you a bottle full of something that might help out.”

Now I never apologize to anybody, and I never back down, and I never
take any guff from mere tradesmen. But this was different. I’d never
been petrified before, nor had my nose rubbed in so many galling truths.
I relented. “O.K., O.K.; let me break away then. I’ll buy something.”

“Your tone is sullen,” he said complacently, dropping lightly to the
floor and holding his atomizer at the ready. “You’ll have to say
‘Please. Pretty please.’ ”

“Pretty please,” I said, almost choking with humiliation.

He went back of the counter and returned with a paper of powder which he
had me sniff. In a couple of seconds I began to sweat, and my limbs lost
their rigidity so quickly that it almost threw me. I’d have been flat on
my back if the man hadn’t caught me and solicitously led me to a chair.
As strength dribbled back into my shocked tissues, it occurred to me
that I might like to flatten this hobgoblin for pulling a trick like
that. But a strange something stopped me—strange because I’d never had
the experience before. It was simply the idea that once I got outside
I’d agree with him for having such a low opinion of me.

He wasn’t worrying. Rubbing his hands briskly, he turned to his shelves.
“Now let’s see … what would be best for you, I wonder? Hm-m-m. Success
is something you couldn’t justify. Money? You don’t know how to spend
it. A good job? You’re not fitted for one.” He turned gentle eyes on me
and shook his head. “A sad case. _Tsk, tsk.”_ I crawled. “A perfect
mate? Nup. You’re too stupid to recognize perfection, too conceited to
appreciate it. I don’t think that I can—Wait!”

He whipped four or five bottles and jars off the dozens of shelves
behind him and disappeared somewhere in the dark recesses of the store.
Immediately there came sounds of violent activity—clinkings and little
crashes; stirrings and then the rapid susurrant grating of a mortar and
pestle; then the slushy sound of liquid being added to a dry ingredient
during stirring; and at length, after quite a silence, the glugging of a
bottle being filled through a filtering funnel. The proprietor
reappeared triumphantly bearing a four-ounce bottle without a label.

“This will do it!” he beamed.

“That will do what?”

“Why, cure you!”

“Cure—” My pompous attitude, as Audrey called it, had returned while he
was mixing. “What do you mean cure? I haven’t got anything!”

“My dear little boy,” he said offensively, “you most certainly have. Are
you happy? Have you ever been happy? No. Well, I’m going to fix all that
up. That is, I’ll give you the start you need. Like any other cure, it
requires your cooperation.

“You’re in a bad way, young fellow. You have what is known in the
profession as retrogressive metempsychosis of the ego in its most
malignant form. You are a constitutional unemployable; a downright
sociophagus. I don’t like you. Nobody likes you.”

Feeling a little bit on the receiving end of a blitz, I stammered,
“W-what do you aim to do?”

He extended the bottle. “Go home. Get into a room by yourself—the
smaller the better. Drink this down, right out of the bottle. Stand by
for developments. That’s all.”

“But—what will it do to me?”

“It will do nothing _to_ you. It will do a great deal _for_ you. It can
do as much for you as you want it to. But mind me, now. As long as you
use what it gives you for your self-improvement, you will thrive. Use it
for self-gratification, as a basis for boasting, or for revenge, and you
will suffer in the extreme. Remember that, now.”

“But what is it? How—”

“I am selling you a talent. You have none now. When you discover what
kind of a talent it is, it will be up to you to use it to your
advantage. Now go away. I still don’t like you.”

“What do I owe you?” I muttered, completely snowed under by this time.

“The bottle carries its own price. You won’t pay anything unless you
fail to follow my directions. Now will you go, or must I uncork a bottle
of jinn—and I don’t mean London Dry?”

“I’ll go,” I said. I’d seen something swirling in the depths of a
ten-gallon carboy at one end of the counter, and I didn’t like it a bit.
“Good-by.”

“Bood-gy,” he returned.

I went out and I headed down Tenth Avenue and I turned east up Twentieth
Street and I never looked back. And for many reasons I wish now that I
had, for there was, without doubt, something very strange about that
Shottle Bop.

I didn’t simmer down until I got home; but once I had a cup of black
Italian coffee under my belt I felt better. I was skeptical about it at
last. I was actually inclined to scoff. But somehow I didn’t want to
scoff too loudly. I looked at the bottle a little scornfully, and there
was a certain something about the glass of it that seemed to be staring
back at me. I sniffed and threw it up behind some old hats on top of the
closet, and then sat down to unlax. I used to love to unlax. I’d put my
feet on the doorknob and slide down in the upholstery until I was
sitting on my shoulder blades, and as the old saying has it, “Sometimes
I sets and thinks, and sometimes I just sets.” The former is easy
enough, and is what even an accomplished loafer has to go through before
he reaches the latter and more blissful state. It takes years of
practice to relax sufficiently to be able to “just set.” I’d learned it
years ago.

But just as I was about to slip into the vegetable status, I was annoyed
by something. I tried to ignore it. I manifested a superhuman display of
lack of curiosity, but the annoyance persisted. A light pressure on my
elbow, where it draped over the arm of the chair. I was put in the
unpleasant predicament of having to concentrate on what it was; and
realizing that concentration on anything was the least desirable thing
there could be. I gave up finally, and with a deep sigh, opened my eyes
and had a look.

It was the bottle.

I screwed up my eyes and then looked again, but it was still there. The
closet door was open as I had left it, and its shelf almost directly
above me. Must have fallen out. Feeling that if the damn thing were on
the floor it couldn’t fall any farther, I shoved if off the arm of the
chair with my elbow.

It bounced. It bounced with such astonishing accuracy that it wound up
in exactly the same spot it had started from—on the arm of the easy
chair, by my elbow. Startled, I shoved it violently. This time I pushed
it hard enough to send it against the wall, from which it rebounded to
the shelf under my small table, and thence back to the chair arm—and
this time it perched cozily against my shoulder. Jarred by the bouncing,
the stopper hopped out of the bottle mouth and rolled into my lap; and
there I sat, breathing the bittersweet fumes of its contents, feeling
frightened and silly as hell.

I grabbed the bottle and sniffed. I’d smelled that somewhere
before—where was it? Uh—oh, yes; that mascara the Chinese honky-tonk
girls use in Frisco. The liquid was dark—smoky black. I tasted it
cautiously. It wasn’t bad. If it wasn’t alcoholic, then the old man in
the shop had found a darn good substitute for alcohol. At the second sip
I liked it and at the third I really enjoyed it and there wasn’t any
fourth because by then the little bottle was a dead marine. That was
about the time I remembered the name of the black ingredient with the
funny smell. Kohl. It is an herb the Orientals use to make it possible
to see supernatural beings. Silly superstition!

And then the liquid I’d just put away, lying warm and comfortable in my
stomach, began to fizz. Then I think it began to swell. I tried to get
up and couldn’t. The room seemed to come apart and throw itself at me
piecemeal, and I passed out.

Don’t you ever wake up the way I did. For your own sake, be careful
about things like that. Don’t swim up out of a sodden sleep and look
around you and see all those things fluttering and drifting and flying
and creeping and crawling around you—puffy things dripping blood, and
filmy, legless creatures, and little bits and snatches of pasty human
anatomy. It was awful. There was a human hand afloat in the air an inch
away from my nose; and at my startled gasp it drifted away from me,
fingers fluttering in the disturbed air from my breath. Something veined
and bulbous popped out from under my chair and rolled across the floor.
I heard a faint clicking, and looked up into a gnashing set of jaws
without any face attached. I think I broke down and cried a little. I
know I passed out again.

The next time I awoke—must have been hours later, because it was broad
daylight and my clock and watch had both stopped—things were a little
better. Oh, yes, there were a few of the horrors around. But somehow
they didn’t bother me much now. I was practically convinced that I was
nuts; now that I had the conviction, why worry about it? I dunno; it
must have been one of the ingredients in the bottle that had calmed me
down so. I was curious and excited, and that’s about all. I looked
around me and I was almost pleased.

The walls were green! The drab wallpaper had turned to something
breathtakingly beautiful. They were covered with what seemed to be moss,
but never moss like that grew for human eyes to see before. It was long
and thick, and it had a slight perpetual movement—not that of a breeze,
but of growth. Fascinated, I moved over and looked closely. Growing
indeed, with all the quick magic of spore and cyst and root and growth
again to spore; and the swift magic was only a part of the magical
whole, for never was there such a green. I put out my hand to touch and
stroke it, but I felt only the wallpaper. But when I closed my fingers
on it, I could feel that light touch of it in the palm of my hand, the
weight of twenty sunbeams, the soft resilience of jet-darkness in a
closed place. The sensation was a delicate ecstasy, and never have I
been happier than I was at that moment.

Around the baseboards were little snowy toadstools, and the floor was
grassy. Up the hinged side of the closet door climbed a mass of
flowering vines, and their petals were hued in tones indescribable. I
felt as if I had been blind until now, and deaf, too; for now I could
hear the whispering of scarlet, gauzy insects among the leaves and the
constant murmur of growth. All around me was a new and lovely world, so
delicate that the wind of my movements tore petals from the flowers, so
real and natural that it defied its own impossibility. Awestruck, I
turned and turned, running from wall to wall, looking under my old
furniture, into my old books; and everywhere I looked I found newer and
more beautiful things to wonder at. It was while I was flat on my
stomach looking up at the bed springs, where a colony of jewellike
lizards had nested, that I first heard the sobbing.

It was young and plaintive, and had no right to be in my room where
everything was so happy. I stood up and looked around, and there in the
corner crouched the translucent figure of a little girl. She was leaning
back against the wall. Her thin legs were crossed in front of her, and
she held the leg of a tattered toy elephant dejectedly in one hand and
cried into the other. Her hair was long and dark, and it poured and
tumbled over her face and shoulders.

I said, “What’s the matter, kiddo?” I hate to hear a child cry like
that.

She cut herself off in the middle of a sob and shook the hair out of her
eyes, looking up and past me, all fright and olive skin and big, filled
violet eyes. “Oh!” she squeaked.

I repeated, “What’s the matter? Why are you crying?”

She hugged the elephant to her breast defensively, and whimpered,
“W-where are you?”

Surprised, I said, “Right here in front of you, child. Can’t you see
me?”

She shook her head. “I’m scared. Who are you?”

“I’m not going to hurt you. I heard you crying, and I wanted to see if I
could help you. Can’t you see me at all?”

“No,” she whispered. “Are you an angel?”

I guffawed. “By no means!” I stepped closer and put my hand on her
shoulder. The hand went right through her and she winced and shrank
away, uttering a little wordless cry. “I’m sorry,” I said quickly. “I
didn’t mean … you can’t see me at all? I can see you.”

She shook her head again. “I think you’re a ghost,” she said.

“Do tell!” I said. “And what are you?”

“I’m Ginny,” she said. “I have to stay here, and I have no one to play
with.” She blinked, and there was a suspicion of further tears.

“Where did you come from?” I asked.

“I came here with my mother,” she said. “We lived in lots of other
rooming houses. Mother cleaned floors in office buildings. But this is
where I got so sick. I was sick a long time. Then one day I got off the
bed and came over here, but then when I looked back I was still on the
bed. It was awful funny. Some men came and put the ‘me’ that was on the
bed onto a stretcher-thing and took it—me—out. After a while Mummy left,
too. She cried for a long time before she left, and when I called to her
she couldn’t hear me. She never came back, and I just got to stay here.”

“Why?”

“Oh, I got to. I—don’t know why. I just—got to.”

“What do you do here?”

“I just stay here and think about things. Once a lady lived here, had a
little girl just like me. We used to play together until the lady
watched us one day. She carried on somethin’ awful. She said her little
girl was possessed. The girl kept callin’ me, ‘Ginny! Ginny! Tell Mamma
you’re here!’; an’ I tried, but the lady couldn’t see me. Then the lady
got scared an’ picked up her little girl an’ cried, an’ so I was sorry.
I ran over here an’ hid, an’ after a while the other little girl forgot
about me, I guess. They moved,” she finished with pathetic finality.

I was touched. “What will become of you, Ginny?”

“I dunno,” she said, and her voice was troubled. “I guess I’ll just stay
here and wait for Mummy to come back. I been here a long time. I guess I
deserve it, too.”

“Why, child?”

She looked guiltily at her shoes. “I couldn’ stand feelin’ so awful bad
when I was sick. I got up out of bed before it was time. I shoulda
stayed where I was. This is what I get for quittin’. But Mummy’ll be
back; just you see.”

“Sure she will,” I muttered. My throat felt tight. “You take it easy,
kid. Any time you want someone to talk to, you just pipe up. I’ll talk
to you any time I’m around.”

She smiled and it was a pretty thing to see. What a raw deal for a kid!
I grabbed my hat and went out.

Outside things were the same as in the room to me. The hallways, the
dusty stair carpets wore new garments of brilliant, nearly intangible
foliage. They were no longer dark, for each leaf had its own pale and
different light. Once in a while I saw things not quite so pretty. There
was a giggling thing that scuttled back and forth on the third floor
landing. It was a little indistinct, but it looked a great deal like
Barrel-head Brogan, a shanty-Irish bum who’d returned from a warehouse
robbery a year or so ago, only to shoot himself accidentally with his
own gun. I wasn’t sorry.

Down on the first floor, on the bottom step, I saw two youngsters
sitting. The girl had her head on the boy’s shoulder, and he had his
arms around her, and I could see the banister through them. I stopped to
listen. Their voices were faint, and seemed to come from a long way
away.

He said, “There’s one way out.”

She said, “Don’t talk that way, Tommy!”

“What else can we do? I’ve loved you for three years, and we still can’t
get married. No money, no hope—no nothing. Sure, if we did do it, I just
_know_ we’d always be together. Always and always—”

After a long time she said, “All right, Tommy. You get a gun, like you
said.” She suddenly pulled him even closer. “Oh, Tommy, are you sure
we’ll always be together just like this?”

“Always,” he whispered, and kissed her. “Just like this.”

Then there was a long silence, while neither moved. Suddenly they were
as I had first seen them, and he said:

“There’s only one way out.”

And she said, “Don’t talk that way, Tommy!”

And he said, “What else can we do? I’ve loved you for three years—” It
went on like that, over and over and over.

I felt lousy. I went on out into the street.

It began to filter through to me what had happened. The man in the shop
had called it a “talent.” I couldn’t be crazy, could I? I didn’t _feel_
crazy. The draught from the bottle had opened my eyes on a new world.
What was this world?

It was a thing peopled by ghosts. There they were—storybook ghosts, and
regular haunts, and poor damned souls—all the fixings of a storied
supernatural, all the things we have heard about and loudly disbelieved
and secretly wonder about. So what? What had it all to do with me?

As the days slid by, I wondered less about my new, strange surroundings,
and gave more and more thought to that question. I had bought—or been
given—a talent. I could see ghosts. I could see all parts of a ghostly
world, even the vegetation that grew in it. That was perfectly
reasonable—the trees and birds and fungi and flowers. A ghost world is a
world as we know it, and a world as we know it must have vegetation.
Yes, I could see them. But they couldn’t see me!

O.K.; what could I get out of it? I couldn’t talk about it or write
about it because I wouldn’t be believed; and besides, I had this thing
exclusive, as far as I knew; why cut a lot of other people in on it?

On what, though?

No, unless I could get a steer from somewhere, there was no percentage
in it for me that I could see. And then, about six days after I took
that eye-opener, I remembered the one place where I might get that
steer.

The Shottle Bop!

I was on Sixth Avenue at the time, trying to find something in a
five-and-dime that Ginny might like. She couldn’t touch anything I
brought her but she enjoyed things she could look at—picture books and
such. By getting her a little book of photographs of trains since the
“DeWitt Clinton,” and asking her which of them was like ones she had
seen, I found out approximately how long it was she’d been there. Nearly
eighteen years. Anyway, I got my bright idea and headed for Tenth Avenue
and the Shottle Bop. I’d ask that old man—he’d tell me. And when I got
to Twenty-first Street, I stopped and stared. Facing me was a blank
wall. The whole side of the block was void of people. There was no sign
of a shop.

I stood there for a full two minutes not even daring to think. Then I
walked downtown toward Twentieth, and then uptown to Twenty-first. Then
I did it again. No shop. I wound up without my question answered—what
was I going to with this “talent”?

I was talking to Ginny one afternoon about this and that when a human
leg, from the knee down, complete and puffy, drifted between us. I
recoiled in horror, but Ginny pushed it gently with one hand. It bent
under the touch, and started toward the window, which was open a little
at the bottom. The leg floated toward the crack and was sucked through
like a cloud of cigarette smoke, reforming again on the other side. It
bumbled against the pane for a moment and then ballooned away.

“My gosh!” I breathed. “What _was_ that?”

Ginny laughed. “Oh, just one of the Things that’s all ’e time flying
around. Did it scare you? I used to be scared, but I saw so many of them
that I don’t care any more, so’s they don’t light on me.”

“But what in the name of all that’s disgusting are they?”

“Parts.” Ginny was all childish _savoir-faire_.

“Parts of what?”

“People, silly. It’s some kind of game, _I_ think. You see, if someone
gets hurt and loses something—a finger or an ear or something, why, the
ear—the _inside_ part of it, I mean, like me being the inside of the
‘me’ they carried out of here—it goes back to where the person who owned
it lived last. Then it goes back to the place before that, and so on. It
doesn’t go very fast. Then when something happens to a whole person, the
‘inside’ part comes looking for the rest of itself. It picks up bit
after bit—Look!” she put out a filmy forefinger and thumb and nipped a
flake of gossamer out of the air.

I leaned over and looked closely; it was a small section of
semitransparent human skin, ridged and whorled.

“Somebody must have cut his finger,” said Ginny matter-of-factly, “while
he was living in this room. When something happens to um—you see! He’ll
be back for it!”

“Good heavens!” I said. “Does this happen to everyone?”

“I dunno. Some people have to stay where they are—like me. But I guess
if you haven’t done nothing to deserve bein’ kept in one place, you have
to come all around pickin’ up what you lost.”

I’d thought of more pleasant things in my time.

For several days I’d noticed a gray ghost hovering up and down the
block. He was always on the street, never inside. He whimpered
constantly. He was—or had been—a little inoffensive man of the bowler
hat and starched collar type. He paid no attention to me—none of them
did, for I was apparently invisible to them. But I saw him so often that
pretty soon I realized that I’d miss him if he went away. I decided I’d
chat with him the next time I saw him.

I left the house one morning and stood around for a few minutes in front
of the brownstone steps. Sure enough, pressing through the flotsam of my
new, weird coexistent world, came the slim figure of the wraith I had
noticed, his rabbit face screwed up, his eyes deep and sad, and his
swallowtail coat and striped waistcoat immaculate. I stepped up behind
him and said, “Hi!”

He started violently and would have run away, I’m sure, if he’d known
where my voice was coming from.

“Take it easy, pal,” I said. “I won’t hurt you.”

“Who are you?”

“You wouldn’t know if I told you,” I said. “Now stop shivering and tell
me about yourself.”

He mopped his ghostly face with a ghostly handkerchief, and then began
fumbling nervously with a gold toothpick. “My word,” he said. “No one’s
talked to me for years. I’m not quite myself, you see.”

“I see,” I said. “Well, take it easy. I just happen to’ve noticed you
wandering around here lately. I got curious. You looking for somebody?”

“Oh, no,” he said. Now that he had a chance to talk about his troubles,
he forgot to be afraid of this mysterious voice from nowhere that had
accosted him. “I’m looking for my home.”

“Hm-m-m,” I said. “Been looking for a long time?”

“Oh, yes.” His nose twitched. “I left for work one morning a long time
ago, and when I got off the ferry at Battery Place I stopped for a
moment to watch the work on that new-fangled elevated railroad they were
building down there. All of a sudden there was a loud noise—my goodness!
It was terrible—and the next thing I knew I was standing back from the
curb and looking at a man who looked just like me! A girder had fallen,
and—my word!” He mopped his face again. “Since then I have been looking
and looking. I can’t seem to find anyone who knows where I might have
lived, and I don’t understand all the things I see floating around me,
and I never thought I’d see the day when grass would grow on lower
Broadway—oh, it’s terrible.” He began to cry.

I felt sorry for him. I could easily see what had happened. The shock
was so great that even his ghost had amnesia! Poor little egg—until he
was whole, he could find no rest. The thing interested me. Would a ghost
react to the usual cures for amnesia? If so, then what would happen to
him?

“You say you got off a ferryboat?”

“Yes.”

“Then you must have lived on the Island … Staten Island, over there
across the bay!”

“You really think so?” He stared through me, puzzled and hopeful.

“Why sure! Say, how’d you like me to take you over there? Maybe we can
find your house.”

“Oh, that would be splendid! But—oh, my, what will my wife say?”

I grinned. “She might want to know where you’ve been. Anyway, she’ll be
glad to see you back, I imagine. Come on; let’s get going!”

I gave him a shove in the direction of the subways and strolled along
behind him. Once in a while I got a stare from a passer-by for walking
with one hand out in front of me and talking into thin air. It didn’t
bother me very much. My companion, though, was very self-conscious about
it, for the inhabitants of his world screeched and giggled when they saw
him doing practically the same thing. Of all the humans, only I was
invisible to them, and the little ghost in the bowler hat blushed from
embarrassment until I thought he’d burst.

We hopped a subway—it was a new experience for him, I gathered—and went
down to South Ferry. The subway system in New York is a very unpleasant
place to one gifted as I was. Everything that enjoys lurking in the dark
hangs out there, and there is quite a crop of dismembered human remains.
After this day I took the bus.

We got a ferry without waiting. The little gray ghost got a real kick
out of the trip. He asked me about the ships in the harbor and their
flags, and marveled at the dearth of sailing vessels. He _tsk, tsked_ at
the Statue of Liberty; the last time he had seen it, he said, was while
it still had its original brassy gold color, before it got its patina.
By this I placed him in the late ’70s; he must have been looking for his
home for over sixty years!

We landed at the Island, and from there I gave him his head. At the top
of Fort Hill he suddenly said, “My name is John Quigg. I live at 45
Fourth Avenue!” I’ve never seen anyone quite so delighted as he was by
the discovery. And from then on it was easy. He turned left again,
straight down for two blocks and again right. I noticed—he didn’t—that
the street was marked “Winter Avenue.” I remembered vaguely that the
streets in this section had been numbered years ago.

He trotted briskly up the hill and then suddenly stopped and turned
vaguely. “I say, are you still with me?”

“Still here,” I said.

“I’m all right now. I can’t tell you much how much I appreciate this. Is
there anything I could do for you?”

I considered. “Hardly. We’re of different times, you know. Things
change.”

He looked, a little pathetically, at the new apartment house on the
corner and nodded. “I think I know what happened to me,” he said softly.
“But I guess it’s all right.… I made a will, and the kids were grown.”
He sighed. “But if it hadn’t been for you I’d still be wandering around
Manhattan. Let’s see—ah; come with me!”

He suddenly broke into a run. I followed as quickly as I could. Almost
at the top of the hill was a huge old shingled house, with a silly
cupola and a complete lack of paint. It was dirty and it was
tumble-down, and at the sight of it the little fellow’s face twisted
sadly. He gulped and turned through a gap in the hedge and down beside
the house. Casting about in the long grass, he spotted a boulder sunk
deep into the turf.

“This is it,” he said. “Just you dig under that. There is no mention of
it in my will, except a small fund to keep paying the box rent. Yes, a
safety-deposit box, and the key and an authority are under that stone. I
hid it”—he giggled—“from my wife one night, and never did get a chance
to tell her. You can have whatever’s any good to you.” He turned to the
house, squared his shoulders, and marched in the side door, which banged
open for him in a convenient gust of wind. I listened for a moment and
then smiled at the tirade that burst forth. Old Quigg was catching real
hell from his wife, who’d sat waiting for over sixty years for him! It
was a bitter stream of invective, but—well, she must have loved him. She
couldn’t leave the place until she was complete, if Ginny’s theory was
correct, and she wasn’t really complete until her husband came home! It
tickled me. They’d be all right now!

I found an old pinchbar in the drive and attacked the ground under the
stone. It took quite a while and made my hands bleed, but after a while
I pried the stone up and was able to scrabble around under it. Sure
enough, there was an oiled silk pouch under there. I caught it up and
carefully unwrapped the strings around it. Inside was a key and a letter
addressed to a New York bank, designating only “Bearer” and authorizing
the use of the key. I laughed aloud. Little old meek and mild John
Quigg, I’d bet, had set aside some “mad money.” With a layout like that,
a man could take a powder without leaving a single sign. The
son-of-a-gun! I would never know just what it was he had up his sleeve,
but I’ll bet there was a woman in the case. Even fixed up with his will!
Ah, well—I should kick!

It didn’t take me long to get over to the bank. I had a little trouble
getting into the vaults, because it took quite a while to look up the
box in the old records. But I finally cleared the red tape, and found
myself the proud possessor of just under eight thousand bucks in small
bills—and not a yellowback among ’em!

Well, from then on I was pretty well set. What did I do? Well, first I
bought clothes, and then, I started out to cut ice for myself. I clubbed
around a bit and got to know a lot of people, and the more I knew the
more I realized what a lot of superstitious dopes they were. I couldn’t
blame anyone for skirting a ladder under which crouched a genuine
basilisk, of course, but what the heck—not one in a thousand have beasts
under them! Anyway, my question was answered. I dropped two grand on an
elegant office with drapes and dim indirect lighting, and I got me a
phone installed and a little quiet sign on the door—Psychic Consultant.
And, boy, I did all right.

My customers were mostly upper crust, because I came high. It was
generally no trouble to get contact with people’s dead relatives, which
was usually what they wanted. Most ghosts are crazy to get in contact
with this world anyway. That’s one of the reasons that almost anyone can
become a medium of sorts if he tries hard enough; Lord knows that it
doesn’t take much to contact the average ghost. Some, of course, were
not available. If a man leads a pretty square life, and kicks off
leaving no loose ends, he gets clear. I never did find out where these
clear spirits went to. All I knew was that they weren’t to be contacted.
But the vast majority of people have to go back and tie up those loose
ends after they die—righting a little wrong here, helping someone
they’ve hindered, cleaning up a bit of dirty work. That’s where luck
itself comes from, I do believe. You don’t get something for nothing.

If you get a nice break, it’s been arranged that way by someone who did
you dirt in the past, or someone who did wrong to your father or your
grandfather or your great-uncle Julius. Everything evens up in the long
run, and until it does, some poor damned soul is wandering around the
earth trying to do something about it. Half of humanity is walking
around crabbing about its tough breaks. If you and you and you only knew
what dozens of powers were begging for the chance to help you if you’ll
let them! And if you let them, you’ll help clear up the mess they’ve
made of their lives here, and free them to go wherever it is they go
when they’ve cleaned up. Next time you’re in a jam, go away somewhere by
yourself and open your mind to these folks. They’ll cut in and guide you
all right, if you can drop your smugness and mistaken confidence in your
own judgment.

I had a couple of ghostly stooges to run errands for me. One of them, an
ex-murderer by the name of One-Eye Rachuba, was the fastest spook I ever
saw, when it came to locating a wanted ancestor; and then there was
Professor Grafe, a frog-faced teacher of social science who’d embezzled
from a charity fund and fallen into the Hudson trying to make a getaway.
He could trace the most devious genealogies in mere seconds, deduce the
most likely whereabouts of the ghost of a missing relative. The pair of
them were all the office force I could use, and although every time they
helped out one of my clients they came closer to freedom themselves,
they were both so entangled with their own sloppy lives that I was sure
of their services for years.

But do you think I’d be satisfied to stay where I was making money hand
over fist without really working for it? Oh, no. Not me. No, I had to
big-time. I had to brood over the events of the last few months, and I
had to get dramatic about that screwball Audrey, who really wasn’t worth
my trouble. It wasn’t enough that I’d proven Audrey wrong when she said
I’d never amount to anything. And I wasn’t happy when I thought about
the gang. I had to show them up.

I even remembered what the little man in the Shottle Bop had said to me
about using my “talent” for bragging or for revenge. I figured I had the
edge on everyone, everything. Cocky, I was. Why, I could send one of my
ghostly stooges out any time and find out exactly what anyone had been
doing three hours ago come Michaelmas. With the shade of the professor
at my shoulder, I could backtrack on any far-fetched statement and give
immediate and logical reasons for backtracking. No one had anything on
me, and I could out-talk, out-maneuver, and out-smart anyone on earth. I
was really quite a fellow. I began to think, “What’s the use of my doing
as well as this when the gang on the West Side don’t know anything about
it?” and “Man, would that half-wit Happy Sam burn up if he saw me
drifting down Broadway in my new six-thousand-dollar roadster!” and “To
think I used to waste my time and tears on a dope like Audrey!” In other
words, I was tripping up on an inferiority complex. I acted like a
veridam fool, which I was. I went over to the West Side.

It was a chilly, late winter night. I’d taken a lot of trouble to dress
myself and my car so we’d be bright and shining and would knock some
eyes out. Pity I couldn’t brighten my brains up a little.

I drove up in front of Casey’s pool room, being careful to do it too
fast, and concentrating on shrieks from tires and a shuddering
twenty-four-cylinder roar from the engine before I cut the switch. I
didn’t hurry to get out of the car, either. Just leaned back and lit a
fifty-cent cigar, and then tipped my hat over one ear and touched the
horn button, causing it to play “Tuxedo Junction” for forty-eight
seconds. Then I looked over toward the pool hall.

Well, for a minute I thought that I shouldn’t have come, if that was the
effect my return to the fold was going to have. And from then on I
forgot about everything except how to get out of there.

There were two figures slouched in the glowing doorway of the pool room.
It was up a small side street, so short that the city had depended on
the place, an old institution, to supply the street lighting. Looking
carefully, I made out one of the silhouetted figures as Happy Sam, and
the other was Fred Bellew. They just looked out at me; they didn’t move;
they didn’t say anything; and when I said, “Hiya, small fry—remember
me?” I noticed that along the darkened walls flanking the bright doorway
were ranked the whole crowd of them—the whole gang. It was a shock; it
was a little too casually perfect. I didn’t like it.

“Hi,” said Fred quietly. I knew he wouldn’t like the big-timing. I
didn’t expect any of them to like it, of course, but Fred’s dislike
sprang from distaste, and the others from resentment, and for the first
time I felt a little cheap. I climbed out over the door of the roadster
and let them have a gander at my fine feathers.

Sam snorted and said, “Jelly bean!” very clearly. Someone else giggled,
and from the darkness beside the building came a high-pitched “Woo-woo!”

I walked up to Sam and grinned at him. I didn’t feel like grinning. “I
ain’t seen you in so long I almost forgot what a heel you were,” I said.
“How you making?”

“I’m doing all right,” he said, and added offensively, “I’m still
_working_ for a living.”

The murmur that ran through the crowd told me that the really smart
thing to do was to get back into that shiny new automobile and hoot
along out of there. I stayed.

“Wise, huh?” I said weakly.

They’d been drinking, I realized—all of them. I was suddenly in a spot.
Sam put his hands in his pockets and looked at me down his nose. He was
the only short man that ever could do that to me. After a thick silence
he said:

“Better get back to yer crystal balls, phony. We like guys that sweat.
We even like guys that have rackets, if they run them because they’re
smarter or tougher than the next one. But luck and gab ain’t enough.
Scram.”

I looked around helplessly. I was getting what I’d begged for. What had
I expected, anyway? Had I thought that these boys would crowd around and
shake my hand off for acting this way?

They hardly moved, but they were all around me suddenly. If I couldn’t
think of something quickly, I was going to be mobbed. And when those
mugs started mobbing a man, they did it up just fine. I drew a deep
breath.

“I’m not asking for anything from you, Sam. Nothing; that means advice;
see?”

“You’re gettin’ it!” he flared. “You and your seeanses. We heard about
you. Hanging up widow-women for fifty bucks a throw to talk to their
‘dear departed’! P-sykik investigator! What a line! Go on; beat it!”

I had a leg to stand on now. “A phony, huh? Why I’ll bet I could put a
haunt on you that would make that hair of yours stand up on end, if you
have guts enough to go where I tell you to.”

“You’ll bet? That’s a laugh. Listen at that, gang.” He laughed, then
turned to me and talked through one side of his mouth. “All right, you
wanted it. Come on, rich guy; you’re called. Fred’ll hold stakes. How
about ten of your lousy bucks for every one of mine? Here, Fred—hold
this sawbuck.”

“I’ll give you twenty to one,” I said half hysterically. “And I’ll take
you to a place where you’ll run up against the homeliest, plumb-meanest
old haunt you ever heard of.”

The crowd roared. Sam laughed with them, but didn’t try to back out.
With any of that gang, a bet was a bet. He’d taken me up, and he’d set
odds, and he was bound. I just nodded and put two century notes into
Fred Bellew’s hand. Fred and Sam climbed into the car, and just as we
started, Sam leaned out and waved.

“See you in hell, fellas,” he said. “I’m goin’ to raise me a ghost, and
one of us is going to scare the other one to death!”

I honked my horn to drown out the whooping and hollering from the
sidewalk and got out of there. I turned up the parkway and headed out of
town.

“Where to?” Fred asked after a while.

“Stick around,” I said, not knowing.

There must be some place not far from here where I could find an
honest-to-God haunt, I thought, one that would make Sam backtrack and
set me up with the boys again. I opened the compartment in the dashboard
and let Ikey out. Ikey was a little twisted imp who’d got his tail
caught in between two sheets of steel when they were assembling the car,
and had to stay there until it was junked.

“Hey, Ike,” I whispered. He looked up, the gleam of the compartment
light shining redly in his bright little eyes. “Whistle for the
professor, will you? I don’t want to yell for him because those mugs in
the back seat will hear me. They can’t hear you.”

“O.K., boss,” he said; and putting his fingers to his lips, he gave vent
to a blood-curdling, howling scream.

That was the prof’s call-letters, as it were. The old man flew ahead of
the car, circled around and slid in beside me through the window, which
I’d opened a crack for him.

“My goodness,” he panted, “I wish you wouldn’t summon me to a location
which is traveling with this high degree of celerity. It was all I could
do to catch up with you.”

“Don’t give me that, professor,” I whispered. “You can catch a
stratoliner if you want to. Say, I have a guy in the back who wants to
get a real scare from a ghost. Know of any around here?”

The professor put on his ghostly pince-nez. “Why, yes. Remember my
telling you about the Wolfmeyer place?”

“Golly—he’s bad.”

“He’ll serve your purpose admirably. But don’t ask me to go there with
you. None of us ever associates with Wolfmeyer. And for Heaven’s sake,
be careful.”

“I guess I can handle him. Where is it?”

He gave me explicit directions, bade me good night and left. I was a
little surprised; the professor traveled around with me a great deal,
and I’d never seen him refuse a chance to see some new scenery. I
shrugged it off and went my way. I guess I just didn’t know any better.

I headed out of town and into the country to a certain old farmhouse.
Wolfmeyer, a Pennsylvania Dutchman, had hanged himself there. He had
been, and was, a bad egg. Instead of being a nice guy about it all, he
was the rebel type. He knew perfectly well that unless he did plenty of
good to make up for the evil, he’d be stuck where he was for the rest of
eternity. That didn’t seem to bother him at all. He got surly and became
a really bad spook. Eight people had died in that house since the old
man rotted off his own rope. Three of them were tenants who had rented
the place, and three were hobos, and two were psychic investigators.
They’d all hanged themselves. That’s the way Wolfmeyer worked. I think
he really enjoyed haunting. He certainly was thorough about it anyway.

I didn’t want to do any real harm to Happy Sam. I just wanted to teach
him a lesson. And look what happened!

We reached the place just before midnight. No one had said much, except
that I told Fred and Sam about Wolfmeyer, and pretty well what was to be
expected from him. They did a good deal of laughing about it, so I just
shut up and drove. The next item of conversation was Fred’s, when he
made the terms of the bet. To win, Sam was to stay in the house until
dawn. He wasn’t to call for help and he wasn’t to leave. He had to bring
in a coil of rope, tie a noose in one end and string the other up on
“Wolfmeyer’s Beam”—the great oaken beam on which the old man had hanged
himself, and eight others after him. This was an added temptation to
Wolfmeyer to work on Happy Sam, and was my idea. I was to go in with
Sam, to watch him in case the thing became too dangerous. Fred was to
stay in the car a hundred yards down the road and wait.

I parked the car at the agreed distance and Sam and I got out. Sam had
my tow rope over his shoulder, already noosed. Fred had quieted down
considerably, and his face was dead serious.

“I don’t think I like this,” he said, looking up the road at the house.
It hunched back from the highway, and looked like a malign being deep in
thought.

I said, “Well, Sam? Want to pay up now and call it quits?”

He followed Fred’s gaze. It sure was a dreary-looking place, and his
liquor had fizzed away. He thought a minute, then shrugged and grinned.
I had to admire the rat. “Hell, I’ll go through with it. Can’t bluff me
with scenery, phony.”

Surprisingly, Fred piped up, “I don’t think he’s a phony, Sam.”

The resistance made Sam stubborn, though I could see by his face that he
knew better. “Come on, phony,” he said and swung up the road.

We climbed into the house by way of a cellar door that slanted up to a
window on the first floor. I hauled out a flashlight and lit the way to
the beam. It was only one of many that delighted in turning the sound of
one’s footsteps into laughing whispers that ran round and round the
rooms and halls and would not die. Under the famous beam the dusty floor
was dark-stained.

I gave Sam a hand in fixing the rope, and then clicked off the light. It
must have been tough on him then. I didn’t mind, because I knew I could
see anything before it got to me, and even then, no ghost could see me.
Not only that, for me the walls and floors and ceilings were lit with
the phosphorescent many-hued glow of the ever-present ghost plants. For
its eerie effect I wished Sam could see the ghost-molds feeding greedily
on the stain under the beam.

Sam was already breathing heavily, but I knew it would take more than
just darkness and silence to get his goat. He’d have to be alone, and
then he’d have to have a visitor or so.

“So long, kid,” I said, slapping him on the shoulder, and I turned and
walked out of the room.

I let him hear me go out of the house and then I crept silently back. It
was without doubt the most deserted place I have ever seen. Even ghosts
kept away from it, excepting, of course, Wolfmeyer’s. There was just the
luxurious vegetation, invisible to all but me, and the deep silence
rippled by Sam’s breath. After ten minutes or so I knew for certain that
Happy Sam had more guts than I’d ever have credited him with. He had to
be scared. He couldn’t—or wouldn’t—scare himself.

I crouched down against the walls of an adjoining room and made myself
comfortable. I figured Wolfmeyer would be along pretty soon. I hoped
earnestly that I could stop the thing before it got too far. No use in
making this any more than a good lesson for a wiseacre. I was feeling
pretty smug about it all, and I was totally unprepared for what
happened.

I was looking toward the doorway opposite when I realized that for some
minutes there had been the palest of pale glows there. It brightened as
I watched; brightened and flickered gently. It was green, the green of
things moldy and rotting away; and with it came a subtly harrowing
stench. It was the smell of flesh so very dead that it had ceased to be
really odorous. It was utterly horrible, and I was honestly scared out
of my wits. It was some moments before the comforting thought of my
invulnerability came back to me, and I shrank lower and closer to the
wall and watched.

And Wolfmeyer came in.

His was the ghost of an old, old man. He wore a flowing, filthy robe,
and his bare forearms thrust out in front of him were stringy and
strong. His head, with its tangled hair and beard, quivered on a broken,
ruined neck like the blade of a knife just thrown into soft wood. Each
slow step as he crossed the room set his head to quivering again. His
eyes were alight; red they were, with deep green flames buried in them.
His canine teeth had lengthened into yellow, blunt tusks, and they were
like pillars supporting his crooked grin. The putrescent green glow was
a horrid halo about him. He was a bright and evil thing.

He passed me completely unconscious of my presence and paused at the
door of the room where Sam waited by the rope. He stood just outside it,
claws extended, the quivering of his head slowly dying. He stared in at
Sam, and suddenly opened his mouth and howled. It was a quiet, deadly
sound, one that might have come from the throat of a distant dog, but,
though I couldn’t see into the other room, I knew that Sam had jerked
his head around and was staring at the ghost. Wolfmeyer raised his arms
a trifle, seemed to totter a bit, and then moved into the room.

I snapped myself out of the crawling terror that gripped me and
scrambled to my feet. If I didn’t move fast—

Tiptoeing swiftly to the door, I stopped just long enough to see
Wolfmeyer beating his arms about erratically over his head, a movement
that made his robe flutter and his whole figure pulsate in the green
light; just long enough to see Sam on his feet, wide-eyed, staggering
back and back toward the rope. He clutched his throat and opened his
mouth and made no sound, and his head tilted, his neck bent, his twisted
face gaped at the ceiling as he clumped backward away from the ghost and
into the ready noose. And then I leaned over Wolfmeyer’s shoulder, put
my lips to his ear, and said:

_“Boo!”_

I almost laughed. Wolfmeyer gave a little squeak, jumped about ten feet,
and, without stopping to look around, high-tailed out of the room so
fast that he was just a blur. That was one scared old spook!

At the same time Happy Sam straightened, his face relaxed and relieved,
and sat down with a bump under the noose. That was as close a thing as
ever I want to see. He sat there, his face soaking wet with cold sweat,
his hands between his knees, staring limply at his feet.

“That’ll show you!” I exulted, and walked over to him. “Pay up, scum,
and may you starve for that week’s pay!” He didn’t move. I guess he was
plenty shocked.

“Come on!” I said. “Pull yourself together, man! Haven’t you seen
enough? That old fellow will be back any second now. On your feet!”

He didn’t move.

“Sam!”

He didn’t move.

_“Sam!”_ I clutched at his shoulder. He pitched over sideways and lay
still. He was quite dead.

I didn’t do anything and for a while I didn’t say anything. Then I said
hopelessly, as I knelt there, “Aw, Sam. Sam—cut it out, fella.”

After I minute I rose slowly and started for the door. I’d taken three
steps when I stopped. Something was happening! I rubbed my hand over my
eyes. Yes, it is—it was getting dark! The vague luminescence of the
vines and flowers of the ghost world was getting dimmer, fading, fading—

But that had never happened before!

No difference, I told myself desperately, it’s happening now, all right.
_I got to get out of here!_

See? You see. It was the stuff—the damn stuff from the Shottle Bop. It
was wearing off! When Sam died it … it stopped working on me! Was this
what I had to pay for the bottle? Was this what was to happen if I used
it for revenge?

The light was almost gone—and now it was gone. I couldn’t see a thing in
the room but one of the doors. Why could I see the doorway? What was
that pale-green light that set off its dusty frame?

Wolfmeyer! _I got to get out of here!_

I couldn’t see ghosts anymore. Ghosts could see me now. I ran. I darted
across the dark room and smashed into the wall on the other side. I
reeled back from it, blood spouting from between the fingers I slapped
to my face. I ran again. Another wall clubbed me. Where was that other
door? I ran again, and again struck a wall. I screamed and ran again. I
tripped over Sam’s body. My head went through the noose. It whipped down
on my windpipe, and my neck broke with an agonizing crunch. I floundered
there for half a minute, and then dangled.

Dead as hell, I was. Wolfmeyer, he laughed and laughed.

Fred found me and Sam in the morning. He took our bodies away in the
car. Now I’ve got to stay here and haunt this damn old house. Me and
Wolfmeyer.



YESTERDAY WAS MONDAY


HARRY WRIGHT ROLLED OVER and said something spelled “Bzzzzhha-a-aw!” He
chewed a bit on a mouthful of dry air and spat it out, opened one eye to
see if it really would open, opened the other and closed the first,
closed the second, swung his feet onto the floor, opened them again and
stretched. This was a daily occurrence, and the only thing that made it
remarkable at all was that he did it on a Wednesday morning, and—

Yesterday was Monday.

Oh, he knew it was Wednesday all right. It was partly that, even though
he knew yesterday was Monday, there was a gap between Monday and now;
and that must have been Tuesday. When you fall asleep and lie there all
night without dreaming, you know, when you wake up, that time has
passed. You’ve done nothing that you can remember; you’ve had no
particular thoughts, no way to gauge time, and yet you know that some
hours have passed. So it was with Harry Wright. Tuesday had gone
wherever your eight hours went last night.

But he hadn’t slept through Tuesday. Oh no. He never slept, as a matter
of fact, more than six hours at a stretch, and there was no particular
reason for him doing so now. Monday was the day before yesterday; he had
turned in and slept his usual stretch, he had awakened, and it was
Wednesday.

If _felt_ like Wednesday. There was a Wednesdayish feel to the air.

Harry put on his socks and stood up. He wasn’t fooled. He knew what day
it was. “What happened to yesterday?” he muttered. “Oh—yesterday was
Monday.” That sufficed until he got his pajamas off. “Monday,” he mused,
reaching for his underwear, “was quite a while back, seems as though.”
If he had been the worrying type, he would have started then and there.
But he wasn’t. He was an easygoing sort, the kind of man that gets
himself into a rut and stays there until he is pushed out. That was why
he was an automobile mechanic at twenty-three dollars a week; that’s why
he had been one for eight years now, and would be from now on, if he
could only find Tuesday and get back to work.

Guided by his reflexes, as usual, and with no mental effort at all,
which was also usual, he finished washing, dressing, and making his bed.
His alarm clock, which never alarmed because he was of such regular
habits, said, as usual, six twenty-two when he paused on the way out,
and gave his room the once-over. And there was a certain something about
the place that made even this phlegmatic character stop and think.

It wasn’t finished.

The bed was there, and the picture of Joe Louis. There were the two
chairs sharing their usual seven legs, the split table, the pipe-organ
bedstead, the beige wallpaper with the two swans over and over and over,
the tiny corner sink, the tilted bureau. But none of them were finished.
Not that there were any holes in anything. What paint there had been in
the first place was still there. But there was an odor of old cut
lumber, a subtle, insistent air of building, about the room and
everything in it. It was indefinable, inescapable, and Harry Wright
stood there caught up in it, wondering. He glanced suspiciously around
but saw nothing he could really be suspicious of. He shook his head,
locked the door and went out into the hall.

On the steps a little fellow, just over three feet tall, was gently
stroking the third step from the top with a razor-sharp chisel, shaping
up a new scar in the dirty wood. He looked up as Harry approached, and
stood up quickly.

“Hi,” said Harry, taking in the man’s leather coat, his peaked cap, his
wizened, bright-eyed little face. “Whatcha doing?”

“Touch-up,” piped the little man. “The actor in the third floor front
has a nail in his right heel. He came in late Tuesday night and cut the
wood here. I have to get it ready for Wednesday.”

“This is Wednesday,” Harry pointed out.

“Of course. Always has been. Always will be.”

Harry let that pass, started on down the stairs. He had achieved his
amazing bovinity by making a practice of ignoring things he could not
understand. But one thing bothered him—

“Did you say that feller in the third floor front was an actor?”

“Yes. They’re all actors, you know.”

“You’re nuts, friend,” said Harry bluntly. “That guy works on the
docks.”

“Oh yes—that’s his part. That’s what he acts.”

“No kiddin’. An’ what does he do when he isn’t acting?”

“But he—Well, that’s all he does do! That’s all any of the actors do!”

“Gee—I thought he looked like a reg’lar guy, too,” said Harry. “An
actor? ’Magine!”

“Excuse me,” said the little man, “but I’ve got to get back to work. We
mustn’t let anything get by us, you know. They’ll be through Tuesday
before long, and everything must be ready for them.”

Harry thought: this guy’s crazy nuts. He smiled uncertainly and went
down to the landing below. When he looked back the man was cutting
skillfully into the stair, making a neat little nail scratch. Harry
shook his head. This was a screwy morning. He’d be glad to get back to
the shop. There was a ’39 sedan down there with a busted rear spring.
Once he got his mind on that he could forget this nonsense. That’s all
that matters to a man in a rut. Work, eat, sleep, payday. Why even try
to think anything else out?

The street was a riot of activity, but then it always was. But not quite
this way. There were automobiles and trucks and buses around, aplenty,
but none of them were moving. And none of them were quite complete. This
was Harry’s own field; if there was anything he didn’t know about motor
vehicles, it wasn’t very important. And through that medium he began to
get the general idea of what was going on.

Swarms of little men who might have been twins of the one he had spoken
to were crowding around the cars, the sidewalks, the stores and
buildings. All were working like mad with every tool imaginable. Some
were touching up the finish of the cars with fine wire brushes, laying
on networks of microscopic cracks and scratches. Some, with ball peens
and mallets, were denting fenders skillfully, bending bumpers in an
artful crash pattern, spider-webbing safety glass windshields. Others
were aging top dressing with high-pressure, needlepoint sandblasters.
Still others were pumping dust into upholstery, sandpapering the
dashboard finish around light switches, throttles, chokes, to give a
finger-worn appearance. Harry stood aside as a half dozen of the workers
scampered down the street bearing a fender which they riveted to a 1930
coupé. It was freshly bloodstained.

Once awakened to this highly unusual activity, Harry stopped, slightly
open-mouthed, to watch what else was going on. He saw the same process
being industriously accomplished with the houses and stores. Dirt was
being laid on plate glass windows over a coat of clear sizing. Woodwork
was being cleverly scored and the paint peeled to make it look correctly
weather-beaten, and dozens of leather-clad laborers were on their hands
and knees, poking dust and dirt into the cracks between the paving
blocks. A line of them went down the sidewalk, busily chewing gum and
spitting it out; they were followed by another crew who carefully placed
the wads according to diagrams they carried, and stamped them flat.

Harry set his teeth and muscled his rocking brain into something like
its normal position. “I ain’t never seen a day like this or crazy people
like this,” he said, “but I ain’t gonna let it be any of my affair. I
got my job to go to.” And trying vainly to ignore the hundreds of
little, hardworking figures, he went grimly on down the street.

When he got to the garage he found no one there but more swarms of
stereotyped little people climbing over the place, dulling the paint
work, cracking the cement flooring, doing their hurried, efficient
little tasks of aging. He noticed, only because he was so familiar with
the garage, that they were actually _making_ the marks that had been
there as long as he had known the place. “Hell with it,” he gritted,
anxious to submerge himself into his own world of wrenches and grease
guns. “I got my job; this is none o’ my affair.”

He looked about him, wondering if he should clean these interlopers out
of the garage. Naw—not his affair. He was hired to repair cars, not to
police the joint. Long as they kept away from him—and, of course, animal
caution told him that he was far, far outnumbered. The absence of the
boss and the other mechanics was no surprise to Harry; he always opened
the place.

He climbed out of his street clothes and into coveralls, picked up a
tool case and walked over to the sedan, which he had left up on the
hydraulic rack yester—that is, Monday night. And that is when Harry
Wright lost his temper. After all, the car was his job, and he didn’t
like having anyone else mess with a job he had started. So when he saw
his job—his ’39 sedan—resting steadily on its wheels over the rack,
which was down under the floor, and when he saw that the rear spring was
repaired, he began to burn. He dived under the car and ran deft fingers
over the rear wheel suspensions. In spite of his anger at this
unprecedented occurrence, he had to admit to himself that the job had
been done well. “Might have done it myself,” he muttered.

A soft clank and a gentle movement caught his attention. With a roar he
reached out and grabbed the leg of one of the ubiquitous little men,
wriggled out from under the car, caught his culprit by his leather
collar, and dangled him at arm’s length.

“What are you doing to my job?” Harry bellowed.

The little man tucked his chin into the front of his shirt to give his
windpipe a chance, and said, “Why, I was just finishing up that spring
job.”

“Oh. So you were just finishing up on that spring job,” Harry whispered,
choked with rage. Then, at the top of his voice, “Who told you to touch
that car?”

“Who told me? What do you—Well, it just had to be done, that’s all.
You’ll have to let me go. I must tighten up those two bolts and lay some
dust on the whole thing.”

“You must _what?_ You get within six feet o’ that car and I’ll twist
your head off your neck with a Stillson!”

“But—It has to be done!”

“You won’t do it! Why, I oughta—”

“Please let me go! If I don’t leave that car the way it was Tuesday
night—”

“When was Tuesday night?”

“The last act, of course. Let me go, or I’ll call the district
supervisor!”

“Call the devil himself. I’m going to spread you on the sidewalk
outside; and heaven help you if I catch you near here again!”

The little man’s jaw set, his eyes narrowed, and he whipped his feet
upward. They crashed into Wright’s jaw; Harry dropped him and staggered
back. The little man began squealing, “Supervisor! Supervisor!
Emergency!”

Harry growled and started after him; but suddenly, in the air between
him and the midget workman, a long white hand appeared. The empty air
was swept back, showing an aperture from the garage to blank, blind
nothingness. Out of it stepped a tall man in a single loose-fitting
garment literally studded with pockets. The opening closed behind the
man.

Harry cowered before him. Never in his life had he seen such noble,
powerful features, such strength of purpose, such broad shoulders, such
a deep chest. The man stood with the backs of his hands on his hips,
staring at Harry as if he were something somebody forgot to sweep up.

“That’s him,” said the little man shrilly. “He is trying to stop me from
doing the work!”

“Who are you?” asked the beautiful man, down his nose.

“I’m the m-mechanic on this j-j—Who wants to know?”

“Iridel, supervisor of the district of Futura, wants to know.”

“Where in hell did you come from?”

“I did not come from hell. I came from Thursday.”

Harry held his head. “What _is_ all this?” he wailed. “Why is today
Wednesday? Who are all these crazy little guys? What happened to
Tuesday?”

Iridel made a slight motion with his finger, and the little man scurried
back under the car. Harry was frenzied to hear the wrench busily
tightening bolts. He half started to dive under after the little fellow,
but Iridel said, “Stop!” and when Iridel said, “Stop!” Harry stopped.

“This,” said Iridel calmly, “is an amazing occurrence.” He regarded
Harry with unemotional curiosity. “An actor on stage before the sets are
finished. Extraordinary.”

“What stage?” asked Harry. “What are you doing here anyhow, and what’s
the idea of all these little guys working around here?”

“You ask a great many questions, actor,” said Iridel. “I shall answer
them, and then I shall have a few to ask you. These little men are
stagehands—I am surprised that you didn’t realize that. They are setting
the stage for Wednesday. Tuesday? That’s going on now.”

“Arrgh!” Harry snorted. “How can Tuesday be going on when today’s
Wednesday?”

“Today isn’t Wednesday, actor.”

“Huh?”

“Today is Tuesday.”

Harry scratched his head. “Met a feller on the steps this mornin’—one of
these here stagehands of yours. He said this was Wednesday.”

“It _is_ Wednesday. Today is Tuesday. Tuesday is today. ‘Today’ is
simply the name for the stage set which happens to be in use.
‘Yesterday’ means the set that has just been used; ‘Tomorrow’ is the set
that will be used after the actors have finished with ‘today.’ This is
Wednesday. Yesterday was Monday; today is Tuesday. See?”

Harry said, “No.”

Iridel threw up his long hands. “My, you actors are stupid. Now listen
carefully. This is Act Wednesday, Scene 6:22. That means that everything
you see around you here is being readied for 6:22 AM on Wednesday.
Wednesday isn’t a time; it’s a place. The actors are moving along toward
it now. I see you still don’t get the idea. Let’s see … ah. Look at that
clock. What does it say?”

Harry Wright looked at the big electric clock on the wall over the
compressor. It was corrected hourly and highly accurate, and it said
6:22. Harry looked at it amazed. “Six tw—but my gosh, man, that’s what
time I left the house. I walked here, an’ I been here ten minutes
already!”

Iridel shook his head. “You’ve been here no time at all, because there
is no time until the actors make their entrances.”

Harry sat down on a grease drum and wrinkled up his brains with the
effort he was making. “You mean that this time proposition ain’t
something that moves along all the time? Sorta—well, like a road. A road
don’t go no place—You just go places along it. Is that it?”

“That’s the general idea. In fact, that’s a pretty good example. Suppose
we say that it’s a road; a highway built of paving blocks. Each block is
a day; the actors move along it, and go through day after day. And our
job here—mine and the little men—is to … well, pave that road. This is
the clean-up gang here. They are fixing up the last little details, so
that everything will be ready for the actors.”

Harry sat still, his mind creaking with the effects of this information.
He felt as if he had been hit with a lead pipe, and the shock of it was
being drawn out infinitely. This was the craziest-sounding thing he had
ever run into. For no reason at all he remembered a talk he had had once
with a drunken aviation mechanic who had tried to explain to him how the
air flowing over an airplane’s wings makes the machine go up in the air.
He hadn’t understood a word of the man’s discourse, which was all about
eddies and chords and cambers and foils, dihedrals and the Bernoulli
effect. That didn’t make any difference; the things flew whether he
understood how or not; he knew that because he had seen them. This guy
Iridel’s lecture was the same sort of thing. If there was nothing in all
he said, how come all these little guys were working around here? Why
wasn’t the clock telling time? Where was Tuesday?

He thought he’d get that straight for good and all. “Just where is
Tuesday?” he asked.

“Over there,” said Iridel, and pointed. Harry recoiled and fell off the
drum; for when the man extended his hand, it _disappeared!_

Harry got up off the floor and said tautly, “Do that again.”

“What? Oh—Point toward Tuesday? Certainly.” And he pointed. His hand
appeared again when he withdrew it.

Harry said, “My gosh!” and sat down again on the drum, sweating and
staring at the supervisor of the district of Futura. “You point, an’
your hand—ain’t,” he breathed. “What direction is that?”

“It is a direction like any other direction,” said Iridel. “You know
yourself there are four directions—forward, sideward, upward, and”—he
pointed again, and again his hand vanished—“_that_ way!”

“They never tole me that in school,” said Harry. “Course, I was just a
kid then, but—”

Iridel laughed. “It is the fourth dimension—it is _duration_. The actors
move through length, breadth, and height, anywhere they choose to within
the set. But there is another movement—one they can’t control—and that
is duration.”

“How soon will they come … eh … here?” asked Harry, waving an arm.
Iridel dipped into one of his numberless pockets and pulled out a watch.
“It is now eight thirty-seven Tuesday morning,” he said. “They’ll be
here as soon as they finish the act, and the scenes in Wednesday that
have already been prepared.”

Harry thought again for a moment, while Iridel waited patiently, smiling
a little. Then he looked up at the supervisor and asked, “Hey—this
‘actor’ business—what’s that all about?”

“Oh—that. Well, it’s a play, that’s all. Just like any play—put on for
the amusement of an audience.”

“I was to a play once,” said Harry. “Who’s the audience?”

Iridel stopped smiling. “Certain—Ones who may be amused,” he said. “And
now I’m going to ask you some questions. How did you get here?”

“Walked.”

“You _walked_ from Monday night to Wednesday morning?”

“Naw—From the house to here.”

“Ah—But how did you get to Wednesday, six twenty-two?”

“Well I—Damfino. I just woke up an’ came to work as usual.”

“This is an extraordinary occurrence,” said Iridel, shaking his head in
puzzlement. “You’ll have to see the producer.”

“Producer? Who’s he?”

“You’ll find out. In the meantime, come along with me. I can’t leave you
here; you’re too close to the play. I have to make my rounds anyway.”

Iridel walked toward the door. Harry was tempted to stay and find
himself some more work to do, but when Iridel glanced back at him and
motioned him out, Harry followed. It was suddenly impossible to do
anything else.

Just as he caught up with the supervisor, a little worker ran up,
whipping off his cap.

“Iridel, sir,” he piped, “the weather makers put .006 of one percent too
little moisture in the air on this set. There’s three-sevenths of an
ounce too little gasoline in the storage tanks under here.”

“How much is in the tanks?”

“Four thousand two hundred and seventy-three gallons, three pints, seven
and twenty-one thirty-fourths ounces.”

Iridel grunted. “Let it go this time. That was very sloppy work.
Someone’s going to get transferred to Limbo for this.”

“Very good, sir,” said the little man. “Long as you know we’re not
responsible.” He put on his cap, spun around three times and rushed off.

“Lucky for the weather makers that the amount of gas in that tank
doesn’t come into Wednesday’s script,” said Iridel. “If anything
interferes with the continuity of the play, there’s the devil to pay.
Actors haven’t sense enough to cover up, either. They are liable to
start whole series of miscues because of a little thing like that. The
play might flop and then we’d all be out of work.”

“Oh,” Harry oh-ed. “Hey, Iridel—what’s the idea of that patchy-looking
place over there?”

Iridel followed his eyes. Harry was looking at a corner lot. It was
tree-lined and overgrown with weeds and small saplings. The vegetation
was true to form around the edges of the lot, and around the path that
ran diagonally through it; but the spaces in between were a plane
surface. Not a leaf nor a blade of grass grew there; it was
naked-looking, blank, and absolutely without any color whatever.

“Oh, that,” answered Iridel. “There are only two characters in Act
Wednesday who will use that path. Therefore it is as grown-over as it
should be. The rest of the lot doesn’t enter into the play, so we don’t
have to do anything with it.”

“But—Suppose someone wandered off the path on Wednesday,” Harry offered.

“He’d be due for a surprise, I guess. But it could hardly happen.
Special prompters are always detailed to spots like that, to keep the
actors from going astray or missing any cues.”

“Who are they—the prompters, I mean?”

“Prompters? G.A.’s—Guardian Angels. That’s what the script writers call
them.”

“I heard o’ them,” said Harry.

“Yes, they have their work cut out for them,” said the supervisor.
“Actors are always forgetting their lines when they shouldn’t, or
remembering them when the script calls for a lapse. Well, it looks
pretty good here. Let’s have a look at Friday.”

“Friday? You mean to tell me you’re working on Friday already?”

“Of course! Why, we work years in advance! How on earth do you think we
could get our trees grown otherwise? Here—step in!” Iridel put out his
hand, seized empty air, drew it aside to show the kind of absolute
nothingness he had first appeared from, and waved Harry on.

“Y-you want me to go in there?” asked Harry diffidently.

“Certainly. Hurry, now!”

Harry looked at the section of void with a rather weak-kneed look, but
could not withstand the supervisor’s strange compulsion. He stepped
through.

And it wasn’t so bad. There were no whirling lights, no sensations of
falling, no falling unconscious. It was just like stepping into another
room—which is what had happened. He found himself in a great round
chamber, whose roundness was touched a bit with the indistinct. That is,
it had curved walls and a domed roof, but there was something else about
it. It seemed to stretch off in that direction toward which Iridel had
so astonishingly pointed. The walls were lined with an amazing array of
control machinery—switches and ground-glass screens, indicators and
dials, knurled knobs and levers. Moving deftly before them was a crew of
men, each looking exactly like Iridel except that their garments had no
pockets. Harry stood wide-eyed, hypnotized by the enormous complexity of
the controls and the ease with which the men worked among them. Iridel
touched his shoulder. “Come with me,” he said. “The producer is in now;
we’ll find out what is to be done with you.”

They started across the floor. Harry had not quite time to wonder how
long it would take them to cross that enormous room, for when they had
taken perhaps a dozen steps they found themselves at the opposite wall.
The ordinary laws of space and time simply did not apply in the place.

They stopped at a door of burnished bronze, so very highly polished that
they could see through it. It opened and Iridel pushed Harry through.
The door swung shut. Harry, panic-stricken lest he be separated from the
only thing in this weird world he could begin to get used to, flung
himself against the great bronze portal. It bounced him back, head over
heels, into the middle of the floor. He rolled over and got up to his
hands and knees.

He was in a tiny room, one end of which was filled by a colossal
teakwood desk. The man sitting there regarded him with amusement.
“Where’d you blow in from?” he asked; and his voice was like the angry
bee sound of an approaching hurricane.

“Are you the producer?”

“Well, I’ll be damned,” said the man, and smiled. It seemed to fill the
whole room with light. He was a big man, Harry noticed; but in this
deceptive place, there was no way of telling how big. “I’ll be most
verily damned. An actor. You’re a persistent lot, aren’t you? Building
houses for me that I almost never go into. Getting together and sending
requests for better parts. Listening carefully to what I have to say and
then ignoring or misinterpreting my advice. Always asking for just one
more chance, and when you get it, messing that up too. And now one of
you crashes the gate. What’s your trouble, anyway?”

There was something about the producer that bothered Harry, but he could
not place what it was, unless it was the fact that the man awed him and
he didn’t know why. “I woke up in Wednesday,” he stammered, “and
yesterday was Tuesday. I mean Monday. I mean—” He cleared his throat and
started over. “I went to sleep Monday night and woke up Wednesday, and
I’m looking for Tuesday.”

“What do you want me to do about it?”

“Well—couldn’t you tell me how to get back there? I got work to do.”

“Oh—I get it,” said the producer. “You want a favor from me. You know,
someday, some one of you fellows is going to come to me wanting to give
me something, free and for nothing, and then I am going to drop quietly
dead. Don’t I have enough trouble running this show without taking up
time and space by doing favors for the likes of you?” He drew a couple
of breaths and then smiled again. “However—I have always tried to be
just, even if it is a tough job sometimes. Go on out and tell Iridel to
show you the way back. I think I know what happened to you; when you
made your exit from the last act you played in, you somehow managed to
walk out behind the wrong curtain when you reached the wings. There’s
going to be a prompter sent to Limbo for this. Go on now—beat it.”

Harry opened his mouth to speak, thought better of it and scuttled out
the door, which opened before him. He stood in the huge control chamber,
breathing hard. Iridel walked up to him.

“Well?”

“He says for you to get me out of here.”

“All right,” said Iridel. “This way.” He led the way to a curtained
doorway much like the one they had used to come in. Beside it were two
dials, one marked in days and the other in hours and minutes.

“Monday night good enough for you?” asked Iridel.

“Swell,” said Harry.

Iridel set the dials for 9:30 PM on Monday. “So long, actor. Maybe I’ll
see you again some time.”

“So long,” said Harry. He turned and stepped through the door.

He was back in the garage, and there was no curtained doorway behind
him. He turned to ask Iridel if this would enable him to go to bed again
and do Tuesday right from the start, but Iridel was gone.

The garage was a blaze of light. Harry glanced up at the clock—It was
fifteen seconds after nine-thirty. That was funny; everyone should be
home by now except Slim Jim, the night man, who hung out until four in
the morning serving up gas at the pumps outside. A quick glance around
sufficed. This might be Monday night, but it was a Monday night he
hadn’t known.

The place was filled with the little men again!

Harry sat on the fender of a convertible and groaned. “Now what have I
got myself into?” he asked himself.

He could see that he was at a different place-in-time from the one in
which he had met Iridel. There, they had been working to build, working
with a precision and nicety that was a pleasure to watch. But here—

The little men were different, in the first place. They were
tired-looking, sick, slow. There were scores of overseers about, and
Harry winced with one of the little fellows when one of the men in white
lashed out with a long whip. As the Wednesday crews worked, so the
Monday gangs slaved. And the work they were doing was different. For
here they were breaking down, breaking up, carting away. Before his
eyes, Harry saw sections of paving lifted out, pulverized, toted away by
the sackload by lines of trudging, browbeaten little men. He saw great
beams upended to support the roof, while bricks were pried out of the
walls. He heard the gang working on the roof, saw patches of roofing
torn away. He saw walls and roof both melt away under that driving,
driven onslaught, and before he knew what was happening he was standing
alone on a section of the dead white plain he had noticed before on the
corner lot.

It was too much for his overburdened mind; he ran out into the night,
breaking through lines of laden slaves, through neat and growing piles
of rubble, screaming for Iridel. He ran for a long time, and finally
dropped down behind a stack of lumber out where the Unitarian church
used to be, dropped because he could go no farther. He heard footsteps
and tried to make himself smaller. They came on steadily; one of the
overseers rounded the corner and stood looking at him. Harry was in deep
shadow, but he knew the man in white could see in the dark.

“Come out o’ there,” grated the man. Harry came out.

“You the guy was yellin’ for Iridel?”

Harry nodded.

“What makes you think you’ll find Iridel in Limbo?” sneered his captor.
“Who are you, anyway?”

Harry had learned by this time. “I’m an—actor,” he said in a small
voice. “I got into Wednesday by mistake, and they sent me back here.”

“What for?”

“Huh? Why—I guess it was a mistake, that’s all.”

The man stepped forward and grabbed Harry by the collar. He was about
eight times as powerful as a hydraulic jack. “Don’t give me no guff,
pal,” said the man. “Nobody gets sent to Limbo by mistake, or if he
didn’t do somethin’ up there to make him deserve it. Come clean, now.”

“I didn’t do nothin’.” Harry wailed. “I asked them the way back, and
they showed me a door, and I went through it and came here. That’s all I
know. Stop it, you’re choking me!”

The man dropped him suddenly. “Listen, babe, you know who I am? Hey?”
Harry shook his head. “Oh—you don’t. Well, I’m Gurrah!”

“Yeah?” Harry said, not being able to think of anything else at the
moment.

Gurrah puffed on his chest and appeared to be waiting for something more
from Harry. When nothing came, he walked up to the mechanic, breathed in
his face. “Ain’t scared, huh? Tough guy, huh? Never heard of Gurrah,
supervisor of Limbo an’ the roughest, toughest son of the devil from
Incidence to Eternity, huh?”

Now Harry was a peaceable man, but if there was anything he hated, it
was to have a stranger breathe his bad breath pugnaciously at him.
Before he knew it had happened, Gurrah was sprawled eight feet away, and
Harry was standing alone rubbing his left knuckles—quite the more
surprised of the two.

Gurrah sat up, feeling his face. “Why, you … you hit me!” he roared. He
got up and came over to Harry. “You hit me!” he said softly, his voice
slightly out of focus in amazement. Harry wished he hadn’t—wished he was
in bed or in Futura or dead or something. Gurrah reached out with a
heavy fist and—patted him on the shoulder. “Hey,” he said, suddenly
friendly, “you’re all right. Heh! Took a poke at me, didn’t you? Be
damned! First time in a month o’ Mondays anyone ever made a pass at me.
Last was a feller named Orton. I killed ’im.” Harry paled.

Gurrah leaned back against the lumber pile. “Dam’f I didn’t enjoy that,
feller. Yeah. This is a hell of a job they palmed off on me, but what
can you do? Breakin’ down—breakin’ down. No sooner get through one job,
workin’ top speed, drivin’ the boys till they bleed, than they give you
the devil for not bein’ halfway through another job. You’d think I’d
been in the business long enough to know what it was all about, after
more than eight hundred an’ twenty million acts, wouldn’t you? Heh. Try
to tell _them_ that. Ship a load of dog houses up to Wednesday, sneakin’
it past backstage nice as you please. They turn right around and call me
up. ‘What’s the matter with you, Gurrah? Them dog houses is no good. We
sent you a list o’ worn-out items two acts ago. One o’ the items was dog
houses. Snap out of it or we send someone back there who can read an’
put you on a toteline.’ That’s what I get—act in and act out. An’ does
it do any good to tell ’em that my aide got the message an’ dropped dead
before he got it to me? No. Uh-uh. If I say anything about that, they
tell me to stop workin’ ’em to death. If I do that, they kick because my
shipments don’t come in fast enough.”

He paused for breath. Harry had a hunch that if he kept Gurrah in a good
mood it might benefit him. He asked, “What’s your job, anyway?”

“Job?” Gurrah howled. “Call this a job? Tearin’ down the sets, shippin’
what’s good to the act after next, junkin’ the rest?” He snorted.

Harry asked, “You mean they use the same props over again?”

“That’s right. They don’t last, though. Six, eight acts, maybe. Then
they got to build new ones and weather them and knock ’em around to make
’em look as if they was used.”

There was silence for a time. Gurrah, having got his bitterness off his
chest for the first time in literally ages, was feeling pacified. Harry
didn’t know how to feel. He finally broke the ice. “Hey, Gurrah—How’m I
goin’ to get back into the play?”

“What’s it to me? How’d you—Oh, that’s right, you walked in from the
control room, huh? That it?”

Harry nodded.

“An’ how,” growled Gurrah, “did you get inta the control room?”

“Iridel brought me.”

“Then what?”

“Well, I went to see the producer, and—”

“Th’ _producer!_ Holy—You mean you walked right in and—” Gurrah mopped
his brow. “What’d he say?”

“Why—he said he guessed it wasn’t my fault that I woke up in Wednesday.
He said to tell Iridel to ship me back.”

“An’ Iridel threw you back to Monday.” And Gurrah threw back his shaggy
head and roared.

“What’s funny?” asked Harry, a little peeved.

“Iridel,” said Gurrah. “Do you realize that I’ve been trying for fifty
thousand acts or more to get something on that pretty ol’ heel, and he
drops you right in my lap. Pal, I can’t thank you enough! He was
supposed to send you back into the play, and instead o’ that you wind up
in yesterday! Why, I’ll blackmail him till the end of time!” He whirled
exultantly, called to a group of bedraggled little men who were
staggering under a cornerstone on their way to the junkyard. “Take it
easy, boys,” he called. “I got ol’ Iridel by the short hair. No more
busted backs! No more snotty messages! _Haw haw haw!”_

Harry, a little amazed at all this, put in a timid word, “Hey—Gurrah.
What about me?”

Gurrah turned. “You? Oh. _Tel-e-phone!”_ At his shout two little
workers, a trifle less bedraggled than the rest, trotted up. One hopped
up and perched on Gurrah’s right shoulder; the other draped himself over
the left, with his head forward. Gurrah grabbed the latter by the neck,
brought the man’s head close and shouted into his ear, “Give me Iridel!”
There was a moment’s wait, then the little man on his other shoulder
spoke in Iridel’s voice, into Gurrah’s ear, “Well?”

“Hiyah, fancy pants!”

“Fancy—I beg your—Who is this?”

“It’s Gurrah, you futuristic parasite. I got a couple things to tell
you.”

“Gurrah! How—_dare_ you talk to me like that! I’ll have you—”

“You’ll have me in your job if I tell all I know. You’re a wart on the
nose of progress, Iridel.”

“What is the meaning of this?”

“The meaning of this is that you had instructions sent to you by the
producer an’ you muffed them. Had an actor there, didn’t you? He saw the
boss, didn’t he? Told you he was to be sent back, didn’t he? Sent him
right over to me instead of to the play, didn’t you? You’re slippin’,
Iridel. Gettin’ old. Well, get off the wire. I’m callin’ the boss, right
now.”

“The boss? Oh—don’t do that, old man. Look, let’s talk this thing over.
Ah—about that shipment of three-legged dogs I was wanting you to round
up for me; I guess I can do without them. Any little favor I can do for
you—”

—“you’ll damn well do, after this. You better, Goldilocks.” Gurrah
knocked the two small heads together, breaking the connection and
probably the heads, and turned grinning to Harry. “You see,” he
explained, “that Iridel feller is a damn good supervisor, but he’s a
stickler for detail. He sends people to Limbo for the silliest little
mistakes. He never forgives anyone and he never forgets a slip. He’s the
cause of half the misery back here, with his hurry-up orders. Now things
are gonna be different. The boss has wanted to give Iridel a dose of his
own medicine for a long time now, but Irrie never gave him a chance.”

Harry said patiently, “About me getting back now—”

“My fran’!” Gurrah bellowed. He delved into a pocket and pulled out a
watch like Iridel’s. “It’s eleven forty on Tuesday,” he said. “We’ll
shoot you back there now. You’ll have to dope out your own reasons for
disappearing. Don’t spill too much, or a lot of people will suffer for
it—you the most. Ready?”

Harry nodded; Gurrah swept out a hand and opened the curtain to
nothingness. “You’ll find yourself quite a ways from where you started,”
he said, “because you did a little moving around here. Go ahead.”

“Thanks,” said Harry.

Gurrah laughed. “Don’t thank me, chum. You rate all the thanks! Hey—if,
after you kick off, you don’t make out so good up there, let them toss
you over to me. You’ll be treated good; you’ve my word on it. Beat it;
luck!”

Holding his breath, Harry Wright stepped through the doorway.

He had to walk thirty blocks to the garage, and when he got there the
boss was waiting for him.

“Where you been, Wright?”

“I—lost my way.”

“Don’t get wise. What do you think this is—vacation time? Get going on
the spring job. Damn it, it won’t be finished now till tomorra.”

Harry looked him straight in the eye and said, “Listen. It’ll be
finished tonight. I happen to know.” And, still grinning, he went back
into the garage and took out his tools.



BRAT


“It’s strictly a short order proposition,” said Michaele, tossing her
searchlight hair back on her shoulders. “We’ve got to have a baby eight
days from now or we’re out a sweet pile of cash.”

“We’ll get one somewhere. Couldn’t we adopt one or something?” I said,
plucking a stalk of grass from the bank of the brook and jamming it
between my front teeth.

“Takes weeks. We could kidnap one, maybe.”

“They got laws. Laws are for the protection of people.”

“Why does it always have to be other people?” Mike was beginning to
froth up. “Shorty, get your bulk up off the ground and think of
something.”

“Think better this way,” I said. “We could borrow one.”

“Look,” said Mike. “When I get my hands on a kid, that child and I have
to go through a short but rigorous period of training. It’s likely to be
rough. If _I_ had a baby and someone wanted to borrow it for any such
purpose, I’d be damned if I’d let it go.”

“Oh, you wouldn’t be too tough,” I said. “You’ve got maternal instincts
and stuff.”

“Shorty, you don’t seem to realize that babies are very delicate
creatures and require the most skilled and careful handling. I don’t
know _anything_ about them. I am an only child, and I went right from
high school into business college and from there into an office. The
only experience I ever had with a baby was once when I minded one for an
afternoon. It cried all the time I was there.”

“Should’ve changed its diapers.”

“I did.”

“Must’ve stuck it with a pin then.”

“I did not! You seem to know an awful lot about children,” she said
hotly.

“Sure I do. I was one myself once.”

“Heel!” She leaped on me and rolled me into the brook. I came up
spluttering and swearing. She took me by the neck, pulled me half up on
the bank and began thudding my head on the soft bank.

“Let go my apple,” I gasped. “This is no choking matter.”

“Now will you cooperate? Shorty, quit your kidding. This is serious.
Your Aunt Amanda has left us thirty grand, providing we can prove to her
sister Jonquil that we are the right kind of people. ‘Those who can take
care of a baby can take care of money,’ she used to say. We’ve got to be
under Jonquil’s eye for thirty days and take care of a baby. No
nursemaids, no laundresses, no nothing.”

“Let’s wait till we have one of our own.”

“Don’t be stupid! You know as well as I do that that money will set you
up in a business of your own as well as paying off the mortgage on the
shack. _And_ decorating it. _And_ getting us a new car.”

“_And_ a fur coat. _And_ a star sapphire. Maybe I’ll even get a new pair
of socks.”

_“Shorty!”_ A full lip quivered, green eyes swam.

“Oh darling, I didn’t mean—Come here and be kissed.”

She did. Then she went right on where she had left off. She’s like that.
She can puddle up at the drop of a cynicism, and when I apologize she
sniffs once and the tears all go back into her eyes without being used.
She holds them for when they’ll be needed instead of wasting them. “But
you know perfectly well that unless we get our hands on money—lots of
it—and darn soon, we’ll lose that little barn and the garage that we
built just to _put_ a new car in. Wouldn’t that be silly?”

“No. No garage, no need for a car. Save lots of money!”

“Shorty—please.”

“All right, all right. The fact that everything you say is correct
doesn’t help to get us a baby for thirty days. Damn money anyway! Money
isn’t everything!”

“Of course it isn’t, darling,” said Michaele sagely, “but it’s what you
buy everything with.”

A sudden splash from the brook startled us. Mike screamed, “Shorty—grab
him!”

I plunged into the water and hauled out a very tiny, very dirty—baby. It
was dressed in a tattered romper, and it had an elfin face, big blue
eyes and a golden topknot. It looked me over and sprayed
me—_b-b-b-b-b-br-r-r_—with a combination of a mouthful of water and a
Bronx cheer.

“Oh, the poor darling little angel!” said Mike. “Give him to me, Shorty!
You’re handling him like a bag of sugar!”

I stepped gingerly out of the brook and handed him over. Michaele
cradled the filthy mite in her arms, completely oblivious to the child’s
effect on her white linen blouse. The same white linen blouse, I
reflected bitterly, that I had been kicked out of the house for, when I
pitched some cigar ashes on it. It made me feel funny, watching Mike
handle that kid. I’d never pictured her that way.

The baby regarded Mike gravely as she discoursed to it about a poor
drowned woofum-wuffums, and did the bad man treat it badly, then. The
baby belched eloquently.

“He belches in English!” I remarked.

“Did it have the windy ripples?” cooed Mike. “Give us a kiss, honey
lamb.”

The baby immediately flung its little arms around her neck and planted a
whopper on her mouth.

“Wow!” said Mike when she got her breath. “Shorty, could you take
lessons!”

“Lessons my eye,” I said jealously. “Mike, that’s no baby, that’s some
old guy in his second childhood.”

“The idea.” She crooned to the baby for a moment, and then said
suddenly, “Shorty—what were we talking about before heaven opened up and
dropped this little bundle of—” Here the baby tried to squirm out of her
arms and she paused to get a better grip.

“Bundle of what?” I asked, deadpan.

“Bundle of joy.”

“Oh! Bundle of joy. What were we talking about? Ba—Hey! Babies!”

“That’s right. And a will. And thirty grand.”

I looked at the child with new eyes. “Who do you think belongs to the
younker?”

“Someone who apparently won’t miss him if we take him away for thirty
days,” she said. “No matter what bungling treatment I give him, it’s
bound to be better than what he’s used to. Letting a mere babe crawl
around in the woods! Why, it’s awful!”

“The mere babe doesn’t seem to mind,” I said. “Tell you what we’ll
do—we’ll take care of him for a few days and see if anyone claims him.
We’ll listen to the radio and watch the papers and the ol’ grapevine. If
anybody does claim him, maybe we can make a deal for a loan. At any rate
we’ll get to work on him right away.”

At this juncture the baby eeled out of Mike’s arms and took off across
the grass. “Sweet Sue! Look at him go!” she said, scrambling to her
feet. “Get him, Shorty!”

The infant, with twinkling heels, was crawling—running, on hands and
knees—down toward the brook. I headed him off just as he reached the
water, and snagged him up by the slack of his pants. As he came up off
the ground he scooped up a handful of mud and pitched it into my eyes. I
yelped and dropped him. When I could see a little daylight again I
beheld Michaele taking a running brodie into a blackberry bush. I
hurried over there, my eyelids making a nasty grating sound. Michaele
was lying prone behind the baby, who was also lying prone, his little
heels caught tightly in Mike’s hands. He was nonchalantly picking
blackberries.

Mike got her knees and then her feet under her, and picked up the baby,
who munched contentedly. “I’m disgusted with you,” she said, her eyes
blazing. “Flinging an innocent child around like that! Why, it’s a
wonder you didn’t break every bone in his poor little body!”

“But I—He threw mud in my—”

“Pick on someone your size, you big bully! I never knew till now that
you were a sadist with an inferiority complex.”

“And I never knew till now that it’s true what they say about the guy in
the three-cornered pants—the king can do no wrong! What’s happened to
your sense of justice, woman? That little brat there—”

“Shorty! Talking that way about a poor little baby! He’s beautiful! He
didn’t mean anything by what he did. He’s too young to know any better.”

In the biggest, deepest bass voice I have ever heard, the baby said,
“Lady, I do know what I’m doin’. I’m old enough!”

We both sat down.

“Did you say that?” Mike wanted to know.

I shook my head dazedly.

“Coupla dopes,” said the baby.

“Who—What are you?” asked Mike breathlessly.

“What do I look like?” said the baby, showing his teeth. He had very
sharp, very white teeth—two on the top gum and four on the lower.

“A little bundle of—”

“Shorty!” Mike held up a slim finger.

“Never mind him,” growled the child. “I know lots of four-letter words.
Go ahead, bud.”

“You go ahead. What are you—a midget?”

I no sooner got the second syllable of that word out when the baby
scuttled over to me and rocked my head back with a surprising right to
the jaw. “That’s the last time I’m going to be called that by anybody!”
he roared deafeningly. “No! I’m not a … a … what you said. I’m a pro tem
changeling, and that’s all.”

“What on earth is that?” asked Mike.

“Just what I said!” snapped the baby, “A pro tem changeling. When people
treat their babies too well—or not well enough—I show up in their
bassinets and give their folks what for. Only I’m always the spitting
image of their kid. When they wise up in the treatment, they get their
kids back—not before.”

“Who pulls the switch? I mean, who do you work for?”

The baby pointed to the grass at our feet. I had to look twice before I
realized what he was pointing at. The blades were dark and glossy and
luxuriant in a perfect ring about four feet in diameter.

Michaele gasped and put her knuckles to her lips. “The Little People!”
she breathed.

I was going to say, “Don’t be silly, Mike!” but her taut face and the
baby’s bland, nodding head stopped me.

“Will you work for us?” she asked breathlessly. “We need a baby for
thirty days to meet the conditions of a will.”

“I heard you talking about it,” said the baby. “No.”

“No?”

“No.”

A pause. “Look, kid,” I said, “what do you like? Money? Food? Candy?
Circuses?”

“I like steaks,” said the child gruffly. “Rare, fresh, thick. Onions.
Cooked so pink they say, ‘Moo!’ when you bite ’em. Why?”

“Good,” I said. “If you work for us, you’ll get all the steaks you can
eat.”

“No.”

“What would you want to work for us?”

“Nothin’. I don’t wanna work for you.”

“What are we going to do?” I whispered to Mike. “This would be perfect!”

“Leave it to me. Look—baby—what’s your name, anyway?”

“Percival. But don’t call me Percival! Butch.”

“Well, look, Butch; we’re in an awful jam. If we don’t get hold of a
sockful of money darn soon, we’ll lose that pretty little house over
there.”

“What’s the matter with _him?_ Can’t he keep up the payments? What is
he—a bum?”

“Hey, you—”

“Shut up, Shorty. He’s just beginning, Butch. He’s a graduate caterer.
But he has to get a place of his own before he can make any real money.”

“What happens if you lose th’ house?”

“A furnished room. The two of us.”

“What’s the matter with that?”

I tensed. This was a question I had asked her myself.

“Not for me. I just couldn’t live that way.” Mike would wheedle, but she
wouldn’t lie.

Butch furrowed his nonexistent eyebrows. “Couldn’t? Y’know, I like that.
High standards.” His voice deepened; the question lashed her. “Would you
live with him in a furnished room if there were no other way?”

“Well, of course.”

“I’ll help you,” said Butch instantly.

“Why?” I asked. “What do you expect to get out of it?”

“Nothing—some fun, maybe. I’ll help you because you need help. That’s
the only reason I ever do anything for anybody. That’s the only thing
you should have told me in the first place—that you were in a jam. You
and your bribes!” he snapped at me, and turned back to Mike. “I ain’t
gonna like that guy,” he said.

I said, “I already don’t like you.”

As we started back to the house Butch said, “But I’m gonna get my
steaks?”

Aunt Jonquil’s house stood alone in a large lot with its skirts drawn
primly up and an admonishing expression on its face. It looked as if it
had squeezed its way between two other houses to hide itself, and some
scoundrel had taken the other houses away.

And Aunt Jonquil, like her house, was five times as high as she was
wide, extremely practical, unbeautifully ornate, and stood alone. She
regarded marriage as an unfortunate necessity. She herself never married
because an unkind nature had ruled that she must marry a man, and she
thought that men were uncouth. She disapproved of smoking, drinking,
swearing, gambling, and loud laughter. Smiles she enjoyed only if she
could fully understand what was being smiled at; she mistrusted
innuendo. A polite laugh was a thing she permitted herself perhaps twice
a week, providing it was atoned for by ten minutes of frozen-faced
gravity. Added to which, she was a fine person. Swell.

On the way to the city, I sat through this unnerving conversation:

Butch said, “Fathead! Drive more carefully!”

“He’s doing all right,” said Mike. “Really. It surprises me. He’s
usually an Indian.” She was looking very lovely in a pea-green linen
jacket and a very simple white skirt and a buff straw hat that looked
like a halo.

Butch was wearing a lace-edged bonnet and an evil gleam in his eye to
offset the angelic combination of a pale-blue sweater with white rabbits
appliquéd on the sides, and fuzzy Angora booties on which he had
insisted because I was a wearing a navy-blue and he knew it would come
off all over me. He was, I think, a little uncomfortable due to my
rather unskilled handling of his diapering. And the reason for my doing
that job was to cause us more trouble than a little bit. Butch’s ideas
of privacy and the proprieties were advanced. He would no more think of
letting Mike bathe or change him than I would think of letting Garbo
change me. Thinking about this, I said:

“Butch, that prudishness of yours is going to be tough to keep up at
Aunt Jonquil’s.”

“You’ll keep it up, son,” said the infant, “or I’ll quit working. I
ain’t going to have no women messin’ around me that way. What d’ye think
I am—an exhibitionist?”

“I think you’re a liar,” I said. “And I’ll tell you why. You said you
made a life’s work of substituting for children. How could you with
ideas like that? Who you trying to horse up?”

“Oh,” said Butch, “that. Well, I might’s well confess to you that I
ain’t done that kind of work in years. I got sick of it. I was gettin’
along in life and … well, you can imagine. Well, about thutty years ago
I was out on a job an’ the woman was changin’ my drawers when a
half-dozen babes arrived from her sewin’ circle. She left off workin’
right where she was and sang out for them all to come in and see how
pretty I looked the way I was. I jumped out o’ th’ bassinet, grabbed a
diaper off th’ bed an’ held it in front of me while I called the whole
bunch of ’em what they were and told them to get out of there. I got
fired for it. I thought they’d put me to work hauntin’ houses or
cleanin’ dishes for sick people or somethin’, but no—they cracked down
on me. Told me I’d have to stay this way until I was repentant.”

“Are you?” giggled Mike.

Butch snorted. “Not so you’d notice it,” he growled. “Repentant because
I believe in common decency? Heh?”

We waited a long time after we rang the bell before Jonquil opened the
door. That was to give her time to peep out at us from the tumorous bay
window and compose her features to meet the niece by marriage her
unfastidious nephew had acquired.

“Jonquil!” I said heartily, dashing forward and delivering the required
peck on her cheek. Jonquil expected her relatives to use her leathery
cheek precisely as she herself used a napkin. Pat. Dry surface on dry
surface. Moisture is vulgar.

“And this is Michaele,” I said, stepping aside.

Mike said, “How do you do?” demurely, and smiled.

Aunt Jonquil stepped back a pace and held her head as if she were
sighting at Mike through her nostrils. “Oh, yes,” she said without
moving her lips. The smile disappeared from Mike’s face and came back
with an effort of will that hurt. “Come in,” said Jonquil at last, and
with some reluctance.

We trailed through a foyer and entered the parlor. It wasn’t a living
room, it was an honest-to-goodness front parlor with antimacassars and
sea shells. The tone of the room was sepia—light from the background of
the heavily flowered wallpaper, dark for the furniture. The chairs and a
hard-looking divan were covered with a material that looked as if it had
been bleeding badly some months ago. When Butch’s eye caught the
glassed-in monstrosity of hay and dead flowers over the mantelpiece, he
retched audibly.

“What a lovely place you have here,” said Mike.

“Glad you like it,” acknowledged Jonquil woodenly. “Let’s have a look at
the child.” She walked over and peered at Butch. He scowled at her.
“Good heavens!” she said.

“Isn’t he lovely?” said Mike.

“Of course,” said Jonquil without enthusiasm, and added, after searching
her store of ready-made expressions, “the little wudgums!” She
kitchy-cooed his chin with her sharp forefinger. He immediately began to
wail, with the hoarse, high-pitched howl of a genuine baby.

“The poor darling’s tired after his trip,” said Mike.

Jonquil, frightened by Butch’s vocal explosion, took the hint and led
the way upstairs.

“Is the whole damn house like this?” whispered Butch hoarsely.

“No. I don’t know. Shut up,” said Mike. My sharp-eared aunt swiveled on
the steps. “And go to sleepy-bye,” she crooned aloud. She bent her head
over his and hissed, “And keep on crying, you little wretch!”

Butch snorted and then complied.

We walked into the bedroom, austerely furnished, the kind of room they
used in the last century for sleeping purposes only, and therefore
designed so that it was quite unattractive to anyone with anything but
sleep on his mind. It was all gray and white; the only spot of color in
the room was the bedstead, which was a highly polished pipe organ. Mike
lay the baby down on the bed and stripped off his booties, his shirt and
his sweater. Butch put his fist in his mouth and waited tensely.

“Oh—I almost forgot. I have the very same bassinet you used, up in the
attic,” said Jonquil. “I should have had it ready. Your telegram was
rather abrupt, Horace. You should have let me know sooner that you’d
come today.” She angled out of the room.

“Horace! I’ll be—Is your name Horace?” asked Butch in delight.

“Yes,” I said gruffly. “But it’s Shorty to you, see, little man?”

“And I was worried about you callin’ me Percival!”

I helped set up the bassinet and we tucked Butch in for his nap. I
managed to be fooling around with his bedclothes when Mike bent over
dutifully to give him a kiss. I grabbed Butch’s chin and held it down so
the kiss landed on his forehead. He was mightily wroth, and bit my
finger till it bled. I stuck it in my pocket and told him, “I’ll see you
later, bummy-wummy!” He made a noise, and Jonquil fled, blushing.

We convened in the kitchen, which was far and away the pleasantest room
in the house. “Where on earth did you get that child?” Jonquil asked,
peering into a nice-smelling saucepan on the old-fashioned range.

“Neighbor’s child,” I said. “They were very poor and were glad to have
him off their hands for a few weeks.”

“He’s a foundling,” Mike ingeniously supplemented. “Left on their
doorstep. He’s never been adopted or anything.”

“What’s his name?”

“We call him Butch.”

“How completely vulgar!” said Jonquil. “I will have no child named Butch
in my house. We shall have to give him something more refined.”

I had a brain wave. “How about Percival?” I said.

“Percival. Percy,” murmured Jonquil, testing it out. “That is much
better. That will do. I knew somebody called Percival once.”

“Oh—you better not call him Percival,” said Mike, giving me her
no-good-can-come-of-this look.

“Why not?” I said blandly. “Lovely name.”

“Yeah,” said Mike. “Lovely.”

“What time does Percival get his dinner?” asked Jonquil.

“Six o’clock.”

“Good,” said Jonquil. “I’ll feed him!”

“Oh no, Aunt J—I mean, Miss Timmins. That’s our job.”

I think Jonquil actually smiled. “I think I’d like to do it,” she said.
“You’re not making an inescapable duty out of this, are you?”

“I don’t know what you mean,” said Mike, a little coldly. “We _like_
that child.”

Jonquil peered intently at her. “I believe you do,” she said in a
surprised tone, and started out of the room. At the door she called
back, “You needn’t call me Miss Timmins,” and she was gone.

“Well!” said Mike.

“Looks like you won the war, babe.”

“Only the first battle, honey, and don’t think I don’t know it. What a
peculiar old duck she is!” She busied herself at the stove, warming up
some strained carrots she had taken out of a jar, sterilizing a bottle
and filling it with pineapple juice. We had read a lot of baby manuals
in the last few days!

Suddenly, “Where’s your aunt?” Mike asked.

“I dunno. I guess she’s—Good grief!”

There was a dry-boned shriek from upstairs and then the sound of hard
heels pounding along the upper hallway toward the front stairs. We went
up the back stairs two at time, and saw the flash of Jonquil’s dimity
skirts as she disappeared downstairs. We slung into the bedroom. Butch
was lying in his bassinet doubled up in some kind of spasm.

“Now what?” I groaned.

“He’s choking,” said Mike. “What are we going to do, Shorty?”

I didn’t know. Mike ran and turned him over. His face was all twisted up
and he was pouring sweat and gasping. “Butch! Butch—What’s the matter?”

And just then he got his wind back. “_Ho ho ho!”_ he roared in his
bullfrog voice, and lost it again.

“He’s laughing,” Mike whispered.

“That’s the funniest way I ever saw anyone commit sideways,” I said
glumly. I reached out and smacked him across the puss. “Butch! Snap out
of it!”

“Ooh!” said Butch. “You lousy heel. I’ll get you for that.”

“Sorry, Butch. But I thought you were strangling.”

“Guess I was at that,” he said, and started to laugh again. “Shorty, I
couldn’t help it. See, that ol’ vinegar visage come in here and started
staring at me. I stared right back. She bends over the bassinet. I grin.
She grins. I open my mouth. She opens her mouth. I reach in and pull out
her bridgework and pitch it out the windy. Her face sags down in the
middle like a city street in Scranton. She does the steam-siren act and
hauls on out o’ here. But Shorty—Mike”—and he went off into another
helpless spasm—“you shoulda seen her _face!”_

We all subsided when Jonquil came in again. “Just tending to my
petunias,” she said primly. “Why—you have dinner on the table. Thank
you, child.”

“Round two,” I said noncommittally.

Around two in the morning I was awakened by a soft thudding in the
hallway. I came up on one elbow. Mike was fast asleep. But the bassinet
was empty. I breathed an oath and tiptoed out into the hall. Halfway
down was Butch, crawling rapidly. In two strides I had him by the scruff
of the neck.

_“Awk!”_

“Shut up! Where do you think you’re going?”

He thumbed at a door down the hall.

“No, Butch. Get on back to bed. You can’t go there.”

He looked at me pleadingly. “I can’t? Not for _nothin’?”_

“Not for nothin’.”

“Aw—Shorty. Gimme a break.”

“Break my eyebrow! You belong in that bassinet.”

“Just this once, huh, Shorty?”

I looked worriedly at Jonquil’s bedroom door. “All right, dammit. But
make it snappy.”

Butch went on strike the third day. He didn’t like those strained
vegetables and soups to begin with, and then one morning he heard the
butcher boy downstairs, singing out, “Here’s yer steaks, Miss Timmins!”
That was enough for little Percival.

“There’s got to be a new deal around here, chum,” he said the next time
he got me in the room alone. “I’m gettin’ robbed.”

“Robbed? Who’s taking what?”

“Youse. You promise me steaks, right? Listen, Shorty, I’m through with
that pap you been feedin’ me. I’m starvin’ to death on it.”

“What would you suggest?” I asked calmly. “Shall I have one done to your
taste and delivered to your room, sir?”

“You know what, Shorty? You’re kiddin’.” He jabbed a tiny forefinger
into the front of my shirt for emphasis. “You’re kiddin’, but I ain’t.
An’ what you just said is a pretty good idea. I want a steak once a
day—here in this room. I mean it, son.”

I opened my mouth to argue and then looked deep into those baby eyes. I
saw an age-old stubbornness, an insurmountable firmness of character
there. I shrugged and went out.

In the kitchen I found Mike and Jonquil deeply engaged in some
apparently engrossing conversation about rayon taffeta. I broke it up by
saying, “I just had an idea. Tonight I’m going to eat my supper upstairs
with Bu … Percival. I want you to get to know each other better, and I
would commune with another male for a spell. I’m outnumbered down here.”

Jonquil actually did smile this time. Smiles seemed to be coming to her
a little more easily these days. “I think that’s a lovely idea,” she
said. “We’re having steak tonight, Horace. How do you like yours?”

“Broiled,” said Mike, “and well d—”

“Rare!” I said, sending a glance at Mike. She shut up, wonderingly.

And that night I sat up in the bedroom, watching that miserable infant
eat my dinner. He did it with gusto, with much smacking of the lips and
grunting in ecstasy.

“What do you expect me to do with this?” I asked, holding up a cupful of
lukewarm and sticky strained peas.

“I don’t know,” said Butch with his mouth full. “That’s your problem.”

I went to the window and looked out. Directly below was a spotless
concrete walk which would certainly get spattered if I pitched the
unappetizing stuff out there. “Butch—won’t you get rid of this stuff for
me?”

He sighed, his chin all greasy from my steak. “Thanks, no,” he said
luxuriously. “Couldn’t eat another bite.”

I tasted the peas tentatively, held my nose and gulped them down. As I
swallowed the last of them I found time to direct a great many highly
unpleasant thoughts at Butch. “No remarks, _Percy,”_ I growled.

He just grinned. I picked up his plates and the cup and started out.
“Haven’t you forgotten something?” he asked sleepily.

“What?” He nodded toward the dresser and the bottle which stood on it.
Boiled milk with water and corn syrup added. “Damned if I will!” I
snapped.

He grinned, opened his mouth and started to wail.

“Shut up!” I hissed. “You’ll have them women up here claiming I’m
twisting your tail or something.”

“That’s the idea,” said Butch. “Now drink your milk like a good little
boy and you can go out and play.”

I muttered something impotently, ripped the nipple off the bottle and
gulped the contents.

“That’s for telling the old lady to call me Percy,” said Butch. “I want
another steak tomorrow. ’Bye now.”

And that’s how it came about that I, a full-grown man in good health,
lived for close to two weeks on baby food. I think that the deep respect
I have for babies dates from this time, and is founded on my realization
of how good-natured they are on the diet they get. What really griped me
was having to watch him eat my meals. Brother, I was earning that thirty
grand the hard way.

About the beginning of the third week Butch’s voice began to change.
Mike noticed it first and came and told me.

“I think something’s the matter with him,” she said. “He doesn’t seem as
strong as he was, and his voice is getting high-pitched.”

“Don’t borrow trouble, beautiful,” I said, putting my arm around her.
“Lord knows he isn’t losing any weight on the diet he’s getting. And he
has plenty of lung power.”

“That’s another thing,” she said in a puzzled tone. “This morning he was
crying and I went in to see what he wanted. I spoke to him and shook him
but he went on crying for almost five minutes before he suddenly sat up
and said, ‘What? What? Eh—it’s you, Mike.’ I asked him what he wanted;
he said nothing and told me to scram.”

“He was kidding you.”

She twisted out of my arms and looked up at me, her golden brows just
touching over the snowy crevasse of her frown. “Shorty—he was
crying—_real tears.”_

That was the same day that Jonquil went into town and bought herself a
half dozen bright dresses. And I strongly suspect she had something done
to her hair. She looked fifteen years younger when she came in and said,
“Horace—it seems to me you used to smoke.”

“Well … yes—”

“Silly boy! You’ve stopped smoking just because you think I wouldn’t
approve! I like to have a man smoking around the house. Makes it more
homey. Here.”

She pressed something into my hand and fled, red-faced and bright-eyed.
I looked at what she had given me. Two packs of cigarettes. They weren’t
my brand, but I don’t think I have ever been so deeply touched.

I went and had a talk with Butch. He was sleeping lightly when I entered
the room. I stood there looking down at him. He was awful tiny, I
thought. I wonder what it is these women gush so much about.

Butch’s eyes were so big under his lids that they seemed as if they just
couldn’t stay closed. The lashes lay on his cheek with the most gentle
of delicate touches. He breathed evenly, with occasionally a tiny catch.
It made nice listening, somehow. I caught a movement out of the corner
of my eye—his hand, clenching and unclenching. It was very rosy, and far
too small to be so perfect. I looked at my own hand and at his, and I
just couldn’t believe it …

He woke suddenly, opening his eyes and kicking. He looked first at the
window, and then at the wall opposite. He whimpered, swallowed, gave a
little cry. Then he turned his head and saw me. For a long moment he
watched me, his deep eyes absolutely unclouded; suddenly he sat up and
shook his head. “Hello,” he said sleepily.

I had the strange sensation of watching a person wake up twice. I said,
“Mike’s worried about you.” I told him why.

“Really?” he said. “I—don’t feel much different. Heh! Imagine this
happening to me.”

“Imagine what happening?”

“I’ve heard of it before, but I never … Shorty, you won’t laugh at me,
will you?”

I thought of all that baby food, and all those steaks. “Don’t worry. You
ain’t funny.”

“Well, you know what I told you about me being a changeling. Changelings
is funny animals. Nobody likes ’em. They raise all kinds of hell.
Fathers resent ’em because they cry all night. Mothers get panicky if
they don’t know it’s a changeling, and downright resentful if they do. A
changeling has a lot of fun bein’ a brat, but he don’t get much
emotional sugar, if you know what I mean. Well, in my case … dammit, I
can’t get used to it! Me, of all people! … well, someone around
here … uh … loves me.”

“Not me,” I said quickly, backing away.

“I know, not you.” He gave me a sudden, birdlike glance and said softly,
“You’re a pretty good egg, Shorty.”

“Huh? Aw—”

“Anyway, they say that if any woman loves a changeling, he loses his
years and his memories, and turns into a real human kid. But he’s got to
be loved for himself, not for some kid he replaces.” He shifted
uneasily. “I don’t … I can’t get used to it happening to me, but … oh
oh!” A pained expression came across his face and he looked at me
helplessly. I took in the situation at a glance.

A few minutes later I corralled Mike. “Got something for you,” I said,
and handed her something made of layette cloth.

“What’s … Shorty! Not—”

I nodded. “Butch’s getting infantile,” I said.

While she was doing the laundry a while later I told her what Butch had
said. She was very quiet while I told her, and afterward.

“Mike—if there is anything in all this fantastic business, it wouldn’t
be you, would it, that’s making this change in him?”

She thought it over for a long time and then said, “I think he’s
terribly cute, Shorty.”

I swung her around. She had soapsuds on her temple, where her fingers
had trailed when she tossed her bright hair back with her wrist.

“Who’s number one man around here?” I whispered. She laughed and said I
was silly and stood on tiptoe to kiss me. She’s a little bit of a thing.

The whole thing left me feeling awful funny.

Our thirty days were up, and we packed. Jonquil helped us, and I’ve
never seen her so full of life. Half the time she laughed, and once in a
while she actually broke down and giggled. And at lunch she said to us,
“Horace—I’m afraid to let you take little Percy back with you. You said
that those people who had him were sort of ne’er-do-wells, and they
wouldn’t miss him much. I wish you’d leave him with me for a week or so
while you find out just what their home life is like, and whether they
really want him back. If not, I … well, I’ll see that he gets a good
place to live in.”

Mike and I looked at each other, and then Mike looked up at the ceiling,
toward the bedroom. I got up suddenly. “I’ll ask him,” I said, and
walked upstairs.

Butch was sitting up in the bassinet trying to catch a sunbeam. “Hey!” I
said. “Jonquil wants you to stick around. What do you say?”

He looked at me, and his eyes were all baby, nothing else.

“Well?”

He made some tremendous mental effort, pursed his lips, took a deep
breath, held it for an unconscionable time, and then one word burst out.
“Percy!”

“I get it,” I said. “So long, fella.”

He didn’t say anything; just went back to his sunbeam.

“It’s O.K. with him,” I said when I got back to the table.

“You never struck me as the kind of man who would play games with
children,” laughed Jonquil. “You’ll do … you’ll do. Michaele, dear—I
want you to write to me. I’m so glad you came.”

So we got our thirty grand. We wrote as soon as we reached the
shack—_our_ shack, now—that no, the people wouldn’t want Percy back, and
that his last name was—Fay. We got a telegram in return thanking us and
telling us that Jonquil was adopting the baby.

“You goin’ to miss ol’ Butch?” I asked Mike.

“No,” she said. “Not too much. I’m sort of saving up.”

“Oh,” I said.



THE ANONYMOUS


WHEN CHLOE HOOKED GABE, there was quite a ripple about it. The ripple,
as such things will, spread in widening circles from office to drugstore
to nightclub to the society columns, and everyone said, “Oh, the lucky
girl, to get such a handsome fiancé!” Or, conversely, “Imagine being
married to a man as good-looking as that! The poor kid!”

No, they weren’t society, but it hit print all the same. What
notoriety—for such it was—surrounded the engagement was Gabe’s. He was a
Figure. He Stood for Something. Pictures were taken of him and published
in magazines, and the pictures were clipped out and hoarded by
unprepossessing girls of all ages. He was Glamour—he was the
Unattainable. Men disliked him because he was a byword of masculine
desirability among all the girls they knew. Girls went coiffure over
leather-lifts about the gentleman, following him, pestering him, forming
a living halo of studied spontaneity about him. Some said he was
Hayundsome. Some said he was just too, too. Most just said, “Oh, my!” at
the first glimpse of his noble profile, and lapsed into ecstatic sighs.
Oh, he was a killer.

And Chloe—well, she got cuffed around plenty, behind her back. It was
amazing the way her friends dropped away from her when the news got
around. The girls wondered in noisy whispers how she had managed to
catch him, with all her obvious flaws, none of which had been worth
mentioning before. One said, “She must have compromised him. She
couldn’t possibly have done it any other way.” Another agreed
delightedly, for such is the feminine way, and said, “I don’t know how
she has the gall to face us. If I were her I’d blush to the dark roots
of my blonde hair.” A third chimed in wistfully, “But Gabe’s so
wonderful. Chloe is really lucky,” and was so pitied for her attitude
that she was frozen out of the conversation. As for Chloe’s men friends,
they took the attitude that they were beaten, hopelessly outclassed, and
might just as well take their efforts elsewhere.

Chloe was hardly deserving of such treatment. She was a taffy-blonde,
with long green eyes and a build something on the order of a Coca-Cola
bottle. She had brain-power and differed from the ordinary run of brainy
women in that she used hers. She caught Gabe by the simple tactic of
refusing to “Oh!” and “Ah!” his every word and gesture, and he found
this so refreshing that he asked her to marry him. Her head whirled
violently at that, and, by sheer power of will, she had the whirling
generate centripetal force enough to keep her from flinging herself into
his arms. She smiled tremulously and squeezed his hand, and that was
that.

As for Gabe, he liked it—the whole idea of it. It was generally taken
for granted that Gabe was one to be envied. He had everything, hadn’t
he? He had looks, and he had the kind of job that could keep him clothed
to suit those looks, and he had the natural manner for clothes like
that—he would have been a distinguished man even if he had a face like
the hunchback of Notre Dame. As it was, he had the face of a Greek god
after a beauty treatment.

It wasn’t just his features, though Lord knows they were superspecial
enough, what with his olive skin and his arched, pomegranate lips and
his inscrutable eyes, and his rich dark hair. It was the way he used
them, too. He was credited with a thousand virtues he couldn’t possibly
have possessed. To look at a woman wasn’t a mere matter of focussing his
eyes on her. It was to look deep into her crystal orbs—under his glance
a woman’s eyes immediately became crystal orbs—with a gaze so full of
deep intent, of subdued and thrilling passion, of such age-old
understanding, of such fright-fraught desires, that the poor girl found
herself—insisted on being—a willing slave to him. And it was most
embarrassing to him, because he was quite without intentions of any sort
except to be agreeable. Gabe, you see, was rather a simple soul.

And his voice—Why, the man was incapable of raising it without its being
warmly vibrant, or of lowering it without transmitting unspoken
messages. The tones of it were as the bugle to the military man, the
gong to a racehorse, as the piper’s flute to the children—and rats—of
Hamelin. At the first sound of it, spinsters left their crocheting,
maidens their movie magazines, and wives their husbands. And he had a
hell of a time getting rid of them. If he tried to be polite about it,
they were sure he was being considerate of their ex-current paramours,
and that made him very noble and self-sacrificing, and they loved it. If
he called a spade a spade, or even a dirty old shovel, they thought he
was being dominant, and loved that too. If he tried making them jealous
by going with another woman, why then they got jealous, and he had the
other woman on his hands.

But with Chloe it was different. She was that rare type of woman—there
are such—who carried a constitutional resentment of magnificent men.
Gabe was a bit more magnificent than most, but she doggedly stuck by her
guns and treated him the way she had always treated what she called “his
kind.” She took for granted that if a man were better-looking than
average, he was correspondingly more vain, more conceited, more
narrow-minded, more self-centered and more stupid than one who had to
rely on his personality to ingratiate himself with her. Any man who
treats extra-beautiful women in this fashion has the right idea; but for
a woman to take this tack is dangerous, as it is not an invariable rule,
and she can get herself disliked by handsome men, categorically. She
then has no alternative but to be less finicky about the men she is
unpleasant to, and ultimately she will find all men desirable and all of
them detestable. Chloe was headed in that general direction when she
received Gabe’s surprising proposal.

He made it in all sincerity. He was, as has been remarked, a simple
soul, a sheep in wolf’s clothing. He found it intoxicatingly refreshing
to discover a girl who would slap him around—a girl who would tell him
to stop his nonsense when he inadvertently said something sweet, and who
would accuse him of unbearable ostentation every time he chose a
necktie; who would tell him to stop bragging if he mentioned that he had
had an egg for breakfast, and that he would look better with a mustache
because it would cover part of his face. He was delighted by insults and
charmed by disparagement, for here, in a lifetime of being a beautiful
baby and a lovely child and a handsome youth and a glamorous man, was
the first time that a woman had ever spoken to him with anything but
awed admiration. His reaction was precisely the same as that of a
one-eyed dwarf with halitosis who has been gently treated by the most
beautiful woman who ever lived; he fell hopelessly in love. She called
him “you revolting swell-head,” and he loved it. She told someone in his
hearing that he was an insufferable, humorless bore, and he went out and
bought her a diamond pendant which he could not afford, and which she
exchanged immediately for a genuine dyed weasel mink coat, which he
despised, and he loved her for her independence. He didn’t even mind it
when she began to run true to form. She did; after all, she was a woman,
in spite of the fact that she was an unusual one. She began crabbing
about the way other women acted toward him.

And they really acted. Anyone who has been publicly engaged knows that,
for some obscure reason, an engaged man is considered prey, and is the
recipient of more ogling glances in any given day of his engagement than
he received during any week before. Gabe was badgered. He became
familiar with the friendly type of girl—the one who says, “Do tell me
all about your fiancée; can she cook? She must be a dear; do you think
she’ll be able to handle your money? I’m so glad for you. I do _hope_
you’ll be happy. Of course, marriage is such an important step, but if
you think you’ve chosen the right girl, I guess you’ll be all right.”

All of which gave Gabe much food for thought. One, or two, or half a
dozen “friendly” girls, all envious of the fiancée, all trying
desperately to break things up between them by their innuendoes—any man
can handle them, if the fiancée in question has him properly hooked. But
with Gabe, there were scores of them. Every single female of his
acquaintance worked her malicious wiles on him, until he was embroiled
in a mass of dreary conjectures about Chloe. His mind was not very fast;
things occurred to him with startling suddenness, and he brought himself
up sharply after a particularly harrowing session with the realization
that he had cold feet. He was actually becoming afraid of Chloe and the
fast-approaching connubial state. He locked himself in his room and
faced himself sternly. He was frightened by his own fright, and
stubbornly began to beat it down, point by point. He was still in love,
and so he reasoned as a lover, and therefore came to many satisfactory
conclusions about her. If she couldn’t cook, then they’d eat in
restaurants or hire someone who could. If she turned out to be a bad
manager, then he’d do the managing. He glossed over her more evident
faults, excused those which might have existed, and forgot those he was
tempted to investigate. It was a close thing, but he emerged again into
the everyday world a man with an ideal—Chloe. “And,” he swore
dramatically to himself, “If I’m not good enough for Chloe, then by
damn, I’ll make myself over the way she wants me.” Lousy technique. But
then, what man who is truly in love can hang on to his technique?

So he became humble to Chloe, and defiant to the “friendly” girls who
swarmed around increasingly as the wedding date approached. That was the
cause of all his trouble—his stubborn determination to make himself
over.

For Chloe, having achieved her goal, was foolish enough to believe that
she could keep him by continuing to act the way she had to get him, not
knowing that the girl who continually surprises her man is the one who
marries him. She was persistently destructive in her comments and her
conversation. Every time she was secretly thrilled by his word or
gesture, she kept it a secret, and loudly demanded that he remove the
thrilling characteristic. He looked absolutely stunning, for instance,
in a dark green gabardine; and as soon as she saw it she refused to go
out with him in it, saying that it was too informal-looking for the
black cire satin she had on. She didn’t like the red pinstriped serge he
substituted after a frenzied and expensive taxi ride home and back, but
she said nothing about it. She didn’t particularly care whether or not
she changed him for the better; so long as she changed him she was
satisfied. She felt that he was happier with her if she was persistently
waspish and bullying. She went, eventually, a little too far.

For after Gabe had completely replaced his wardrobe, changed his
diction, acquired new reading habits, learned to play bridge, joined
four lodges so she could force him to break off any time she wished it,
and innumerable other impositions, there was nothing left for her to
work on but the very thing about him that made him desirable—his looks.
And she hadn’t sense enough not to stop there. She criticized the color
of his hair, his eyes, his skin. She accused him of vanity, of posing,
and of playing to his feminine galleries. She—well, let’s listen in to a
conversation.

It was at Romany Joe’s place, which Gabe didn’t like, and to which Chloe
had therefore dragged him. Romany Joe’s was a gypsy restaurant whose
cuisine was as authentically gypsy as chop suey is Chinese. It was
complete with a string orchestra, flowing flowered organdies wrapped
around cigarette girls, wandering violinists, and fortune tellers.

Chloe, radiant in something pale-green and fluffy, was in her stride,
while Gabe diffidently yessed her. “Stop admiring your reflection in the
waitresses’ eyes,” she said pleasantly, “And see if you can’t get
another wine. Your taste in wines is foul.” She daintily pushed away a
crystal goblet of genuine 1923 Oporto.

Gabe stirred uneasily—he had spent half the previous evening boning up
on the subject. “All right, darling.” Chloe fought down an impulse to
fling herself into his arms at the gentle, caressing tones of his voice
and said,

“Gabe, for once and all—you’ve got to learn to keep your endearments to
yourself in public places. I won’t have you making a spectacle of
yourself any longer. Keep that sort of thing for when we’re alone.”

“But we’re never alone,” he said sadly.

“Well, we will be after we’re married. Don’t stare at me that way, just
so you can turn your profile to that minx at the other table. She saw it
when you came in.”

Gabe sighed miserably and turned his head away. Chloe followed his gaze,
rather hoping that it would be resting on something luscious enough to
arouse her audible jealousy. But Gabe was looking at an old, old gypsy
woman who hobbled down the line of booths, stopping at each to mumble a
few words. Chloe turned over a couple of scathing remarks and finally
settled on, “Gabe! You’re disgusting! Stop your ogling—have you no age
limit?”

Gabe looked at her apologetically, remembered her warning about the
brunette over there with the profile-fixation, looked up at the old
woman, and then dropped his eyes to his long brown hands, really not
knowing what to do with his eyes. Chloe said, “Stop trying to look
penitent. You know I can see through you.” And just then the old gypsy
stopped at their booth.

“I tal fortune, pretty lady? Gen-tul-mun?”

Gabe thought as rapidly as his permanently fuzzy mind would permit.
Chloe would doubtless feel that to give the woman any money would be
wanton extravagance, and that to listen to her mumbo-jumbo would be
childish. He shook his head and said, “Thanks, no.” So Chloe leaned over
and whispered viciously in his ear, “What’s the matter with you? Do you
begrudge a poor old woman a living? Call her back, Gabe! Or is she too
old for you to waste any time with her?” Gabe passed up this astonishing
reversal and beckoned to the crone. She showed her gums and limped back.

“Will you tell the lady’s fortune?” Gabe asked. The old woman stared at
Chloe with bright button-eyes.

“Maybe the lady no like,” she said.

“What do you mean?” asked Gabe.

“Maybe I tal true fortune, maybe true fortune not good. Maybe”—she
raised her arms and let them fall—“the lady no like.”

“Don’t be silly,” said Chloe, and laughed. “You fortune tellers are all
alike. I’ll take a trip, there’s danger ahead but it’ll be all right in
the end, there will be two men in my life and one of them will win out,
beware of—”

“Ax-cuze me, lady,” said the old woman gently. “Bot you are not right.
All fortune tellers are not alike, no. Many tal you zis stuff, but only
I tal you true. I have—” she waved a floppy reticule “—real magics an’
spells in zis bag. I can tal you what weel happen if you don’t use one
of my spells, an’ what will happen if you do. I can make your wishes
come true. You will see, no?”

“We will see, yes,” said Chloe. “Gabe, cross the old palm with silver
and let’s see what happens.”

Gabe reached into his pocket, but the gypsy put out her hand and stopped
him. “Not yat, good mister,” she said. “Wait first.”

That radical departure from custom should have been proof enough to both
of them that this gypsy was indeed not like other gypsies!

The old lady busily opened her bag and drew out several things which she
laid on the table. There was a hank of coarse black hair, a gold button,
a half-dozen odd-sized jars of salve, and four old sheepskin scrolls.
She arranged them in the shape of an unequal pentagon, and then began
making the motions of taking more objects out of her bag and placing
them carefully in the air over those on the table. Gabe and Chloe
watched, entranced by the seriousness with which she worked.

The gypsy paused a moment, to see if her invisible structure would stand
firm without her steady old hands on it, and then swiftly reached out
and ran a lock of Chloe’s hair through her fingers. Chloe would be
appalled to discover when she reached home and a mirror later that that
one lock had returned to its natural shade, a striking but unfashionable
red-gold.

“Ah!” she cackled, peering through what must have been an aperture in
the unseen pile of intangibles on the table. _“Orel … orel … adartha
cay.…”_

“Wh—?” asked Gabe.

“Shh. Is gypsy language. Lady has color-hair to make veree easy gypsy
spells. This one good now—watch.”

A man strolled close by playing a violin, and the old woman whirled and
snatched at the air, tying swift, elaborate knots out of nothing and
twining them about and through the Thing on the table. Gabe had the odd
feeling that she was stringing out the notes from the violin, tying them
into a strong, thin, sweet pattern.

“Now. Is ready. I tal you fortune.” The gypsy stared through nothingness
at Chloe for so long that the girl shifted uneasily in her chair and
said lightly, “Well? What’s going to happen to me?”

“You will make wan wish,” said the gypsy. “An’ the wish will come true.
An’ then you will be as you were, an’ for years you will be sorry for
what you have done.”

Gabe and Chloe turned puzzled eyes to each other; and whether the old
lady vanished into her house of mystic cards between them, or sank into
the floor, or simply scuttled off, they never knew. But in the time it
took them to look away and then look back, she was—gone.

“Well!” said Chloe.

“I didn’t pay her yet,” said Gabe, looking vainly around.

“Why should you?” snapped Chloe. “She didn’t do anything to earn her
money.”

“But you just said I shouldn’t begrudge—”

“I said nothing of the kind, and you have no right to put that
interpretation on it if I did. Is that what life with you is going to
be, Gabe—bickering all the time, and having you throw everything I’ve
ever said in my face? You’re a stupid arrogant fool, and I really fail
to see why I—”

“Chloe!” he cried before she could get the cruel words out. “Oh, Chloe,
don’t ever say you’re sorry! Darling, I’ll do anything to be worthy of
you. Please don’t keep telling me how poor a match I make for
you—please. I’ll do anything—what do you want me to be? What’s the
matter with me?” The poor, lovely, love-lorn lug was positively abject.
He was leaning close to her, pleading in his eyes and his voice and his
pose; and then he made one of those perfectly sincere gestures which are
sneered at by you and you as melodramatic and laughable—he buried his
face in his hands, and his shoulders shook.

Chloe was touched, but she would stick by her guns until death parted
her from them. She looked down her nose at the handsome back of his
neck, and sneered. A complementary sobbing caught her ear; she turned
and saw the brunette at the other table, who had been eagerly watching
the discussion, sobbing quite openly with Gabe. She was a sympathetic
soul, and then, of course, she was more than taken with Chloe’s
spectacular escort.

Chloe was furious. The cloying mass of females that circulated about
Gabe’s beautiful but disinterested head had bothered her many a time
before, but never to this extent. Oh, why did he have to make such a
hopeless idiot of himself? She leaned closely to him and snarled in his
ear,

“All right, pretty boy, I’ll tell you what’s the matter with you. You’re
too wonderful-looking to be alive. You attract too much attention. You
have too long a string of stupid females trailing around after you, and
I’m sick and tired of it and—” here she waxed very intense and lost all
pretense of being a lady _“_—_and I wish to God you had the most
ordinary-looking mug on earth!”_

He raised his head and their eyes met; and then, up between them flared
a cloud of blinding purple flame, shot with yellow and blue-white. It
hung for a split second over the table—over the paraphernalia the gypsy
had left there; and even in that brief interval, Gabe saw that the flame
was five-sided, irregular, exactly in the form of the thing the gypsy
had built there. Then their eyes gave out. Chloe said “Eek!” and sat for
a moment frozen, and Gabe said “Ulp!” and followed suit. When sight
returned to Chloe, she was quite alone. She sat where she was, her hands
on her cheeks, her eyes wide and frightened, watching the startled
darknesses receding. That she couldn’t see Gabe at first was, she
thought, a trick of the light. Then the old oak seat showed itself, and
then its grain and the soft play of the lamps on it, and Gabe just
wasn’t there.

It had taken but the tiniest fraction of moments, and only now she
realized that the music had stopped, that people were chattering and
turning her way, and that two waiters and an unremarkable man were
around her, asking questions.

“W’at ees eet, modom?”

“Are you hurt?”

“What happened?”

Chloe stared at them blankly. “I—wh-where’s Gabe?”

One of the men put a hand on her shoulder and she shook it off. “Where
did he go?” she demanded. She didn’t like the business of people
disappearing from the booth.

“Gayub?” queried one of the waiters. “Vat ees dis Gayub?”

The anonymous man leaned over to speak to her, his face working. She
rose and pushed him away. “The man who was with me,” she said. “Find
him!”

The waiter looked about and scurried off. Chloe stood, very much alone,
amid the gathering crowd. Someone said something about a bomb, and there
was a tidal movement toward the door. Chloe ceased to be interesting,
the music began, so that in very little time she was standing fretfully
by herself beside the booth. She felt a timid hand on her arm and turned
to look distantly at the nondescript character beside her.

He was a man somewhere between five and a half and six and a half feet,
medium build, dressed in clothes which suited his height and weight. His
eyes were either blue or brown and his complexion was halfway between
light and dark. His manner was not quite retiring and almost aggressive,
and there was something annoying and something likable about him. And he
said,

“I don’t like it here. Let’s go home.”

She flared up at him. “How _dare_ you! Leave me alone!” She picked up
her bag and wrap and walked away from him, toward the door. The man
followed her; she knew he was close by her, yet when she glanced over
her shoulder he had mingled with the crowd, like a praying mantis on a
bean-vine.

She was stopped by a large individual who presented the general effect
of good axle-grease—refined slime. It was Romany Joe himself.

He said, “Excuse me, madam. You are the lady who had the so unfortunate
experience just now over there?”

“Yes. Have you found my fiancé?”

“Ah—he was your fiancé, this so handsome gentleman? No, madam, we have
searched everywhere. He must have left.”

“That heel!” she gritted. “I knew that face of his was a false front.
Running away like that! Well, I’m glad I found out what sort of coward
he is. I’m glad, you hear?”

“I hear,” said Romany Joe, who couldn’t have avoided it if he were three
blocks away. “I am so soree. Would madam be so kind as to leave her name
and address in case this unhappy incident has further ramifications?”

Chloe said, “By all means. And if you find that living cameo I came in
with, give him a message from me. Tell him _never_ to bother me again.
I’m through! And while you’re on the subject, tell him that the next
time I say as much as ‘Good morning’ to another Greek god, it will be
over my dead body.” She paused, panting, lost a little in the floods of
vituperation crowding to her writhing lips. The ubiquitous hand of the
stranger touched her elbow again, and before he had a chance to open his
mouth she whirled on him and gave him a tongue-lashing that sent him
scuttling out of the place and stopped the music again. Romany Joe stood
wringing his hands helplessly while everyone else in the place stood
around Chloe and giggled. But there are times when a lady gets so
all-fired mad that she cares not one whit how high her entertainment
value gets. Yes, they managed to ship her out of there, crying and
hysterical and still spouting out mouthfuls of epithets that can only be
described as “cherce.” The insult that was added to her injury was the
receipt, the following morning, of a polite note from Romany Joe
reminding her that the dinner and wine had not been paid for, and
enclosing a bill for six dollars and thirty-eight cents. Joe was
primarily a businessman, after all.

When the magic flame sprang up between them, Gabe’s first reaction after
being shocked into immobility was to leap to his feet and fight the
menace. He leapt, but found himself standing rather foolishly beside the
booth with no apparent menace to fight. He turned to Chloe, a
newly-arrived waiter at each shoulder. He put out his hand and said,
“Are you hurt?” and Chloe looked right past him. That stunned him a
little, and then he reflected that she was probably upset by the flash.
He was edged out by the waiters, who were busily engaged in their
mercenary solicitude. He shook his head to clear it and pushed forward
again. Chloe had just sent the waiters off on some errand.

“I don’t like it here,” said Gabe, a little plaintively. “Let’s go
home.”

And to his utter surprise, Chloe turned viciously to him, snapped, “How
_dare_ you! Leave me alone!” He fell back, feeling like a kicked dog,
and then was utterly astounded to realize that she was loudly demanding
that he be hunted down. He pressed forward as she headed for the door,
touched her arm once and was brushed off like a beetle, and listened in
to her conversation with Romany Joe. When he tried to speak to her again
she turned on him with such a blast of invective that he had to retreat
in self-defense. He couldn’t understand it—any of it. He had a strange
idea that maybe he was invisible, but he could see that people casually
made way for him as anyone will for anyone else. He walked right past
the cashier and she never noticed him. He had far too much on his mind
to think of stopping. He went right on out into the night, agonized,
bruised through and through by Chloe’s treatment of him. What had he
done to deserve that strange, harsh treatment? What did Chloe mean by
ignoring him so, addressing him as if he were a total stranger, and a
masher at that? What was the idea of demanding that a search be
instituted for him when he was standing right beside her all the time?
Why wouldn’t she give him a chance to explain himself? It wasn’t fair
and it couldn’t be understood, and the only thing that seemed at all
clear was that he had lost his beloved Chloe for ever and ever.

He reached into his pocket for a cigarette and then remembered that he
had left them on the table at Romany Joe’s. He paused a moment, tempted
to go back for them. Maybe he’d run into Chloe and she’d let him take
her home at least. But then suppose she acted the same way? He couldn’t
stand any more of it; he hadn’t done anything. Through his trampled
affections began to show a dim ray of resentment. Heck with her. She
could go her way, he’d go his. That’s the way she wanted it, apparently.
And that’s the way it would be.

For tonight anyway. Maybe tomorrow it would be different …

Gabe didn’t know quite what to do with himself. He didn’t want to go
home and go to bed, just to lie awake and brood all night. Neither did
he want to walk around the streets this way. He squared his shoulders
and marched into an all-night drugstore. He needed cigarettes anyway.
What did the guys in the movies do when they had had a soul-shattering
blow? Well, they paid attention to the little details of living, and
shook it off that way. All right, he would. Until morning anyway. He’d
go in there and buy cigarettes just as if nothing had happened.

The sleepy clerk slid his pack across the counter and took the
half-dollar Gabe handed him. He punched up fifteen cents on the cash
register and gave Gabe a dime. Gabe was almost to the door when he
realized that the man had given him change for a quarter, not a half. He
turned back to the counter, congratulating himself on his attention to
detail in the face of this overwhelming series of events.

“Hey, doc—you short-changed me a little,” he said, not at all
offensively.

The clerk blinked at him. “Huh?”

“I gave you a half for that pack of cigarettes,” Gabe explained, “Not a
quarter.”

“When?” asked the clerk, eyeing Gabe suspiciously.

“Just now!” said Gabe, surprised. “My God, man, I didn’t even walk out
of the place!”

“Yeah?” said the clerk. “Better beat it, bud. I had that worked on me
before. You watch some guy come in an’ buy something, an’ then when he’s
gone you come in and say you been short-changed. Me, I never forget a
face. Far as I know, I never seen you before in my life.”

“You never—listen, you can’t get away with that! Look, pal, I don’t want
to start any trouble. Here’s the cigarettes. Didn’t you just sell a pack
of this brand, three minutes ago?”

“Yep. That don’t mean I sold ’em to you. You might have got them any
place around here.”

Gabe heaved a sigh, and said patiently, “Do you, by any chance, know how
many half-dollars you have in the register now?”

“Yeah, sure. My relief gets here in a few minutes; I just counted up.”
He pulled a ruled slip from behind the register. There’s—lessee—eight
halves in the drawer.”

“Okay—now look in and count ’em.”

“You better hope you’re right,” said the clerk pugnaciously. He turned
to the cash register, poked the “No Sale,” and scooped up his halves.
“Two—four—five—seven—eight.” He swung to Gabe. “Eight, see, wise-guy?
Now get the hell—”

“Hold on, fella,” said Gabe evenly. “Look in the quarter compartment.”

The clerk slung the halves back into their compartment and ran his
fingers around the inside of the quarter section. “You’re a lot of
trouble, bud. I oughta—I’ll be damned! You’re right—there is a
half-dollar in with the quarters!”

“Satisfied?” asked Gabe gently.

“Okay—okay. Here. But get this. I don’t know how you found about this
two bits, but you did. Lucky guess. If it made any difference to me, I’d
never let you walk out of here with it. Hear?”

Gabe pocketed the quarter. “I’ll guarantee that I’ll never walk in here
again,” he snapped, and ignoring the clerk’s “Suits me!”, he left the
store. He would have been interested in the clerk’s account of the
incident as told to his relief, a few minutes later. It wound up, “—you
wanna watch for that bird, Charley.”

“What’s he look like?” asked Charley, slipping into a white coat.

“Oh, he’s a guy about five foot—uh … his hair is—Damn it, Charley, I
don’t remember _what_ he looked like!”

Gabe stood on the corner outside for a moment, fuming at the sleepy
stupidity of the clerk, and then hailed a taxi. He sat back in the seat
and reminded himself of Chloe by firmly thinking of other things. And
when the cab stopped at his address, and the driver flipped up the flag
on the meter and opened the door, Gabe was startled to hear the man say,
“Hey! What happened to that other guy?”

“What other guy?”

“The one who got in on Pleasant View and Thirteenth.”

“That was me!”

“Yeah? Well I—I dunno. I coulda swore it was some other guy. Well—thanks
mister. ‘Night.”

“ ‘Night.” Gabe stood for a moment on the curb, watching the cab whirl
away altogether too fast. “Guy’s seeing things,” he grinned, and went up
the steps.

Gabe lived in a very comfortable and very modern little
light-housekeeping bachelor digs. He had a large room and kitchenette up
on the seventh floor. Sometimes he used to wonder if Chloe would be able
to keep house as efficiently as the maid that cleaned up so precisely
every day. He thought of that now, and ached a little inside. Oh well—

The elevator operator said “Floor?” and closed the doors, looking at him
inquiringly. Gabe stared back. “Always kidding, hey, Joe?”

“Suh?”

“You’ve been ferrying me up to the seventh floor for two years now,
every single night. ‘Smatter, boy; don’t you recognize me?” Gabe asked
flippantly. The boy shook his head slowly, his large ivory eyes fixed on
Gabe’s face, giving the impression that they were fastened to something
invisible in front of him.

“I’m Jarret—Gabe Jarret!” said that irritated gentleman.

“Mist’ Jarret? Wal, I swan, I do! I never rec’nize you!”

“I don’t know what’s the matter with everybody tonight,” said Gabe
worriedly as he got off at the seventh. The doors closed behind him; a
thought struck him and he pushed the elevator button. The doors slid
open and Joe peered owlishly out.

“Er—Joe, don’t call me in the morning, hey? I’m going to take the day
off.”

“Yassuh. Whut’s that room number again, suh?”

_“What?”_

“Ain’t you that new feller moved in yestiddy?”

“Joe! For the second time in half a minute, I’m Gabe Jarret! Room 7C!
What the devil’s the matter with you?”

Joe scratched his head and looked sheepish. “ ‘Deed, Mist’ Jarret, I
dunno. Guess I better have my eyes examined or somp’n. Okay, I don’t
ring your room in th’ mornin’. ‘N-night, suh.” He retreated into his
cage, and Gabe strode fuming down the corridor. “Must be an epidemic,”
he muttered under his breath as he let himself into his room. “Everyone
in the city turned moron overnight.” He snapped on the lights, walked
over and stood in front of the full-length mirror on his closet door.
“Couldn’t be me,” he said positively. He fingered his necktie and
scowled. “Or—could it?”

He was changed, certainly. His decisive, handsome features were
indescribably, subtly changed. His nose, though still essentially the
same shape, was not distinctly Roman. As a matter of fact, it was not
distinctly anything. It was just a nose. His eyes—weren’t they as deeply
set? Or had they moved closer together? Or—farther apart? Or was there a
difference at all? And the line of his jaw—let’s see; it used to go
straight back to there and then turn up a little, didn’t it? Or did it?
Gabe shook his head. “I’m having a nervous breakdown,” he said, and
undressed and washed and went to bed.

Not to sleep, though, for a long while. He talked quietly to himself
about it.

“I used to have a face, damn it. I used to stop traffic. My God—not one
woman gave me the eye all evening, ever since that—that explosion at
Joe’s. That was a funny thing. Wonder what—Chloe sure raised hell.
Shouldn’t have left her alone there, but—I dunno. It’s up to me to give
her what she wants, and she sure didn’t want me around. Lord, what a
tongue that girl has! Imagine living with—what was that flash, anyway?
Lessee—the old woman had just told Chloe’s fortune. Gave her a wish.
Well, she didn’t wish anything. Funny if there was something in all this
mumbo jumbo. Suppose she had a chance to wish for something that would
come true.… I wonder what Chloe wants, anyhow? She’s a funny kid.
Everything I did or said was wrong, and I found that such a change—so
damn original, that I fell for her. Suppose she had a chance to make a
wish come true; would she wish for money? We have enough, between us;
don’t know what she’d do with any more. Would she wish for more looks?
Hell, she’s all right. Love? She’s got me; Lord knows I showed her how
much I loved her.” Gabe heaved himself up on his elbow, staring off into
the dark. “How much difference did that make to her? Every other woman I
ever met seemed to want her innings, but then Chloe is different from
any other woman I ever met. Maybe she didn’t care after all.”
Overwhelmed by the alien thought, Gabe gave himself up to his misery for
a long moment. Then, “Holy Pete, this is a mess. I took an awful lot
from her and as far as she knew I liked it. I—didn’t.” It was the first
time he had admitted that to himself. “Imagine her calling me down like
that in public. What was that crack she made—something about me setting
an age limit, when I accidentally looked at that old woman? You know,
that was raw. And telling me I was conceited, and that I had lousy taste
in clothes, and—Yeah, that was strong—’I wish to God you had the most
ordinary-looking mug on earth!’ Yeah—me too. I have, judging from the
way she acted toward me after that explosion. Yeah, Chloe and the
cashier and the clerk in the drugstore and Joe the elevator boy. Heh!
They look at my face once, and when they see it again, they don’t
recognize it. ‘I wish to God you had the—’ Heh! That was a wish! Hell of
a thing to come true. Why, a man with that kind of a face would really
be behind the eight-ball. Anyone who saw him would never remember him
the next time. Just like Joe, in the elevator. I guess he was just
sleepy; didn’t take notice. Like the guy in the store—_My God!”_ Gabe
rolled out of bed and sat on the edge of it. “That _was_ a wish! And it
was the first wish she made after the old woman told her that her wish
would come true!”

He stood up, sat down, stood up and began to pace the room.

“That’s a fairy story. It just couldn’t _be!_ Wishes coming true._… Me_,
without a _face?”_ He ran to the wall switch and flipped it, turned up
the table and bed lamps, and stood in a blaze of light before the
mirror.

“It’s—it’s amazing,” he said aloud. His face was blurred—just the
slightest bit indistinct, like a molded jelly that has been standing in
a warm room. It was a perfectly normal, unfrightening face. It was the
face of the Great Average—the consolidated features of a mob. It was the
face of the man who shines your shoes on a ferryboat, as remembered two
months later. It was the face of a fellow called Charley something, who
was in your Latin class in your first year in high school. Gabriel
Jarret, glamor-boy, was now—the Anonymous!

“What am I going to _do?”_ he breathed, turning away and back to the
mirror, away and back. It was a terrible thing, a horrifying, morbidly
fascinating thing. What could he do? He was a salesman; his living
depended on his ability to put up a memorable front. Why, they wouldn’t
even know him at the office. He’d have to introduce himself in the
morning and every day when he came in from his calls! What about his
regular customers, and—omigosh—his prospects? Suppose he entertained a
buyer, and left him for a moment during the evening; the man wouldn’t
know him when he got back! He was through—washed up—ruined. How could he
even get a job now, let alone keep the one he had?

He turned out half the lights and threw himself into an easy chair to
think it over. What would life be like for an anonymous man? No more
heads turning when he came into a restaurant or night-club or office. No
more women on his doorstep, on his mind, in his hair. Say, that wouldn’t
be bad, at that. He had spent twenty-eight years in being admired, and
he was as sick of it as is a man with a purple birthmark with his
particular flaw. It was a flaw, you see, as anything must be when
carried to an extreme. Good diction is an asset; perfect diction is
annoying and affected. Pleasing features are helpful to their possessor;
perfect ones are a damn nuisance, to quote the late Valentino, who early
learned that the art of un-wenching is a far more difficult one than
that of amorous conquest. And Gabe had been the extreme, the outside
edge of hyper-superlativity.

He grinned excitedly. He could actually walk into a whole roomful of
high school girls and walk out again without having one of them gasp and
flutter! Why, he could have a life of his own, unmarked, unremarkable!

And so it was that Gabe smacked his palm with his fist, laughed aloud,
turned out the lights and dove into bed, a happy man. Of all men in the
world, only he could have been delighted with such an affliction; of all
lovers in the world, only he was foolish enough to believe that his
precious Chloe would be happy to find him as he was now. Hadn’t she
persistently accused him of being too handsome? Hadn’t she fervently
wished that he had the most ordinary-looking mug on earth? Ah, now she
was his; now he was all she could have wanted him to be.

That’s what he thought.

He woke early the next morning, and like a kid running for his Christmas
tree, he ran for the mirror. It was true—it was true!

“Hot damn,” he grinned. “No glamour!”

He dressed carefully and sat down to write a few notes. One to his bank,
informing them that hereafter he would deal with them by mail. One to
his landlord, giving him notice. A few to various debtors, enclosing
checks. One to his employers, a resignation. And one to Chloe, and that
was the strangest:

“Darling:

“Forgive me for the way I acted last night; something has happened to me
that I can’t understand, but which has made me very happy. That
explosion in our booth last night changed me into what you have said you
wanted me to be. I want you to see it too. Please, beloved, meet me as
usual at lunch. Same place, same time. And be prepared for a surprise!”

He marked it for a special messenger, took the sheaf of envelopes out
and mailed them, and then headed for a restaurant. He ordered a
substantial breakfast, thinking amusedly that if he ordered and then
moved to another table, the waiter would never find him. He ate
leisurely, picked up his check and reached in his pocket for a dime to
leave on the table.

He’d forgotten to bring any money.

He said, “Damn!” and wondered whether to try explaining it to the
cashier, or to—he ate here often; she’d know him. It would be no
trouble.

Approaching the cashier’s desk, he remembered that she wouldn’t remember
him at that. He paused again, rubbed the side of his cheek in
perplexity, and then squared his shoulders, tossed the check on the
desk, said, “Good Morning!” and sauntered out the door.

“Hey, mister!” called the cashier, a pert young blonde. “Hey—you didn’t
pay! Jim—catch that guy!”

A brawny gentleman dropped his mop and trotted after Gabe. Gabe, by this
time, was twenty feet away from the door and still moving. The waiter’s
heavy hand fell on his shoulder; he stopped, turned, looked surprisedly
up at the duty-bound face.

“You can’t get away with that, bud,” said the mopster.

“With what?” asked Gabe innocently.

“Come back in here and ask the cashier with what,” said the man, pushing
Gabe in that direction.

Gabe went, protesting. Once inside the restaurant, the man said,

“I’ve got ‘im, Molly.”

The girl threw up her hands. “Jimmy, you’re a double-barreled half-wit!
You’ve got the wrong guy!”

The man loosed Gabe and shuffled uneasily. “You sure, Molly?”

“Sure I’m sure, you—you ox!” she snapped, and said to Gabe, “Gee, I’m
sorry, mister. I wouldn’t have had that happen for—”

“Skip it,” grinned Gabe. “As for you, Muscles, watch your step. You can
get into trouble doing things like that.” The lug retreated; Gabe smiled
at the girl and walked out like an honest citizen. And after that he
didn’t bother going home for his money. He didn’t need money.

He walked along Beaufort St., feeling proud of himself. He thought of
the great criminal masterminds of song and story, and of how the basic
idea, that a man must be remarkable to be a phenomenon, had been
plugged. Why, you don’t need brains to break the laws of statute and
custom; all you need is protective coloration. He was absolutely
invulnerable, and the idea was intoxicating. He could do
anything—absolutely anything, and get away with it. That redhead over
there, for instance; a luscious creation. Motivated not entirely by
scientific curiosity, he overtook her, spun her around, put his arms
about her and kissed her lingeringly. He held her long enough for a
sizable crowd to gather, which took about forty-five seconds, and then
released her, breathless and choleric. She said, “You—you—” and then
hauled off and swung at him. He laughed at her and ducked back into the
crowd. She lost sight of him for a moment—which was, of course, forever.
She peered angrily about, looking for her “attacker,” and her eyes
finally rested on Gabe.

Now there were a lot of people laughing in that crowd, but none more
heartily than Gabe Jarret. He was having the time of his life. The
redhead took note of this, and spat out at him,

“What are you laughing at? What’s supposed to be so funny? If you had
the guts God gave a goose, you’d have stopped that—that beast from doing
that to me instead of standing there laughing!”

“Lady,” gasped Gabe, “I could no more have stopped him than I could have
stopped myself!” And, still joyful, he threaded his way through the
crowd and on down the street, leaving the girl to give furious and vain
descriptions of her assailant to a tardy policeman.

“This,” said Gabe, “certainly has possibilities.”

He strolled on up the street, casually stepping on people’s feet and
watching them glare past him for the guilty party; boldly pulling
handkerchiefs out of dignified old gentlemen’s breast pockets; having
himself a hell of a time. He stole a revolver out of a policeman’s
holster, ran around a bystander and handed it back to the cop, saying,
“Lucky for you I snatched this out of that crook’s hand, officer.” The
cop positively blushed. It was altogether too fast for him. And he saw a
face he didn’t like and knocked some teeth out of it for that reason,
then disappeared completely by moving ten feet. He stopped at a bar and
moved along the mahogany a few inches after each of four drinks, and
they were all on the house. Ultimately, then, he wound up at the
fountain and restaurant where he had been used to lunching with Chloe.

And she was there. He was thrilled at the sight of her, and went over
and sat at her table. She looked up at him, deadpan, and went back to
her food. He hugged himself.

“Chlo—”

She started and looked around her. He said it again. She looked straight
at him, sniffed coldly and did something with one shoulder which said,
“Don’t annoy me.”

“Chloe—don’t you recognize me?”

“I do not! Leave me alone!”

“Chloe—it’s Gabe!”

She narrowed her eyes and stared. “Don’t look at my face,” he said.
“Look at my hands. See that ring? Remember it—the signet I always wore?”

“Yes,” she said, puzzled. “It’s Gabe’s, but—” and her eyes went back to
his face.

“This scar on my wrist,” he said. “This necktie—you chose it. Remember
the red pin-stripe suit?”

She pushed her chair back, appalled. “Gabe! What’s—happened to you?”

“Something you won’t believe—but it happened anyway. Remember last night
in Romany Joe’s? Well—you can think what you like about it, but when
that old gypsy said you could make a wish and have it come true, she was
right. You made a wish, and—here I am!”

“I made a—what are you talking about?”

“You did. You were sore at me, I guess, and you wished I had the most
ordinary face on earth. Well—this is it! It’s so ordinary that nobody
I’ve met so far can remember it for two consecutive seconds!”

“Gabe—that’s—that’s childish. Wishes, indeed! Come on, now—tell me
what’s changed you so!”

“I tell you, that’s it! Darling, isn’t that what was bothering you so?
Didn’t you tell me that the main thing wrong with me was my looks?” He
leaned eagerly across the table to her. “Well, that’s been taken care
of! I’ll guarantee, there’ll never be another woman cooing over me
again!”

She looked at him. “I can well believe that,” she said nastily.

“Chloe—I’ve changed my clothes and my mind and my habits for you, and it
wasn’t enough. Now I’ve changed my face—isn’t that all you can ask?”

Chloe rose, her head whirling. What colossal joke was this? What was she
doing even talking to this nondescript character? How could she listen
to this drivel he was pouring out, about an engagement and love and—and
marriage? Had she come as low as this, that she must marry such an
unassuming creature? Certainly she could catch a man who looked like
_somebody_, not like just—_anybody_.

She twisted the diamond from her finger. “Gabe—I can’t for the life of
me think why I took this at all, or why I didn’t give it back to you
weeks ago. Do I have to say anything more?” And she tossed it on the
table in front of the now speechless Gabe, and ran from him. As she left
the restaurant she turned and looked back. There was a man sitting at
the table—a man whom, as far as she knew, she had never seen before. He
was looking at something clutched in his hands and he was apparently
crying into them. Chloe wondered vaguely where Gabe had gone so quickly,
and then went back to her office, where she sat in front of a typewriter
all afternoon doing nothing and silently shrieking out at the injustice
of the monstrous fate that had taken her beautiful, beautiful Gabe away.

It was a little more than Gabe could stand, that jilting. He sat there
for a long time, watching the diamond wink and glitter crazily through
his tears; and then he got up and walked unnoticed out of the
restaurant. He walked without purpose, through the teeming streets, back
and back through the city until he brought up in the marketing district,
where fat women in shawls and squalling brats dodged great refrigerator
trucks. He stood there for an hour or so, seeing nothing, smoking
constantly and without enjoyment, staring blindly into his empty heart.
Resentment grew redly as he stood there, and when he took his last
cigarette and hurled it into the gutter, straightened his shoulders and
said, “Damn her!”, he was a changed and bitter man. He looked up and
down the cluttered street, got his bearings and strode rapidly off. “I’m
this way, by God, and she don’t like it. Well, I do, and I’m going to
make it pay off.”

The late afternoon and evening papers were filled with an amazing series
of robberies. It was a one-man crime wave, but the papers didn’t know
that.

A pawn-shop was the first. An unidentified man had walked into the
store, stepped behind the counter, scooped up a handful of large bills
and a revolver, and had casually walked out again. He was chased, but
had vanished into the crowd.

A man with a gun had held up a gas station a block away from the pawn
shop. He had cleared out the till and disappeared under the very nose of
the policeman on the beat.

Two patrol cars had responded to a call that a bank was being robbed.
Technically, it was only the patrons who were held up, and forced at
gunpoint to deliver up their larger bills. When the police arrived, they
bumped into a “bystander” on his way out of the bank. He cried, “There’s
a robbery going on in there!” and as the police rushed in with drawn
revolvers, he leaped into one of the patrol cars and roared off up the
avenue, his siren going full blast. The police could find no one who
could describe either the bank-robber or the man who had stolen the
bandit-chaser, or who could determine whether or not they were the same
man. The car was found abandoned two miles up the street; several people
had seen a man in plain clothes get out quietly and walk away, but no
one knew what he looked like. While the two patrolmen were dusting their
repossessed car for fingerprints, the jewelry store across the sidewalk
from them was robbed—cash only. They both saw him leave and duck into a
side street. They were greatly helped by a man who said he saw the
robber go into a certain house. Search of the house revealed—nothing;
and no sign was found of their informant.

Oh, Gabe had a wonderful afternoon.

Chloe left the office early, pleading sickness. All during the long
afternoon she had worried and fretted about Gabe. Perhaps she had been
hasty, she thought. Maybe it was his idea of a joke—a lesson for her,
perchance. Could he have achieved that amazing, subtle change in his
face by makeup? She doubted it. It was too good.

She thought of his new face, frightened by the idea. Much careful
thinking had yielded the fact that the man she saw sitting at her table
as she left must have been Gabe, since only he would have been sitting
there, staring at the ring. Yet at the time she could have sworn it was
a total stranger! And now, she couldn’t think of how he differed from
the Gabe she had sat at lunch with, nor how that Gabe differed from the
one who took her to Romany Joe’s the night before. Chloe was one of
those unimaginative girls whose philosophy is strictly on a Q.E.D.
basis. That is, if a certain action produced a certain reaction, she was
so guided from then on, and did not care how or why it had happened. The
operation of the little convertible coupe she drove on weekends was as
much a mystery to her as was the gypsy woman’s irregular pentagon. She
could believe the automobile’s operation without understanding it—why
not the spell? She could start her car, and she could stop it. She had
inadvertently started a spell. She would go to Romany Joe’s tonight.

She arrived fairly early, looking worried but very lovely; and by luck
she managed to get exactly the same booth she had had the night before.
She was grimly determined to undo last night’s weird work, no matter
what the cost. As soon as she was settled with a cup of wine, she called
the waiter back.

“Meess?”

“I’m looking for a fortune teller,” said Chloe.

“Immediately, meess,” said the waiter, bowing and backing away.

“Wait a minute! I want one particular fortune teller—no other.”

“Vat ees her name?”

“I don’t know. She’s a very old woman, and she carries a bag with her.”

“Vairy old? I am sorry, meess, but ve have no such a one here.”

“But she—” Chloe paused, and then wearily waved the man away. What was
the use? She might have known it would be like this. The whole thing
made no sense at all. She was sick through and through. She would—

“You were looking for me, modom?”

Chloe started violently. There, beside the booth, was her old
fortune-teller.

“I—that is—the waiter said—”

“He is a fool. If you want me, I will come. I come the first time, and
the second time, and then I come no more. Now what is it?”

Chloe almost cried with relief. Now to make an end to this crazy
business. She spilled out the whole story, while the old woman stood
quietly, missing not a word, watching each passing expression of Chloe’s
petulant face with her brilliant little eyes. When Chloe had finished,
she said,

“You have made one wish, and it is true; it can not be un-made. What do
you want me to do?”

“What _can_ you do? Oh please—I’ll give you anything if you’ll make my
Gabe as he was. I’ve got to have him back—I’ve got to!”

“You want his nize face, no? Nothing more of him?”

“Oh yes—yes! But I can’t stand him now; what woman wants a husband that
can’t be found in a crowd? I’d have to—” she giggled hysterically—“Make
him sign a register before I would dare let him in the house at night!
Oh please—”

“Yes, I can give you one more wish, if you like. But you must be
careful. You must remember that you wished before and now you are
unhappy. If you wish again you may not be happy too, more.”

“I don’t care! If I had Gabe back, loving me the way he did, I’d _have_
to be happy. You will help me? You will?”

In answer, the gypsy brought out her charms and began to lay them out.
Chloe watched breathlessly. There was a slight commotion at the door
which she didn’t begin to notice. She watched the strange invisible
pentagon take shape over the table, her eyes caught and held by the
marvellous dexterity of the old fingers.

In just a few hours Gabe, in his half-crazed, desperate attempt to make
his affliction amuse him, had become much sought after—more so, he
reflected wryly, than he had ever been before he became so superbly
homely. Probably because he was richer now, he grinned as he walked out
of a downtown factory with the payroll in his inside pocket and half the
police in the city running around him, bumping into him, shoving him out
the way in their earnest effort to find him.

He was a little tired of helping himself to other people’s valuables,
particularly since he didn’t need money. However, he’d buy himself a
famous automobile or two and take it easy for a while without getting in
anyone’s hair.

He strolled around downtown with a good, unpaid-for dinner under his
belt and thousands of dollars crammed into his pockets. He didn’t know
quite what to do with himself until he saw a brilliant neon display
halfway down what had been a side street before said display had been
installed. ROMANY JOE’S.

“Now,” said Gabe with great glee, “By all that’s unholy, Joe’s place is
the one place in the world that deserves to be robbed by me! I’ll get
even with the gypsies for doing this to me—may they prosper!”

He hitched up his trousers, got his hand on the revolver in his right
coat pocket, and sauntered in.

“Table for one, sir?” asked Romany Joe, rubbing his hands.

“C’mere,” ordered Gabe coldly, and without even looking at Joe, walked
over to the cashier. Joe followed.

“What can I do for you, sir?”

“Your belly,” said Gabe in his best movie-gangster style, “Reminds me of
a great, big balloon. Now I’m a funny feller. I like to pop balloons. I
like to pump bullets into them. I’m going to bust that one of yours
unless you get back of that counter and shell out all the twenties and
everything else bigger than a twenty. I ain’t greedy—you can keep the
rest. Now—_move!”_ and he prodded Joe with the concealed gun. Joe moved.
The cashier squeaked and then subsided, and it was her squeak that
caused the rustle that Chloe couldn’t hear, so engrossed was she in the
gypsy’s work.

The gypsy steadied the structure carefully, and then carefully withdrew
her hand. “Now!” she said hoarsely. “Make your wish!”

Chloe’s mind raced. She would restore Gabe’s looks, if there was
anything in this mumbo jumbo. And he would be all hers—all hers. She’d
see to that! “I wish,” she said, “that Gabe will be handsome again—_and
that he will never be able to make love to another woman besides me!”_

The weird flame leaped up, blinding her. She was shocked into
silence—her whole mind was silenced, not even able to exult. And through
that silence knifed the gypsy’s voice—frightened now; _“You wish too
much! Ah, it is not good.…”_

Romany Joe, trembling, pushed the pile of bills across the counter. Gabe
smiled, reached for it, and then stiffened. In the mirror behind Romany
Joe, he saw the reflection of a man—

A tall, handsome man. His features, his teeth, his hair, breathtakingly
beautiful. It was—

Himself! Gabe Jarret!

Gabe backed away, gun in hand, stripped of his cloak of anonymity. His
eyes darted to right and left, seeking a way out, trying subconsciously
to merge himself into the crowd, utterly failing.

Romany Joe ducked down, came up with a blue automatic. Gabe’s revolver
coughed twice, twice again—Gabe stared at it, his hand clamped tight on
the trigger, wondering hysterically why it had gone off. Romany Joe
folded slowly down over the counter, slid behind it, his clawed
fingernails shrieking on the marble. Gabe ran towards the door, found
his way blocked by three waiters. He fired wildly, missed, and the gun
was knocked out of his hand as he was tackled from two sides at once. He
went down, and just before his head struck the floor and knocked him
unconscious, he saw Chloe’s drawn face, and heard her shriek, “Gabe! Oh
God, Gabe!”

He had a fractured skull. It was very bad, and it took him a long
time—more than a year—to get well enough to stand trial for the murder
of Josef Blebenau, known as Romany Joe. And during all that time, and
during the trial, and after, in the days in the death house when appeal
after appeal was being fought, Chloe visited him constantly. He loved
her, and she loved him, and, being where he was, he had no chance at all
to make love to any other woman. No chance at all, for the rest of his
life. He died on the chair.

Chloe got her wish, you see. He was handsome, and saw only her for the
rest of his days. It was not what she wanted, but it was her wish. But
then, of course, wants and wishes are not the same thing.



TWO SIDECARS


HENLEY REACHED OUT to push it back under those hills, out of his eyes;
but it was eight and a half million miles away and busy making the dawn
a pretty one. His quarrel wasn’t with the sun anyway, he reflected,
staring at it through meshed eyelashes. His quarrel was with a man whose
name he didn’t know yet, but he’d find out. Oh yes he would, and then
there was going to be a party. Henley was going to have fun at the
party, and the other guy was not. The other guy was going to get pushed
around.… Henley gazed for a long moment at the great, straight band
canted across the sky before he identified it as the top of his
windshield. He lay staring complacently at it until he shivered, and
then he realized that he was soaking wet. He could tell without trying
that if he moved at all his head would begin to detonate blindingly. He
weighed this knowledge against a growing curiosity as to his
whereabouts, and it was some time before the curiosity was intense
enough to justify the pain of sitting up. He moved himself gently, both
hands to his face, pulling himself upright by his cheeks. The two-day
stubble offended him.

He gritted his teeth and fumbled in the side pocket of the car for the
large rag that was cached there. Shaking it out, he flung it over the
windshield to shade his eyes. _There are two of me now_, he thought.
_One has a honey of a hangover and wants to lie down and die, and the
other is worried about Caroline and wants to move_. The part of him that
wanted to lie still and pass out watched the other part passively,
watched it gaze about the flats back of the city, at the back road, at
the way the car was tilted off it into the ditch. The car was a
convertible and the top was down and it must have rained hard while he
slumped back of the wheel. He searched fumblingly for reasons for his
being here, being drunk. The only thing he could find to base it all on
was Caroline’s leaving him, and while that was reason enough, it was no
excuse. He couldn’t bring her back by getting drunk. He couldn’t find
her or the man she was leaving with. He couldn’t do anything until he
could think clearly, and he wouldn’t be able to think clearly until he
had another sidecar.

Two sidecars.

He looked down at his hands. One was cut across the knuckles. They
thought for him, the hands, darting out to twitch the rag away, finding
the brake, the gearshift lever, as his thinking feet began their slow
dance over the starter, accelerator, clutch. The engine raced and
coughed and raced again cleanly, and the big car backed out of the
ditch. The low rasp of a new tire against a crumpled fender rose to a
moan and died and rasped again as he backed and stopped and shifted, and
then he swept away toward the city, the tortured fender screaming.
Henley didn’t care about that now. He rode inside the car, deep inside
himself, watching his reflexive driving, looking at an insane mental
flash of himself choosing melodramatically between Caroline and a
sidecar, taking the sidecar. He felt sick and drove very fast.

There was a man sweeping the sidewalk in front of DeMaio’s when Henley
pulled up. “Lousy,” said Henley when the man asked how he was. “You a
bartender?”

“I think so,” said the man, watching Henley get out of the car. He
thought it was a shame to use expensive clothes like that. “But the boss
don’t yet, so I’m a porter. Why?”

“Can you mix a sidecar?”

“We ain’t open yet.” Henley walked into the place and said, “If the
doors are open the joint is open. Mix me a sidecar. Two sidecars.” The
man began to speak, then left his jaw dropped as he saw the bill Henley
tossed on the counter. He went behind the bar.

Henley hung by his triceps for two and a half hours then, drinking
sidecars. The only thing in his mind was “Why didn’t Caroline tell me
who he was? Maybe I wouldn’t care then. Maybe I wouldn’t be sore.” It
was in his mind so long because he said it over and over again. He was
saying it half aloud when someone stopped beside him for a beer. Henley
screwed his gaze over to the man. He knew him. Ruskin. “Hi.”

Ruskin jumped. “Good God. Henley.” His voice was deep and smooth. He was
young and tall and clean. His beer came and he didn’t look at it. He was
seeing Henley, the way he looked, his wrinkled clothes, his two-day
beard. Henley laughed in two syllables that hurt his throat. He struck
Ruskin’s beer; it slid two feet down the bar and turned over. “The
ge’mun’s with me,” he told the barkeep who wiped it up. “Two sidecars.”

“You’re in a sweet shape, Henley.”

“Got a right to be. What’s South America like, Ruskin?” Ruskin would
know. He had a station at Bahia. Was going back in a day or so.

Ruskin raised his eyebrows. “Big. What part?”

“Dunno,” said Henley flatly. He drank, and then words spilled out.
“Wife’s going there. She sent me a note. Polite as hell.” His voice
turned falsetto. “I’m sorry but it just won’t work. Don’t hold it
against anyone—me, the man I’m going away with, or even yourself. You
can’t help being what you are. This shouldn’t bother you much; your
girlfriends won’t let you be lonely. I’m going to South America. Maybe
I’ll write someday.”

“That the note?” asked Ruskin, and smiled. “You always did cut a lot of
corners with her, Henley. Talked a lot about it. You know, I often used
to wonder if you talked like that to Car—your wife. Seems you did. Women
don’t like that, Henley. Didn’t you know?”

Henley started on Ruskin’s drink. He wasn’t listening. He was trying to
think. When the sound of Ruskin’s voice stopped, he said, “Yes, I’ll
kill the dirty—” The disgust on Ruskin’s face reached him vaguely.
“Don’t like me, do you?” he spat. “Okay, okay. Beat it then. Go on away.
Don’t like me, don’t have to stick around. Plenty other—”

Ruskin’s face was pale. “I never realized what a heel you are,” he
half-whispered. “How in God’s name could a woman like Caroline ever—”
His taut arms relaxed and his hands fell against his thighs. He walked
out. Henley glared after him. When he was gone he called, “Hey! Have
another—” Then he shrugged and finished the drink.

He put his weight on his elbows and hung his head and rocked a bit.
“Damn boy scout,” he muttered. He was irritated because Ruskin reminded
him of Caroline. They were both tall, clean-looking like that. When he
thought of them together, it was no trouble at all for him to realize
who was taking his wife away to South America. He said _“Gha!”_ with an
intake of breath, choked on his saliva. He stood on the brass rail,
pounded the counter furiously. “That’s the guy, that Ruskin! He’s the
one, the—” He began to cough. The bartender reached over, held him by
the armpits, steadied him down to the floor.

“Who’s who?” asked the bartender soothingly.

“That guy was drinking with me. Him and my wife—you see? You get that?”

“Well?” The bartender’s cheeks were tight, smiling inside. He kept
holding Henley up.

Henley felt something die, down deep. It hurt. He should kill Ruskin. He
should kill them both. He had the guts. He looked at the bartender for a
long time and then saw him. He drew a deep breath.

“Two sidecars,” he said.



MICROCOSMIC GOD


HERE IS A STORY about a man who had too much power, and a man who took
too much, but don’t worry; I’m not going political on you. The man who
had the power was named James Kidder, and the other was his banker.

Kidder was quite a guy. He was a scientist and he lived on a small
island off the New England coast all by himself. He wasn’t the dwarfed
little gnome of a mad scientist you read about. His hobby wasn’t
personal profit, and he wasn’t a megalomaniac with a Russian name and no
scruples. He wasn’t insidious, and he wasn’t even particularly
subversive. He kept his hair cut and his nails clean and lived and
thought like a reasonable human being. He was slightly on the baby-faced
side; he was inclined to be a hermit; he was short and plump
and—brilliant. His specialty was biochemistry, and he was always called
_Mr_. Kidder. Not “Dr.” Not “Professor.” Just Mr. Kidder.

He was an odd sort of apple and always had been. He had never graduated
from any college or university because he found them too slow for him,
and too rigid in their approach to education. He could not get used to
the idea that perhaps his professors knew what they were talking about.
That went for his texts, too. He was always asking questions, and didn’t
mind very much when they were embarrassing. He considered Gregor Mendel
a bungling liar, Darwin an amusing philosopher, and Luther Burbank a
sensationalist. He never opened his mouth without its leaving his victim
feeling breathless. If he was talking to someone who had knowledge, he
went in there and got it, leaving his victim breathless. If he was
talking to someone whose knowledge was already in his possession, he
only asked repeatedly, “How do you know?” His most delectable pleasure
was taken in cutting a fanatical eugenicist into conversational ribbons.
So people left him alone and never, never asked him to tea. He was
polite, but not politic.

He had a little money of his own, and with it he leased the island and
built himself a laboratory. Now I’ve mentioned that he was a biochemist.
But being what he was, he couldn’t keep his nose in his own field. It
wasn’t too remarkable when he made an intellectual excursion wide enough
to perfect a method of crystallizing Vitamin B1 profitably by the ton—if
anyone wanted it by the ton. He got a lot of money for it. He bought his
island outright and put eight hundred men to work on an acre and a half
of his ground, adding to his laboratory and building equipment. He got
messing around with sisal fiber, found out how to fuse it, and boomed
the banana industry by producing a practically unbreakable cord from the
stuff.

You remember the popularizing demonstration he put on at Niagara, don’t
you? That business of running a line of the new cord from bank to bank
over the rapids and suspending a ten-ton truck from the middle of it by
razor edges resting on the cord? That’s why ships now moor themselves
with what looks like heaving line, no thicker than a lead pencil, that
can be coiled on reels like a garden hose. Kidder made cigarette money
out of that, too. He went out and bought himself a cyclotron with part
of it.

After that money wasn’t money any more. It was large numbers in little
books. Kidder used little amounts of it to have food and equipment sent
out to him, but after a while that stopped, too. His bank dispatched a
messenger by seaplane to find out if Kidder was still alive. The man
returned two days later in a mused state, having been amazed something
awesome at the things he’d seen out there. Kidder was alive, all right,
and he was turning out a surplus of good food in an astonishingly
simplified synthetic form. The bank wrote immediately and wanted to know
if Mr. Kidder, in his own interest, was willing to release the secret of
his dirtless farming. Kidder replied that he would be glad to, and
enclosed the formulas. In a P.S. he said that he hadn’t sent the
information ashore because he hadn’t realized anyone would be
interested. That from a man who was responsible for the greatest
sociological change in the second half of the twentieth century—factory
farming. It made him richer; I mean it made his bank richer. He didn’t
give a rap.

But Kidder didn’t really get started until about eight months after the
messenger’s visit. For a biochemist who couldn’t even be called “Dr.” he
did pretty well. Here is a partial list of the things that he turned
out:

A commercially feasible plan for making an aluminum alloy stronger than
the best steel so that it could be used as a structural metal.

An exhibition gadget he called a light pump, which worked on the theory
that light is a form of matter and therefore subject to physical and
electromagnetic laws. Seal a room with a single light source, beam a
cylindrical vibratory magnetic field to it from the pump, and the light
will be led down it. Now pass the light through Kidder’s “lens”—a ring
which perpetuates an electric field along the lines of a high-speed
iris-type camera shutter. Below this is the heart of the light pump—a
ninety-eight percent efficient light absorber, crystalline, which, in a
sense, _loses_ the light in its internal facets. The effect of darkening
the room with this apparatus is slight but measurable. Pardon my
layman’s language, but that’s the general idea.

Synthetic chlorophyll—by the barrel.

An airplane propeller efficient at eight times sonic speed.

A cheap goo you brush on over old paint, let harden, and then peel off
like strips of cloth. The old paint comes with it. That one made friends
fast.

A self-sustaining atomic disintegration of uranium’s isotope 238, which
is two hundred times as plentiful as the old stand-by, U-235.

That will do for the present. If I may repeat myself: for a biochemist
who couldn’t even be called “Dr.,” he did pretty well.

Kidder was apparently unconscious of the fact that he held power enough
on his little island to become master of the world. His mind simply
didn’t run to things like that. As long as he was left alone with his
experiments, he was well content to leave the rest of the world to its
own clumsy and primitive devices. He couldn’t be reached except by a
radiophone of his own design, and its only counterpart was locked in a
vault of his Boston bank. Only one man could operate it. The
extraordinarily sensitive transmitter would respond only to Conant’s own
body vibrations. Kidder had instructed Conant that he was not to be
disturbed except by messages of the greatest moment. His ideas and
patents, what Conant could pry out of him, were released under
pseudonyms known only to Conant—Kidder didn’t care.

The result, of course, was an infiltration of the most astonishing
advancements since the dawn of civilization. The nation profited—the
world profited. But most of all, the bank profited. It began to get a
little oversize. It began getting its fingers into other pies. It grew
more fingers and had to bake more figurative pies. Before many years had
passed, it was so big that, using Kidder’s many weapons, it almost
matched Kidder in power.

Almost.

Now stand by while I squelch those fellows in the lower left-hand corner
who’ve been saying all this while that Kidder’s slightly improbable;
that no man could ever perfect himself in so many ways in so many
sciences.

Well, you’re right. Kidder was a genius—granted. But his genius was not
creative. He was, to the core, a student. He applied what he knew, what
he saw, and what he was taught. When first he began working in his new
laboratory on his island he reasoned something like this:

“Everything I know is what I have been taught by the sayings and
writings of people who have studied the sayings and writings of people
who have—and so on. Once in a while someone stumbles on something new
and he or someone cleverer uses the idea and disseminates it. But for
each one that finds something really new, a couple of million gather and
pass on information that is already current. I’d know more if I could
get the jump on evolutionary trends. It takes too long to wait for the
accidents that increase man’s knowledge—my knowledge. If I had ambition
enough now to figure out how to travel ahead in time, I could skim the
surface of the future and just dip down when I saw something
interesting. But time isn’t that way. It can’t be left behind or tossed
ahead. What else is left?

“Well, there’s the proposition of speeding intellectual evolution so
that I can observe what it cooks up. That seems a bit inefficient. It
would involve more labor to discipline human minds to that extent than
it would to simply apply myself along those lines. But I can’t apply
myself that way. No one man can.

“I’m licked. I can’t speed myself up, and I can’t speed other men’s
minds up. Isn’t there an alternative? There must be—somewhere, somehow,
there’s got to be an answer.”

So it was on this, and not on eugenics, or light pumps, or botany, or
atomic physics, that James Kidder applied himself. For a practical man,
he found the problem slightly on the metaphysical side; but he attacked
it with typical thoroughness, using his own peculiar brand of logic. Day
after day he wandered over the island, throwing shells impotently at sea
gulls and swearing richly. Then came a time when he sat indoors and
brooded. And only then did he get feverishly to work.

He worked in his own field, biochemistry, and concentrated mainly on two
things—genetics and animal metabolism. He learned, and filed away in his
insatiable mind, many things having nothing to do with the problem in
hand, and very little of what he wanted. But he piled that little on
what little he knew or guessed, and in time had quite a collection of
known factors to work with. His approach was characteristically
unorthodox. He did things on the order of multiplying apples by pears,
and balancing equations by adding log [] to one side and ∞ to the other.
He made mistakes, but only one of a kind, and later, only one of a
species. He spent so many hours at his microscope that he had to quit
work for two days to get rid of a hallucination that his heart was
pumping his own blood through the mike. He did nothing by trial and
error because he disapproved of the method as sloppy.

And he got results. He was lucky to begin with, and even luckier when he
formularized the law of probability and reduced it to such low terms
that he knew almost to the item what experiments not to try. When the
cloudy, viscous semifluid on the watch glass began to move of itself he
knew he was on the right track. When it began to seek food on its own he
began to be excited. When it divided and, in a few hours, redivided, and
each part grew and divided again, he was triumphant, for he had created
life.

He nursed his brainchildren and sweated and strained over them, and he
designed baths of various vibrations for them, and inoculated and dosed
and sprayed them. Each move he made taught him the next. And out of his
tanks and tubes and incubators came amoebalike creatures, and then
ciliated animalcules, and more and more rapidly he produced animals with
eye spots, nerve cysts, and then—victory of victories—a real blastopod,
possessed of many cells instead of one. More slowly he developed a
gastropod, but once he had it, it was not too difficult for him to give
it organs, each with a specified function, each inheritable.

Then came cultured mollusklike things, and creatures with more and more
perfected gills. The day that a nondescript thing wriggled up an
inclined board out of a tank, threw flaps over its gills and feebly
breathed air, Kidder quit work and went to the other end of the island
and got disgustingly drunk. Hangover and all, he was soon back in the
lab, forgetting to eat, forgetting to sleep, tearing into his problem.

He turned into a scientific byway and ran down his other great
triumph—accelerated metabolism. He extracted and refined the stimulating
factors in alcohol, coca, heroin, and Mother Nature’s prize dope runner,
_cannabis indica_. Like the scientist who, in analyzing the various
clotting agents for blood treatments, found that oxalic acid and oxalic
acid alone was the active factor, Kidder isolated the accelerators and
decelerators, the stimulants and soporifics, in every substance that
ever undermined a man’s morality and/or caused a “noble experiment.” In
the process he found one thing he needed badly—a colorless elixir that
made sleep the unnecessary and avoidable waster of time it should be.
Then and there he went on a twenty-four-hour shift.

He artificially synthesized the substances he had isolated, and in doing
so sloughed away a great many useless components. He pursued the subject
along the lines of radiations and vibrations. He discovered something in
the longer reds which, when projected through a vessel full of air
vibrating in the supersonics, and then polarized, speeded up the
heartbeat of small animals twenty to one. They ate twenty times as much,
grew twenty times as fast, and—died twenty times sooner than they should
have.

Kidder built a huge hermetically sealed room. Above it was another room,
the same length and breadth but not quite as high. This was his control
chamber. The large room was divided into four sealed sections, each with
its individual heat and atmosphere controls. Over each section were
miniature cranes and derricks—handling machinery of all kinds. There
were also trapdoors fitted with aid locks leading from the upper to the
lower room.

By this time the other laboratory had produced a warm-blooded,
snake-skinned quadruped with an astonishingly rapid life cycle—a
generation every eight days, a life span of about fifteen. Like the
echidna, it was oviparous and mammalian. Its period of gestation was six
hours; the eggs hatched in three; the young reached sexual maturity in
another four days. Each female laid four eggs and lived just long enough
to care for the young after they hatched. The males generally died two
or three hours after mating. The creatures were highly adaptable. They
were small—not more than three inches long, two inches to the shoulder
from the ground. Their forepaws had three digits and a triple-jointed,
opposed thumb. They were attuned to life in an atmosphere with a large
ammonia content. Kidder bred four of the creatures and put one group in
each section of the sealed room.

Then he was ready. With his controlled atmospheres he varied
temperatures, oxygen content, humidity. He killed them off like flies
with excesses of, for instance, carbon dioxide, and the survivors bred
their physical resistance into the next generation. Periodically he
would switch the eggs from one sealed section to another to keep the
strains varied. And rapidly, under these controlled conditions, the
creatures began to evolve.

This, then, was the answer to his problem. He couldn’t speed up
mankind’s intellectual advancement enough to have it teach him the
things his incredible mind yearned for. He couldn’t speed himself up. So
he created a new race—a race which would develop and evolve so fast that
it would surpass the civilization of man; and from them he would learn.

They were completely in Kidder’s power. Earth’s normal atmosphere would
poison them, as he took care to demonstrate to every fourth generation.
They would make no attempt to escape from him. They would live their
lives and progress and make their little trial-and-error experiments
hundreds of times faster than man did. They had the edge on man, for
they had Kidder to guide them. It took man six thousand years really to
discover science, three hundred to put it to work. It took Kidder’s
creatures two hundred days to equal man’s mental attainments. And from
then on—Kidder’s spasmodic output made the late, great Tom Edison look
like a home handicrafter.

He called them Neoterics, and he teased them into working for him.
Kidder was inventive in an ideological way; that is, he could dream up
impossible propositions providing he didn’t have to work them out. For
example, he wanted the Neoterics to figure out for themselves how to
build shelters out of porous material. He created the need for such
shelters by subjecting one of the sections to a high-pressure rainstorm
which flattened the inhabitants. The Neoterics promptly devised
waterproof shelters out of the thin waterproof material he piled in one
corner. Kidder immediately blew down the flimsy structure with a blast
of cold air. They built them up again so that they resisted both wind
and rain. Kidder lowered the temperature so abruptly that they could not
adjust their bodies to it. They heated their shelters with tiny
braziers. Kidder promptly turned up the heat until they began to roast
to death. After a few deaths, one of their bright boys figured out how
to build a strong insulant house by using three-ply rubberoid, with the
middle layer perforated thousands of times to create tiny air pockets.

Using such tactics, Kidder forced them to develop a highly advanced
little culture. He caused a drought in one section and a liquid surplus
in another, and then opened the partition between them. Quite a
spectacular war was fought, and Kidder’s notebooks filled with
information about military tactics and weapons. Then there was the
vaccine they developed against the common cold—the reason why that
affliction has been absolutely stamped out in the world today, for it
was one of the things that Conant, the bank president, got hold of. He
spoke to Kidder over the radiophone one winter afternoon with a voice so
hoarse from laryngitis that Kidder sent him a vial of vaccine and told
him briskly not to ever call him again in such a disgustingly inaudible
state. Conant had it analyzed and again Kidder’s accounts and the bank’s
swelled.

At first Kidder merely supplied them with the materials he thought the
Neoterics might need, but when they developed an intelligence equal to
the task of fabricating their own from the elements at hand, he gave
each section a stock of raw materials. The process for really strong
aluminum was developed when he built in a huge plunger in one of the
sections, which reached from wall to wall and was designed to descend at
the rate of four inches a day until it crushed whatever was at the
bottom. The Neoterics, in self-defense, used what strong material they
had in hand to stop the inexorable death that threatened them. But
Kidder had seen to it that they had nothing but aluminum oxide and a
scattering of other elements, plus plenty of electric power. At first
they ran up dozens of aluminum pillars; when these were crushed and
twisted they tried shaping them so that the soft metal would take more
weight. When that failed they quickly built stronger ones; and when the
plunger was halted, Kidder removed one of the pillars and analyzed it.
It was hardened aluminum, stronger and tougher than molybd steel.

Experience taught Kidder that he had to make certain changes to increase
his power over his Neoterics before they got too ingenious. There were
things that could be done with atomic power that he was curious about;
but he was not willing to trust his little superscientists with a thing
like that unless they could be trusted to use it strictly according to
Hoyle. So he instituted a rule of fear. The most trivial departure from
what he chose to consider the right way of doing things resulted in
instant death of half a tribe. If he was trying to develop a Diesel-type
power plant, for instance, that would operate without a flywheel, and a
bright young Neoteric used any of the materials for architectural
purposes, half the tribe immediately died. Of course, they had developed
a written language; it was Kidder’s own. The teletype in a
glass-enclosed area in a corner of each section was a shrine. Any
directions that were given on it were obeyed, or else … After this
innovation, Kidder’s work was much simpler. There was no need for any
more indirection. Anything he wanted done was done. No matter how
impossible his commands, three or four generations of Neoterics could
find a way to carry them out.

This quotation is from a paper that one of Kidder’s high-speed
telescopic cameras discovered being circulated among the younger
Neoterics. It is translated from the highly simplified script of the
Neoterics.

“These edicts shall be followed by each Neoteric upon pain of death,
which punishment will be inflicted by the tribe upon the individual to
protect the tribe against him.

“Priority of interest and tribal and individual effort is to be given
the commands that appear on the word machine.

“Any misdirection of material or power, or use thereof for any other
purpose than the carrying out of the machine’s commands, unless no
command appears, shall be punishable by death.

“Any information regarding the problem at hand, or ideas or experiments
which might conceivably bear upon it, are to become the property of the
tribe.

“Any individual failing to cooperate in the tribal effort, or who can be
termed guilty of not expending his full efforts in the work, or the
suspicion thereof, shall be subject to the death penalty.”

Such are the results of complete domination. This paper impressed Kidder
as much as it did because it was completely spontaneous. It was the
Neoterics’ own creed, developed by them for their own greatest good.

And so at last Kidder had his fulfillment. Crouched in the upper room,
going from telescope to telescope, running off slowed-down films from
his high-speed cameras, he found himself possessed of a tractable,
dynamic source of information. Housed in the great square building with
its four half-acre sections was a new world, to which he was God.

Conant’s mind was similar to Kidder’s in that its approach to any
problem was along the shortest distance between any two points,
regardless of whether that approach was along the line of most or least
resistance. His rise to the bank presidency was a history of ruthless
moves whose only justification was that they got him what he wanted.
Like an overefficient general, he would never vanquish an enemy through
sheer force of numbers alone. He would also skillfully flank his enemy,
not on one side, but on both. Innocent bystanders were creatures
deserving no consideration.

The time he took over a certain thousand-acre property, for instance,
from a man named Grady, he was not satisfied with only the title to the
land. Grady was an airport owner—had been all his life, and his father
before him. Conant exerted every kind of pressure on the man and found
him unshakable. Finally judicious persuasion led the city officials to
dig a sewer right across the middle of the field, quite efficiently
wrecking Grady’s business. Knowing that this would supply Grady, who was
a wealthy man, with motive for revenge, Conant took over Grady’s bank at
half again its value and caused it to fold up. Grady lost every cent he
had and ended his life in an asylum. Conant was very proud of his
tactics.

Like many another who has had Mammon by the tail, Conant did not know
when to let go. His vast organization yielded him more money and power
than any other concern in history, and yet he was not satisfied. Conant
and money were like Kidder and knowledge. Conant’s pyramided enterprises
were to him what the Neoterics were to Kidder. Each had made his private
world; each used it for his instruction and profit. Kidder, though,
disturbed nobody but his Neoterics. Even so, Conant was not wholly
villainous. He was a shrewd man, and had discovered early the value of
pleasing people. No man can rob successfully over a period of years
without pleasing the people he robs. The technique for doing this is
highly involved, but master it and you can start your own mint.

Conant’s one great fear was that Kidder would someday take an interest
in world events and begin to become opinionated. Good heavens—the
potential power he had! A little matter like swinging an election could
be managed by a man like Kidder as easily as turning over in bed. The
only thing he could do was to call him periodically and see if there was
anything that Kidder needed to keep himself busy. Kidder appreciated
this. Conant, once in a while, would suggest something to Kidder that
intrigued him, something that would keep him deep in his hermitage for a
few weeks. The light pump was one of the results of Conant’s
imagination. Conant bet him it couldn’t be done. Kidder did it.

One afternoon Kidder answered the squeal of the radiophone’s signal.
Swearing mildly, he shut off the film he was watching and crossed the
compound to the old laboratory. He went to the radiophone, threw a
switch. The squealing stopped.

“Well?”

“Hello,” said Conant. “Busy?”

“Not very,” said Kidder. He was delighted with the pictures his camera
had caught, showing the skillful work of a gang of Neoterics
synthesizing rubber out of pure sulphur. He would rather have liked to
tell Conant about it, but somehow he had never got around to telling
Conant about the Neoterics, and he didn’t see why he should start now.

Conant said, “Er … Kidder, I was down at the club the other day and a
bunch of us were filling up an evening with loose talk. Something came
up which might interest you.”

“What?”

“Couple of the utilities boys there. You know the power set-up in this
country, don’t you? Thirty percent atomic, the rest hydroelectric,
Diesel and steam?”

“I hadn’t known,” said Kidder, who as innocent as a babe of current
events.

“Well, we were arguing about what chance a new power source would have.
One of the men there said it would be smarter to produce a new power and
then talk about it. Another one waived that; said he couldn’t name that
new power, but he could describe it. Said it would have to have
everything that present power sources have, plus one or two more things.
It could be cheaper, for instance. It could be more efficient. It might
supersede the others by being easier to carry from the power plant to
the consumer. See what I mean? Any one of these factors might prove a
new source of power competitive to the others. What I’d like to see is a
new power with _all_ of these factors. What do you think of it?”

“Not impossible.”

“Think not?”

“I’ll try it.”

“Keep me posted.” Conant’s transmitter clicked off. The switch was a
little piece of false front that Kidder had built into the set, which
was something that Conant didn’t know. The set switched itself off when
Conant moved from it. After the switch’s sharp crack, Kidder heard the
banker mutter, “If he does it, I’m all set. If he doesn’t, at least the
crazy fool will keep himself busy on the isl—”

Kidder eyed the radiophone for an instant with raised eyebrows, and then
shrugged them down again with his shoulders. It was quite evident that
Conant had something up his sleeve, but Kidder wasn’t worried. Who on
earth would want to disturb him? He wasn’t bothering anybody. He went
back to the Neoterics’ building, full of the new power idea.

Eleven days later Kidder called Conant and gave specific instructions on
how to equip his receiver with a facsimile set which would enable Kidder
to send written matter over the air. As soon as this was done and Kidder
informed, the biochemist for once in his life spoke at some length.

“Conant—you inferred that a new power source that would be cheaper, more
efficient and more easily transmitted than any now in use did not exist.
You might be interested in the little generator I have just set up.

“It has power, Conant—unbelievable power. Broadcast. A beautiful little
tight beam. Here—catch this on the facsimile recorder.” Kidder slipped a
sheet of paper under the clips on his transmitter and it appeared on
Conant’s set. “Here’s the wiring diagram for a power receiver. Now
listen. The beam is so tight, so highly directional, that not three
thousandths of one percent of the power would be lost in a
two-thousand-mile transmission. The power system is closed. That is, any
drain on the beam returns a signal along it to the transmitter, which
automatically steps up to increase the power output. It has a limit, but
it’s way up. And something else. This little gadget of mine can send out
eight different beams with a total horsepower output of around eight
thousand per minute per beam. From each beam you can draw enough power
to turn the page of a book or fly a superstratosphere plane. Hold on—I
haven’t finished yet. Each beam, as I told you before, returns a signal
from receiver to transmitter. This not only controls the power output of
the beam, but directs it. Once contact is made, the beam will never let
go. It will follow the receiver anywhere. You can power land, air or
water vehicles with it, as well as any stationary plant. Like it?”

Conant, who was a banker and not a scientist, wiped his shining pate
with the back of his hand and said, “I’ve never known you to steer me
wrong yet, Kidder. How about the cost of this thing?”

“High,” said Kidder promptly. “As high as an atomic plant. But there are
no high-tension lines, no wires, no pipelines, no nothing. The receivers
are little more complicated than a radio set. Transmitter is—well,
that’s quite a job.”

“Didn’t take you long,” said Conant.

“No,” said Kidder, “it didn’t, did it?” It was the lifework of nearly
twelve hundred highly cultured people, but Kidder wasn’t going into
that. “Of course, the one I have here’s just a model.”

Conant’s voice was strained. “A—model? And it delivers—”

“Over sixty-thousand horsepower,” said Kidder gleefully.

“Good heavens! In a full-sized machine—why, one transmitter would be
enough to—” The possibilities of the thing choked Conant for a moment.
“How is it fueled?”

“It isn’t,” said Kidder. “I won’t begin to explain it. I’ve tapped a
source of power of unimaginable force. It’s—well, big. So big that it
can’t be misused.”

“What?” snapped Conant. “What do you mean by that?”

Kidder cocked an eyebrow. Conant _had_ something up his sleeve, then. At
this second indication of it, Kidder, the least suspicious of men, began
to put himself on guard. “I mean just what I say,” he said evenly.
“Don’t try too hard to understand me—I barely savvy it myself. But the
source of this power is a monstrous resultant caused by the unbalance of
two previously equalized forces. Those equalized forces are cosmic in
quantity. Actually, the forces are those which make suns crush atoms the
way they crushed those that compose the companion of Sirius. It’s not
anything you can fool with.”

“I don’t—” said Conant, and his voice ended puzzledly.

“I’ll give you a parallel of it,” said Kidder. “Suppose you take two
rods, one in each hand. Place their tips together and push. As long as
your pressure is directly along their long axes, the pressure is
equalized; right and left hands cancel each other. Now I come along; I
put out one finger and touch the rods ever so lightly where they come
together. They snap out of line violently; you break a couple of
knuckles. The resultant force is at right angles to the original force
you exerted. My power transmitter is on the same principle. It takes an
infinitesimal amount of energy to throw those forces out of line. Easy
enough when you know how to do it. The important question is whether or
not you can control the resultant when you get it. I can.”

“I—see.” Conant indulged in a four-second gloat. “Heaven help the
utility companies. I don’t intend to. Kidder—I want a full-size power
transmitter.”

Kidder clucked into the radiophone. “Ambitious, aren’t you? I haven’t a
staff out here, Conant—you know that. And I can’t be expected to build
four or five thousand tons of apparatus myself.”

“I’ll have five hundred engineers and laborers out there in forty-eight
hours.”

“You will not. Why bother me with it? I’m quite happy here, Conant, and
one of the reasons is that I’ve no one to get in my hair.”

“Oh, now, Kidder—don’t be like that—I’ll pay you—”

“You haven’t got that much money,” said Kidder briskly. He flipped the
switch on his set. _His_ switch worked.

Conant was furious. He shouted into the phone several times, then began
to lean on the signal button. On his island, Kidder let the thing squeal
and went back to his projection room. He was sorry he had sent the
diagram of the receiver to Conant. It would have been interesting to
power a plane or a car with the model transmitter he had taken from the
Neoterics. But if Conant was going to be that way about it—well, anyway,
the receiver would be no good without the transmitter. Any radio
engineer would understand the diagram, but not the beam which activated
it. And Conant wouldn’t get his beam.

Pity he didn’t know Conant well enough.

Kidder’s days were endless sorties into learning. He never slept, nor
did his Neoterics. He ate regularly every five hours, exercised for half
an hour in every twelve. He did not keep track of time, for it meant
nothing to him. Had he wanted to know the date, or the year, even, he
knew he could get it from Conant. He didn’t care, that’s all. The time
that was not spent in observation was used in developing new problems
for the Neoterics. His thoughts just now ran to defense. The idea was
born in his conversation with Conant; now the idea was primary, its
motivation something of no importance. The Neoterics were working on a
vibration field of quasi-electrical nature. Kidder could see little
practical value in such a thing—an invisible wall which would kill any
living thing which touched it. But still—the idea was intriguing.

He stretched and moved away from the telescope in the upper room through
which he had been watching his creations at work. He was profoundly
happy here in the large control room. Leaving it to go to the old
laboratory for a bite to eat was a thing he hated to do. He felt like
bidding it good-by each time he walked across the compound, and saying a
glad hello when he returned. A little amused at himself, he went out.

There was a black blob—a distant power boat—a few miles off the island,
toward the mainland. Kidder stopped and stared distastefully at it. A
white petal of spray was affixed to each side of the black body—it was
coming toward him. He snorted, thinking of the time a yachtload of silly
fools had landed out of curiosity one afternoon, spewed themselves over
his beloved island, peppered him with lame-brained questions, and thrown
his nervous equilibrium out for days. Lord, how he hated _people!_

The thought of unpleasantness bred two more thoughts that played
half-consciously with his mind as he crossed the compound and entered
the old laboratory. One was that perhaps it might be wise to surround
his buildings with a field of force of some kind and post warnings for
trespassers. The other thought was of Conant and the vague uneasiness
the man had been sending to him through the radiophone these last weeks.
His suggestion, two days ago, that a power plant be built on the
island—horrible idea!

Conant rose from a laboratory bench as Kidder walked in.

They looked at each other wordlessly for a long moment. Kidder hadn’t
seen the bank president in years. The man’s presence, he found, made his
scalp crawl.

“Hello,” said Conant genially. “You’re looking fit.”

Kidder grunted. Conant eased his unwieldy body back onto the bench and
said, “Just to save you the energy of asking questions, Mr. Kidder, I
arrived two hours ago on a small boat. Rotten way to travel. I wanted to
be a surprise to you; my two men rowed me the last couple of miles.
You’re not very well equipped here for defense, are you? Why, anyone
could slip up on you the way I did.”

“Who’d want to?” growled Kidder. The man’s voice edged annoyingly into
his brain. He spoke too loudly for such a small room; at least, Kidder’s
hermit’s ears felt that way. Kidder shrugged and went about preparing a
light meal for himself.

“Well,” drawled the banker. “I might want to.” He drew out a Dow-metal
cigar case. “Mind if I smoke?”

“I do,” said Kidder sharply.

Conant laughed easily and put the cigars away. “I might,” he said, “want
to urge you to let me build that power station on this island.”

“Radiophone work?”

“Oh, yes. But now that I’m here you can’t switch me off. Now—how about
it?”

“I haven’t changed my mind.”

“Oh, but you should, Kidder, you should. Think of it—think of the good
it would do for the masses of people that are now paying exorbitant
power bills!”

“I hate the masses! Why do you have to build here?”

“Oh, that. It’s an ideal location. You own the island; work could begin
here without causing any comment whatsoever. The plant would spring
full-fledged on the power markets of the country, having been built in
secret. The island can be made impregnable.”

“I don’t want to be bothered.”

“We wouldn’t bother you. We’d build on the north end of the island—a
mile and a quarter from you and your work. Ah—by the way—where’s the
model of the power transmitter?”

Kidder, with his mouth full of synthesized food, waved a hand at a small
table on which stood the model, a four-foot, amazingly intricate device
of plastic and steel and tiny coils.

Conant rose and went over to look at it. “Actually works, eh?” He sighed
deeply and said, “Kidder, I really hate to do this, but I want to build
that plant rather badly. Carson! Robbins!”

Two bull-necked individuals stepped out from their hiding places in the
corners of the room. One idly dangled a revolver by its trigger guard.
Kidder looked blankly from one to the other of them.

“These gentlemen will follow my orders implicitly, Kidder. In half an
hour a party will land here—engineers, contractors. They will start
surveying the north end of the island for the construction for the power
plant. These boys here feel about the same way I do as far as you are
concerned. Do we proceed with your cooperation or without it? It’s
immaterial to me whether or not you are left alive to continue your
work. My engineers can duplicate your model.”

Kidder said nothing. He had stopped chewing when he saw the gunmen, and
only now remembered to swallow. He sat crouched over his plate without
moving or speaking.

Conant broke the silence by walking to the door. “Robbins—can you carry
that model there?” The big man put his gun away, lifted the model
gently, and nodded. “Take it down to the beach and meet the other boat.
Tell Mr. Johansen, the engineer, that this is the model he is to work
from.” Robbins went out. Conant turned to Kidder. “There’s no need for
us to anger ourselves,” he said oilily. “I think you are stubborn, but I
don’t hold it against you. I know how you feel. You’ll be left alone;
you have my promise. But I mean to go ahead on this job, and a small
thing like your life can’t stand in my way.”

Kidder said, “Get out of here.” There were two swollen veins throbbing
at his temples. His voice was low, and it shook.

“Very well. Good day, Mr. Kidder. Oh—by the way—you’re a clever devil.”
No one had ever referred to the scholastic Mr. Kidder that way before.
“I realize the possibility of your blasting us off the island. I
wouldn’t do it if I were you. I’m willing to give you what you
want—privacy. I want the same thing in return. If anything happens to me
while I’m here, the island will be bombed by someone who is working for
me. I’ll admit they might fail. If they do, the United States government
will take a hand. You wouldn’t want that, would you? That’s rather a big
thing for one man to fight. The same thing goes if the plant is
sabotaged in any way after I go back to the mainland. You might be
killed. You will most certainly be bothered interminably. Thanks for
your … er … cooperation.” The banker smirked and walked out, followed by
his taciturn gorilla.

Kidder sat there for a long time without moving. Then he shook his head,
rested it in his palms. He was badly frightened; not so much because his
life was in danger, but because his privacy and his work—his world—were
threatened. He was hurt and bewildered. He wasn’t a businessman. He
couldn’t handle men. All his life he had run away from humans and what
they represented to him. He was like a frightened child when men closed
in on him.

Cooling a little, he wondered vaguely what would happen when the power
plant opened. Certainly the government would be interested.
Unless—unless by then Conant was the government. That plant was an
unimaginable source of power, and not only the kind of power that turned
wheels. He rose and went back to the world that was home to him, a world
where his motives were understood, and where there were those who could
help him. Back at the Neoterics’ building, he escaped yet again from the
world of men into his work.

Kidder called Conant the following week, much to the banker’s surprise.
His two days on the island had gotten the work well under way, and he
had left with the arrival of a shipload of laborers and material. He
kept in close touch by radio with Johansen, the engineer in charge. It
had been a blind job for Johansen and all the rest of the crew on the
island. Only the bank’s infinite resources could have hired such a man,
or the picked gang with him.

Johansen’s first reaction when he saw the model had been ecstatic. He
wanted to tell his friends about this marvel; but the only radio set
available was beamed to Conant’s private office in the bank, and
Conant’s armed guards, one to every two workers, had strict orders to
destroy any other radio transmitter on sight. About that time he
realized that he was a prisoner on the island. His instant anger
subsided when he reflected that being a prisoner at fifty thousand
dollars a week wasn’t too bad. Two of the laborers and an engineer
thought differently, and got disgruntled a couple of days after they
arrived. They disappeared one night—the same night that five shots were
fired down on the beach. No questions were asked, and there was no more
trouble.

Conant covered his surprise at Kidder’s call and was as offensively
jovial as ever. “Well, now! Anything I can do for you?”

“Yes,” said Kidder. His voice was low, completely without expression. “I
want you to issue a warning to your men not to pass the white line I
have drawn five hundred yards north of my buildings, right across the
island.”

“Warning? Why, my dear fellow, they have orders that you are not to be
disturbed on any account.”

“You’ve ordered them. All right. Now warn them. I have an electric field
surrounding my laboratories that will kill anything living which
penetrates it. I don’t want to have murder on my conscience. There will
be no deaths unless there are trespassers. You’ll inform your workers?”

“Oh, now, Kidder,” the banker expostulated. “That was totally
unnecessary. You won’t be bothered. Why—” But he found he was talking
into a dead mike. He knew better than to call back. He called Johansen
instead and told him about it. Johansen didn’t like the sound of it, but
he repeated the message and signed off. Conant liked that man. He was,
for a moment, a little sorry that Johansen would never reach the
mainland alive.

But that Kidder—he was beginning to be a problem. As long as his weapons
were strictly defensive he was no real menace. But he would have to be
taken care of when the plant was operating. Conant couldn’t afford to
have genius around him unless it was unquestionably on his side. The
power transmitter and Conant’s highly ambitious plans would be safe as
long as Kidder was left to himself. Kidder knew that he could, for the
time being, expect more sympathetic treatment from Conant than he could
from a horde of government investigators.

Kidder only left his own enclosure once after the work began on the
north end of the island, and it took all of his unskilled diplomacy to
do it. Knowing the source of the plant’s power, knowing what could
happen if it were misused, he asked Conant’s permission to inspect the
great transmitter when it was nearly finished. Insuring his own life by
refusing to report back to Conant until he was safe within his own
laboratory again, he turned off his shield and walked up to the north
end.

He saw an awe-inspiring sight. The four-foot model was duplicated nearly
a hundred times as large. Inside a massive three-hundred-foot tower a
space was packed nearly solid with the same bewildering maze of coils
and bars that the Neoterics had built so delicately into their machine.
At the top was a globe of polished metal alloy, the transmitting
antenna. From it would stream thousands of tight beams of force, which
could be tapped to any degree by corresponding thousands of receivers
placed anywhere at any distance. Kidder learned that the receivers had
already been built, but his informant, Johansen, knew little about that
end of it and was saying less. Kidder checked over every detail of the
structure, and when he was through he shook Johansen’s hand admiringly.

“I didn’t want this thing here,” he said shyly, “and I don’t. But I will
say that it’s a pleasure to see this kind of work.”

“It’s a pleasure to meet the man that invented it.”

Kidder beamed. “I didn’t invent it,” he said. “Maybe someday I’ll show
you who did. I—well, good-by.” He turned before he had a chance to say
too much and marched off down the path.

“Shall I?” said a voice at Johansen’s side. One of Conant’s guards had
his gun out.

Johansen knocked the man’s arm down. “No.” He scratched his head. “So
that’s the mysterious menace from the other end of the island. Eh! Why,
he’s a hell of a nice little feller!”

Built on the ruins of Denver, which was destroyed in the great Battle of
the Rockies during the Western War, stands the most beautiful city in
the world—our nation’s capital, New Washington. In a circular room deep
in the heart of the White House, the President, three army men and a
civilian sat. Under the President’s desk a dictaphone unostentatiously
recorded every word that was said. Two thousand and more miles away,
Conant hung over a radio receiver, tuned to receive the signals of the
tiny transmitter in the civilian’s side pocket.

One of the officers spoke.

“Mr. President, the ‘impossible claims’ made for this gentleman’s
product are absolutely true. He has proved beyond doubt each item on his
prospectus.”

The President glanced at the civilian, back at the officer. “I won’t
wait for your report,” he said. “Tell me—what happened?”

Another of the army men mopped his face with a khaki bandanna. “I can’t
ask you to believe us, Mr. President, but it’s true all the same. Mr.
Wright here has in his suitcase three or four dozen small … er … bombs—”

“They’re not bombs,” said Wright casually.

“All right. They’re not bombs. Mr. Wright smashed two of them on an
anvil with a sledgehammer. There was no result. He put two more in an
electric furnace. They burned away like so much tin and cardboard. We
dropped one down the barrel of a field piece and fired it. Still
nothing.” He paused and looked at the third officer, who picked up the
account.

“We really got started then. We flew to the proving grounds, dropped one
of the objects and flew to thirty thousand feet. From there, with a
small hand detonator no bigger than your fist, Mr. Wright set the thing
off. I’ve never seen anything like it. Forty acres of land came straight
up at us, breaking up as it came. The concussion was terrific—you must
have felt it here, four hundred miles away.”

The President nodded. “I did. Seismographs on the other side of the
Earth picked it up.”

“The crater it left was a quarter of a mile deep at the center. Why, one
planeload of those things could demolish any city. There isn’t even any
necessity for accuracy!”

“You haven’t heard anything yet,” another officer broke in. “Mr.
Wright’s automobile is powered by a small plant similar to the others.
He demonstrated it to us. We could find no fuel tank of any kind, or any
other driving mechanism. But with a power plant no bigger than six cubic
inches, that car, carrying enough weight to give it traction, outpulled
an army tank!”

“And the other test!” said the third excitedly. “He put one of the
objects into a replica of a treasury vault. The walls were twelve feet
thick, super-reinforced concrete. He controlled it from a hundred yards
away. He … he burst that vault! It wasn’t an explosion—it was as if some
incredibly powerful expansive force inside filled it and flattened the
walls from inside. They cracked and split and powdered, and the steel
girders and rods came twisting and shearing out like … like—_whew!_
After that he insisted on seeing you. We knew it wasn’t usual, but he
said he has more to say and would say it only in your presence.”

The President said gravely, “What is it, Mr. Wright?”

Wright rose, picked up his suitcase, opened it and took out a small
cube, about eight inches on a side, made from some light-absorbent red
material. Four men edged nervously away from it.

“These gentlemen,” he began, “have seen only part of the things this
device can do. I’m going to demonstrate to you the delicacy of control
that is possible with it.” He made an adjustment with a tiny knob on the
side of the cube, set it on the edge of the President’s desk.

“You have asked me more than once if this is my invention or if I am
representing someone. The latter is true. It might also interest you to
know that the man who controls this cube is right now several thousand
miles from here. He, and he alone, can prevent it from detonating now
that I”—he pulled his detonator out of the suitcase and pressed a
button—“have done this. It will explode the way the one we dropped from
the plane did, completely destroying this city and everything in it, in
just four hours. It will also explode”—he stepped back and threw a tiny
switch on his detonator—“if any moving object comes within three feet of
it or if anyone leaves this room but me—it can be compensated for that.
If, after I leave, I am molested, it will detonate as soon as a hand is
laid on me. No bullets can kill me fast enough to prevent me from
setting it off.”

The three army men were silent. One of them swiped nervously at the
beads of cold sweat on his forehead. The others did not move. The
President said evenly:

“What’s your proposition?”

“A very reasonable one. My employer does not work in the open, for
obvious reasons. All he wants is your agreement to carry out his orders;
to appoint the cabinet members he chooses; to throw your influence in
any way he dictates. The public—Congress—anyone else—need never know
anything about it. I might add that if you agree to this proposal, this
‘bomb,’ as you call it, will not go off. But you can be sure that
thousands of them are planted all over the country. You will never know
when you are near one. If you disobey, it means instant annihilation for
you and everyone else within three or four square miles.

“In three hours and fifty minutes—that will be at precisely seven
o’clock—there is a commercial radio program on Station RPRS. You will
cause the announcer, after his station identification, to say ‘Agreed.’
It will pass unnoticed by all but my employer. There is no use in having
me followed; my work is done. I shall never see nor contact my employer
again. That is all. Good afternoon, gentlemen!”

Wright closed his suitcase with a businesslike snap, bowed, and left the
room. Four men sat staring at the little red cube.

“Do you think he can do all he says?” asked the President.

The three nodded mutely. The President reached for his phone.

There was an eavesdropper to all of the foregoing. Conant, squatting
behind his great desk in the vault, where he had his sanctum sanctorum,
knew nothing of it. But beside him was the compact bulk of Kidder’s
radiophone. His presence switched it on, and Kidder, on his island,
blessed the day he had thought of that device. He had been meaning to
call Conant all morning, but was very hesitant. His meeting with the
young engineer Johansen had impressed him strongly. The man was such a
thorough scientist, possessed of such complete delight in the work he
did, that for the first time in his life Kidder found himself actually
wanting to see someone again. But he feared for Johansen’s life if he
brought him to the laboratory, for Johansen’s work was done on the
island, and Conant would most certainly have the engineer killed if
heard of his visit, fearing that Kidder would influence him to sabotage
the great transmitter. And if Kidder went to the power plant he would
probably be shot on sight.

All one day Kidder wrangled with himself, and finally determined to call
Conant. Fortunately he gave no signal, but turned up the volume on the
receiver when the little red light told him that Conant’s transmitter
was functioning. Curious, he heard everything that occurred in the
President’s chamber three thousand miles away. Horrified, he realized
what Conant’s engineers had done. Built into tiny containers were tens
of thousands of power receivers. They had no power of their own, but, by
remote control, could draw on any or all of the billions of horsepower
the huge plant on the island was broadcasting.

Kidder stood in front of his receiver, speechless. There was nothing he
could do. If he devised some means of destroying the power plant, the
government would certainly step in and take over the island, and
then—what would happen to him and his precious Neoterics?

Another sound grated out of the receiver—a commercial radio program. A
few bars of music, a man’s voice advertising stratoline fares on the
installment plan, a short silence, then:

“Station RPRS, voice of the nation’s Capital, District of South
Colorado.”

The three-second pause was interminable.

“The time is exactly … er … _agreed_. The time is exactly seven PM
Mountain Standard Time.”

Then came a half-insane chuckle. Kidder had difficulty believing it was
Conant. A phone clicked. The banker’s voice:

“Bill? All set. Get out there with your squadron and bomb up the island.
Keep away from the plant, but cut the rest of it to ribbons. Do it quick
and get out of there.”

Almost hysterical with fear, Kidder rushed about the room and then shot
out the door and across the compound. There were five hundred innocent
workmen in barracks a quarter mile from the plant. Conant didn’t need
them now, and he didn’t need Kidder. The only safety for anyone was in
the plant itself, and Kidder wouldn’t leave his Neoterics to be bombed.
He flung himself up the stairs and to the nearest teletype. He banged
out, “Get me a defense. I want an impenetrable shield. Urgent!”

The words ripped out from under his fingers in the functional script of
the Neoterics. Kidder didn’t think of what he wrote, didn’t really
visualize the thing he ordered. But he had done what he could. He’d have
to leave them now, get to the barracks, warn those men. He ran up the
path toward the plant, flung himself over the white line and marked
death to those who crossed it.

A squadron of nine clip-winged, mosquito-nosed planes rose out of a cove
on the mainland. There was no sound from the engines, for there were no
engines. Each plane was powered with a tiny receiver and drew its
unmarked, light-absorbent wings through the air with power from the
island. In a matter of minutes they raised the island. The squadron
leader spoke briskly into a microphone.

“Take the barracks first. Clean ’em up. Then work south.”

Johansen was alone on a small hill near the center of the island. He
carried a camera, and though he knew pretty well that his chances of
ever getting ashore again were practically nonexistent, he liked angle
shots of his tower, and took innumerable pictures. The first he knew of
the planes was when he heard their whining dive over the barracks. He
stood transfixed, saw a shower of bombs hurtle down and turn the
barracks into a smashed ruin of broken wood, metal and bodies. The
picture of Kidder’s earnest face flashed into his mind. Poor little
guy—if they ever bombed his end of the island he would—But his tower!
Were they going to bomb the plant?

He watched, utterly appalled, as the planes flew out to sea, cut back
and dove again. They seemed to be working south. At the third dive he
was sure of it. Not knowing what he could do, he nevertheless turned and
ran toward Kidder’s place. He rounded a turn in the trail and collided
violently with the little biochemist. Kidder’s face was scarlet with
exertion, and he was the most terrified-looking object Johansen had ever
seen.

Kidder waved a hand northward. “Conant!” he screamed over the uproar.
“It’s Conant! He’s going to kill us all!”

“The plant?” said Johansen, turning pale.

“It’s safe. He won’t touch _that!_ But … my place … what about all those
men?”

“Too late!” shouted Johansen.

“Maybe I can—Come on!” called Kidder, and was off down the trail,
heading south.

Johansen pounded after him. Kidder’s little short legs became a blur as
the squadron swooped overhead, laying its eggs in the spot where they
had met.

As they burst out of the woods, Johansen put on a spurt, caught up with
the scientist and knocked him sprawling not six feet from the white
line.

“Wh … wh—”

“Don’t go any farther, you fool! Your own damned force field—it’ll kill
you!”

“Force field? But—I came through it on the way up—Here. Wait. If I can—”
Kidder began hunting furiously about in the grass. In a few seconds he
ran up to the line, clutching a large grasshopper in his hand. He tossed
it over. It lay still.

“See?” said Johansen. “It—”

“Look! It jumped! Come on! I don’t know what went wrong, unless the
Neoterics shut it off. They generated that field—I didn’t.”

“Neo—huh?”

“Never mind,” snapped the biochemist, and ran.

They pounded gasping up the steps and into the Neoterics’ control room.
Kidder clapped his eyes to a telescope and shrieked in glee. “They’ve
done it! We’ve done it!”

“Who’s—”

“My little people! The Neoterics! They’ve made the impenetrable shield!
Don’t you see—it cut through the lines of force that start up that field
out there! Their generator is still throwing it up, but the vibrations
can’t get out! They’re safe! They’re safe!” And the overwrought hermit
began to cry. Johansen looked at him pityingly and shook his head.

“Sure—your little men are all right. But we aren’t,” he added, as the
floor shook to the detonation of a bomb.

Johansen closed his eyes, got a grip on himself and let his curiosity
overcome his fear. He stepped to the binocular telescope, gazed down it.
There was nothing there but a curved sheet of gray material. He had
never seen a gray quite like that. It was absolutely neutral. It didn’t
seem soft and it didn’t seem hard, and to look at it made his brain
reel. He looked up.

Kidder was pounding the keys of a teletype, watching the blank yellow
tape anxiously.

“I’m not getting through to them,” he whimpered. “I don’t know what’s
the mat—Oh, of _course!”_

“What?”

“The shield is absolutely impenetrable! The teletype impulses can’t get
through or I could get them to extend the screen over the building—over
the whole island! There’s _nothing_ those people can’t do!”

“He’s crazy,” Johansen muttered. “Poor little—”

The teletype began clicking sharply. Kidder dove at it, practically
embraced it. He read off the tape as it came out. Johansen saw the
characters, but they meant nothing to him.

“Almighty,” Kidder read falteringly, “pray have mercy on us and be
forbearing until we have said our say. Without orders we have lowered
the screen you ordered us to rise. We are lost, O great one. Our screen
is truly impenetrable, and so cut off your words on the word machine. We
have never, in the memory of any Neoteric, been without your word
before. Forgive us our action. We will eagerly await your answer.”

Kidder’s fingers danced over the keys. “You can look now,” he gasped.
“Go on—the telescope!”

Johansen, trying to ignore the whine of sure death from above, looked.

He saw what looked like land—fantastic fields under cultivation, a
settlement of some sort, factories, and—beings. Everything moved with
incredible rapidity. He couldn’t see one of the inhabitants except as
darting pinky-white streaks. Fascinated, he stared for a long minute. A
sound behind him made him whirl. It was Kidder, rubbing his hands
together briskly. There was a broad smile on his face.

“They did it,” he said happily. “You see?”

Johansen didn’t see until he began to realize that there was a dead
silence outside. He ran to a window. It was night outside—the blackest
night—when it should have been dusk. “What happened?”

“The Neoterics,” said Kidder, and laughed like a child. “My friends
downstairs there. They threw up the impenetrable shield over the whole
island. We can’t be touched now!”

And at Johansen’s amazed questions, he launched into a description of
the race of beings below them.

Outside the shell, things happened. Nine airplanes suddenly went
dead-stick. Nine pilots glided downward, powerless, and some fell into
the sea, and some struck the miraculous gray shell that loomed in place
of an island, slid off, and sank.

And ashore, a man named Wright sat in a car, half dead with fear, while
government men surrounded him, approached cautiously, daring instant
death from a now-dead source.

In a room deep in the White House, a high-ranking army officer shrieked,
“I can’t stand it any more! I can’t!” and leaped up, snatched a red cube
off the President’s desk, ground it to ineffectual litter under his
shining boots.

And in a few days they took a broken old man away from the bank and put
him in an asylum, where he died within a week.

The shield, you see, was truly impenetrable. The power plant was
untouched and sent out its beams; but the beams could not get out, and
anything powered from the plant went dead. The story never became
public, although for some years there was heightened naval activity off
the New England coast. The navy, so the story went, had a new target
range out there—a great hemi-ovoid of gray material. They bombed it and
shelled it and rayed it and blasted all around it, but never even dented
its smooth surface.

Kidder and Johansen let it stay there. They were happy enough with their
researches and their Neoterics. They did not hear or feel the shelling,
for the shield was truly impenetrable. They synthesized their food and
their light and air from the materials at hand, and they simply didn’t
care. They were the only survivors of the bombing, with the exception of
three poor maimed devils who died soon afterwards.

All this happened many years ago, and Kidder and Johansen may be alive
today, and they may be dead. But that doesn’t matter too much. The
important thing is that the great gray shell will bear watching. Men
die, but races live. Some day the Neoterics, after innumerable
generations of inconceivable advancement, will take down their shield
and come forth. When I think of that I feel frightened.



THE HAUNT


JUST A GAG, that’s all—a gag. I’m sure it was. It had to be. Heck, we
were wise, Tommy and me. Tommy was a radio technician and a good one,
and I knew the gadgets to the last hidden loudspeaker and the last
Fahnestock clip almost as well as he did. Tommy was a funny egg, anyway.
Foggy, you know—the kind of guy that shows up at work with one brown
shoe and one black, or dunks his cafeteria check in his coffee and hands
a doughnut to the waiter to punch. But—he knew his stuff, he had the
apparatus, and the idea tickled him. I can see his point there. Scaring
the living daylights out of a cool cookie like Miriam Jensen was a
challenge to any man.

Her rock-hard nerves were by no means her only striking characteristic.
She was smooth—smooth to look at, smooth to talk to, smooth in the way
she thought and acted and moved. Tall, you know—dark brunette, long slim
neck, small head and features; quite tall—that kind. A knockout. Brains,
too, and she used them. I don’t believe anything but hard exercise could
raise her pulse more than one-two beats a minute. I know that the funny
idea I had that it would be nice to be married to her didn’t have her at
all fluttery. She laughed me off. When I asked for her lily-white hand,
did she say she’d be a sister to me? Did she tell me tenderly that we
weren’t suited? Did she say so much as “No”? Uh-uh. She said: “You’re
cute, Bill. Didn’t anyone ever tell you how cute you were?” And she
giggled. I stood there with my teeth in my mouth and my bare face
hanging out, watching her walk away; and then and there I said to
myself, “I’m going to shake her off her high horse, by all that’s
unholy, if I have to kill her to do it.”

I came home—lived in an apartment hotel then—and met Tommy in the hall.
I dragged him into my place, stuck a drink in his hand, and figuratively
wept on his shoulder about it for the best part of an hour, while he sat
there doddering his untidy hair up and down and watching the bubbles
collect on the bottom of an ice cube.

“W-what do y-you want to do about it?” he asked.

“I told you—slap her down. If I could think of a way to slap her down so
that it would do _me_ some good, I’d do it, too. But you can’t walk up
to a woman, take a poke at her, and expect her to marry you for it.”

“You can with s-some women,” Tommy observed with the profundity of a
confirmed celibate.

“Not with this one,” I snorted. “No, I’ve got to scare the bustle cover
off her, and then rescue her, maybe. Or show her that I’m not scared by
the same thing. Or both. Got any ideas?”

“I th-think you’re a ph-phony, Bill.”

“I didn’t mean your ideas about me. Come on—you’re supposed to run to
brains. Forget the personalities and let’s have a brain wave or two.”

Tommy stared at the ceiling and gravely ground out his cigarette two
inches away from an ash tray. “What’s she sc-sc-frightened of, do you
think?”

I walked up and down for a couple of minutes, trying to frown out an
answer to that one. “Nothing, as far as I’ve ever heard,” I said.
“Miriam will dive off a sixty-foot platform, or break a bronc, or drive
a midget racer, and breathe no harder for it than she does after a fast
conga. I tell you, that girl’s nerves—if she has any—are made of
iridium-plated piano wire.”

“I bet she’s superstitious,” said Tommy.

“What? Ghosts, you mean? Huh. Could be, but what—”

“Easy.” Tommy set his half-empty glass down on the floor from about
waist height. “We’ll make her some ghosts—you’ll rescue her from them.”

“Swell. What do we do—draw some magic squares on the hotel carpet around
a pot of devil’s brew or something?”

“N-no. We take a couple coils of wire and my little public-speaking
s-system, and maybe a few colored lights and stuff. And we haunt a
house. Th-then you bring your iridium girl friend in. J-just leave it to
me.”

“That sounds like quite something, Tommy,” I said. I was so tickled with
the idea that I remembered I hadn’t had a drink and began pouring myself
one. “Miriam’s a sucker for a dare. But the Lord help me if she ever
found out about this.”

Tommy looked at me vaguely and grinned. “I don’t know nothin’,
ch-chief,” he said, and got up to go. “I’ll l-let you know what I dream
up on this, B-Bill. Night.” He went through the door.

I thanked him, pulled him out of the bathroom, and saw him to the right
door. I never did meet such a foggy fellow.

Inside of a week he had it rigged up and took me out there to look it
over. The house was a chalet over a century old. It had hedges in front
of it gone hog wild, and the once-green paint was a filthy gray. It had
eleven-foot ceilings and Venetian shutters which were in the last stages
of decay, full of tartar and cavities, as it were. I don’t know how
Tommy had gotten hold of it, but he had, and man, how he’d rigged it up!

“You s-see,” he explained, “the old place has a history, too. There have
been four murders here, and th-three suicides. The l-last guy who owned
it starved to death in the cellar.” He motioned me after him and started
through the weeds toward the back. I looked up at the gloomy old pile
and shuddered. “What are we going around the back for?” I asked.

“So the dust in the f-front hallway will look as if no one has been here
in the last twenty years,” he said, opening a cellar window. “G-go
on—climb in.”

I did, and he tumbled in after me. He threaded his way though large
piles of rubbish until he came to a partition. He opened a door in it
and we found ourselves inside a neatly arranged control room. Pointing,
Tommy said, “See th-that board? There’s a photo cell and relay laid
across every door in the house. Any time anyone goes into a room I know
which it is by the number underneath the light. There’s my mike over
there, and phonograph pick-up. There’s a hot-air system in the house; I
put the speaker in the furnace, and when I play my little collection of
m-moans and groans and shrieks from those recordings, you c-can hear
them all over the house. It sounds swell.”

“It does,” I grinned. “But why do you have to know which room we’re
going to be in?”

“For the l-lights,” he said. He showed me a battery of half a dozen
knife switches and a rheostat. “Some of the lights are ultraviolet, and
they shine on fluorescent paint on the opposite wall. You s-see
something there, and when you turn your flashlight on it, it’s gone.
Some of the lights are photo flashes. Oh, it’ll be quite a sh-show.”

“It sure will,” I said, delighted.

“Now, when you b-bring your little lump of dry ice in,” said Tommy—I
gathered he was referring to Miriam—“take her in the front way.
Here—I’ve typed out all the stories about p-people who died in this
place, and all the dope about how and where they g-got knocked off. Tell
her all the yarns and take her into all the rooms. You’ll know what to
expect. That’s all I can do—you’ll have to figure out the rest
yourself.”

“You’ve done enough,” I said, slapping him on the back so that his
glasses fell off and broke. He pulled another pair out of his pocket and
put them on. “Don’t worry,” I said. “This ought to cut some of her ice.”

He gave me a few more details and took me on a tour of the place. Then I
took my typewritten sheets and went home to bone up on them. It should
be a snap, I thought. Anyhow, it should have been.

I cornered Miriam two nights later. I came up behind her and whispered
in her ear, “Will you marry me?”

She said, “Oh, hello, Bill,” without even turning around.

“Miriam,” I said hoarsely, “I asked you a question!”

She gently slid her shoulder out from under my hand. “And I said ‘Hello,
Bill.’ ” She grinned.

I gnashed my teeth and tried to be calm.

“Do you like ghosts?” I asked irrelevantly.

“Dunno. I never met one,” she said. “Don’t you ever ask girls to dance?”

“No,” I said. “I sweep ’em off their feet onto the floor when I feel
like dancing, which I don’t right now. I want to talk about ghosts.”

“A safe subject,” she observed. I nodded my head toward one of those
pieces of furniture euphemistically called love seats, and we threaded
our way through the crowd of people—it was one of those parties that
Reggie Johns used to throw for people he didn’t know. That is, he’d
invite six couples he knew and forty or fifty would arrive.

“In 1853,” I said oratorically, “Joachim Grandt—spelled with a ‘d’—was
murdered by person or persons unknown in the first floor back of an old
Swiss chalet up on Grove Street. A rumor circulated to the effect that
the room was haunted. This so depreciated the value of the house and
grounds that Joachim’s great-nephew, Harrison Grandt—also spelled with a
‘d’—tried to prove that it was not haunted by spending a night there. He
was found the next morning by one Harry Fortunato, strangled to death in
exactly the manner used by the aforementioned person or persons.
Fortunato was so exercised by this strange turn of events that he rushed
out of the house and broke his neck on the front steps.”

“All this is quite bewildering,” said Miriam softly, “but it seems to me
that it is hardly the thing to whisper into my shell-like ear when we
could be dancing.”

“Damn it, Miriam—”

“—also spelled with a ‘d,’ ” she interjected.

“Let me finish telling you about this. After Fortunato’s death there
were two more murders and two supposed suicides, all of them either
stranglings or neck-breakings. Now, the house is supposed to be really
haunted. They say you can really see the spooks and hear voices and
rattles and so froth—all the fixin’s. I found out where the place is.”

“Oh? And what might that have to do with—”

“You? Well, I’ve heard tell that you aren’t afraid of man, woman or
beast. I just wondered about ghosts.”

“Don’t be childish, Bill. Ghosts live inside the heads of foolish people
and pop out when the foolish people want to be frightened.”

“Not these ghosts.”

She regarded me amusedly. “Don’t tell me you’ve seen them?”

I nodded.

She said, “That proves my point. Let’s dance.”

She half rose, but I caught her wrist and yanked her back. I don’t think
she liked it. “Don’t tell me you’re afraid to go and see for yourself,
Iron Woman?”

“Nobody suggested it.”

“I just did.”

She stopped yearning toward the dance floor and settled back. “Ah—so
that’s the idea. Go on—let’s have it,” she said in a
I-won’t-do-it-but-I’d-like-to-hear-about-it tone of voice.

“We’d just go out there and investigate it,” I said. “Frankly, I’d like
to see your hair curl.”

“Let me get this straight,” she said. “You and I are going out at this
time of night to a deserted house in a deserted neighborhood to catch us
a ghost. Right?” Her raised eyebrow added, “Monkey business, hey?”

“No!” I said immediately. “No monkey business. My word on that.” Of
course, Tommy’s electrical ghosts were monkey business, but that was not
what she and her eyebrow meant by monkey business.

“Real ghosts,” she mused. “Bill, if this is some kind of a joke—”

“With me, lady,” I said, with real sincerity, “this is no joke.”

She insinuated herself out of the love seat onto her feet and said,
“Stand by, then, while I tell Reggie we’re leaving. I came with Roger
Sykes, but he doesn’t have to know anything about it.”

While she was gone I got some grinning done. Just like clockwork, it
was—this was the night Tommy had said he’d pick to throw a scare into
her. She’d fallen for the bait better than I ever could have hoped, and
it certainly looked as if everything was breaking my way. Maybe if I
could get her scared enough we could head for Gretna Green. Could
be—could be.

I saw her at the door, waiting for me. She was dressed in something
skintight and yet flowing, with a long white panel front and back, and
black shoulders and sides—I dunno—I’m no dressmaker, but the dress was
like the rest of her—smooth. And now she had slipped a great black cloak
over her shoulders that fell away from her body and looked like wings.
What a woman! I sighed, envying myself because I was going to have her
to myself for a few hours.

We climbed into my ancient but efficient old struggle buggy. “Where is
this place?” Miriam asked as I pulled away from the curb.

I glanced at her, taking in the way she wound her cloak about her and
writhed deeper into it. Every move a miracle, I thought. “I told you,” I
said, keeping my thoughts to myself. “Up on Grove Street, on top of Toad
Hill, across the street from a junk yard.”

“I know about where it is,” she said. “Tarry not, my fran’—pile some
coal on and let’s get there. I’ve always wanted to meet up with a
ghost.”

Her tone was one I’d heard before, once in a while. The time, for
instance, that one of the boys had been trying to lasso a post with a
length of clothesline and she had grabbed it from him impatiently,
saying, “Dammit, Joe, you make me nervous. Here,” and had whirled it
once and snagged the post on the first cast. And that other time when
one of the horses from the riding academy broke its leg taking a hedge.
While half a dozen people looked on, she picked up an edged stone and
with one clean blow killed the horse. “It was the only thing to do,” she
explained bluntly. “None of you blockheads have even started back to the
academy for a gun yet. What do you want to do—leave the animal to lie
here screaming for a solid hour?”

“What makes you that way?” I asked her. She looked at me questioningly.
“I mean, why are you always ducking in to do more or less violent
things? Why don’t you learn to knit?”

“I can knit,” she said shortly, in a voice that said, “Oh, dry up.”

So I dried up, contenting myself with the joyful play of street lights
on her darkened profile, and wondering if I were a heel to pull this
sort of a trick. We drew up eventually in front of the house. Miriam got
out and stared up at it. It loomed gray and forbidding in the light of a
half-moon. Before it, striving their dark utmost to hide the front walk,
were the tangled, twelve-foot hedges. The whole place had a greedily
unkempt look—it was a dirty old panhandler of a house, begging the right
to exist another moment. Miriam walked up to the hedge and stopped, and
I don’t know whether she was hesitating or just waiting for me. We went
up the path together.

I noticed with satisfaction that Tommy had either taken a taxi or parked
his car on another street. That had bothered me a little—he was damn
clever, but a little short on foresight. When we reached the top of the
steps I covertly touched the doorbell. There was no sound—it would light
a bulb on Tommy’s board so he’d know we were in. I handed Miriam one of
the two flashlights I had stowed in the car and pushed open the door.

Miriam caught my arm. “Ladies first, you clod,” she laughed, and slid in
ahead of me.

The floor of the foyer settled two inches under her feet with a bump;
she flailed one arm a little to get her balance and turned to me,
smiling coolly. “Coming, Bill?”

We found ourselves in a high, narrow hallway containing a flight of
stairs far too big for it.

_“Hello-o-o! Who’s the-e-e-ere—”_

“Huh?” Miriam and I asked each other. The voice had been tiny, just the
echo of an echo, but clear as a bos’n’s pipe. “I didn’t say anything,”
we chorused, and then Miriam said, “Either we’re not the only
investigators or the ghosts are wasting no time on us. Either way, I
like it here. Where to first, Bill?”

She’ll have to get a little more scared than that before I can show her
up, I thought. “Upstairs,” I said. “We’ll start at the top and work
down.”

Side by side, we headed up the old steps, scything great lumps of
darkness away with our lights. At the first landing, Miriam walked
ahead, as the stairs narrowed here. As she crossed the landing, I saw
her heel sink as her weight whipped a loose board up on end. I caught it
just before it could belt the back of her head.

“Thanks, pal,” she said evenly. “I’ll do the same for you some time.”
Never turned a hair!

Almost to the top, I thought I heard something. “Don’t look now,” I said
in a hushed voice, “but I don’t want you to miss anything, and I think I
hear someone laughing.”

We froze and stopped breathing to give the faint sound a chance. “That
isn’t laughing,” said Miriam.

I listened more carefully. “Check,” I said, “but from the sound of it,
whatever is being laughed about should be cried over. Good heavens, what
a crazy sound.”

It was a burbly noise, so quiet it was almost intimate, and it sobbed in
peals. Miriam snorted as if she were trying to blow an evil smell out of
her nostrils. I wiped sweat off the palms of my hands. Where the hell
had Tommy picked up _that_ recording?

We tiptoed across the second-floor hall and Miriam pushed open a door.
Dust swirled up as it swung noiselessly back, far faster than was
warranted, and a great dim shape loomed up out of it.

_Smash!_

A splintering crash behind us, and that unimaginable something ahead of
us. I jumped to the right and Miriam to the left, and for a second the
whole world was made of flailing electric beams and hidden menace.
Miriam, to be frank, calmed down first; at least, enough to steady her
flashlight on one of the sources of our panic. It was the old print that
had been hanging in the hallway. Its nail had pulled out of the loose
plaster, probably because of one of my dainty No. 10 footfalls, and it
had fallen to the floor, smashing the glass in the picture frame. I shot
my light at the open door. Just inside was a tall piece of furniture, an
old-fashioned secretary desk, covered with a dusty white cloth.

“A little jumpy, aren’t you, Bill?” called Miriam cheerfully as she came
over to me.

I thrust my tongue between my teeth so they wouldn’t chatter so loudly,
and tried to grin doing it. In that crazy light I think I got away with
it. Miriam must have thought I felt fine, because she rather readily let
me lead the way into the room.

There was nothing much there but dust and a couple of broken chairs. At
the back of the room was another door. With Miriam treading on my heels,
I went through it. I stood just inside, fencing with the blackness with
my torch and seeing nothing, stepped aside to let Miriam in. Something
touched me lightly on the shoulder—

_Bong! Whee-hoo! Bong! Whee-hoo! Bong!_

Miriam said “Gha!” with an intake of breath and grabbed at my arm,
making me drop my light. It thumped to the floor and went out, and she
pawed at hers, accidentally flipped the switch. Darkness hit us so hard
our knees sagged under the weight of it, and my cold-blooded darling
wrapped both arms around my head, which was the first thing she
contacted; and she began making a noise like a duckling at the ripe old
age of two hours. The bonging and whee-hooing went right on, until
Miriam’s hand, in a convulsive contraction, turned on her light again.
We found ourselves staring up at an old-style cuckoo clock. It and its
cuckoo were telling us the falsehood that it was eleven o’clock. I must
have bumped into the pendulum and set it off.

Miriam stood there with her arms around me until the silly wooden bird
had finished and retired; and yet a moment longer. This was my moment,
and by damn if I wasn’t too upset to appreciate it. Then she let me go,
and said through a funny little smile, “Bill—I think maybe this is
comic. Laugh a bit, huh?”

I licked some moisture off my upper lip onto a dry tongue. “Ha, ha,” I
said without enthusiasm.

Miriam said firmly, “The laughing noise was water in a pipe somewhere.
That crash was a picture falling off the wall. We both saw it.
The … ah … thing in the doorway was an old bookcase covered with a dust
cloth. This last ghost of yours was a cuckoo clock. Right?”

“Right.”

“And that ‘Who’s there’ we heard when we came in was … was—What was it,
anyway?”

“Imagination,” I said promptly. “Although I know damn well _I_ didn’t
imagine it.”

“I did, then,” she said stubbornly, and added, “Enough for both of us.”
Her wry grin was a sight to behold.

“Must be,” I said, picking up my flashlight and trying to make my
fingers behave enough to unscrew the reflector and slip in a spare bulb.
I managed it, somehow. “And are you by any slim chance imagining—_that_,
too?” I pointed. She pivoted.

“That” was a blob of light on the wall, so dim it was all but invisible.
The beam from her torch had been on another wall, or I wouldn’t have
seen it at all. As I stared breathlessly, looking at its shades and
shadowy outlines, I began to make out what it was.

“It looks like a … a neck!” whispered Miriam, backing onto my feet. The
thing was indeed a neck, flesh-pink and mottled with deep fingerlike
gouges of blue-black. It held for just a few seconds and then faded out.

I gulped and said, “Pretty!”

Miriam whipped her light around and splashed it on the wall. The beam
wasn’t steady, and she didn’t say anything.

“Miriam—I feel like dancing, I think.”

“There’s no music here,” she said quietly. “We’d have to go somewhere
else.”

“Yeah,” I said, and gulped. “We would, wouldn’t we?” But neither of us
moved.

Finally she shrugged and took a deep breath. “What are you waiting for,
Bill? Let’s go!”

“Go? Dancing, you mean?”

“Dancing!” she contraltoed scornfully. “We were going to explore this
house, weren’t we? Come on, then.”

“Quite a feller, aren’t you?” I said to her under my breath. I think she
heard me, because she squared her shoulders and went out. I tagged
along.

It occurred to me that it was all very well to put on this show for her,
but I was damned lucky that I’d picked her to pull it on rather than
some more impressionable female. The place was getting under my skin as
it was. Suppose I’d been with some twist who fainted or got hysterical
or lost or something? Suppose I got left alone in this place? I began
stepping on Miriam’s heels.

We gave the rest of the second floor the once-over and nothing much
happened. That pep talk of hers helped a lot. We casually dismissed
sundry creaks and groans and rattlings as the wind in the chimneys,
banging shutters, and settling floors. Neither of us saw fit to mention
that there was no wind that night, and that a
one-hundred-twenty-five-year-old house does not settle. In other words,
we thought that nothing was bothering us at all until that sob-laughing
started up again. That was pretty awful. Miriam had been holding hands
with me for ten minutes before I realized it, and I only knew it at all
when I felt her bones grate together as I clutched her when the laughing
started. It ran up and down a whole tone scale, sounding like a palsied
madman playing on a piano full of tears.

“Still like it here?” I asked.

“I didn’t like school,” she said, “but I graduated.”

We had to open a door to get on the stairs leading to the third floor.
They were narrow with a turn in the middle, with a tiny square landing
at the turn. I was in the lead—must have been a mistake, because you can
bet I didn’t ask for it, chivalry or no chivalry. Just before I reached
the landing I saw a woman, a beautiful thing in diaphanous robes, walk
gravely out of the wall at my right, across the landing and into the
wall at my left. The only thing that detracted from her loveliness was
the blood which spouted from her ears, and the fact that I could see the
patchy wall though her quite easily. I gasped and stepped back on
Miriam’s instep.

“Oo-o! Dammit, Bill—” She stood on her uninjured foot and clutched at
the banister, a section of which immediately broke loose and went
crashing and somersaulting into the darkness below.

“You all right?” I said over the reverberations.

I clutched at her to keep her from falling and managed only to get my
thumb into her eye. She said something that her mother didn’t teach her.
“Get away, Bill—you’re a menace! What in the name of corruption did you
step backward for?”

“Didn’t you see her—it?” I said before I had sense enough to say
nothing. She shook her head.

“Who?”

“A girl! She—Oh, skip it, Miriam. I guess I imagined that, too. Come
on.”

We started to climb again, and something possessed us both to look back.
At any rate, when I looked, it was over Miriam’s head, and she was
staring at the transparent woman, who was crossing back again from wall
to wall across the landing. This time she walked backward, and the blood
ran into her ears. It was infinitely more horrible than the first time,
and yet, after the first shock of it, I was comforted. For the first
time Tommy had laid it on too thick. That reversed action was too
cinematic to get over, I thought. And that’s what it must have been—a
film projected from somewhere, perhaps out from under one of the steps,
run forward and then backward. That would easily account for the
transparency of the girl’s figure, since it was projected directly
against the wall. But—damn it, how did he ever achieve that astonishing
three-dimensional effect?

“That,” Miriam was saying brokenly, “is something that I just am not
going to believe! Bill—for Heaven’s sake, what sort of place is this?”

“Regular haunt, isn’t it?” I said cheerfully. I was feeling better now
that I’d figured out one of the ghosts to my satisfaction. “Come
on—we’ll make our round and get out of here. The sooner the quicker,
y’know!”

Her gait and her carriage and her expression, all I could catch in the
sweeping beams of our torches, were almost meek. I suddenly felt
overwhelmingly like a heel. This was a lousy thing to do to such a swell
girl.

“Miriam,” I said softly, catching her arms, “I—”

But just then the laughter reached a cold crescendo, and from downstairs
came the most blood-freezing, ululating scream that it’s ever been my
sorrow to hear. It was the kind of sound to clamp a man’s jaws so tight
in terror that his gums bleed, and his skin goose-fleshes out like a
woodrasp. The scream seemed to stop the laughter, for the stillness
after it devoted itself to the scream’s echoes; and we stopped breathing
so that the sound of our breath would not keep the echoes alive. That
scream didn’t belong on this earth. Somewhere in hell is a damned soul
which has been there long enough to be miserable enough and still stay
strong enough to scream like that.

We pushed away from each other merely because it was the only movement
we could make to thrust the remembrance of that sound from us a little.
The desire to complete our tour of the chalet was something fevered and
senseless and quite irresistible by now. We hurried to get it done—we
made no slightest move to leave it partly finished. I couldn’t have done
it without my knowledge that no matter how extreme these horrors became,
they were but the creations of Tommy’s strange genius for handling
electrical circuits. Miriam had her own iron nerve and the fact that so
far I hadn’t broken into a hysterical retreat.

The third floor wasn’t bad—there was nothing there but odds and ends of
old furniture, dust, and creaking floorboards. When we started
downstairs we knew we were all but on our way out, and we grew almost
cheerful. Almost. Not quite, because that noise began again—that
creeping, tear-filled laughter. It went on and on and on, until we
couldn’t stand it anymore, and it passed that point and still went on.
We walked down steps and trotted down corridors and broke and ran in and
out of rooms, playing childishly at being casual, while the laughter
grew, not louder, but more and more clear; and we couldn’t tell whether
it was following us or whether it was simply everywhere. It was so
all-enveloping that we lost consciousness of the fact that it was in the
house. It was all around us, more than a sound—it was something we
breathed, something which pressed our clothing to our shrinking bodies
with its pulsings. It filled the whole world and there would never,
never be an end to it, and we couldn’t escape it by fleeing the house.
We couldn’t ever get away from it. It was part of us now, in our blood,
in our bones. Rounding a corner on the first floor, Miriam crashed into
a door and reeled back into my arms. I turned my light on her face. Part
of the sound—some of it, all of it, I don’t know—_was coming from her!_

“Miriam!” I screamed, and slapped her face twice, and clamped my hand
over her writhing mouth. The laughter receded into the upper part of the
house, and she sank tremblingly closer to me. “Miriam—Why did I—Darling,
come out of it. Listen to me! Mir—”

“Oh, Bill! Bill, I’m scared! I’m scared, Bill!” She said it quietly, in
a small, very surprised voice; and then she began to cry, and I’ll bet
my eyeballs that it was the first time in her life she’d cried, because
those tears came hard.

I picked her up in my arms and carried her into a room we hadn’t yet
visited. There was a monstrous old red plush and mahogany divan there,
and I put her down on it. She put her arms around my neck and all of a
sudden was a very little girl afraid of the dark. I bent over her, all
choked up, and for all I know, I cried, too.

The laughter approached again.

“Bill!” she wailed. “Make it stop! Oh, please, please, make it stop!”

I couldn’t keep up that pretense any longer. “Stick around, bud,” I
gritted; and, jamming one of the torches in an angle of the divan’s
rococo, I headed for the door.

Miriam sat up and screamed for me. I went back, put my arms around her
and kissed her. She was so surprised when I let her go that she just sat
there with her hand to her mouth, wordless, while I tore out and along
the corridor to the steps that led down into the cellar.

Tommy’s carried this thing too damn far, I gritted to myself as I cut
into the littered cellar room where he had hidden his controls. There
was such a thing as doing a job too well, and I was about to tell a
radio engineer that, complete with fireworks. I fumbled along the wooden
partition until I found a knothole he had used for a doorknob. I jammed
a finger into it, whipped the door open, stabbed a ray of light inside.
There wasn’t anyone there. There just wasn’t anyone in there at all!

“Tommy?” I sagged up against the partition, gasping. “Tommy!” Nobody in
there. No one working those lights, that switchboard, phonograph,
no—“Tommy!” I quavered.

The laughter kept on. On and on. I looked at the phonograph. It was
there, all right, with its crystal pick-up and the wires running to the
speaker in the old furnace. But it wasn’t operating. I crept up to it
and put out my hand and turned it over with a crash, and the laughter
wouldn’t stop.

Tommy! The goon, where’d he get to? Maybe he’d been here up until a
minute or so ago. Maybe he was hiding in the cellar somewhere. I went to
the door and called him. No answer. I came back, ran my hand over the
bulb-studded board. That sob-laughing was still sounding all around me.
I wasn’t doing it, was I? I shook my head to clear it and tried to
think. Could that foggy fellow have forgotten to show up? _Hadn’t he
been here at all?_

Tuesday. Tuesday night. This was Tuesday night. Wasn’t Tommy supposed to
show up for the haunt tonight? That’s what I thought. A vague memory
flashed across my mind—Tommy telling me what night he wanted to pull his
trick. He had gone, “Wuh-Wuh-Wuh-Wuh-Wuh—” for about thirty seconds
before he got it out. But a guy doesn’t make that noise when he’s trying
to say “Tuesday.” He does it when he’s trying to say “Wednesday.” Oh,
but that was too damn silly! Whatever in the world made me think it was
Tuesday? I knew he’d said something about Tue—Oh, yes! “C-contact your
snow queen on Tuesday so you’ll be sure to have her at the house on
Wuh-Wuh-Wuh—” That was it!

I punched myself in the mouth, I was so sore. Well, it didn’t
matter—some son of a gun had been monkeying with these controls for the
last hour or so, and I didn’t care who it was! I rushed the beam over
the wiring, located the power line and tore it away from the
switchboard. That would do it.

That didn’t do it. First I heard that laughter, and then I heard Miriam
scream. I bolted for the door—straight for the door, even though it
meant plowing through all of Tommy’s electrical equipment. I hit the
cellar room amid a shower of coils and broken bulbs and rheostats and
headed for the stairs. As I reached them, another thought wound itself
around my heart and tried to stop it. Miriam was in the first floor back
room—the room into which I had carried her—the room where four people
had been inexplicably but thoroughly strangled!

I really made time. I was running too fast to get through the door
clean, and I left a piece of my shoulder on the doorpost and kept
running. This was it. This was our little haunt. That house didn’t need
Tommy!

Miriam was lying on the divan with her head twisted crazily and blue
marks on her throat.

I screamed and whirled and ran out. A doctor—a policeman—I had to get
someone! Miriam—I’d done this to Miriam! If she was dead, then I killed
her!

I flew down the hall, out through the foyer. The outer door stopped me
for a moment because it opened inward. I wrestled it open, stood gasping
at the top of the steps. This was the way it was, then. This was what
had happened to Grandt, and Fortunato had found Grandt as I found
Miriam. Fortunato was lucky. He broke his neck running out of the house.
I wished my neck was broken, and then I wouldn’t have to worry about
killing Miriam. I looked hungrily down the steps. Three other men had
died on them the same way—why not one more? The laughter behind me fell
away and settled into a low, expectant gurgle. It was going to happen
again. Strangle one person, and break another’s neck on the steps.
That’s the way it always had been. That’s the—

_“No!”_ I sobbed, and turned and butted my way back into the house. When
I did, the laughter stopped within itself.

I went blindly back down the long corridor and into the first floor
back. Miriam still lay there, and I stood, all tired inside, looking at
her. I didn’t want to go near, didn’t want to touch, didn’t want
anything. I just looked at her woodenly, the way she was stretched there
and twisted, the way her head hung, and the way those blue marks on her
long white neck bit in and shifted and bit in again. And then I saw that
she hadn’t been strangled at all, for—_she was being strangled!_

With a hoarse bark I leaped in, seized her, lifted her. I had to pull
against something. I propped her up with one arm, felt around her throat
with the other hand. Nothing there! I picked her up and tried to carry
her away, and I couldn’t because she was being held by the neck! I
clutched her to me and put everything I had into that effort to tear her
away, and I couldn’t! Then I felt something give, and her eyes rolled up
out of sight. She looked ghastly in the crazy light from the torch that
still flung its bright shaft angling upward from where I had jammed it.
I knew it hurt her, and I could all but feel her pain. Then everything
let go, and by a miracle I stayed on my feet, and I stumbled and bungled
and carried her out of the room and out of the house and into the car.

As soon as we were well away from there I pulled over to the curb. She
couldn’t have lived through that—she couldn’t! But why was she moving,
then, and whispering something? I pulled her to me, chafed her wrist.
She was saying my name. I almost laughed. She began to swear in a deep,
husky voice. I did laugh.

“Oh—boy!” she said, and licked her lips. “Have I been through the mill!”
She touched her neck weakly and grinned.

“Darling, I’m a heel to get you into that place. I don’t know whatever
got into me—”

“Shush,” she said, and lay back.

She was so quiet for so long that I got frightened. “Miriam—”

“Apropos of nothing,” she said, and her voice was so strong and normal
that it was a shock to me, “there’s a question you asked me that I’ve
been dodging. I’ll marry you if you like.”

I was still feeling like a heel. “What _for?”_ I asked in real
amazement. She leaned over against me.

“Because,” she said softly, “I always wanted to be married to a man who
could tell me ghost stories on long winter evenings.”

There are just two more things to tell. Tommy refused to be our best man
because he was sore at me for wrecking his equipment. The other thing is
that I bought the chalet on Grove Street and had it razed. We built our
house there and we’re very happy in it.



COMPLETELY AUTOMATIC


“WHAT THE DEVIL does he do for a living?” I asked as the petty officer
left the mess room.

“Nothing,” said the second officer. “Nothing at all.”

“What do you carry him for, then?”

The second was a man in his middle forties with a very nice grin. He
used it now. “We carry him just in case,” he said. “He’s the chemical
supervisor. He stands no watches, makes no reports. He reports aboard
before we take off and disappears when we make port. For that he knocks
down six hundred and forty credits a month.”

“Six—Holy Kit, that’s a lot of change for doing nothing. I was always
under the impression that the crew of a spaceship was streamlined down
to practically nothing. Does every ship carry these … these paid
passengers?”

The second nodded as he filled my glass again. “There was a time, four
or five hundred years ago, when a ship couldn’t have done without them.
They had no automatic machinery to speak of then. The ships were
self-powered, and half their capacity was given over to fuel. Half the
rest was driving machinery. They had no power beams then; they had to
plot their courses and steer them every trip. Now, of course, with the
power beams that both guide and drive the vessels, things are different.
There are only two or three hundred men in the System that know the
theory of astrogation nowadays, and they are either research scientists
or doddering scholars. It’s only tradition that keeps a crew aboard any
more—that and the fact that the more jobs the Supreme Council can
create, the better for everybody. I don’t kid myself—I know damn well
that I could be replaced in a minute by two switches and a rheostat on
the control panel back on Earth. That goes for everyone else riding
these ships, too. Only the passenger ships carry captains, and they are
there to impress the passengers. Sort of glorified masters of
ceremonies. No, space travel isn’t what it used to be.”

“That may be true,” I said, “but at least you do something for a living.
You stand a regular watch and supervise the stowage and the passenger
lists and keep the log and give the passengers the idea that the ship is
in competent hands—but what about that chem super? False front is false
front, but it’s usually attached to something solid. That guy hasn’t
even an excuse for being aboard.”

“You don’t think so? Granted, his work is taken care of entirely by
automatic machinery that hasn’t broken down once in the last three
hundred years, but that isn’t the point. Remember—I told you that he is
here _just in case.”_

“In case of what?”

“Certain eventualities. Got an hour or so? I’ll tell you a story about a
chemical supervisor that might interest you.”

“Go ahead,” I said. “I’ve got three weeks with nothing to do, let alone
an hour. Start spinning.”

The second officer unzipped his collar, flipped a lever on his chair to
tilt it back a little, and began.

The reason I think you in particular would be interested in this yarn is
that it has to do with what happened when they did exactly what you say
they should do—get rid of some hundred-odd thousand pieces of deadwood
in the way of chem supers and their apprentices. Yeah, they did, about
twenty-eight years ago. There was a great deal of noise about it at the
time, because most of the old conservatives didn’t like the idea of
breaking an old space tradition that way. They said that spaceships
should no more take off without chem supers than they should without
lifeboats. The fact that no one within the memory of living man had ever
used a lifeboat for anything but joy-riding didn’t faze them.

The machinery was foolproof, rigidly inspected every trip, and all of it
either one hundred percent automatic or remote control. Supers simply
were not needed. The boys that held down the jobs were, with a few
exceptions, friends of somebody who had a friend in the office. Their
qualifications were courtesy ones; a couple of oral questions were
examination enough for them. Many skippers carried their relatives with
them as supers. A lot of fellows grabbed the jobs because they were
sincerely interested in space travel and that way they could have a good
look around the ship to see how they liked it and what kind of work
would suit them best. It was a set-up—harmless enough, to be sure,
except for the fact that the supers got paid a high wage, and that made
the rest of the crew a little sore because they had to work for a
living.

This was before the days of the Functionalist government, when many of
the space lines were privately owned and the big boys at the top were
anxious to cut costs and increase profits without regard to the number
of men they threw out of work. I don’t have to tell you that space
transportation is as big an industry as they come; to get rid of a chem
super and his apprentice on every single ship in the System that ever
left any atmosphere was a big jolt. A few hundred thousand men thrown
out of work all at once played hell with the economic balance, close as
it was. Besides, most of those supers were absolutely worthless—bums,
parasites, drifters, trouble-makers.

It was a foolish move, and the Council knew it; but the pressure put on
by the profit-drunk “efficiency” experts of the space companies was too
strong. They bounced them out—every last one of them. It’s interesting
to know that it was that group of worthless exsupers who, by the noise
they made, were ultimately responsible for the new set-up, where men are
hired and paid for jobs that could be done away with—my job, for
instance. It’s better that way. No one loses anything; the companies
don’t gain so much, that’s all. They can afford it. And it has
completely done away with unemployment.

But to get back to the supers. I know all about what happened because it
happened aboard the _Maggie Northern_, my first ship—my first job on
these cans. It was a first for the ship too—her first trip without a
super.

I came aboard her—I was a teenage kid at the time—with a suitcase with a
busted handle under my arm and more ignorance than sense under my hat. I
got in a lot of people’s way and was finally shunted into the rocket
man’s fo’c’sle. I stood in the middle of the floor feeling shy. I hadn’t
known a spaceship would be like this. Like every kid my age, I had
filled myself full of stories about the trade, and thought it would be
cramped and stuffy with tiered bunks and lacking every facility a he-man
would sneer at. But this, one of the poorest-equipped freighters in the
Great Northern ore fleet, had three men to a room, each with a bed with
innerspring mattress, hot and cold running water—the works. Some bright
soul had painted a garden scene on the windowless bulkhead and had
rigged it up with a window frame, glass and curtains. There was a kid a
couple of years older than me sitting on a bench looking sad. He looked
up at me.

“Hi. You the new wiper?”

“Yeah.”

He got up and stuck out a hand. He was a good-looking kid, very tall.
Well set up. “My name’s Hume. Welcome to our dirty little home.”

“I’m Babson. It don’t look so bad.”

“Neither does Fuzzy here,” said Hume as a burly individual, the third
wiper, came into the room. “But, boy—wait till you get to know him.”

Fuzzy stopped in his tracks as he saw me and waited while his apelike
face lit up. Then he ambled over to me, looked into my face, circled me
slowly. “I seen that hay spread on the gangplank an’ I figgered they was
goin’ to coax somethin’ like this aboard,” he said as if to himself.
“What they doin’, Hume—shippin’ hog-callers now that they got rid of the
supers?”

I got sore right away, not knowing kidding when I ran against it. “I
don’t think I like this guy, Hume,” I said, and squared off to this
Fuzzy.

Fuzzy said, “Heh! It talks!” But he went over to the lockers and began
being busy.

“Don’t mind him,” Hume told me. “He ain’t happy. I was super on this
scow, see, and he was tired of working for a living and was after my
job. Darn near got it, too—didn’t you, Fuzzy?”

Fuzzy grunted.

“Would have, too, only the Council wiped the job off the books. That’s
the only thing about losing my job I like—it didn’t go to a heel like
that.”

Since Hume seemed to be getting away with talking behind Fuzzy’s back to
his face that way, I thought I might as well chime in. “What’d he do?”

“Started studying chemistry, of all things! He was all set to prove to
the Board that he knew more about my job than I did. As if anyone cared
about how much a chem super knew! Anyhow, he’s all set to pull his
little blitz on me when the job disappears. This scow, being an ore boat
and notably ill-equipped, has no apprentice super. I get demoted to
wiper; Fuzzy is still a wiper; you’re another.”

I laughed. Fuzzy swung around. “All right, you mugs. I’ll get my chance
to show you wise eggs up yet. Some day, that job’s going back on the
books. When it does, I get it.”

“Not a chance,” said Hume. “It took the Council three hundred years to
get rid of the job. You’ll be on a government pension before you ever
hear of it again.”

Fuzzy opened his mouth to say something else but the loudspeaker cleared
its throat and announced the takeoff. The two wipers jumped to their
bunks, threw up a lever and lay down. I followed suit; in a few seconds
there was a grinding roar and our beds slid on quad-rantal rollers up
against the bulkhead. There was a moment of crushing weight, and just
when I thought I’d never get the strength to draw in another breath, the
beds slid back off the bulkhead and were parallel with the floor again.
In those days the momentum screens were inoperable inside the Heaviside
Layer, and during the few seconds it took to get outside, the
acceleration was really rough. They could lay it on thick because it
lasted such a short time, but I can tell you, the headache you carried
around with you for a couple of hours after starting was one to stand up
and sneer at all the other headaches on Earth, laid end to end.

I learned all I had to know about being a wiper within two days after
starting. I had a station to keep clean, a few alleyways to sweep, and
the 12 to 4 space man to keep entertained. His job was to clean another
station, sweep the alleyways I didn’t sweep, and entertain me. In the
old days, you know, they had an engine room aboard, and a crew to run
it; and they had a control room and another crew to run that. The
Plotnick-Martin power beams took care of that now. The three space men
held lifeboat tickets and the wipers didn’t, and that was the crew. They
stood watches, two at a time, four hours on and eight off, and then
there was a pinheaded individual who used to wander around the alleyways
at odd hours doing nothing that I could see. He answered to the title of
captain and he carried papers certifying his ability as a stowage expert
for this particular ship.

That ship was quite something. There may be a few of them left—bulky old
KH-type ore carriers. The series has been discontinued now, but it seems
to me I saw one or two of them on the inter-asteroid runs a few years
ago. Her capacity was something like two hundred thousand tons net and
she was loaded to the ceil-plates with granular magnesium and sodium for
the Sun mirrors of Titan. I don’t have to tell you about the seven
two-mile-diameter orbital mirrors that circulate around the satellite,
making it habitable. You may not know, though, that the girders are all
solid mag, because great rigidity isn’t needed out there, and mag is
cheap. The mirrors are silvered with sodium, which is bright and easy to
handle. They have a patrol for each of the mirrors, which patches up
meteorite punctures when they occur, squirting liquid sodium around the
holes until they fill, then shaving them down with N rays. Well, we were
bringing them their stock in trade, and it was an interesting cargo to
handle. The mag was flaked to facilitate melting and casting, and the
sodium was melted on Earth and run right into the holds where it
“froze.” When we discharged it, we would simply heat up the holds and
pump it out. As long as it was loaded in an atmosphere of nitrogen and
pumped out in space, there was little danger from it. We had tanks of
nitrogen under pressure aboard, because after the sodium solidified in
the holds it contracted. The space it left had to be filled with
something, and it better not be air or water! Hence the nitrogen.

After a couple of weeks of this kind of life I began to wonder about the
stories I had read, and what happened to all the glamour and adventure
the space service was steeped in. I even went so far as to ask Hume
about it. He thought it was very funny.

“That whiffed out with the power beams,” he told me. “There wouldn’t be
anyone aboard these ships if it weren’t for the fact that someone has to
keep the chrome clean and the books up to date. Then, of course, there
are emergencies.”

“What?” I asked hopefully.

“Oh—I dunno. I never heard of any. But just in case some of the
machinery turned out not to be foolproof, which has never happened so
far, or in case something happened to the ship—”

“But what _could_ happen?”

“Well—aw, why worry about it? Nothing ever has. If it did, it would
happen so quickly we’d never know about it, or the ship would take care
of itself so fast that by the time we realized there was an emergency,
it would be past history.” He sat down on the mess room table and put
his feet on the bench. “Look, kid, I might as well wise you up. This is
no kind of a life for a human being. If any of us were worth a damn in
any trade at all, we wouldn’t be here. If the Board members weren’t as
worthless as we are, they’d build ships without crew’s quarters. If you
have any gumption, you’ll get off as soon as we get back to Terra, and
go back to raising castor beans or whatever else it was you were doing
before you shipped aboard this mud hen. If you have no gumption, you’ll
stay here with the rest of us bums and pray that the world in general
and the Space Commerce Board in particular doesn’t get hep to what soft,
soft cushions a space tradition has shoved under our fat—”

_Crash!_

It wasn’t a loud noise, and it wasn’t much of a lurch, but both were so
utterly unexpected that both of us found ourselves thrown very hard and
very flat.

Hume looked at me blankly. The lights went out, flashed on again as an
automatic emergency circuit snapped in. He said in a weak voice, “Well,
there’s your emergency!” and fainted away.

A voice I had never heard before said sharply, through the speakers,
“Emergency! Stand by!” I rightly assumed that this, too, was an
automatic alarm. I shook Hume until he sat up.

“What do we do now?” I snapped at him. I rather think I was a little
panicky.

“I only work here,” he said with a sickly attempt at levity. There were
voices in the alleyway outside. We drifted out there. It was the captain
and two of the space men.

“How should I know? Who do you think I am—Plotnick?”

“Who’s Plotnick?” asked one of the stooges. The fact that Plotnick had
invented the power beam that Martin had adapted to interstellar commerce
was just another of those things that those guys never got around to
learning.

“Plotnick’s dead,” said the other stooge brightly.

“The captain ain’t dead,” said the first stooge even more brightly.

“Oh, go on back to bed,” said the captain pettishly. “Something
happened. I don’t know what it was. It’ll be fixed when we get to Titan.
Pass the word.”

There was no necessity for that since the whole crew was there by that
time. Those not on watch went back to bed. Yeah—back to bed, in the most
desperate emergency any of them were ever destined to live through.

I went on watch two hours later. I hadn’t slept very well. Breathing was
hard and my heart was racing violently. I dozed fitfully, not realizing
what the trouble was until the sting of sweat got into my eyes and I
came awake. Just then Fuzzy came in to call me.

“One bell, lug,” he said. His usual shirt and dungarees had given way to
a pair of underwear shorts, and he, too, was sweating profusely. What
jolted me more than anything else was his voice. It had been a deep
gas-on-the-stomach bass. Now it was a quavering tenorbaritone.

“Comin’ up,” I said, and rolled out. We stared at each other curiously.
My voice had positively pipsqueaked. He opened his mouth, closed it
again and went out. I noticed he was panting.

There was a red light blinking over the door. I’d never noticed it
before. Somewhere an alarm siren began wailing. I didn’t know what that
meant either. I rolled out and headed for the mess room. They were all
there. Everyone looked worried except the captain. He just looked
unhappy. They were all asking him what had happened, what was happening.
I gathered that everyone was having trouble breathing, and I know
everyone’s voice sounded like a recording speeded up three hundred
percent.

It was hot as hell.

Came that throat-clearing sound from the annunciators. Everyone shut up.
Here at last was the blessed voice of authority. “Air pressure falling,”
it said. “All hands into space suits. Look for leaks.”

We looked at each other stupidly. No one had the slightest idea where a
space suit might be found.

There was a whir and click from the alleyway. Someone looked out and
reported, “An impenetron shield’s blocked us off from the rest of the
crew’s quarters, cap.”

“My word,” said the captain.

“My cigarettes,” said Fuzzy.

The captain started forward. We followed because there was nothing else
for us to do. When we got to the control room another shield dropped
quietly behind us.

“No more mess room,” said Fuzzy sadly.

“Yeah. No more eats,” said one of the stooges.

“I don’t see what’s so funny about this,” I said. I was scared. I was
more scared than I ever even heard of anyone being. I was wishing I was
working in the mines instead of this. I was wishing I was home in bed.

“There isn’t anything funny about this,” said the captain worriedly. He
began fumbling a door open. We trailed in.

Thank heavens the captain knew something about the ship. The room was
lined with case upon case of supplies—food, weapons, coils of wire,
masses of spare apparatus that none of us knew anything about. But we
knew cases of food when we saw them. There was even a roomy refrigerator
there for storage. Also—eight space suits. Spares.

The captain checked our rush for them. “The air’s all right here,” he
said. “Those automatic gates must have cut off the sections where the
leaks were. We’ll just have to make ourselves comfortable here.”

“Yeah,” said one of the stooges. “No beds. Where am _I_ gonna sleep?”

There was a babel over that childish question. I drew Hume aside. He was
no gem, but he seemed a little more intelligent than the rest of them.
“What’s this all about?”

He scratched his ear. “I dunno.” That seemed to be a reflex with these
boys—‘I dunno.’ “I guess we hit something—or something hit us.”

“That would account for the loss of pressure,” I said, “but what about
the heat?” He began to speak; I stopped him. _“Don’t_ say, ‘I dunno.’
Think, for a change!”

It was a new idea for Hume. He turned it over for a minute and then came
out with, “Why should I worry about it? The ship can take care of us
till we get to Titan, and then the repair crews can worry about it.”

“O.K., O.K.,” I said, sore. “Go on, worm, spin yourself a cocoon. Me,
I’ll do my worrying now. That heat isn’t coming from just nothing. Seems
to me if we were just punctured it’d be getting cold here, not hot.
But—you ain’t worried. So go ahead. Be happy.” I walked away.

He stared after me for a second and then shrugged and started looking
for a place to bunk. Twice, out of the corner of my eye, I saw him stop
and stare at me. He seemed to be going through pangs of some sort. I had
a hunch what it was. The birth of thought. The stirring of an awakening
intellect. It isn’t surprising. Brains atrophy when they’re not used,
same as arms or legs. Boy, he was a case.

It got hotter.

I went to the captain about it. He actually seemed to be listening to
everything I had to say. He nodded sagely every time I paused for
breath. I was a little more than annoyed when I realized that he was
nodding because he didn’t understand a word of what I was saying. In
some kind of desperation I asked him if there was, by any chance, a
manual aboard, describing the ship and its equipment. When I had
finished he went right on nodding his head, realized I had asked him a
direct question, and stopped, not knowing what to do with his little
head. Not use it to think with, certainly. He was another. The things
that happen in the name of civilization! Some people would call this
kind of ship progress. I was calling it poison.

“Yes,” he said uncertainly, “there ought to be some such thing around.”
He began fumbling through the stores. I had to keep on his tail or he’d
have forgotten what it was he was looking for. “Don’t know what you want
it for. Can’t imagine. Terribly dull reading,” he kept muttering.
Suddenly he came across a box of books. He pulled one out, looked at
it—the son-of-a-gun could read, apparently—and exclaimed, “Now _here_ is
something!” He handed it over to me. It was a trilogy of romantic
novels. “What the hell’s this for?”

“One of the finest books I ever read,” he said, in a
let-me-be-a-sister-to-you tone.

I threw it at his head, tipped the books out. The manual was there, all
right. It was a thick volume, very efficient-looking. It was. It was
streamlined. It consisted of column after column, page after page, of
figures and letters and dozens of symbols I’d never heard of. I couldn’t
understand a letter of it. In the foreword it said something about a
key. Apparently there was a twenty- or thirty-volume key somewhere which
gave the definitions of all that spaghetti. There was, the captain
informed me—in the after magazine.

The after magazine was closed off by those precious automatic gates.

I groaned and took myself and my manual off into a corner. Somewhere in
that book must be what I was looking for—instructions on how to proceed
when your ship seems to be burning up. I raised my head. Burning up? If
something was burning—

But what could be burning? The ship was all steel and impenetron. The
cargo—_magnesium. Sodium!_

I almost let out a shout, but I hadn’t the heart to disturb all those
happy, stupid, unworried drifters. What good would it do them to know
what the trouble was? They wouldn’t know what to do about it if I did
tell them.

No one got in my way as I circulated around the control chambers,
staring at the maze of dials and indicators banked around the walls. The
ship’s designers had had a shot of the interior decorator’s virus mixed
in with their blood, it seemed to me. There were more damn concealed
closets and sliding panels than a dope addict could dream up. It was
mostly by accident that I found what I was looking for—a panel studded
with tiny centigrade dials, with a monel plate at the top bearing the
inscription “Cargo Temperatures.”

Now the _Maggie Northern_ had seventy-six holds of various sizes. Our
cargo was about one-sixth sodium, the rest mag. According to the
dials—and there was no reason why they should lie about it—fourteen of
the mag holds were at temperatures ranging from nine to eleven
hundred-odd degrees. Fourteen of them, all on the starboard bilge. That
was all I wanted to know. I called the captain over. He peered owlishly
at the dials.

“There’s your trouble,” I said with the air of a man completing a very
complicated card trick. He nodded and looked at me as if he expected me
to say something else.

“Well, what’s the matter with you?” I roared. “The mag’s afire! We hit
something—sideswiped it! The frictional heat raised the mag to its
kindling temperature; there was a residue of air in the holds; the mag
started to burn, softened the bulkheads, and the air pressure from
alleyways and living quarters and other holds caved them in and fed more
air to the burning mag!”

The captain shook his head in wonderment. “You certainly seem to have
doped it out,” he said admiringly.

I stared at him, unable to believe my own eyes and ears. “What’s the
matter with you?” I screamed. By this time the rest of them were
gathered around us, looking like a flock of sheep just over the hill
from blasting operations. “Radio in to Titan! Find out what to do about
it!”

The captain looked about him blankly. “What’s the use? The ship’s
duplicate indicator aboard has already told the Titans all about it. I
can’t imagine why they haven’t already let us hear from them.”

“Try it,” I gritted.

“Why?” he said.

I plowed into him. I only got a couple of good ones in before Hume and
Fuzzy piled on me and held me down. The captain ran into the storeroom
and shut the door.

“You shouldn’t have done that,” said Hume amazedly.

I said something like “Ugh!” and shrugged loose.

Fuzzy’s ape face was disgustingly slack. Those guys didn’t have the guts
God gave a goose.

I went over to what looked to me more like a visiscreen than anything
else in the place. There was a switch beside it. I threw it. Nothing
happened. “Where’s the receiver and transmitter?” I growled.

One of the space men piped up. “That’s my station,” he said. “Starboard
side, down below.”

I had another look at the hold-temperature indicators. “Fused solid by
this time,” I grunted. “You know anything about radio?”

He shook his chowder head. So did everyone else. I felt like crying.

Somebody had to do something. I couldn’t—I didn’t know anything. If only
I had—aw, what’s the use! And then it was I had my bright idea. I turned
to Hume.

“Listen—didn’t you say you were chem controller aboard this ship?”

He nodded.

“Well—come on then—give. We got a fire aboard. Put it out!”

“Me?”

“You.”

“Oh.” He counted on his fingers in slow motion, which, I gathered, was
his substitute for thought. Finally he came out with, “I don’t know
how.”

“You don’t know how.” I was going to get started on a long diatribe
about how he ever got to be a chemical controller when he didn’t even
know how to put a little fire out—a fire that would have us all
well-done and tender a week before what was left of the ship reached
Titan. I decided to try to be patient.

“Look,” I said gently. “Unless something is done by somebody, and soon,
you and you and you are going to be roasted alive in this pig. See? I
don’t suppose you’ve noticed it, but it’s getting warm in here too,
already. Look—Four more holds have gone. O.K. Sit around and tell each
other some bedtime stories. Go on. Die. See if anyone cares. Wait until
the air gets so hot in here you can’t breathe it. Watch your lazy
ignorant flesh slough off when it starts to cook. It won’t be quick, you
know. You’ll stay alive a long time. You have plenty to eat, plenty to
drink. It’ll hurt some, but what do you care? You’re too damn
comfortable to do anything about it.”

The boys looked definitely sober. After a while Fuzzy spoke up. “Come
on, Hume—can’t you think of something?”

Hume had suddenly become very important to all of them. And I think the
guy was really trying to come through. “We could put water on it,” he
said finally.

“This ain’t a house fire, you know,” I said.

“So what?”

“So—nothing,” I said in my ignorance. “Try it, anyway; try something.”

We coaxed the captain out and explained what went on. It was all right
with him. Anything was all right with him. He showed us the tank valves
and the controls to the hold pipe lines. Luckily they were very plainly
labeled. Hume went to work on No. 14 hold. It wasn’t as hot as the
others, according to the temperature readings. The hottest any of them
got was around eleven hundred, for some reason. Fourteen was about eight
hundred. That was the mean temperature for the hold; I gathered from
that that it was part afire. After a lot of fumbling, Hume got the vents
into the tank open and the water turned on. We could spare the water—all
those ships stored themselves with a safety factor of five. Council law.

The hold had gotten fifty degrees hotter before Hume got the water in
there. As soon as he turned his valve the needle bounced up to about two
thousand and quivered there.

“Turn it off!” I squawked. “That mag likes water. It likes it very much.
Look at that!” I pointed at the board. The next hold was getting hot.

“Now what?” said Hume worriedly.

Me, I didn’t know what to say. Fuzzy saved me the trouble.

“Get out of the way,” he spat, suddenly very much alive. “You call
yourself a chem super! I wasn’t far off when I got the idea I could push
you out of that job! Let a man in there.” He slammed Hume aside, began
to be very busy with the valves. “The set-up’s perfect,” he said.
“What’s in a fire extinguisher? Water? No, dope—carbon dioxide. We have
fire in an enclosed space—all we have to do to blank it is fill the hold
with CO₂! Cap—give me a hand.”

I just watched. It sounded all right to me. Hume looked ashamed of
himself. The rest of the boys clustered around the temperature gauges.

“Try Hold No. 20,” I said.

Fuzzy threw over a lever and turned a valve quickly. There was a new
confidence in the way he worked that was like a breath of cool air in
the control room. Only there wasn’t any cool air in the control room. It
was getting hotter. Seven pairs of eyes watched the needle, narrowed as
it flickered, widened as it slid over the dial to two thousand plus.

“Cut!” I cried.

There was dead silence. Someone said unnecessarily, “It likes carbon
dioxide, too.”

“I don’t understand it,” said the captain. “I’ve been loading mag on
this run for eight years now.” He mopped his head. “I know all about
it—specific gravity 1.75, boiling point 1100, melting point 632.7. But I
guess no one ever thought I’d have to know how to put it out if it
started to burn.”

“And you never thought to look it up,” I said.

He shook his head.

I’d noticed that Hume had been sulking a little too silently in a corner
after Fuzzy had shoved him there. He suddenly let out a yip and dove for
the valves.

“Now what?” I asked.

“That would-be over there,” Hume said, nodding toward Fuzzy, “barked up
the wrong stump. I’ve got it! We’re safe! Look—when mag burns—when
anything burns—it hooks up with oxygen—right? It burned the oxygen in
the air. It burned the oxygen in the water. It burned the oxygen in the
CO₂. But there ain’t no oxygen in nitrogen!”

I turned it over gleefully, and slapped him on the back. He and the
captain got busy hooking up the nitrogen tanks to the hold pipe lines. I
called for No. 22. It took a little longer this time, due to Hume’s
accidentally turning the water valve on instead of off when he had
finished turning a whole set of wrong valves, so that the nitrogen,
under pressure, backed up into the water tanks. But we got that
straightened out and proceeded.

Nothing happened. One of the stooges got hysterical and had to be locked
in the storeroom. The needle wavered a little, went down twenty degrees,
stayed there. In a few minutes it went up.

“It used up all the nitrogen!” wailed the captain.

Hume said, “Must have combined with it. Damn. That mag sure is hungry.”
He looked at me as if I were a policeman and he were a little lost boy.

“Don’t look at me that way,” I said. I glanced at the dials. More than
half the mag cargo was either burning or ready to. I had a bright idea.
“Dump the cargo!”

The captain spread his hands. “Can’t. If the hatches are opened, the
automatic relays will break the power beam. The ship can’t take off,
operate, or anything else with the hatches open.”

“Oh.” I started walking up and down. I took off my shirt. Everyone else
already had. Some had gone further than that. These automatic controls
might have some good points, but—boy, oh, boy! when they started working
against you!

I whirled on the captain. “What about the lifeboats?”

He looked up hopefully and then shook his head. “There’s one forward and
one aft. But they’re both aft of here; we’re right up in the nose now.
The impenetron shields have locked us in. There’s an escape hatch here,
but—no, the lifeboat locks can only be opened from the inside. We
couldn’t get to the boats if we went out in space suits.”

Hume got excited then. “How about those space suits?” he rapped out.
“When it gets too hot in here, couldn’t we cling to the hull in suits
until the ship docks?”

We streamed into the storeroom. On each of the space helmets was a tag
describing the air, water and food rations for each suit. Enough for
eight days. We wouldn’t be in for another two weeks. We went back to the
control room and sat down. The stooge who had been locked in came out
with us, much chastened. It got hotter.

Four days later we were a sorry-looking lot. No one had spoken for
twelve hours. We’d thrown away all our clothing with metal fasteners,
all rings, wrist chronometers and radios, because the metal was too hot
to bear. The refrigerator in the storeroom had afforded some relief
until it broke down. We were in a bad way. And one by one the crew
started to crack. Hume began to giggle quietly to himself, on and on and
on. Fuzzy lay still like some great hairy animal, panting silently. The
captain sat unmoving with an insanely complacent smirk on his excuse for
a face. No one dared move or speak because of the agonizing impact of
the hot air on their bare flesh when they did so. There was no relief,
no help for it. By now the sodium cargo was molten, the mag burning
wherever it could find air—and it found air every time it got a bulkhead
hot enough to work on it. The bulkheads weren’t built for that sort of
thing. They could take any kind of hammering when they were fairly cool,
but that damn alloy couldn’t take it when it got much over a thousand
degrees. The hull resisted nicely enough, more’s the pity. We’d have
been happy to see the mag burn its way through into space.

No one noticed the faint rumbling sound any more, once we had doped it
out as merely the opening up of new bulkheads, feeding more air and more
mag to the voracious fire. But all of us started weakly at the
tremendous shuddering crash that echoed suddenly through the ship. The
captain began to laugh crazily. We looked at him numbly.

“She’s still working,” he whispered hoarsely. “And that finishes us. The
ship was getting off balance. The automatic equalizing chutes just
opened. All the mag on the port side’s open to the fire now.” He waved
weakly at the temperature board. Every needle on it had begun to climb.

Hume said something that made my flesh creep. “I wish I had the guts to
kill myself.”

Another two days. The crew sprawled around, asleep or unconscious or
dead. I came to for a little while, I remember, because I started
coughing weakly. Hume, in a last effort to accomplish something, had
opened a water valve he’d discovered in the storeroom, thinking it would
cool us off. It puffed into steam where it touched metal, and the air
was full of it. Somehow someone else—Fuzzy, I think—managed to turn it
off.

Then there was a time when someone began shaking me and shaking me. I
didn’t see how I could be alive, but I must have been because I felt the
heat again. It was Hume. He had lost about thirty pounds. He had a red
beard. Red eyes.

“Whassamarrer?”

“The gauges! They’re … they’re going down!”

I lay there for a long time, not able to react. He crouched over me, a
thin line of moisture creeping out of the corner of his mouth.

“The holds are cooling down!” he said again and began shaking me.

I sat up, blinked at the board. It took quite a while for me to focus my
eyes, but when I saw he was right I somehow found the energy to get my
feet under me, climb upright.

It was unbelievable, it was past all hope, but it was true! Hume started
giggling again, and this time it didn’t annoy me because I giggled, too.

“The mag,” he said. “You see? Why’n hell didn’t we think of that before?
Mag’s a good conductor. When the ship equalized herself, the rest of the
mag smashed down on what was burning, soaked up heat, distributed it so
much that it lowered the temperature below kindling point!”

“Throw another log on the fire,” I crooned, “an’ the fire goes out!” And
then the rest of it occurred to me.

“Th’ sodium!” I said. “See what happened? It dumped onto the hot mag,
vaporized. The vapor conducted the heat to the ship’s hull. She’s
radiating it off! If it wasn’t for that, the temperature would just get
to a certain point and stay there, and we’d have gotten roasted anyway,
fire or no fire!”

We hugged each other gleefully and then started working on the rest of
the crew.

“Well, that’s all there is to it. We rode in to Titan on the
super-efficient wreck. We were all of us more dead than alive, but what
the hell—as long as there was life enough left to bring back.” The
second officer of the new passenger liner stood up and stretched
himself.

“So they restored the office of chem super?”

“Yep. But now those boys really know their stuff. Man—you ought to see
the examinations they have to pass to get that kind of money for doing
nothing! I’d sooner work for pay all along the line than work for
nothing trying to learn that much about a job I might flunk out of
anyway.”

“Just a second,” I said. “A couple of things I’d like to know. What
happened to Hume and Fuzzy?”

“Both got the jobs they wanted. You’d be surprised how hard they studied
their chemistry!”

“Not under those circumstances I wouldn’t,” I said. “Er … one thing I
don’t understand. You said that the ship was thrown off balance when one
half of the mag cargo was ignited. How come? Where’d the weight come
from?”

The second officer fastened his collar. “Very shrewd of you, my lad. Can
you keep something to yourself?”

“I can try.”

He sat down again and put his head close. “The _Maggie Northern_ didn’t
put her own fire out. I did.”

“_You_ did?”

“Yeah. Now wait a minute—don’t go giving me credit for it. I turned
plumb yellow. I got hysterical. I couldn’t stand to see those boys
gasping out their lives for days on end. Most of all, I guess, I
couldn’t stand the idea of dying that way myself. That ‘log on the fire’
business was my idea. If half the cargo would burn and kill us slowly, I
assumed that if the whole cargo burned we’d die fast. I dumped the rest
of the cargo on the fire. Maybe some of them saw me, but no one noticed.
Well, it turned the trick, and it wasn’t the kind of thing I’d bring out
at the inquest if nobody else did.”

“Completely automatic,” I murmured. “I’ve sure changed my opinion about
these useless jobs. You guys can get along swell without brains!”



POKER FACE


WE ALL HAD to get up early that morning, and we still hadn’t sense
enough to get up from around the poker table. We’d called in that funny
little guy from the accounting department they called Face to make it a
foursome with the three of us. It had been nip and tuck from nine
o’clock on—he played a nice game of stud. But tonight there was no one
lucky man, and when Harry jokingly bet a nickel on a pair of fours and
Delehanty took him up on it, the game degenerated into penny-ante. After
a while we forgot whose deal it was and sat around just batting the
breeze.

“Screwy game,” said Delehanty. “What’s the use of squattin’ here all
this time just to break even? Must be your influence, Face. Never
happened before. We generally hand all our money over to Jack after four
deals. Hey, Jack?”

I grinned. “The game still owes me plenty, bud,” I said. “But I think
you’re right about Face. I don’t know if you noticed, but damn if that
winning didn’t go right around behind the deal—me, you, Face, Harry, me
again. If I won two, everyone else would win two.”

Face raised an eyebrow ridge because he hadn’t any eyebrows. There
wasn’t anything particularly remarkable about his features, except that
they were absolutely without hair. The others carried an AM stubble, but
his face gleamed nakedly, half luminous. He’d been a last choice, but a
pretty good one. He said little, watched everyone closely and casually,
and seemed like a pretty nice guy. “Noticed that, did you?” he asked.
His voice was a very full tenor.

“That’s right,” said Harry. “How about it, Face? What is this power you
have over poker?”

“Oh, just one of those things you pick up,” he said.

Delehanty laughed outright. “Listen at that,” he said. “He’s like the
ol’ mountain climber who saw a volcano erupting in the range he’d scaled
the day before. ‘By damn,’ he says, ‘why can’t I be careful where I
spit?’ ”

Everybody laughed but Face. “You think it just happened? Would you like
to see it happen again?”

They stopped the hilarity. We looked at him queerly. Harry said, “What’s
the dope?”

“Play with chips,” said Face. “No money, no hard feelings. If you like,
I won’t touch the cards. Just to make it easy, I’ll put it this way.
Deal out four hands of stud. Jack’ll win the first with three threes.
Delehanty next with three fours. Me next with three fives. Harry next
with three sixes. Each three-spread will come out hearts, diamonds,
clubs, in that order. You, Delehanty, start the deal. Go on—shuffle them
all you like.”

Delehanty was a little popeyed. “You wouldn’t want to make a little bet
on that, would you?” he breathed.

“I would not. I don’t want to take your money that way. It would be like
picking pockets.”

“You’re bats, Face,” I said. “There’s so little chance of a shuffled
deck coming out that way that you might as well call it impossible.”

“Try it,” said Face quietly.

Delehanty counted the cards carefully, shuffled at least fifteen times
with his very efficient gambler’s riffle, and dealt around quickly. The
cards flapped down in front of me—a jack face down, a six, and
then—three threes; hearts, diamonds, clubs, in that order. Nobody said
anything for a long time.

Finally, “Jack’s got it,” Harry breathed.

“Let me see that deck,” snapped Harry. He swept it up, spread it out in
his hands. “Seems O.K.,” he said slowly, and turned to Face.

“You deal,” said Face woodenly.

Harry dealt quickly. I said, “Delehanty’s s’posed to be next with three
fours—right?” Yeah—right! Three fours lay in front of Delehanty. It was
too much—cards shouldn’t act that way. Wordlessly I reached for the
cards, gathered them up, pitched them back over my shoulder. “Break out
a new deck,” I said. “Your deal, Face.”

“Let Delehanty deal for me,” said Face.

Delehanty dealt again, clumsily this time, for his hands trembled. That
didn’t matter—there were still three fives smiling up at Face when he
was through.

“Your deal,” whispered Harry to me, and turned half away from the table.

I took up the cards. I spent three solid minutes shuffling them. I had
Harry cut them and then cut them again myself and then passed them to
Delehanty for another cut. I dealt four hands, and Harry’s was the
winning hand, with three sixes—hearts, diamonds, clubs.

Delehanty’s eyes were almost as big now as his ears. He said, “Heaven.
All. Might. Tea.” and rested his chin in his hands. I thought he was
going to cry or something.

“Well?” said Face.

“Were we playing poker with this guy?” Harry asked no one in particular.

When, by a great deal of hard searching, I found my voice again, I asked
Face, “Hey, do you do that any time you feel like it, or does it come
over you at odd moments?”

Face laughed. “Any time,” he said. “Want to see a really pretty one?
Shuffle and deal out thirteen cards to each of us, face down. Then look
them over.”

I gave him a long look and began to shuffle. Then I dealt. I think we
were all a little afraid to pick up our cards. I know that when I looked
at mine I felt as if someone had belted me in the teeth with a night
stick. I had thirteen cards, and they were all spades. I looked around
the table. Delehanty had diamonds. Face had hearts. Harry had clubs.

You could have heard a bedbug sneeze in the room until Harry began
saying, “Ah, no. Ah, no. Ah, no,” quietly, over and over, as if he were
trying to tell himself something.

“Can they all do things like that where you come from?” I asked, and
Face nodded brightly.

“Can everyone walk where you come from?” he returned. “Or see, or hear,
or think? Sure.”

“Just where do you come from?” asked Harry.

“I don’t know,” said Face. “I only know how I came and I couldn’t
explain it to you.”

“Why not?”

“How could you explain an internal-combustion engine to an Australian
bushman?”

“You might try,” said Delehanty, piqued. “We’s pretty smart bushmen, we
is.”

“Yeah,” I chimed in. “I’m willing to allow you the brains to do those
card tricks of yours; you ought to have enough savvy to put over an idea
or two.”

“Oh—the cards. That was easy enough. I felt the cards as you shuffled
them.”

“You felt with my fingers?”

“That’s right. Want proof? Jack, your head is itching a little on the
right side, near the top, and you’re too lazy to scratch it just yet.
Harry’s got a nail pushing into the third toe of his right foot—not very
bad, but it’s there. Well, what do you say?”

He was right. I scratched. Harry shuffled his feet and said, “O.K., but
what has that got to do with arranging the cards that way? Suppose you
did feel them with our hands—then what?”

Face put his elbows on the table. “As for arranging the cards, that was
done in the shuffle. You grasp half of the deck in each hand, bend them,
let them flip out from under your thumbs. If you can control the
pressure of each thumb carefully enough, you can make the right cards
fall into the right places. You all shuffled at least four times; that
made it that much easier for me.”

Delehanty was popeyed again. “How did you know which cards were supposed
to go in which places?”

“Memorized their order, of course,” said Face. “I’ve seen that done in
theaters even by men like you.”

“So’ve I,” said Harry. “But you still haven’t told us how you arranged
the deal. If you’d done the shuffling I could see it, but—”

“But I _did_ do the shuffling,” said Face. “I controlled the pressure of
your thumbs.”

“How about the cuts?” Delehanty put in, finding that at last we had him
on the run. “When Jack dealt he handed the pack to Harry and me both to
be cut.”

“I not only controlled those cuts,” said Face calmly, “but I made you do
it.”

“Go way,” said Delehanty aggressively. “Don’t give us that. How’re you
going to make a man do anything you like?”

“Skeptical animal, aren’t you?” grinned Face; and Delehanty rose slowly,
walked around the table, caught Harry by the shoulders and kissed him on
both cheeks. Harry almost fell off his chair. Delehanty stood there
rockily, his eyes positively bulging. Suddenly he expectorated with
great violence. “What the dirty so and forth made me do that?” he wanted
to know.

“Chummy, ain’t you?” grinned Harry through his surprise.

Face said, “Satisfied, Delehanty?”

Delehanty whirled on him. “Why you little—” His fury switched off like a
light going out. “Right again, Face.” He went over and sat down. I never
saw that Irishman back down like that before.

“You made him do that?” I asked.

Face regarded me gravely. “You doubt it?”

We locked glances for a moment, and then my feet gathered under me. I
had a perverse desire to get on all fours and bark like a dog. It seemed
the most natural thing in the world. I said quickly, “Not at all, Face,
not at all!” My feet relaxed.

“You’re the damnedest fellow I ever saw,” said Harry. “What kind of a
man are you, anyway?”

“Just a plain ordinary man with a job,” said Face, and looked at
Delehanty.

“So am I,” said Harry, “but I can’t make cards sit up and typewrite, or
big, dumb Irishers snuggle up to their fellow-men.”

“Don’t let that bother you,” said Face. “I told you before—there’s
nothing more remarkable in that than there is in walking, or seeing, or
hearing. I was born with it, that’s all.”

“You said everyone was, where you come from,” Harry reminded him. “Now
spill it. Just where did you come from?”

“Geographically,” said Face, “not very far from here. Chronologically, a
hell of a way.”

Harry looked over my way blankly. “Now what does all that mean?”

“As near as I can figure out,” said Face, “it means just what I said. I
come from right around here—fifty miles, maybe—but the place I came from
is thirty-odd thousand years away.”

“Years _away?”_ I asked, by this time incapable of being surprised. “You
mean ‘ago,’ don’t you?”

“Away,” repeated Face. “I came along duration, not through time itself.”

“Sounds very nice,” murmured Delehanty to a royal flush he had thumbed
out for himself.

Face laughed. “Duration isn’t time—it parallels it. Duration is a
dimension. A dimension is essentially a measurement along a plane of
existence. By that I mean that any given object has four dimensions, and
they extend finitely, along four planes—length, width, height, duration.
The last is no different from the others; nor is it any less tangible.
You simply take it for granted.

“When you’re ordering a piece of lumber, for instance, you name its
measurements. You say you want a two by six, twelve feet long. You don’t
order its duration; you simply take it for granted it will extend long
enough in that dimension to suit your needs. You would build better if
you measured it as carefully as you do the others, but your life span is
too short for you to care that much.”

“I think I can savvy that,” said Harry, who had been following
carefully, “but what do you mean by saying that you came ‘along’
duration?”

“Again, just what I said. You can’t move without moving along the plane
of dimension. If you walk down the street, you move along its length. If
you go up in an elevator, you move along its height. I came along
duration.”

“You mean you projected yourself into the fourth dimension?” asked
Henry.

“No!” said Face violently, and snorted. “I told you—duration is a
dimension, not another set of dimensions. Can you project yourself into
length, or height, or into any one dimension? Of course not! The four
are interdependent. That fourth-dimension stuff you read is poppycock.
There’s no mystery about the fourth dimension. It isn’t an impalpable
word. It’s a basis of measurement.”

I said, “What’s this business of your traveling along it?”

Face spread out his hands. “As I said before, duration is finite.
Suppose you wanted to walk from Third Street to Fifth Street. First
you’d locate a sidewalk that would take you in the direction you were
going. You’d follow that until it ended. Then you’d locate one that
would take you to your destination. Where the one stopped and the other
started is Fourth Street. Now if you want to go twenty blocks instead of
two, you simply repeat that process until you get where you’re going.

“Traveling along duration is exactly the same thing. Just as you enter a
street at a certain point in its length, so you encounter an object on
the street at a certain point in its duration. Maybe it’s near the
beginning, maybe near the end. You follow it along that dimension—you
don’t project yourself into it. All objects have two terminations in
duration—inception and destruction. You travel along an object’s
duration until it ceases to exist because you have reached the end of
it—or the beginning. Then you proceed to find another object so that you
may continue in the same direction, exactly as you proceeded to find
yourself another sidewalk in your little trek across town.”

“I’ll be damned,” said Delehanty, “I can understand it!”

“Me, too,” Harry said. “That much of it. But exactly how do you travel
along duration? I can get the idea of walking beside a building’s
length, for instance, but I can’t see myself walking along
beside … er … how long it lasted, if you see what I mean. Or do _I_ see
what I mean?”

“Now you’re getting to something that may be a little tough to explain,”
said Face. “You have few expressions in your language that could cover
it. About the clearest way for me to put it is this: My ability to
travel in that particular direction is the result of my ability to
perceive it. If you could only perceive two dimensions, length and
breadth, you would be completely in the dark about the source of an
object which dropped on you from above. If you couldn’t sense the
distance from here to the door—if you didn’t know the door existed, nor
the distance to it, you wouldn’t be able to make the trip. I can see
along duration as readily as you can see up and down a road. I can move
along it equally readily.”

“Do you stay in one place while you travel duration?” I asked suddenly.

“I can. I don’t have to, though. You can go forward and upward while you
curve to the left, can’t you? Mix ’em any way you like.”

Harry piped up. “You say you came thirty thousand years. How is that
possible? You don’t look as if you’re much older than I am.”

“I’m not,” said Face, “in point of years existed. That is, I didn’t live
those years. I—passed them.”

“How long did it take you?”

Face smiled. “Your question is ridiculous, Harry. ‘How long’ is a
durational term. It involves passage of time, which is a convenient
falsehood. Time is static, objects mobile. I can’t explain a true state
of affairs from the basis of a false conception.”

Harry shut up. I asked him something that had been bothering me. “Where
did you come from, Face, and—why?”

He looked at me deeply, that eyebrow ridge rising a trifle. “I came—I
was sent. I came because I was qualified for the job. I was sent
because—well, someone had to be sent, to restore the balance of the
city.”

“What city?”

“I don’t know. It had a name, I suppose, but it was forgotten. Do you
name your toothbrush, or your bed sheets, or anything else that has been
nearly part of you all your life? No one ever left the city, no one ever
arrived at it. There were other cities, but no one cared about them,
where they were, who their people were and what they were like, and so
on. There was no need to know. The city was independent and utterly
self-sufficient. It was the ultimate government. It was not a democracy,
for each individual was subjugated entirely to the city. But it was not
a dictatorship as you know the term, for it had no dictators. It had no
governing body, as a matter of fact. It didn’t need one. It had no laws
but those of habit and custom. It ran smoothly because all of its
internal frictions had been worn smooth by the action of centuries. It
was an anarchistic society in the true sense of anarchism—society
without need of government.”

“That’s an impossibility,” said Harry, who had a reputation as a minor
barroom sociologist.

“I came from that city,” Face reminded him gently. “Why is it
impossible? You must take certain things into account before you make
such rash statements. Your human nature is against such an organization.
Your people would be like lost sheep—possibly like lost wolverines—under
such a set-up. But my people were not like that—not after centuries of
breeding for the most desirable traits, living circumscribed ways of
life, thinking stereotyped thoughts. Imagine it if you can.

“Now the city was divided into two halves, like the halves of a great
brain. For every death there was a birth; for every loss there was a
gain or an equal loss on the other side. The equation was kept balanced,
the scales level. The city was permanent, inexorable, immortal and
static.”

“What did they do with their spare time?” asked Harry.

“They lay in their cubicles until they were needed.”

“Were there no theaters, ball games—nothing like that?” asked Delehanty.

Face shook his head. “Amusement is for the relaxation of an imperfect
mind,” he said. “A mind that has been trained to do one thing and one
thing only needs no stimulation or change of pace.”

“Why was the city so big?” asked Harry. “Good gosh, a civilization like
that doesn’t _mean_ anything. Why didn’t it simply degenerate into the
machines that ruled it? Why keep all those humans if they must live like
machines?”

Face shrugged. “When the city was instituted, there was a population of
that size to allow for. Then, it had a rigid human government, and there
was crime and punishment and pain and happiness. They were disposed of
in a few generations—they were not logical, you see, and the city was
designed on the philosophy that what is not logical is also not
necessary. By that time the city was too steeped in its own traditions,
there was no one left to make such a radical change as to cut down on
the population. The city could care for that many—likewise it could not
exist as it was unless it did care for that many. Many human offices
were disposed of as they became unnecessary and automatic. One of these
was that of controller of population. The machines took care of
that—they and the unbreakable customs.”

“Hell!” said Delehanty explosively. “I wouldn’t go for that. Why didn’t
the people push the whole thing over and get some fun out of life?”

“They didn’t want it!” said Face, as if he were repeating a self-evident
fact, and was surprised that he had to. “They had never had that sort of
life; they never heard or read or saw anything of the sort. They had no
more desire to do things like that than you have to play pattycake! They
weren’t constituted to enjoy it.”

“You still haven’t told us why you left the place,” I reminded him.

“I was coming to that. In the city there was a necessity for the
pursuance of certain knowledges, as a safety measure against the time
when one or another of the machines might need rebuilding by a man who
understood them.

“One of these men was an antiquarian named Hark Vegas, which is really
not a name at all but a combination of sounds indicating a number. His
field was history—the development of all about him, from its earliest
recorded mythologies and beyond that to its most logical sources. In the
interests of the city, he so applied himself to his work that he
uncovered certain imponderables—historical trends which were neither
logical nor in harmony with the records. They were of no importance,
perhaps, but their existence interfered with the perfection of his
understanding. The only way he could untangle these unimportant matters
was to investigate them personally. And so—that is what he did.

“He waited until his successor was thoroughly trained, so that in any
eventuality the city would not be left without an antiquarian for more
than a very little while, and he studied carefully the records of the
city’s customs. These forbade any citizen’s leaving the city, and
carefully described the boundaries thereof. They were so very old,
however, that they neglected to stipulate the boundaries along the
duration dimension, since duration perception was a development of only
the past four or five thousand years. As an antiquarian, Hark Vegas was
familiar with the technique. He moved himself out along the duration of
a metallic fragment and thus disappeared from the city.

“Now this unheard-of happening disturbed the timeless balance of the
city, for Hark Vegas was no longer to be found. Within seconds of his
disappearance, news of it had reached the other half of the city, and
the group of specialists there.

“The matter involved me immediately for several reasons. In the first
place, my field was—damn it, there’s no word for it in your language
yet. It’s a mental science and has to do with time perceptions. At any
rate, I was the only one whose field enabled him to reason where Hark
Vegas had gone. Secondly, Hark Vegas was my contemporary in the other
half of the city. We would both be replaced within a week, but during
that week there would be one too many in my half of the city, one too
few in his—an intolerable, absolutely unprecedented state of affairs.
There was only one thing to do, since I was qualified, and that was to
find him and bring him back. My leaving would restore the balance; if I
were successful in finding him, our return would not disturb it. It was
the only thing to do, for the status quo had to be maintained at all
costs. I acquired a piece of the metal he had used—an easy thing to do,
since everything in the city was catalogued—and came away.”

Face paused to light a cigarette. The man smoked, I noticed, with more
sheer enjoyment than anyone I had ever met.

“Well,” said Harry impatiently, “did you find him?”

Face leaned back in a cloud of blue smoke and stared dreamily at the
ceiling. “No,” he said, “And I’ll tell you why.

“I ran into a characteristic of dimensions that was so utterly simple
that it had all but escaped me. Let me give you an example. How many
sides has a cube?”

“Six,” said Harry promptly.

Face nodded. “Exactly. Excluding the duration dimension, the cube is a
three-dimensional body and has six sides. There are _two_ sides as
manifestations of each dimension. I think I overlooked that. You see,
there are four dimensions, but eight_—directions!_”

He paused, while the three of us knotted our brows over the conception.
“Right and left,” he said. “Up and down. Forward and backward—and
‘beginningwards’ and ‘endwards’—the two directions in the duration
dimension!”

Delehanty raised his head slowly. “You mean you—didn’t know which _way_
to go?”

“Precisely. I entered the durational field and struck off blindly in the
wrong direction! I went as far as I reasoned Hark Vegas had gone, and
then stopped to look around. I found myself in such a bewildering,
uproarious, chaotic world that I simply hadn’t the mental equipment to
cope with it. I had to retreat into a deserted place and develop it. I
came into your world—here, about eight years ago. And when I had begun
to get the ways of this world, I came out of hiding and began my search.
It ended almost as soon as it had begun, for I stopped searching!

“Do you know what happened to me? Do you realize that never before had I
seen color, or movement, or argument, or love, hate, noise, confusion,
growth, death, laughter? Can you imagine my delighted first glimpses of
a street fight, a traffic jam, a factory strike? I should have been
horrified, perhaps—but never had I seen such beautiful marvels, such
superb and profound and moving happenings. I threw myself into it. I
became one of you. I became an accountant, throttling down what powers I
alone of all this earth possess, striving for life as a man on an equal
footing with the rest of men. You can’t know my joy and my delight! I
make a mistake in my entries, and the city—this city, does not care or
suffer for it, but brawls on unheeding. My responsibilities are to
myself alone, and I defy my cast-steel customs and laugh doing it. I’m
living here, you see? Living! Go back? Hah!”

“Colors,” I murmured. “Noise, and happy filth, and sorrows and screams.
So they got you—_too!”_

Face’s smile grew slowly and then flashed away. He stared at me like
some alabaster-faced statue for nearly a full minute, and then the agile
tendrils of his mind whipped out and encountered mine. We clutched each
other thus, and the aura of our own forces around us struck two men
dumb.

“Hark Vegas,” he said woodenly.

I nodded.

He straightened, drew a deep breath, threw back his head and laughed.
“This colossal joke,” he said, wiping his eyes, “was thirty-eight
thousand years in the making. Pleased to meet you—Jack.”

We left then. Harry and Delehanty can’t remember anything but a poker
game.



NIGHTMARE ISLAND


THE GOVERNOR TOOK a sight between two leaves of carefully imported mint,
lining the green notch up with the corner of the bamboo verandah and the
bowed figure of the man on the beach. He was silent so long that his
guest became restless, missing the easy drone of the governor’s voice.
That was the only thing to do, he thought, watching the old man pressing
the cool glass against his cheek, peering through the leaves at the
beachcomber; the only thing a man could do in this dreary, brilliant
group of little islands—you could only talk. If you didn’t keep a
conversation going, you thought of the heat and surf-etched silences,
and the weary rattle of palm fronds, and that brought you back to the
heat again. God, he thought suddenly, the governor dresses for dinner in
this heat, every last damn day.

“Poor crazy devil,” muttered the governor.

His American visitor asked, “Who?”

The governor gestured with his glass toward the sea and the beachcomber,
and then sipped.

The American swiveled and stared. The beachcomber stood dejectedly with
the surf tumbling about his knees, and the sun was sinking so rapidly
that his shadow crept and crawled along the beach like something with a
life of its own. A trick of the light seemed to make the man’s flesh
transparent for a split second, and it appeared to the American that the
man was a broad-shouldered skeleton standing there staring out to sea. A
slight shift of shades showed him up again for what he was, the thin
husk of a man, sharp-boned, stringy.

The American grunted and turned back toward his host. “What’s the matter
with him?”

The governor said, “Him? He just doesn’t give a damn any more. He lost
something and he can’t—I can’t let him—get it back.”

“What did he lose?”

The governor regarded him gravely. “You’re a businessman. You deal in
dollars and cents and tons—You wouldn’t believe me if I told you, and
you might not let me finish.”

The American opened his mouth to protest, but the governor held up his
hand and said, “Listen to that.”

The beachcomber’s cracked wail drifted out over the cluttered beach and
the whispering surf. “Ahniroo!” he cried. “Ahni- Ahniroo!” Then for a
long while he was silent, and it grew darker. Just as the sleepy sun
pulled the blanket of horizon over its head, they saw the beachcomber’s
shoulders slump. He turned and walked up the beach.

The American squinted at him. “I take it he isn’t as crazy as he looks?”

The governor shook his head. “You can put it that way.”

The American settled himself more comfortably. He didn’t care about the
‘comber particularly, or the governor either, for that matter. But he
had to stay here another forty-eight hours, and there would be nothing
to do until the mail steamer came except to sit and talk with the old
boy. The man seemed to have at least one good yarn to tell, which was
promising.

“Come on—give,” he grinned. “I’ll take your word for it. Don’t forget,
I’m not used to this kind of country, or the funny business that goes on
in it. Who is he, anyhow? And why is he calling out over the water?
Gives me the creeps. Who’s Ahniroo—or what is it?”

The governor leaned back and looked up at a spider that would probably
drop down someone’s collar before the evening was over, and he said
nothing for quite a while. Then he began:

Ahniroo was a … a friend of the fellow’s. I doubt that any man has had a
friend like that. As far as the man himself is concerned—yes, you may be
right. Perhaps he isn’t quite all there. But after what he went through,
the surprising thing is that he can talk fairly sensibly. Of course,
he’s peculiar there, too—all he’ll talk about is Ahniroo, but he does it
quite rationally.

He was a seaman, much like any other seaman. He had relatives ashore and
was going to marry one of these years, perhaps; and there was a visit to
the place where he was born, some day, when he could walk into the town
with a hundred-dollar bill in every pocket of a new suit. Like other
seamen he saved his money and spent it and lost it and had it stolen
from him, and like some other seamen he drank.

Being on the beach really started the whole thing for him. A sailor’s
unemployment is unlike any other kind, in that it is so little dependent
on the man’s whereabouts. A silk mill worker must starve around a silk
mill before he can get his job, but a seaman can starve anywhere. If he
is a real seaman, he is a painter and a general handyman, a stevedore
and roustabout. Chances are that he can drive a truck or play a little
music or can turn his hand at any of a thousand semiskilled trades. He
may not know where he will eat next, but he can always find a bit of
drink to warm him or cool him as the weather dictates. But Barry—our
beachcomber over there—didn’t care much for eating, and didn’t do much
of it for quite a while, except when it was forced on him. He
concentrated on the drinking, and the more he drank the more reasons he
found for drinking, until he couldn’t walk or sleep or work or travel or
stay still without a little snort or two as a persuader. Not so good. He
lost a lot of jobs ashore and afloat. When he had a job he’d guzzle to
celebrate, and when he lost one he’d guzzle to console himself. You can
imagine what happened.

It hit him in a small town on the Florida coast. He had just been fired
from a little four-thousand ton freighter that ran coastwise and found
that stopping in such half-forgotten whistle stops paid expenses. It was
on the North American continent, but aside from that it hardly differed
from these islands. It was hot and humid and a long, long way from
anywhere else.

And Barry found himself sitting on the edge of a wooden sidewalk with
his feet and his soul in the gutter, with no money and no job and no
food in his stomach. He felt pretty good, being just halfway between a
binge and a hangover. He stared for twenty minutes at a painted stone in
the dusty road, just because his eyes happened to be directed that way.
And before long a scorpion crept out from behind the stone and stood
looking at him.

It was like no other scorpion he had ever seen. It was no larger than
any other, and the same dark color, but instead of the formidable
pincers, it had _arms_. They were tiny and perfect and pink and soft,
and had delicate hands and little diamond specks of fingernails. And—oh,
yes, no joints, apparently. They were as sinuous as an elephant’s trunk.
It was such an unheard-of thing to see that Barry stared at it for a
long moment before he let himself believe what he had seen. Then he
shook himself, shrugged drunkenly, and said: “I’ll be damned!” And then,
addressing the strange scorpion, “Hi!”

The scorpion waved one of its perfect, impossible arms, and said, “You
will be!” and then, “Hi yourself.”

Barry started so violently that he came to his feet. The liquor he had
been sopping seemed to have collected in his knees; at any rate, those
members were quite liquid and buckled under him, so that he fell on his
face. He remembered the scorpion scuttling away, and then his forehead
struck the painted stone and the lights went out for him.

Barry had been a strong man, but after two years of nursing from flat
bottles, you wouldn’t have known it. He was no beauty. He had a long
leather face and purple nose. His eyes were nearly as red as their lids,
and his broad shoulders were built of toothpicks and parchment. Skin
that had been taut with the solid muscle under it was now loose and dry,
and fitted him as badly as the clothes he wore. He was a big fellow—six
foot three at least, and he weighed all of a hundred and twenty-seven
pounds.

The scorpion was the start of it, and the crack on the skull brought it
on full strength. That’s right—the horrors. The good old creeping,
crawling horrors. When he came to and hauled his ragged body back up to
the sidewalk, he found himself in a new world, horribly peopled by
things he couldn’t understand. There were soft white wriggling things—a
carpet of them under his feet. Standing at bay in the doorway of a
general store down the street was a gryphon, complete with flaming
breath, horns and tail, frighteningly real, lifted bodily from an old
book that had frightened him when he was a child. He heard a monstrous
rustle over his head, and there was a real life prototype of
Alice-in-Wonderland’s buck-toothed Jabberwock, and it was out to get
him. He shrieked and tried to run, and fell choking and splattering into
the Slough of Despond from “Pilgrim’s Progress.” There was someone else
in there with him—a scantily clad girl on skis from the front cover of a
Paris magazine. She laughed and turned into a six-legged winged snake
which bit at him viciously and vanished. He scrambled to his feet and
plunged sobbing down the dusty road, and people on the sidewalks turned
and stared and said, “Crazy with th’ heat,” and went on about their
business, for heat madness was common among beached sailors in that
country in August.

Barry staggered on out of town, which wasn’t very far, and out among the
sand dunes and scrub and saw grass. He began to see things that he could
not describe, devils and huge spiders and insects. In the angry blaze of
the sun he slumped to his knees, sobbing, and then something clicked in
his mind and he collapsed from sheer psychic exhaustion.

It was night, and very cool, when he woke again. There was half a moon
and a billion stars, and the desertlike dunes were all black velvet and
silver. The black and the gleam were crowded with strange life, but it
was worse now than it had been in the daytime, because now he could feel
what he couldn’t see. He _knew_ that twenty feet away from him stood a
great foul buzzard that stared steadily at him, and yet he could not see
it. It was more than a fearsome sensation that the thing was there; he
could feel each feather, every wrinkle of the crested, wattled neck,
each calloused serration on its dry yellow legs. As he stared
tremblingly into the mounding distances, he felt the grate of a bison’s
hoof as it eyed him redly, ready to charge. The sound of a wolf’s teeth
impacted on his skin rather than his eardrums, and he felt its rough
tongue on its black lips. He screamed and ran toward the town, guided by
his omnipresent seaman’s instinct, dodging and zigzagging among the
silver dunes. Oh yes—he had ’em. He had the horrors really thoroughly.

He reached town about eleven at night. He was pretty much of a
mess—covered with grime, cut and bruised and sick. Someone saw him
leaning rockily against the sun-dried wall of a gin mill, trying to
revive himself with the faint clinking of glasses and the fainter odor
of liquor that drifted from inside. Someone else said, “Look at the
hulk; let’s feed him a drink.” It was a lucky break for Barry; with his
metabolism in the pickled state it was, he would most certainly have
dropped dead if he had not had that snifter.

They led him in and gave him a couple more, and his garbled mutterings
were amusing to them for a time, but after a while they went home and
left him cluttering up a round table with his spent body.

Closing time—which meant the time when there was no one left around to
buy a nickel beer—came, and the bartender, a misplaced Louisiana Cajun,
came over to throw the sailor out. There was no one else in the place
but a couple of rats and some flies. One of the rats had only two legs
and wore a collar and tie even in that heat. The other rat had some
self-respect and scuttled under the beer pulls to lap suds, being a true
quadruped with inherited rat reflexes.

The two-legged rat’s name was Zilio. He was a small oily creature with
swarthy skin, a hooked nose supported by a small mustache, an
ingratiating manner and a devious way of making a living. His attention
was attracted toward Barry by the barkeep’s purposeful approach. Zilio
slid off his stool and said:

“Hold it, Pierre; I’m buying for the gentleman. Pour a punch.”

The name did not refer to the ingredients of the drink but to its
effect. The barkeep shrugged and went back to his bar, where he poured a
double drink of cheap whiskey, adding two drops of clear liquid from a
small bottle, this being the way to mix a Zilio punch.

Zilio took it from him and carried it over to Barry. He set it on the
table in front of the seaman, drew up a chair and sat close to him, his
arm on Barry’s shoulder.

“Drink up, old man,” he said in an affected accent. He shook Barry
gently, and the sailor raised his head groggily. “Go on,” urged Zilio.

Barry picked up the glass, shaking and slopping, and sipped because he
had not energy for a gulp.

“You’re a sailor, eh?” murmured Zilio.

Barry shook his head and reared back to try to focus his disobedient
eyes on the oily man. “Yeah, an’ a damn good one.”

“Union member?”

“What’s it to you?” asked Barry belligerently, and Zilio pushed the
glass a little closer. Barry realized that the smooth, swarthy character
was buying a drink, and promptly loosened up. “Yeah; I belong to the
union.” He picked up the glass.

“Good!” said Zilio. “Drink up!”

Barry did. The raw liquid slid down his throat, looped around and
smashed him on the back of the neck. He sank tinglingly into
unconsciousness. Zilio watched him for a moment, smiling.

Pierre said, “What are you going to do with that broken down piece o’
tar?”

Zilio began to search Barry’s pockets diligently. “If I can find what
I’m looking for,” he said, “this broken down piece of tar is going to be
removed from the rolls of the unemployed.” Another minute’s searching
uncovered Barry’s seaman’s papers. “Ah—able seaman—quartermaster—wiper
and messman. He’ll do.” He stood back and wiped his hands on a large
white handkerchief. “Pierre, get a couple of the boys and have this
thing brought down to my dock.”

Pierre grunted and went out, returning in a few minutes with a couple of
fishermen. Without a word they picked up the unconscious Barry and
carried him out to a disreputable old flivver, which groaned its way out
of sight down the dusty road.

Zilio said, “ ‘Night, Pierre.” He handed the bartender two clean dollar
bills for his part in the shanghai, and left.

When Barry swam up out of the effects of Pierre’s Mickey Finn, he found
himself in all too familiar surroundings. He didn’t have to open his
eyes; his nose and sense of touch told him where he was. He was lying in
a narrow bed, and the sparse springs beneath him vibrated constantly.
His right side felt heavier than his left, and he rolled a little that
way, and then the weight shifted and he rolled back. He groaned. How did
he ever get working again?

He opened his eyes at last, to see what kind of a box it was that he had
shipped out on. He saw a dimly lit fo’c’s’le with six bunks in it, only
one of which was occupied. The place was filthy, littered with empty
beer cans, dirty socks, a couple of pairs of dungarees, wrapping paper
from laundry parcels, and cigarette butts—the usual mess of a merchant
ship’s crew’s quarters when leaving port. He closed his eyes and shook
his head violently to rid himself of this impossible vision—he didn’t
remember catching a ship, _knew_ he was on the beach, and was good and
sick of seeing things he could not believe. So—he closed his eyes and
shook his head to clear it, and when he did that he groaned in agony at
the pain that shot through it. Oooh—that must have been a party. Wow! He
lay very still until the pain subsided, and then cautiously opened his
eyes again. He was still in a ship’s fo’c’s’le.

“Hey!” he called weakly.

The figure on the lower bunk opposite started, and a man pushed his head
into the light that trickled in from the alleyway.

“Hey, where am I? Eh—when is this?”

Apparently the man could make sense out of the vague question.
“Tuesday,” he said. That meant nothing to Barry. “Ye’re aboard th’
_Jesse Hanck_. Black oil. Far East.”

Barry lay back. “Oh,” he moaned.

The Hanck ships were famous—or was it notorious? They were old Fore
River ships, well-deck tankers. They were dirty and unseaworthy, and
they were hungry ships and paid ordinary seaman’s wages to their petty
officers, grading it on down from there. Twenty-eight lousy dollars a
month. No overtime. Eighty-six-day runs.

Barry got up one elbow and said half to himself, “What did I do—_ask_
for this job?”

The other man rolled out and sat on the edge of his bunk, putting on a
tankerman’s safety shoes. “Damfino. Did you ever meet a guy called
Zilio?”

“Ah—Yeah.”

The man nodded. “There you are then, shipmate. He gave you a drink. You
passed out. You wake up aboard this oil can. That’s Zilio’s business.”

“Why the dirty—I’m a union member! I’ll tie this ship up! I’ll have her
struck! I’ll report her to the Maritime Commission! I’ll—”

The other man rose and came across the fo’c’s’le to lean his elbows on
Barry’s bunk and breathe his gingivitis into Barry’s face. “You’ll do
your work and shut up. When you sober up enough to look around, you’ll
find out you’re sailing without seaman’s papers. If you’re a good boy
and play along with the seahorse that calls himself a chief mate, you’ll
get them back. Step off the straight and narrow and you’ll be beached
somewhere without your livin’. An’ listen—better dry up with that union
talk. You got picked up by a fink-herder and shipped on a fink ship.
They don’t go for that around here, that fellow-worker stuff.”

“Yeah?” Barry swung his feet over the side of the bunk and had to clutch
his pounding head. “I’ll jump ship in Panama! We got to go through the
canal!”

“Ain’t nobody jumpin’ no ship in Panama nowadays, friend. They’ll send
out a fifth-colyum alarm fer you from the ship an’ you’ll spend
somethin’ like fifty years in a military bastille. Besides—time you get
to Colon you won’t want to be jumpin’ ship. Better cool off now. G’wan
back to sleep. I got the eight to twelve. You got the twelve to four.”

So Barry went back to work again. He spent his days and nights in the
utmost misery. The packing around the posthole beside his bunk had
kicked out some years ago, and every time the weather got a little
drafty, his bunk shipped water. The food was atrocious, and the crew was
composed of bootblacks, kids on vacation, ex-tenant farmers, and one or
two bonafide seamen like himself, either outright finks or shanghaied
wrecks. But all of this didn’t stack up to his horrors. They persisted
and they grew.

It isn’t often a man gets them that badly, but then it isn’t often that
a man lets himself get into the state that Barry was in. He walked in a
narrowing circle of ravenous beasts. When he slept he dreamed horrible
dreams, and when he lay awake he could feel tiny, cold, wet feet
crawling over his body. He was afraid to stand a lookout watch by
himself, and the mate had to batten down his ears for him before he
would go out to the fo’c’s’le head at night. He was dead sure that there
was something horrible hiding in the anchor engine, ready to leap out at
him and wrap him up in the anchor cables. He was just as afraid to be in
a roomful of men, because, to his sodden eyes, their faces kept running
together fluidly, assuming the most terrifying shapes. So he spent his
hours off watch hovering in the outskirts of smaller groups of men,
making them nervous, causing them to call him Haunt and Jonah.

He found out what the eight-to-twelve man had meant when he’d said that
Barry wouldn’t feel like jumping ship in Panama. A day before they made
the canal, those who might make trouble were called to the second mate’s
room, each secretly, and fed rotgut liquor. They hadn’t learned—not one
of them. It was a Mickey again. When they came to, they were in the
Pacific.

The _Jesse Hanck_ steamed well out of the usual steamer lanes. The Hanck
fleet were charter boats, and they saw to it that they were always
behind schedule sufficiently to enable the captains to pad the fuel and
store consumption accounts enough so that pockets were lined all around,
except for those of the crews. A thoroughly rotten outfit. At any rate,
Barry had his little accident eight days out of the canal.

The ship was shuffling along somewhere on the tenth meridian, and it was
hot. It was one of those evenings when a man puts clothes on to soak up
perspiration and rips them off thirty seconds later because he can’t
stand the heat of them; when sleeping on deck is just as bad.

The men bunked all over the place, throwing mattresses down on the after
boatdeck, swinging hammocks from the midship rigging, crawling under the
messroom tables, which were out on the poop now—sleeping anywhere and
everywhere in impossible attempts to escape the cruel heat. Calling the
watch was a hit-or-miss proposition; you might find your relief and then
again you might wake the wrong man from a rare snatch of real sleep and
get yourself roughed up for your mistake.

Barry came off watch at four that morning. He turned in somewhere back
aft. He never got up for breakfast anyway, and when the eight-to-twelve
ordinary seaman tried to call him for lunch at eleven-thirty, he
couldn’t be found. It was one-thirty before the bos’n missed him.
Sometime between four in the morning and one in the afternoon, then,
Barry had left the ship.

It gave all hands something to talk about for a couple of days. The
captain wrote up a “lost at sea” item in the log and pocketed Barry’s
wages. An ordinary seaman was given Barry’s duties with no increase in
pay. Barry was forgotten. Who cared, anyway? Nobody liked him. He wasn’t
worth a damn. He couldn’t steer. He couldn’t paint. He was a lousy
lookout.

Barry himself always gets that part of his story garbled. How a man
trained at sea, capable in any emergency of looking out for his own
skin, no matter what the weather or his state of sobriety, could
possible _fall_ off a ship at sea is beyond understanding. I don’t
believe he did. I think he jumped off. Not because of the way he was
being treated aboard that slave ship; he hadn’t self-respect enough left
for that. It must have been his horrors; at any rate, that, according to
him, is the last thing he remembers happening to him aboard the _Jesse
Hanck_.

He had just drifted off to sleep, when he was aroused by some shipboard
noise—the boilers popping off, perhaps, or a roar from the antiquated
steering engine. At any rate, he was suddenly dead certain that
something was pursuing him, and that if he didn’t get away from it, he
would be horribly killed. He tried, and then he was in the water.

As the rusty old hull slid past him in the warm sea, he looked up at it
and blinked the brine out of his failing eyes and made not the slightest
attempt to shout for help. He trod water for some moments, until the
after light of the tanker was a low star swinging down on the horizon,
and then he turned over on his back and kicked sluggishly to keep
himself afloat.

Now delirium tremens is a peculiar affliction. Just as the human body
can be destroyed by a dose of poison, but will throw off an overdose, so
the human mind will reach a point of supersaturation and return to
something like normality. In Barry’s case it was pseudosanity; he did
not cease to have his recurrent attacks of phantasmagoria, but he became
suddenly immunized to them. It was as if he had forgotten how to be
afraid—how, even, to wonder at the things he saw and felt. He simply did
not care; he became as he is today, just not giving a damn. In effect,
his mind was all but completely gone, so that for the first time in
weeks he could lie at ease and feel that he was not mortally afraid. It
was the first time he had been in real danger, and he was not afraid.

He says that he lay there and slept for weeks. He says that porpoises
came and played with him, bunting him about and crying like small
children. And he says that an angel came down from the sky and built him
a boat out of seaweed and foam. But he only remembers one sun coming up,
so it must have been that same morning that he found himself clutching a
piece of driftwood, rocking and rolling in a gentle swell just to
windward of a small island. It was just a little lump of sand and rock,
heaped high in the middle, patched with vegetation and wearing a halo of
shrieking sea birds. He stared at it with absolutely no interest at all
for about four hours, drifting closer all the while. When his feet
struck bottom he did not know what it meant or what he should do; he
just let them drag until his knees struck also, and then he abandoned
his piece of wood and crept ashore.

The sun was coming up again when Barry awoke. He was terribly weak, and
his flesh was dry and scaly the way only sea-soaked skin can be. His
tongue was interfering with his breathing. He lolled up to his hands and
knees and painfully crawled up the sloping beach to a cluster of palms.
He collapsed with his chin in a cool spring, and would have killed
himself by over-drinking if he had not fallen asleep again.

The next time he pushed the groggy clouds from him, he felt much better.
He was changed; he knew that. He was basically changed; he felt
different about things. It took him quite a while to figure out just
how, but then it occurred to him that though he was still surrounded
with the monsters and visions and phantoms of his own drink-crazed
creation, he did not fear them. But it was more than that. It was not
the disinterest he had experienced out there when he was adrift. It was
a sullen hatred of the things. It was an eagerness to have one of them
come near enough for him to attack. He crouched by the spring and looked
craftily about him, trying to find an object to kill and tear. He found
it. Near him was a coconut. He picked up a stone and hurled it, and
cracked the coconut. He caught it up and drank greedily from the
streaming cracks, and then broke it and ate the meat until it made him
sick. He was enormously pleased with himself.

All around him the ground pimpled and dimpled, and from the little
depressions what he thought were strange plants began to grow. They were
sinuous stalks, and they seemed to be made of two rubbery sheaths that
wound about each other spirally, forming a tentaclelike stem, and
spreading out at the tip in two flashy extensions like snail’s eyes. He
reached out and touched one as it grew visibly, and it writhed away from
him and began clubbing the ground blindly, searchingly. He’d never
dreamed up anything like this before. But he was certain he had nothing
to fear from them. He got up, kicking one out of the way disgustedly,
and began to climb the central hill for bearings. Just as he left, one
of the growths spurted up out of the ground, curved over his head and
smashed wetly down on the spot he had just vacated. He didn’t even look
over his shoulder. Why should he, for a figment of his imagination? The
mistake he made was that the things were real. Just as real, my friend,
as you and I!

Barry, poor crazed wreck, couldn’t realize it then, because the growing,
writhing trunks all around him were mixed and mingled with things of his
own creation, dancing and gibbering around him. There were things
harmless and beautiful, and things too foul to mention, and it is little
wonder that the stemlike things were of little importance.

Barry went on up the hill. He picked up a thorny stick, quite heavy, and
strode on, casually swiping at the monsters, real and imaginary. He
noticed subconsciously that when he struck at a unicorn or a winged
frog, it would vanish immediately, but when he swung at a growing
tentacle it would either duck quickly or, when struck, twist into a
tight knot about its wound. He even looked back and noticed how the
stalks kept pace with him, sinking back into the ground behind him and
sprouting ahead. It still meant nothing to him.

A few hundred yards from the top he stopped and sniffed. There had been
a growing, fetid odor about the place, and he didn’t like it. He
connected it somehow with the smell of the ichor that exuded from the
wounded stalks after he had slashed them, but he was incurious; he
didn’t really care. He shrugged and finished his climb.

When he had reached the top he stood a moment wiping his forehead with
his wrist, and then sighted all around the horizon. There were no other
islands in sight. This one was small—nearly round, and perhaps a mile by
a mile and a quarter. He spotted two more springs and a tight grove of
coconut and breadfruit. That was encouraging. He stepped forward as a
rubbery trunk poured out of the ground and lashed at his legs with its
two prehensile tentacles. It missed.

A puff of wind bearing an unspeakable odor brought his attention back to
the crest of the hill. It was nearly round, almost exactly following the
contours of the island, and fell in the center to form a small crater.
Down at the bottom of the crater was a perfectly round hole, and that
was the source of the noisome smell.

Barry walked down toward it because he happened to be facing that way
and it was the easiest way to go. He was halfway down the slope when two
points of what looked like pulpy flesh began to rise out of the hole.
They seemed to be moving slowly, but Barry suddenly realized that it was
an illusion due to their enormous size. Before he could bring himself to
stop, they had risen twenty feet in the air. They began leaning outward,
one directly toward him, the other across the hole, away from him. They
grew thicker as they poured upward and outward, and finally they lay
flat on the slope and the near one began licking up toward him.

It was the most frightening phantasm that had yet presented itself to
Barry’s poor alcoholic brain, but now he would not be frightened. He
stood there, legs apart, club at the ready, and waited. When the thing
reached his feet he raised himself on his toes and brought the thorny
club down with all his strength on its fleshy tip. It winced away and
then poured back. He hit it twice more and it retreated. He ran after it
and smashed it again and again. It suddenly rocketed up in the air, as
did its mate from the other side of the crater. They struck together
with a mighty wet _smack!_ and stood there, a pale-green, shining column
of living flesh, quivering in the sunlight. And then, with unbelievable
speed, they plunged into the ground, back into their hole. Barry dropped
his club, clasped his hands over his head and smirked. Then he turned
and went back to his spring.

And all the way back, not another trunk showed itself.

He slept well that night under a crude shelter of palm leaves. Not a
thing bothered him but dreams, and of course they didn’t bother him much
any more. His victory over the thing in the crater had planted a tiny
seed of self-esteem in that rotten hulk of a man. That, added to the
fact that he was too crazy to be afraid of anything, made him something
new under the sun.

In the morning he sat up abruptly. At his feet was a pile of breadfruit
and coconuts, and around him was a forest, a wall of the waving stalks.
He leaped to his feet and cast about wildly for his club. It had
disappeared. He drew his sheath knife, which by some miracle had stayed
with him since he left the _Jesse Hanck_, and stood there, palisaded by
the thickly planted, living stems. And he still was not afraid. He took
a deep breath and stepped menacingly toward the near wall of stalks.
They melted into the ground before he reached them. He whirled and
rushed those behind him. They were gone before he could get within
striking distance. He paused and nodded to himself. If that was the way
they wanted it, it was O.K. He put away his knife and fell to on the
fruit. The stems ranked themselves at a respectful distance, as if they
were watching. And then he noticed something new. Deep within his brain
was a constant, liquid murmur, as if thousands of people were talking
quietly together in a strange tongue. He didn’t mind it very much. He’d
been through worse, and he wasn’t curious.

After he was quite finished he noticed a rustling movement in the wall
surrounding him. The creatures were passing something, one to the
other—his club! It reached the stalk nearest him; it was taken and laid
gently by his side. The stalk straightened and dropped into the earth
quickly as if it were embarrassed.

Barry looked at the waving things and almost grinned. Then he picked up
the club. Immediately the things on one side of him melted into the
ground, and those on the other side doubled in number. A couple of them
began sprouting under his feet; he jumped away, startled. More sank into
the earth from his path, and more sprang up behind. He looked at them a
little uneasily; it occurred to him that they were a little insistent,
compared with his usual disappearing monsters. He walked away from them.
They followed; that is, they massed behind him, sprouting in his
footsteps. And the murmuring in his mind burst into a silent cacophony;
gleeful, triumphant.

He wandered inland, followed by his rustling company of pale-green
stalks. When he turned aside they would spring up around him, and it was
no good trying to press through. They made no attempt to harm him at
all. But—they were _forcing_ him toward the hill! Perhaps he realized
it—perhaps not. Barry, by this time, was totally unhinged. Any other man
could not have lived through what he did. But his peculiar conditioning,
the subtle distortion of his broken mind, gave him the accidental
ability to preserve himself. Certainly he himself could take no credit
for it. His fantastic world was no more strange to him than ours is to
us. If you or I were suddenly transported to that island, we would be as
frightened as—well, a gorilla in Times Square, or a New Yorker in an
African jungle. It’s all a matter of receptivity.

And so he found himself marching up the central slope being driven
gently but firmly toward that monstrous thing in the crater by his
entourage of pale-green stalks. They must have been a weird-looking
company.

And the thing was waiting for him. He came up over the crest of the
rise, and the tip of one of the two great green projections curled up
over his head and lashed down at him. He threw himself sideways and
belted it with his club as it touched the ground. It slid back toward
the hole. He took a step or two after it. It was huge—fully sixty feet
of it stretched from him to the hole in the center of the crater. And no
telling how much more of it was in there. At the first movement from the
thing, there had been a rustle behind him and every one of the stalks
had dropped from sight.

As Barry ran forward to strike again, a shape shot up out of the ground
at his side, whipped around his leg and flung him down. He rolled over
and sat up, to see the other great green arm come swooping down on the
stalk that had tripped him and—saved his life. The two huge tentacles
slapped together, twisted the slender stalk between them, and began to
pull. The stalk tried to go underground, and for a moment held, while
its spiraled body stretched and thinned under tons of pull. Then the
ground itself gave, and with a peculiar sucking sound, the stalk came up
out of the earth. And for the first time Barry saw it for what it was.

The “root” was a dark-green ovoid, five or six feet long, about two and
a half feet thick at the middle. It was rough and wrinkled, and gleamed
with its coating of slime. The stalk itself was nearly eight feet long.
The creature hung for a moment in the twin tentacles of its captor, and
then it was enfolded, the bulge of it sliding visibly down the two arms
which had closed together and twisted, forming a great proboscislike
tube. And Barry heard it scream, deep down in his mind.

Barry rose and scrambled back over the crest of the hill. It had
occurred to him that the monster in the crater had struck at a
victim—himself—and that the stalk had sacrificed itself to save him.
Having a victim, it would be satisfied for the time being. He was right.
Peering back, he saw the great column rise in the air and slip swiftly
back into its hole. And he realized something else, as the two tips
disappeared underground. The divided proboscis—the ability to rise from
and sink into the earth—why, the big fellow there was exactly the same
as all the rest of these creatures, except for its huge size!

What was it? Why, Barry never knew exactly, and though I took a great
deal of trouble to find out, I never bothered to tell him. There they
were; more than that, Barry did not care. He still doesn’t. However, as
closely as I can discover, I think that the creatures were a species of
marine worm—one of the _Echiuroidea_, to be exact—_bonellia viridis_.
They grow large anywhere they grow, but I’ve never heard of one longer
than four feet, proboscis and all. However, I think it quite possible
for a colony to develop in a given locality, and mutate into greater
size. As for the big one—well, Barry did find a thing or two out about
that monster.

Barry went back down the hill and headed for cover. He wanted to sit
somewhere in the shade where he would not be bothered by such things. He
found himself a spot and relaxed there. And slowly, then faster and
faster, the stalks began to spring up around him again. They kept their
distance, almost respectfully; but there was a certain bland insistence
in their presence that annoyed Barry.

“Go away!” he said sharply.

And they did. Barry was utterly astonished. It was the first really
human reaction that had struck him in weeks. But the sight of these
curious creatures, so dissimilar to anything that he had ever heard
about, obeying him so implicitly, struck some long-buried streak of
humor in the man. He roared with laughter.

“Hello.”

His laughter cut off and he peered around. Nothing.

“Hello.” The sound seemed to come from no specific direction—as a matter
of fact, it seemed to come from no direction at all. It seemed to come
from inside him, but he hadn’t spoken.

“Who said that?” he snapped.

“I did,” said the voice. He looked around again, and his eyes caught a
movement down low, to his left. There, just peeping out of the ground,
were the twin tendrils that tipped the ubiquitous stalks.

_“You?”_ asked Barry, pointing.

The creature rose another two feet and swayed gently. “Yes.”

“And what the hell might you be?”

“I don’t understand you. What is hell?”

“It speaks English!” gasped Barry.

“I speak,” agreed the monster. “What is English?”

Barry rose to his knees and stared at it. “What are you?” he repeated.

“Man.”

“Yeah? What does that make me?”

“You are different. I have only your words for everything. Your name for
yourself is Man. My name for myself is Man, too. I have no name for
you.”

“I’m a man,” asserted Barry, half truthfully.

“And what would you say I am?”

Barry looked at it carefully. “A damned nightmare.”

The thing said seriously, “Very well. Hereafter we shall be known as
nightmares. I shall tell all the people.”

The thought of actually having a conservation with this
unpleasant-looking beast struck Barry again and almost overwhelmed him.
“How the devil can you speak with me?”

“My mind speaks to your mind.”

“Yeah! Gee!” was the only comment Barry could think of.

“What are you going to do?” asked the creature.

“Whatcha mean?”

“You have proved yourself against the Big One. We know you can destroy
him. Will you do it soon, please?”

“The Big One? You mean that thing in the crater?”

“Yes.”

“What can I do?”

“You will know, all-powerful one.”

Barry looked around to find out who was being addressed in such
prepossessing terms, and then concluded that it was he. He puffed his
chest. “Well,” he said, “I’ll make a deal with you. Get me a drink and
I’ll fix you up.”

It was an old mental reflex, one he had used all over the coast to get
himself plastered when offered any kind of a job, aside from shipping
out. His technique was to demand more liquor until he was so drunk he
was of no value to any kind of an employer; and they would go away and
leave him alone.

The stalk said, “It shall be done.”

A whirring telepathic signal sounded in Barry’s brain, and two or three
dozen of the things leaped out of the earth.

“The master desires a drink. And pass the word; hereafter we are to be
known as nightmares. It is his wish.”

The stalks dropped out of sight, all but the one Barry was talking with.

“Well; that’s something like service,” breathed Barry.

“All things are yours for the service you will do us,” said the
nightmare.

“This is the damnedest thing,” said Barry, scratching his head. “Why
didn’t you talk to me before?”

“I did not know what your intentions were, nor whether or not you were
an intelligent animal,” said the nightmare.

“Y’know now, huh?”

“Yes, master.”

“Hey—How come none of ’em talk to me but you?”

“I differ slightly from the rest. See those birds?”

Barry looked up at the wheeling, screaming cloud of gulls and curlews.
“So?”

The nightmare gave a peculiar telepathic whistle. The birds wheeled and
hurtled downward toward them. In an instant the glade was filled with
them. Barry was cuffed and slapped by their wings as they crowded about
him. He snatched at a large bird, caught it by the leg, and promptly
twisted its neck.

At the nightmare’s sudden signal, the rest of the birds turned and
fluttered and soared up and away.

“Why did you do that?” asked the nightmare.

“I’m going to eat it.”

“You eat birds?”

“Why not?”

“You shall have all you want. But as I was saying—I am different from
these others. Of all of us, I alone can call the birds. Apparently, only
I may speak with you.”

“Seems like. I can—hear the others, but I dunno what they’re driving at.
What about this Big One? Where’d he come from?”

“The Big One was one of us. But he differed also. He was a mutant, like
me, but he is unintelligent. He eats his own kind, which we cannot do.
He is very old, and every time he eats one of us, he grows larger. He
can’t move from the crater because it is rockbound, and he can’t burrow
through it. But the larger he grows the farther he can reach. If you
were not going to kill him, he would grow until he could reach the whole
island, or so they say. It used to be, a thousand years ago, that he
could travel our roads—”

“Roads? I didn’t see no roads.”

“Oh, they are underground. The whole island is honeycombed with our
burrows. We never put more of ourselves above the surface than our
proboscis. We catch our food that way, feeling about the ground and the
water’s edge for small plants and animals. We can dig, too, almost as
fast as we can travel through our roads—Here’s your drink.”

Barry watched fascinated as a column of stalks approached, bearing
gourds of coconut shells filled with water, coconut milk, and breadfruit
juice. Never a drop was spilled, as the stalks progressed. Two or three
would sprout swiftly, lean back, toward the gourd bearers. They would
take the burden, bend swiftly forward and pass it on to some newly
sprouted nightmares, and then sink into the ground and appear ahead.

“Why don’t they carry it underground?” asked Barry.

“It might not suit you then, master. You live in the sun, and the foods
you have eaten have grown in the sun. It shall be as you wish it.”

Barry extended his hand and a coconut shell full of cool water was
deposited in it. He sipped once and threw it down. “Call this a drink?”
he roared. “Get me a _drink!”_

“What would you like?”

“Whiskey, damn you! Gin, rum—beer! Wine, if you can’t find anything
better.” The more he thought of it, the thirstier he got. “Get me a
drink, you—what’s your name?”

“Ahniroo.”

“Well, get it anyway.” Barry slumped sullenly back.

“Master—we have none of these things you ask. Could we perhaps make one
of them?”

“Make one? I don’t—wait a minute.” Barry did a little thinking. If he
had to make a drink—brew it up, wait for it to ferment, strain it—well,
he’d just as soon do without. But it seemed as if these goofy critters
were aching to work for him. “O.K.—I’ll tell you what to do.”

And so Barry gave his orders. He knew very vaguely what to do, purely
because he had some idea of what alcoholic drinks were made out of. And
it passed the time pleasantly. He had plenty to eat and drink and never
had to lift a finger to get it. For the first time in his life he had
the kind of existence he’d dreamed about—even if it was mixed up with
nightmares.

The base of his brew was coconut milk. He’d heard somewhere that an
otherwise innocuous drink would ferment if you put in a raisin and
closed the container tightly. No raisins, though. He tried several
things and finally got fair results with chunks of breadfruit dried on
the rocks in the sun. They were put into a plugged coconut shell, the
opening carefully filled with a whittled wooden stopper and sealed with
mucus from the hides of the nightmares. Barry wasn’t finicky.

It was a pleasure to watch them work. They cooperated admirably,
grouping about a task, each supplying one or both of the “fingers” at
the tips of their proboscis. To see a coconut held, plugged, doctored
with a breadfruit and sealed up again, was a real pleasure, so swiftly
and deftly was it done. Barry had only to whittle one plug when the
knife was taken from him and three of the stalks took over the task, one
to handle the knife, two to hold the wood. And do you know how many
coconuts Barry had them prepare? By actual count, according to
Ahniroo—over nine thousand!

And when it was done, Barry announced that it would be, anyway, six
months before the stuff was worth drinking. The nightmares, in effect,
shrugged that off. They had lots of time. One of them was detailed to
mark off the days; and in the meantime they waited on Barry hand and
foot. No mention was made of the Big One. And Barry lay and dreamed the
days away, thinking of the binge he was going to go on when he could get
his hands on nine thousand bottles of home brew!

“Governor,” said the American, as the old man stopped to light a cigar,
“tell me something. Isn’t it a little tough to believe this drunkard’s
yarn? That business of the worms having intelligence and talking with
him. Isn’t that a little strong?”

The governor considered. “Perhaps. But once you get over the initial
surprise of an idea like that, try taking it apart. Why shouldn’t they
be intelligent? Just what is intelligence anyway?”

“Why”—the American fingered his Adam’s apple uneasily—“I’d say
intelligence was what we have that makes us the leading race on the
planet.”

“Are we, though? We’re outnumbered by thousands of other species—worms,
for instance, if numbers is your idea of racial supremacy. We are not as
strong as the elephant or as quick as the antelope—strength and speed
have nothing to do with supremacy. No, we use our intelligence to make
tools. We owe our position on earth to our ability to make tools.”

“Is that intelligence—tool-making?”

The governor shook his head. “It is one of the ways to use
intelligence.”

“What about these worms of Barry’s, then—why didn’t they have cities and
literature and machines?”

“They didn’t need them. They were not overcrowded on the island. There
was plenty to eat for all. The only menace they had was the Big One, and
even that wasn’t a complete menace—he could have lived another twenty
thousand years without endangering the life of any but those who
wandered too close. His presence was a discomfort. As to their
literature—how can we know about that? Barry was a seaman, and a very
low-type seaman, an ignoramus. What did he care about the splendid
brains that Ahniroo and his people might have had? Intelligence of that
sort must have produced superb developments along some lines. Barry
never bothered to find out.

“No, you can’t judge the intelligence of a race by its clothes or its
automobiles or its fancy foods. Intelligence is a cellular accident
affecting the nervous cysts of certain races. It might strike anywhere.
It seems as if it is a beautiful jest handed about by the gods, like a
philanthropist giving away beautiful grand pianos to uneducated
children. Some may learn to play them. Some may build intricate machines
with the parts. Most would destroy them, one way or another. What do you
think our race is doing with its great gift?

Well?”

The American grinned. “Better get on with your story.”

Well, for those six months Barry lived in the lap of luxury. Yes, raw
sea birds and coconut and breadfruit and clams can be luxury, once
you’re used to them. It isn’t what you have that makes luxury, anyway;
it’s how it’s given to you. A raw albatross, carefully cleaned and cut
up, is as great a luxury when it is brought to you in style as is a
twelve-dollar French meal that you have to cook yourself. Barry had
nothing to kick about. He had never felt better in his life; he hadn’t
sense enough to realize that it was largely due to his being on the
wagon. He dreamed about coconut shells filled with rare old Scotch now,
instead of winged dragons and snakes.

The months went by far faster than he realized; it was a real surprise
to him when Ahniroo came to him one morning bearing a coconut.

“It is ready, master.”

“What?”

“The drink you asked to have us make for you.”

“Oh boy, oh boy! Give it here.”

Ahniroo leaned toward him and he took the nut. A jab with his knife
drove the plug in, and he took gulps. One went down and the other went
immediately out.

_“Phhhtooey!_ Ahni, take this some place and bury it. Holy sweet Sue! It
takes like th’ dregs of a city dump!”

Ahniroo took the nut gravely and swayed away. “Yes, master.”

Barry sat there running his tongue around the inside of his mouth to get
rid of the taste. The tongue moved more and more slowly; he stopped; he
swallowed twice, then he leaped to his feet. “Hold it!” he bellowed.
“I’ve drank worse’n that an’ paid money for it. Bring that back. Bring
fifty of ’em.” He snatched the nut and drained it. It was alcoholic,
after all. It tasted like nothing on earth, but it had a slight wallop.

Three hours later found Barry sprawled out amid a litter of broken
coconut shells. There was a peaceful smile on his long horsy face, and
in his mind was unalloyed bliss. Ahniroo bent over and touched the back
of his neck with a slimy tentacle. Barry rolled his head and lay still
again. Ahniroo was very persistent. Barry finally rolled over and sat
up, promptly falling over the other way and lying prone again. Ahniroo
and two of his fellows helped to roll him over on his back and sit him
up again. Ahniroo shook him gently for some eight minutes until he began
to grumble.

“Master—it is time! Come, please; we are waiting.”

“Time? What time?”

“Your promise, all-powerful one. We have fulfilled your desire. You
promised us you would kill the Big One when we had brought you a drink.
You have had your drink, master.”

Barry clapped his hand to his brow and winced. Promised? Was that
what—Then this wasn’t all for nothing? He had to pay off? The full
import of it struck him. He was deputized to rid the island of that
monstrosity that lived in the crater!

“Now let’s be reas’n’ble,” he coaxed. “You can’t make me do that job,
now; y’know y’can’t, huh?” Getting no answer from Ahniroo, he said
belligerently, “Listen, bean pole, you can’t push me around. S’pose I
don’t even try to do that job?”

Ahniroo said quietly, “You will. You have promised. Come now.”

A shrill signal, and Barry found himself lifted bodily and set on his
feet. Spluttering and protesting, he was shoved by a solid wall of
nightmares towards the hill. Twice he tried to simply quit—sit down, the
way he had on the tank ships when he thought he was getting the
runaround. The _Echiuroidea_ did not understand modern labor methods.
They picked him up and carried him when he would not walk. And once he
tried to run away. They let him—provided he ran toward the hill. He
finally settled to a hesitant plodding, and marched along, wishing the
island was ten times as big and he was twenty times smaller.

When they reached the top of the hill, the nightmares disappeared into
the ground, all but Ahniroo. Barry was in tears.

“Ahni—do I hafta?”

“Yes—master.”

Barry looked toward the hole. It was sixty feet away and thirty feet in
diameter. “Big, ain’t he?”

“Very.”

“How’s about a little drink before I go down there?”

“Of course, master!”

Ahni gave his signal. In a few minutes a stream of coconuts began to pop
out of the earth. They were the only thing of Barry’s that Ahniroo would
allow to be transported underground.

When fifty or sixty had arrived, Barry broke and drained three. “I tell
you, Ahni,” he said, “just you keep ’em coming. I’ll need ’em.”

He gave a hitch at his belt and started down the slope, a coconut in
each fist. There was no sign at all of the Big One. He walked to the
edge of the pit and looked down, trying to hold his breath against the
smell of the thing. Yeah—there he was, the little rascal. He could just
see the tips of his proboscis.

“C’mon up and fight!” Barry yelled drunkenly.

Still no movement. Barry grinned weakly and looked back toward the edge
of the crater. Ahniroo was there, watching. Barry felt a little foolish.

“Come on,” he coaxed. “Here; have a drink.” He cracked open a coconut
and let the fluid run into the pit. There was a stir of movement, and
then silence.

Ahni’s mental voice came to him. “The Big One is not hungry today.”

“Maybe he’s thirsty then. Roll me down a couple dozen nuts, pal.”

The obedient nightmares shoved at the pile of doctored coconuts. They
came rolling and bouncing down the slope. He broke them and pitched them
in—about thirty of them. He had not countermanded his order—they were
still coming up there.

The Big One thrust up a tentacle, waved it and let it slump back. The
last few drinks were getting Barry down. He was long past the stage
where he knew what he was doing.

“Hey! My pal wants more! Come on—fill ’em up! He’s a big feller—he needs
a man-size drink. Couple o’ you guys give me a hand!”

Two stalks immediately appeared beside him. He gave no thought to the
fact that he was possibly leading them to their deaths. The three began
breaking coconut shells and pouring the contents into the pit.

Now just why this happened I could not say. Perhaps the Big One was
allergic to alcohol. Perhaps it tripped up his coordination so that he
couldn’t control a movement once it started. But suddenly, with a
wheezing roar, the Big One rose up out of his lair.

It is all but impossible to describe that sight. The proboscis alone was
fully one hundred and twenty feet long, and it rose straight up in the
air, twisting slowly, and then fell heavily to the ground. It lay on the
floor of the crater, reaching from the center pit all the way up and
over and well down the hill. If it had fallen on Barry it would have
crushed him instantly beyond all semblance of a man. And it didn’t miss
him by much. The two tips of the proboscis were out of sight now, but
the whole mass, eighteen feet thick, pulsed and twitched with the
violent movement that must have been going on at the extremity.

Barry fell back aghast, in that instant cold sober. Ahniroo’s message
cut through his awed horror:

“The bristles, master! Cut the bristles!”

Barry drew his knife and ran to the edge of the pit. The actual body of
the thing, that thick ovoid part, was just visible, and he could see the
bristles—the powerful muscled projections by which the creatures, all of
them, burrowed. But the flesh about the Big One’s bristles was soft and
flabby—it had been decades since he had been able to use them. Barry
leaned over and hacked hysterically at the base of one of them. The
steel slid through the layers of tissue, and in a moment the bristle
hung loose, useless. Barry flung himself aside to avoid a foul gush of
ichor, and drove for the other bristle. He couldn’t do as much to this
one; it sank into the side of the pit, trying to force the great body
back into the hole. The earth yielded; the bristle whipped up through
the ground and smacked into the Big One’s side. That was its last
anchorage, and its last refuge was gone.

Immediately the crater was alive with the wavering stems of Ahniroo’s
kind. Like ants around a slug, they fastened to the gigantic body,
dragged and tore at it, tied it to earth. Barry danced around it, his
mind drink-crazed again; he waved a full coconut shell aloft in one hand
and with the other cut and slashed at the prone monster. He laughed and
shrieked and sang, and finally collapsed weakly from sheer exhaustion,
still murmuring happily and humming to himself.

Ahniroo and some others carried him back down and laid him on the beach.
They washed him and put soft leaves under his body. They fed him
continuously out of the huge stock of coconut shells. They almost killed
him with kindness. And for his sake, I suppose, they shouldn’t have left
him on the beach. Because he got—rescued.

A government launch put into the cove to survey, since these days you
never can tell what salty little piece of rock might be of military
value. They found him there, dead drunk on the beach. It was quite a
puzzle to the shore party. There he was, with no footprints around him
to show where he’d come from; and though they scoured the neighborhood
of the beach, they found no shelter or anything that might have belonged
to him. And when they got him aboard and sobered him up the island was
miles astern. He went stark raving mad when he discovered where he was.
He wanted to go back to his worms. And he’s been here ever since. He’s
no use to anyone. He drinks when he can beg or steal it. He’ll die from
it before long, I suppose, but he’s only happy when he’s plastered. Poor
devil. I could send him back to his island, I suppose, but—Well, it’s
quite a problem. Can I, as the representative of enlightened humanity in
this part of the world, allow a fellow human being to go back to a
culture of worms?

The American shuddered. “I—hardly think so. Ah—governor, is this a true
yarn?”

The governor shrugged. “I’ll tell you—I was aboard that launch. I was
the one who found Barry on the beach. And just before we lost sight of
the island, some peculiar prompting led me to look at the beach again
through my glasses. Know what I saw there?

“It was _alive!_ It was one solid mass of pale-green tentacles, all
leaning toward the launch and Barry. There was an air about them—the way
they were grouped, their graceful bending toward us—I don’t know—that
made me think of a prayer meeting. And I distinctly heard—not with my
ears, either—‘Master, come back! Master!’ Over and over again.

“Barry’s a god to those damned things. So are the rest of us, I imagine.
That’s why they were too frightened by us to show themselves when we
went ashore there. Ah, poor Barry. I should send him back, I suppose.
It’s not fair to keep him here—but damn it, I’m a man! I can’t cater to
a society of—Ugh!”

They sat silently for a long while. Then the American rose abruptly.
“Good night, governor. I don’t_—like_ that story.” He smiled wryly and
went inside, leaving the old man to sit and stare out to sea.

Late that night the American looked out of his bedroom window
uncomfortably. The ground was smoothly covered with a rather ordinary
lawn near the governor’s house. Farther back, there was night-shadowed
jungle.



THE PURPLE LIGHT


I WAS TAKING _No. 14_ back to the base when it happened. The figures
painted on her scarred molyb hull didn’t mean we had fourteen ships. It
was one of the four cans—and I means cans—that comprised our charter
service. In the six years we had been operating, we had bought and
rebuilt seventeen wrecks, and had seen the end of thirteen of them. One
more just at this time would finish us. We couldn’t stay in business
with less than four spaceships, what with the sudden influx of mining
machinery into the asteroid belt and the competition of two more freight
lines in our territory. And here I was about to wash the old _Kelli NX_.

The purple light had flashed on. There were half a dozen signals of the
sort on the little one-man cargo carrier—warnings for lowering air
pressure, fuel shortage, synth-grav system troubles—I always thought
that was a funny one. You’d fly up off the deck plates, and smack your
sconce on the overhead, and when you came to, the silly signal light was
on to tell you something was wrong with the synth-grav!—even humidity
changes and fuel shortage. But the big purple light on the forward
bulkhead was something different again.

It was a very bright and a very pretty shade of purple and it said, in
effect, “Somewhere around here is an atomic power plant whose U-235 is
just at the ticklish point where the disintegration will be too fast for
its ordinary energy output. There is about to be an explosion that will
make a light bright enough to read a postage stamp by from here to the
moons of Mars; and if there is anyone around here just now he’d be
foolish to loiter.”

Out here in space, you know, it wouldn’t make any noise. I wasn’t afraid
of being startled. Nor was it the kind of an explosion that would butter
me over the bulkheads, the way they put it on toast in cafeterias—with a
brush. Because there wouldn’t be any bulkheads. Or any me. There would
be a lot of light and heat and a squib in a trade journal about Rix
Randolph, expressman, and how he had been a little careless with his
’235.

Now it was perfectly evident what I had to do. Also that I had to do it
fast. Cut off my power, stop the uranium action. Just possibly the
disintegration would slow a trifle, enough to lower the output below the
danger point. And if that didn’t work—bail out. Slip into the ancient
but reliable spacesuit strapped to the bulkhead there and get away in
one sweet hell of a hurry. I don’t know why I thought there was any
choice in the matter. The suit was fueled and provisioned for twice the
distance from here to either Terra or Port of Eros.

I hopped to the control panel, threw over the three levers that
controlled the neutron-streams and their generator. The whisper of
escaping steam faded out of the water jackets, and my stomach lurched as
acceleration cut out. I looked up at the purple light again. It was
still on.

Too late!

I ran to the bulkhead, opened the chest plates of the spacesuit, climbed
in, got the arms controls working and flipped the switch that lowered
the helmet, closed the plates, and cut down the artificial gravity of
the floor plates. It seemed to take an eternity to operate, though it
could only have been a couple of seconds; and in that couple of seconds
I did a lot of thinking.

That purple light, for instance. There were some bright boys in the
ship-designing business, and they had even these old cans nicely enough
equipped. The warning device was a result of the labors of that Edison
of the spaceways, old Dr. Fonck. He’d invented the attachment to a U-235
plant that emanated a static quench-field to act as a governor to the
neutron-streams that activated the uranium. It made the neutron-streams
that much more inefficient, but who cared about that with all that power
to throw around? The important thing was that it blanketed the
disintegration to some extent. If the thing was going to blow up with
the fury that only an atomic explosion or a supernova can show, it would
at least start to blow up slowly. That is, when the reaction started to
accelerate beyond control, the quench-field got in the way of the
countless millions of neutrons, tending to add a positron to them, and
convert them into useless, harmless hydrogen nuclei. It meant a slowing
down of the whole process, until the neutrons came too fast. Then—lights
out.

But at the same time it gave the poor sucker in the ship, or wherever
else the plant was, a few minutes grace in which to get away from there.
It also gave that purple light a chance to tell him about it. Not much
of a warning, of course. Once that kind of a reaction starts, it can’t
be stopped. The signal was rather like tying a guy to a chair and then
telling him, “See that dark character over there? He has a gun aimed at
your head and is about to pull the trigger.” You were grateful for the
warning; at least you’d know about it before you were shot. Maybe even
some miracle would happen to untie you. But in the case of the atomic
explosion, it would have to be a miracle in speed.

I thought of something else as I released the suit with me inside it
from the bulkhead straps. It was the ship, the business—all it meant to
me. I was partners in it with my brother, and it had been killing work.
Years of it, borrowing for a measly new piece of equipment; twenty-hour
stretches with welding arcs and pressure testers, trying to make our old
tow-ins spaceworthy; cutting out competition by going profitless,
working for nothing and half-starving besides, just to keep the little
service extant. With my hand on the air-lock door I paused. I knew that.
This was the finish of the business. I knew that. It wouldn’t finish the
way I would if I stayed here another two minutes. Not fast and clean
like that. There would be desperate councils of war with my brother.
Bankruptcy proceedings. Sheriff’s sales. Months of litigation. No job in
the meantime. Relief. I’d never taken something for nothing in my life.

I slumped against the door and flipped open my face plate.

The neutron-field wasn’t confined to the power compartment. It was a
spherical field about the ship, not directly attached to the power
plant. Didn’t have to be. As long as it was as close as possible to the
plant, as long as it was most concentrated near the neutron-streams, it
had its delaying effect on the inevitable explosion. I watched the
forward bulkhead glumly, and the light over it. It would come roaring up
from there. I wondered vaguely if I would be able to see it coming. Bail
out, chowderhead, I told myself desperately. The business is gone; why
do you have to go, too? But I didn’t move. What’s the use of saving a
skin if the very guts are gone out of it? I couldn’t go on any more. I
knew I shouldn’t run out on my brother this way, but—What would he do in
my place? What would anyone do? Fonck himself couldn’t stop it now. No
atomic plant can generate a quench-field powerful enough to stop its own
explosion. My face was clammy. I decided I didn’t want to see it coming,
and walked over to the forward bulkhead.

When I did so the purple light dimmed. I stared at it, shook my head.
Maybe my eyes—no. It remained dim, but it wasn’t getting any dimmer. The
other lights looked all right. I walked back to the after companionway,
looked along it. Those lights were O.K., too. Now what—Oh! Oh! Now the
purple light was brilliant! Any second now. I stumped over to the
forward bulkhead again. I’d meet it halfway—damn the miserable, stupid
business and the balky relic of a ship anyway! They’d finish Rix
Randolph but they’d find him on his feet! I knew what it felt like now
to die with a grand gesture.

I stood with my legs apart, eyes closed, fists clenched, directly under
the purple light. I wish that little French girl in Port of Eros could
see me now, I thought. “All right,” I said steadily. “I’m—ready.”

Nothing happened for about ten seconds. About that time I discovered I’d
been holding my breath. I let it out with a whistle. Still nothing
happened. All of a sudden I felt like a melodramatic damn fool. Which I
was. I opened my eyes. The purple light was dim, almost out.

“I got to get out of here!” I screamed, and headed for the air lock,
slid the door open. As I whirled to close it, I saw the light gleam out
brightly again. I stopped dead, fighting with myself, fighting fear with
curiosity.

Every time I got near the forward bulkhead the light grew dim. Every
time I drew away from it it got brighter. Now—why?

I went, like a fear-frozen sleepwalker, over to the light. It dimmed.
“No!” I breathed. “Don’t tell me—Bodily aura? Hell, that’s ghost story
stuff! But—” It certainly looked like it, though. Well—why not? A man
was a hunk of matter; matter was a mess of electric charges, positive,
negative, neutral. Was I, by some crazy chance, made up of precisely the
right combination of electric charges to increase the quench-field
around the U-235 up there? Aw, it was crazy! But—The light did dim when
I approached the power plant. The indicator was extraordinarily
sensitive—had to be, to record the atomic acceleration in there fast
enough to do any good. Maybe then if I got close to it—crawled in next
to the plant, it would swing the scales!

With a sob I tore open the repair doors in front of the water jacket,
squeezed myself in, hugging the plates. It was hotter than the furnace
in Hell’s cellar in there, even with an insulated spacesuit on. But what
did I care about that? I was going to die anyway. I might as well die
doing something about it.

But I’d already done it. The purple glow faded and died, and I knew I
was safe. I kissed the hot plates, and I’ll have scarred lips for the
rest of my life because of it. I broke down and cried like a baby.

It must have been an hour later when I crawled out and pulled myself
together. As I climbed out of the suit and strapped it up and turned on
the grav again, I thought deliriously of being alive again. Yes, and not
only that—rich! Any way you look at it—suppose I was, as I had guessed,
possessed of a neutral electric charge? Why, the biggest passenger lines
in the System would bid against each other for me! And more—if I handled
it right, I could grab me the Space Prize for the most important
contribution to space commerce when this five-year period was up—five
hundred thousand bucks, no less, on the very strong chance that my
adventure had some hint in it that the lab boys could develop into
something salable. No more worries! No more debts!

And that’s how I came in to Eros, laughing like a loon and calling up
every newspaper and laboratory in the place. They sent their scientists
to look over the old can, and they wined me and dined me and after they
found what they found in the ship they very nearly laughed me out of the
System. Why?

Well, it’s this way. The purple light signal was all right. The
quench-field was all right. And there _had_ been an imminent atomic
explosion in the ship. But not in the ship’s power plant. I shouldn’t
have thought of bailing out. I shouldn’t, being a mere space pilot, have
tried to think I was an atomic physicist. And—I shouldn’t have opened my
face about it. Because that atomic explosion was building up in the
power plant of my _spacesuit_. And I killed it by crawling into the
heart of the ship’s big and potent quench-field.



ARTNAN PROCESS


SLIMMY COB AND his hair stood up short, tough and wiry. His eyes were
slitted like his mouth, both emitting, from his dark face, thin lines of
blue-white. “Blow!” he gritted, and his finger tightened on the trigger
of the snub-nosed weapon he held.

The other man in the ship raised his face by making his pillar of neck
disappear into great hunched shoulders. I was afraid of this, he
thought, and his fingers froze over the control panel. “Better put that
toy away,” he said softly.

“I want a chance to unload it,” said Slimmy, and he moved the muzzle
coldly across the back of Bell Bellew’s hairless skull. “And I’ll sure
get my chance unless you get out of that bucket seat and let me land the
ship. Ain’t kiddin’, son.”

Bell grinned tightly, jammed his knees into the recesses provided for
them under the board, and with one dazzling movement threw two switches.
The gravity plates under Slimmy’s feet went dead and those in the
overhead whipped the little man upward. He hung there, spitting and
swearing like an angry kitten. Wrenching one pinned arm away, he aimed
and fired. An opaque white liquid squirted downward, lathering the big
man’s skull, running down over his ears and eyes, down his neck. Bell
swore chokingly, clawing at his face. He felt swiftly over the panel,
his practiced fingers finding the right switches as if they were tipped
with eyes. Slimmy fell heavily to the deck plates, and Bell pounced on
him.

Great fingers wrapped themselves around Slimmy’s throat, through which
gasped the words, “Dammit! Why didn’t I try to kill you outright instead
of poisoning you?” His jaws champed, and his slot of a mouth closed as
his slitted eyes opened wide and began to pop.

On the arid, shining planet below the silver ship, three naked,
leather-skinned Martians crouched around a compact recording instrument,
their implacable logical minds cubbyholing the above happenings. Their
recorder, receiving by means of a tight beam vibration from the control
room of the Earthlings’ ship, showed in its screen every detail of the
chamber, clearly sounded every word. A slight drift of the ship above
moved it away from the spy beam, and the signals faded out. One of the
Martians bent swiftly to the instrument while the others spoke in their
high, monotonous voices.

“They are unaccountable as ever,” said the first. His words were spoken
syllable by syllable, with no emphasis on any of them, with no rise or
fall of tone at the end of his sentence. The language of Mars is
necessarily that way, since Martians are tone-deaf.

“It is beyond understanding,” said the other, “that these two humans,
who have come from the Solar System to this planet of Procyon, should
have lived so amicably together until the day they arrive here on Artna,
and then strive to kill one another.”

“At least,” said the first, “we have discovered their purpose in coming
here.”

“Yes. I trust that they will meet with no success.”

“If they fail, they will have done no more than we have. The Artnans are
far from hostile, but guard their secret closely. However, it seems
reasonable to me to dispatch these Earthmen. Their presence here
accomplishes nothing for us.”

The third Martian turned from the still-dead recording machine at this.
“I would advise against that,” he piped. “He,” by the way, is a term of
convenience. Martians are parthenogenetic, or self-germinating females.
Variation of racial strains is accomplished by a periodic mutual
absorption. “Earthmen, involved and unnecessary as their
thought-processes are, have achieved a certain degree of development.
Hampered by such inefficient and wandering mentalities, they could only
have developed so far by possessing some unexplained influence over the
laws of chance. Should that quality be used here, they might discover
the secret we are after—how the Artnans produce U-235 so cheaply that
they can undersell Martian and Terrestrial atomic fuel.”

“There is reason in that,” said the first Martian, than which there is
no higher compliment to a Martian. “If we cannot discover the secret
ourselves, we may conceivably secure it from any who get it before us.”
He turned back to his machine, but to no avail. The little silver ship
had disappeared over the horizon, and the Martian spy ray was strictly a
sight-line proposition.

When the blue began to show through Slimmy’s tanned skin, Bell Bellew
let go the little man’s throat, took one wizened ear between each great
forefinger and thumb, and began to rap on the deck plates with Slimmy’s
skull. A little of this, and the gun toter called it quits. Bell sat on
his prostrate shipmate and grinned broadly.

“Get off,” wheezed Slimmy. “I feel all crummy, lying under this big pile
of—”

Bell put a hand under his chin and slammed the wiry head on the deck
again.

“O.K.—O.K. You got me. Now what?”

“What was it you loaded that gun with?” asked Bill.

“Zinc stearate, lug, in an emulsion of carbohydrates and hydrogen oxide.
I couldn’t think of anything you needed more or liked less.”

“Soap and water,” nodded Bell. “Couldn’t believe it, that’s all, coming
from you.” He climbed off. “Enough horseplay, little one. We got to get
to work. We’re over the horizon, anyway. That spy ray of theirs won’t
see any more of this dray-ma.”

Slimmy got his feet under him uncertainly, and shook his spinning head.
“Now that we’re here, what do we do?”

“We land as near as we can get to the Artnan’s transmutation plant and
see if we can get a gander how to make U-235 out of U-238.”

“You really believe they can do that?”

“They must. I used to think they mined it, but they don’t. Artna has an
atmosphere much like Earth’s, except that there’s more xenon and neon
and less nitrogen in the air. Also considerable water; and you know as
well as I do that ’235 can’t exist where there’s water.”

“I dunno,” said Slimmy. “The fact that they produce so much, so cheaply,
is a contradiction in terms. Uranium is a little more plentiful here
than it is on Earth, but it has less than Mars. And the ratio of ’238 to
’235 is 140 to 1, same as anywhere else. Damn, boy,” he burst out
suddenly, “won’t it be something if we crack this racket?”

“Sure will,” breathed Bell.

The simple words bore a weight of profound meaning, for in spite of
their skylarking tendencies, Cob and Bellew never belittled the
importance of their mission. Its history went back nearly five hundred
years, to the ill-fated days when Earth first flung her pioneer ships
out into space, to bring back their tales of other, older civilizations.
They found the dead remains of titans of Jupiter, and they brought back
miles of visigraph records from the steaming swamps of Venus. But from
Mars they brought undreamed-of power; a beam of broadcast energy from
the old red planet that seemed inexhaustible. Earthmen were free to come
and go; Earthmen saw the broadcasting towers that gave them their power,
and the measureless stores of purest U-235 that fed it. The only thing
they were not allowed to see was the plant which supplied the ’235.
Earth did not care much about that—why should they? They got power from
Mars for a fraction of what it cost them to produce it themselves, so
they took the Martian power and shut down their own plants.

Of course, there were one or two small rights which the Martians exacted
in exchange—little matters concerning the rights to Earth’s mineral
resources, occasional requests to the effect that Earthmen must stop
researches in certain directions, must prevent the publication of
certain books, must limit their travel in certain directions … The
edicts came far apart, and were applied with gentle and efficient
firmness. Occasionally a group of Earthly hotheads would find reason to
resent the increasing Martian influence. They were disciplined, usually
by the greater mass of their own race, the hypnotized sheep who
blathered of “beneficent dictatorship”; quoted interminably the
Mars-schooled leader of men who burned his speeches into the souls of
all—Hyatte Grove, who said, “To Mars we owe our power, our
transportation, our every industry. To Mars we owe our daily bread, our
warless, uneventful, steadily progressive lives. The Martian power beam
is the beating heart of our world.”

Earthmen outnumbered Martians ten to one. Martians outlived Earthmen
eight to one. The advantage was with Mars. The Martian conquest was
applied without blood, without pain. There was no war of worlds, no
great fleet of ray-equipped ships. There was just the warming, friendly
power beam, and the great generosity of Earth’s “Elder Sister.”
Generation after generation of men lived and died, and each of them was
gradually led deeper into the slow-spun web of the red planet. Earth
entered into a new era, one of passive peace, submission, slavery.

Some men knew it for what it was, and did not care. Some cared, but
could think of nothing to do about it. Some did something about it, and
were quietly killed. Most of humanity didn’t bother about what happened.
You were born and cared for. You grew up and were given a job. You were
comfortable. Sometimes you were allowed to marry and have children, if
it was all right with Mars. Married or single, there was room for
everyone. When you were too old to be useful, you begged and were cared
for by your fellows—that was easy, for everyone had so much. Then you
died, and they dropped your carcass into the disintegrating furnaces. So
what difference could it make whether man or Martian ran the show?

When man owned the Earth, you were told, he made a mess of it. No one
killed now, or stole or broke any law. It was better. No one thought
very deeply or clearly; no one had ambition, pride, freedom. That was
better, too—for Mars. Mars grew fat on Earth’s endeavor.

But some Earthmen didn’t know when they were well off. They read the
forbidden books, and studied the forbidden sciences, and most of them
were killed off before they could add anything; but some did, and in a
few centuries they had accomplished something. They knew these things:

Earth had a soul of her own, and they were determined to restore it to
her.

Mars was the master—but Mars herself was a slave! And power had enslaved
the red planet even as it had Earth. A thousand years and more before
the first clumsy Earth ships had landed on Mars. Mars, too, had had
great plants for the transmutation of ’238 into ’235. But one night an
object was found on the Great Plain near the city of Lanamarn. It had
appeared without a whisper; it was an irregular cylinder containing
various simple objects—spheres, cubes, triangular and square plane
surfaces of a tough alloy. Each was marked by a symbol. The Martians
experimented with the things, drew some shrewd conclusions, and
deposited other objects in the cylinder, replacing the cap. There was a
shrill whine; on removing the cap again, the Martians found that their
offerings had disappeared and were replaced by still other objects, each
of which also bore a symbol.

After long and painstaking effort, a written language was established
between Mars and the mystery from space which had sent the cylinder. The
Martians learned that it had come from Artna, a planet of the Procyon
system, and that the method of transmission was by way of the
probability wave, a scientific refinement beyond the understanding even
of Mars. It worked on the principle that matter cannot be destroyed; if
it is annihilated in one portion of space, it must necessarily appear
somewhere else. The transmission is instantaneous; as soon as it is
negated at its source, it simply occurs at its destination.

And the Artnans had a proposition, to wit: Perhaps there was some little
thing the Martians would like in return for the boron which showed up so
strongly on the Artnan’s teleospectrographs. The Martians sent out a
sample of U-238 and asked if the Artnans could transmute it, in bulk, to
U-235. The Artnans could, and did. They cheerfully sent plans for
construction of a tremendous plant on the plain. U-238 was dumped into
hoppers, stored by machinery in bins deep in the heart of the apparatus,
and disappeared. Elsewhere in the plant pure ’235 poured out in
pulverized, greenish-black abundance.

So Martian transmutation plants shut down, and Mars used Artnan atomic
fuel exclusively. While boron was cheap, the arrangement was greatly to
Mars’ advantage. But the Artnans easily realized their advantage when
they had cornered the power market, and they jumped the price. They kept
it at just the level that would make it impossible for the Martians to
reopen their own plants, until they had nearly exhausted the Martians’
supply of both uranium and boron. They would accept no substitute for
the boron; Mars faced an extreme economic reversal when the fortunate
fact of communications with Earth was established. Hence Mars’ economic
penetration of Earth’s resources; and now, Mars could afford to sit back
and enjoy her position. Earthmen slaved in the boron mines; cargo after
cargo of Terrestrial uranium was freighted to Mars to feed the maw of
the gigantic “transmutation” plant on the Great Plain.

All this was discovered by Earth’s spies, the dozens who came back out
of the hundreds of thousands that sought the information. In two
centuries, nine attempts were made on Earth to design and build a ship
which could travel to Procyon fast enough to spare its crew the
misfortune of dying of old age before the ship reached there. Eight
crews of workers were discovered and killed or dispersed, put to work in
the mines by wandering, gently thorough Martian investigators. The ninth
ship got away—a physical impossibility, as the Mars-hating element on
Earth freely admitted. Mars gave them no permission to build and launch
the little silver craft; but the Martian investigators stretched the
probability and did not discover the hidden factory.

Perhaps it was purposeful. Perhaps Mars was curious to know whether
Earthmen could find the secret of Artnan transmutation. Mars couldn’t.
Even now that they had Earth’s vast resources at their disposal, the
Martians would be happy to free themselves from the Artnan monopoly of
transmutation. They remembered with bitterness the carefully outfitted
body of operatives who had entered the transmission chamber and had gone
to Artna via the wave, in place of a scheduled cargo of boron. The
Artnans, with their next shipment of ’235, included the six-legged,
two-foot long body of an Artnan and a polite note thanking the Martians
for the inclusion of the _corpses!_ and expressing regret that no living
thing could traverse space time via the wave; also a reminder that the
latest boron shipment was slightly overdue.

All of which flashed through Bell Bellew’s mind as he stood beside
Slimmy Cob and stared down at Artna. It had been a long trip—three years
or so, even with the slight space warp stolen by workers in Martian
shipyards. But Slimmy was good company, even if he did prefer horsing
around to anything else in the world. They had both been picked for that
quality, among many others. The reason was that the Martian mind is
completely without humor, and the less Martians could understand the two
men, the better it would be.

“Do you see what I see?” asked Slimmy after a long moment.

Bell followed the little man’s pointing finger. Down in a hollow, nearly
invisible from above, lay the squat shape of the Martian space cruiser.

“I do. I wouldn’t worry about that, Slimmy. I expected that they’d be
here.”

“Why?”

“As I told you—I don’t think it was just luck that got this ship off
Earth, out of our system. I think the Martians let us.”

“Yeah.” There was disbelief in Slimmy’s voice. “The Martians have always
treated us that way—let us do as we pleased, when we pleased. Wipe the
rest of that soap off, Bell; it’s addled your brain.”

Bellew gave Slimmy a playful pat that brought him up against the
opposite bulkhead, and went back to the controls. “Let me know when you
sight anything that looks like the Great Plain transmutation plant,” he
said. “We can start from there.”

The planet was but slightly larger than Earth, with an astonishingly
smooth topography. There were no mountain ranges, and yet there were no
true plains. The whole planet was surfaced with small rolling hillocks.
Most were sandy; there was little vegetation. The Artnans, whose
metabolism was a mineral one, had no agriculture.

After an hour or two Slimmy grunted and came away from the forward
observation port and switched on the visiplate, tuning in the buildings
he had spotted. “There she be, cap’n,” he said.

Bell studied the great pile of alloy. “You got to give credit to those
Martians,” he said. “They certainly built theirs the spit an’ image of
this one.”

“Not quite,” said Slimmy, swinging the range finders. “Look there—see
that … that—What is it anyway?”

“Sort of a shed,” said Bell. “One flat building, not more than three
feet high, and all of ten miles square!”

A warning signal pinged, and their eyes swiveled toward it. A yellow
light blinked among the studs on the panel. “Vibrations,” gritted Bell,
and put a thousand feet of altitude under them so fast that he heard
Slimmy’s kneecaps crackle. They circled slowly over the shed, feeling
carefully ahead of them with delicate instruments, and charted the
hemisphere of tight-knit waves that roofed the flat structure.

“What is it?” asked Slimmy.

“Dunno. Let’s sit down and see if we can find out.”

The ship settled down gently, her antigrav plates moaning. Bell followed
the curve of the vibration field at a safe distance, and came down in a
depression a hundred yards from its invisible edge.

“Air O.K.?”

“Sure,” said Slimmy. “Just like home. Temperature’s just under blood
heat. Come a-walkin’!”

They strapped on side arms and went out, using the air lock for safety’s
sake. They topped a rise and stood a moment looking at the shed. It was
barely visible from the ground, and there wasn’t a sign of life anywhere
about.

“Wonder why the sand don’t drift over the thing,” said Slimmy.

“This might be why,” Bell grunted. He was staring at a line in the sand
across the path. On their side of it, the sand puffed and tumbled in the
light breeze. Toward the shed, however, there was apparently no moving
air. “See that line? Unless I’m ‘way off my base, that’s the edge of the
vibration field.” He scooped up a handful of sand, stepped cautiously
close to the line and tossed it. The sand fanned out, drifted over the
line and—disappeared.

Slimmy tried it for himself before he commented. “I would gather,” he
said dryly, “that the Artnans would rather not have anyone look into
that shed.”

“Something like that,” said Bell. “Look!” The crest of a nearby dune
detached itself and scrabbled on six scrawny legs toward the line. It
shot between the startled Earthmen, over the line, almost to the low
wall of the shed before it turned up its pointed tail and burrowed
quickly under the sand.

“What was that?” asked Slimmy.

“An Artnan, from what I’ve heard.”

“Nasty little critter,” said Slimmy. “Hey—the field didn’t seem to
bother it any, Bell.”

“So I noticed. Seems that the field has been set up for the benefit of
you and me. And maybe even for our Martian friends over there.”

As they turned back toward their ship, Slimmy said pensively, “What we
just saw is justification for the Laidlaw Hypothesis, if it makes any
difference to you.”

“What do you mean?”

“Speaks for itself, doesn’t it? Laidlaw said that the inhabitants of any
Solar System have a mutual ancestor, parallel evolutions, and similar
metabolisms. You know yourself that Martians, Earthmen, Venusians and
the extinct Jovians are all bipeds composed mainly of hydrocarbons. That
field was set up to keep such molecular structures out. The sand here is
apparently something of the sort. The Artnan who ran through the field
was something different. We’ll catch us one sometime and find out just
what makes him tick.”

“Yeah. You got something there. What interests me, though, is what’s in
that shed. If we guessed right about who it was put up for, then the
shed must cover something they want to keep Solar noses out of. Ah—it
wouldn’t by any chance be what we’re looking for, would it?”

Slimmy’s eyes glowed. “The transmutation plant? Could be, pal; could be.
It’s adjacent to the Prob.-wave transmitter. It’s screened against Earth
or Martian interference.”

“Huh!” Bell ran a thick forefinger up behind his ear. “We got a problem
here, little man. We toss ourselves through nine-odd light years of
space and wind up flat-footed in front of a killer-wave thrown up around
a cubist’s idea of a beanfield. I sort of expected a city—machinery,
people, maybe.”

“It’s not simple,” said Slimmy. “Howsomever, let’s see if you can make
your brains go where you flat feet fear to tread. Let’s go to work on
the Martians. From the looks of things, they’ve been messing around here
for quite some time.”

“Want to go right to work, don’t you?” grinned Bell. “Always wanted to
get a Martian alone away from his playmates so you could tie a half
hitch in his eyestalks! O.K., buddy—where do we find us one?”

“If I know Martians, there ought to be a couple sniffing around our ship
by this time.”

There were.

They were lined up in front of the air lock, their spare bodies
quivering with the palpitation peculiar to their race, and with their
eyestalks pointing rigidly toward the approaching Earthmen, points
together, in the well-known Martian cross-eyed stare. They had, of
course, sensed the body vibrations of the men quite some time ago; the
very fact that they were there meant that they were ready for a
showdown.

“Hi, fellers,” said Slimmy laconically, flipping the butt of his atomic
gun to make sure that it was loose in the holster.

“What are you doing here?” piped the Martian on the right.

“We’re rick-bijitting for a dew-jaw,” said Slimmy immediately.

He had studied the masterworks of the ancients in his extreme youth.

“Yes,” said Bell, taking the cue. “We willised the altibob, and no
sooner did we jellik than—_boom!_ here we are.”

The Martians regarded them silently. “You do not tell the truth,” one of
them said.

“It ain’t a lie,” Bell dead-panned.

The evasion served its purpose, for to them, anything that was not a lie
was the truth, and vice versa. Their hearing apparatus was partly
sensitive to air-vibration and partly telepathic. Bell’s last statement
was the truth and they knew it was the truth; that convinced them.
They’d die before they admitted they didn’t know what the men were
talking about.

“What are _you_ doing here?” Slimmy countered, before their machinelike
minds could work on the problem.

The Martians stiffened. “It is not for you to ask,” said one of them.

“Aw, don’t be like that, son,” drawled Bell. “Haven’t Martians always
told Earthmen that Mars takes only its just due, and does nothing for
Earth but good?”

“Yeah,” said Slimmy. His inflection was drawn-out, lowering, and meant
“That’s a lot of so-and-so!”

But to the Martians “Yeah” meant “Yes,” and that was that. “Why should
things be different here? You don’t have to hide the fact that you’re
looking for the same thing we are; maybe we can make a little deal.”

“Sure—come in and set awhile!” Bell pushed past the Martians and
unlatched the airlock. He knew that turning his back on the enemy was
bad tactics, but it was good diplomacy. Besides, fast on their feet as
Martians were, no one in the Universe could draw, aim and fire faster
than little Slimmy Cob.

Slimmy walked around the Martians, not between them, and sidled into the
ship. He apparently faced the Martians merely to talk to them.
“Sure—come on in. Maybe we can give each other a hand. We can decide
later what to do if we get the information we’re after.”

Three sets of eyestalks intertwined briefly, and then the three spindly
Martians bent and entered the silver ship.

The Martians squatted in a row against the starboard bulkhead, sipping
Earth’s legendary cocola through glassite straws and coming as near to a
feeling of well-being as was possible to these unemotional logicians.
Slimmy’s sharp eyes had noticed that one of them was taller than the
others, the second taller than the third. Knowing that Martian names,
being in the semi-telepathic Martian language, were unpronounceable to
humans, he had dubbed them Heaven, Its Wonders, and Hell.

“Have another coke,” said Bell heartily.

Its Wonders passed his empty flask. Bellew flashed a glance at Slimmy
and Slimmy nodded. The Martians were getting nicely mellow; a carbonated
drink plasters up the Martian metabolism with amazing efficiency.
Intoxication, however, is not befuddlement to a Martian. It merely makes
him move slower and think faster. If he drinks enough, he will stop
altogether and turn into a genius for an hour or so. The idea of gassing
the Martians up was to disarm them as to the human’s motives; for they
knew that no human would dare to try to pull the wool over a drunken
Martian’s eyes.

The Martians accepted the drink as a gesture of good faith, for they
knew that they would soon be unable to navigate. It was the pipe of
peace between them, with the Earthmen paying the piper, which was the
way any deal with Mars seems to work out. So when the pale-blue flush
began to blossom across their leathery hides, Slimmy went to work on
them.

“Look fellers,” he said bluntly, “there’s no sense in our cutting each
other’s throats for a while yet. If you’ve guessed what we’re here
after, you’ve probably guessed right. We know that Martian ’238 isn’t
transmuted into ’235 on Mars. We know it’s done here, in that flat
building under the killer field over there. All we want to know is how
it’s done, and whether or not the method can be used in our System.”

“What has that to do with us?” asked Hell.

“I’ll take the question as a feeler,” Bellew cut in. “You want to find
out how much else we know. All right. We know that more than half of
Terrestrial and Martian industry is being diverted to the production of
boron to pay for the Artnans’ processing of ’238. We know that Martian
domina … er … control of the Solar System won’t be complete unless and
until the Artnan process of transmutation is made the property of Mars;
for every indication shows that the cost of the Artnan process must be
practically nothing. We know that the Martian Command did not have the
process when we left the System three years ago, and we know that you
don’t have it yet because we wouldn’t have found any Martians here if
you had.”

Heaven said, “What do you want to find the process for?”

“I might say that we of Earth would like to return to Mars some of the
many kindnesses she has done us,” said Slimmy around the tongue of his
cheek. “And I might say that it’s none of your damn business. I’ll do
neither, and simply say that I won’t insult your intelligence by
considering the question.”

Three sets of eyestalks fumblingly sought each other out and,
intertwining, connected their owners in a swift, silent conference.
Coming out of the huddle, Heaven addressed the humans. “We have certain
information bearing on the matter at hand. How can we be assured that it
will be to our benefit to share it?”

Bell answered that. “I’ve no idea how long you’ve been here, but it
seems as though you haven’t got on the right track yet. I don’t know
whether we’ll be able to find the process with your information and our
brains. If we can, well and good. If we can’t, what have you lost?”

“We will share it,” decided Its Wonders instantly. “All we know is this:
The Artnans are a race totally unlike anything in our System. They have
a mineral metabolism, feeding on ores and excreting sulphides. Their
culture is beyond our understanding; they seem beyond the reach of Solar
reasoning. They have made no attempt to drive us away from the planet.
They have also made no attempt to communicate with us, in spite of the
fact that they must know we are Martians and that it is with Martians
that they trade. The vibration field around the transmutation plant
cannot be penetrated by anything but light; it even excludes a spy ray.
There is no way of estimating the extent of their science or their
civilization. They exist mainly underground; for all we know, this may
be an artificial planet. There is a possibility that their science is no
more advanced than ours, but that it has simply progressed along other
lines. The trade with Mars may be a major or a very minor industry with
them. It is completely impossible to tell. That is all we have been able
to discover.”

“That might help,” said Bellew, “and it might not. We’ll work on it.
Now. There’s one more little point we have to take care of. How can all
concerned be sure that there is no dirty work? How do we know that we
will not be killed if we get the secret; how do you know that we will
not kill you for it if you beat us to the gun?”

“We can promise,” said Its Wonders in his spark-coil voice.

“Won’t do, chum,” said Slimmy. “No reflection on you, but in spite of
the fact that a Martian has never been known to break his word, we don’t
want you establishing precedents. Bad for the racial morale. Got any
other ideas?”

Bellew sometimes wished that Martians could add inflection, voice
control, to their speech. You couldn’t tell whether they were sore,
happy, insulted—anything. He shook his head quickly at Slimmy—the little
man was pushing things a little.

However, Its Wonders didn’t seem annoyed by the refusal of his word. “We
could,” he said, “destroy each other’s weapons.”

“Would you agree to such a proposition?”

“Yes,” chorused the three Martians.

Once they were together again in their emasculated ship, Slimmy and Bell
compared notes.

“What’s their ship like?” Slimmy wanted to know.

“Smooth,” said Bell. “An Ikarion 44, with all the fixin’s. Got that
old-style ether-cloud steering for hyper-space travel, though—you
know—the one that builds etheric resistance on one bow or the other to
turn the ship when she’s traveling faster than light? We can outmaneuver
them if it comes to a chase.”

Slimmy grinned. “That bootleg ether rudder of ours is so perfect because
it’s so simple, but it’s not the easiest thing in the world to adapt to
an Ikarion. How’s their spatial steering?”

“Same as ours,” answered Bell. “So all we need is the process and a
small start. Fat chance … By the way—remember what Its Wonders said
about the killer field’s stopping a spy ray? That was a slip on his
part. I got looking for one when I was busting up their big guns. They
have one, sure enough—a neat, little portable, sound and visiscreen; and
I’ll bet my back teeth it records. We got to watch our mouths.”

“Yeah.” Slimmy walked over and drew himself a flask of cocola, then came
and sat on his bunk next to Bell.

Bell was surprised to find that on the way Slimmy had snatched up the
cellotab and stylus. He took it, shielded it closely, and began to write
as he talked about the Martian ship. In a few minutes he passed the
tablet to Slimmy. It read:

“A laugh for you. Heaven and Its Wonders no sooner got out of here than
they began to pump me about why you’d tried to kill me just before we
landed. We were right; they saw you shooting me with the water pistol
and it threw their mental gears into six speeds at once. Couldn’t
understand why you didn’t kill me or why I didn’t kill you for trying.
Suggested that if I wanted to slip you the double-x, they’d see to it
that you were killed. Gave me a phial of Martian paralysis virus. They
told me that if we found the Artnan secret, if I killed you with the
virus, I’d be protected when they brought me back to the System.”

“Yep,” said Slimmy aloud as he reached for the stylus, “them Martians
are certainly nice fellers.”

Bellew motioned to Slimmy to duck the cellotab, winked, stretched and
said, “You think we ought to grab some sleep?”

Slimmy said, “Why, sure,” with admirable promptness, considering that
both of them had had the sleep-centers removed from their brains by
outlaw Earth surgeons in preparation for the trip.

While Slimmy pulled off his shoes, Bell went to a locker and slid two
pairs of thick spectacles under his tunic, along with two disks of the
same material as the lenses. He switched off the lights, pulled his own
bunk out from the bulkhead over Slimmy’s, dropped a pair of spectacles
and a disk on the little man’s chest, and rolled into bed. Both men
clipped the disks to their bunklights, switched them on, and donned the
glasses. Martians, possessing vision far into the ultraviolet, are blind
to the reds merging into the infrared which is so prevalent on their own
planet. If the spy ray was functioning—and of course it was—all the
screen showed was a lot of nothing on a background of the same, and all
the amplifier picked up was the tiny whisper of a busy stylus.

“Been thinking about those Artnans,” wrote Bell. “What do you suppose is
the reason for their building that transmutation shed on the surface of
the planet if their civilization is underground?”

“To be near the transmitter, I’d imagine. Far as I know, a probability
wave can’t operate below ground.”

“Seems likely. What’s your guess about the process?”

“That, bud, is our little stymie. The Martians have tested the ground
right clear up to the edge of the killer field for vibrations from
machinery. They heard the footsteps and the burrowing of the Artnans,
and the noise from the Prob.-wave transmitter and receiver. But that’s
all. Artnan workers—not more than eight or ten at a time—tend whatever’s
in that shed. Now and then a blast of artificial wind rushes through the
shed. Right afterward big suction intakes gather up a powdery material
and collect it in the hoppers which feed ’235 into the transmitter. Then
the wind blasts back with a slightly heavier powder. There’s also a
little vegetative sound—spores popping and what-not—but our Martian
friends don’t know whether there is some plant life in the shed or
whether the vibrations come from the flora outside. That’s lot of info
to get from ground vibrations, but you know Martian detection
instruments.”

“Wonder what the Artnans do with the boron they get from Mars?” Slimmy
wrote after a silent interval.

“Eat it, I guess. For all we know, the whole setup that has made Earth a
slave and put Mars on the economic rocks may be just a sideline to the
Artnans. Maybe it’s candy to them, or a liquor industry. That’s
something we’ll never know as long as the Artnans act so unsociable.”

“They don’t behave like an outfit that’s trying to keep a monopoly,”
Slimmy scrawled. “Seems to me their very treatment of us and the
Martians is their way of telling us, ‘We found the process. If you want
to dig it up for yourselves, go to it.’ They don’t seem to give much of
a damn whether we do or not.”

“Seems sound enough. I wish we could get some slant on their psychology.
Their reasoning is so alien to anything we have in our System. Old
Laidlaw was right.”

Bell handed this to Slimmy and then snatched it back excitedly. _“The
Laidlaw Hypothesis!”_ he underlined. “That’s the answer! Laidlaw said
that each Solar System had civilizations and cultures with a common
ancestor, which ancestor was peculiar to the System. For that reason
there is no way of predicting in what direction a new system’s fauna
will evolve. The Artnans are mineral eaters, right? Then, according to
Laidlaw, their plants have a corresponding metabolism, and so has every
other living thing in the system! Do you see what I’m getting at?”

“No,” said Slimmy aloud, forgetting himself. Bell snatched the pad and
belted the little man’s mouth with it before he wrote:

“It isn’t an apparatus process, dope! The Artnans don’t transmute ’238
into ’235 by electrochemistry or radiophysics or any other process we
ever heard of! Those Artnans in the shed aren’t scientists or even
mechanics! They’re _gardeners!”_

“Plants?” Slimmy’s amazement dug the stylus deep into the cellotab. “How
can plants transmute one isotope into another?”

“An Artnan might like to know how an Earth plant can change light and
water and minerals into cellulose,” wrote Bell. “Now; plant or mold or
fungus—what sort of a place might it come from?”

“Not here,” was Slimmy’s prompt reply. “The atmosphere is slightly
humid. Water and pure ’235 don’t mix. Any plant that gave off atomic
fuel that way would blow itself from here to Scranton. It must have been
brought here from an airless planet or satellite too hot or too cold for
water to exist.”

“Is there such a body in this system?”

In answer, Slimmy rolled out of his bunk and went to the chart desk,
returning with a sketched astro map of the system.

“Two,” he wrote on the edge of the chart. “This one”—an arrow indicated
a large planet far away from the double sun—“and this peanut here. A
ninety-six-day year, son, and it’s hot. I mean, but torrid. Don’t tell
me anything from there could live here, if at all.”

“Might, if it’s a mold, or a bacterium. Temperature wouldn’t make much
difference to a really simple metallic mold. It’s worth a try. How do we
get out there without taking our three little playmates with us?”

They thought that over for a while, and then Slimmy giggled and wrote,
“Buddy, I feel an awful attack of Martian paralysis coming on!”

Bell snapped his fingers, lay back in his bunk and roared with laughter.

Heaven, Its Wonders and Hell squatted excitedly before the portable
spy-ray set in the center of their control room, watching the scene it
pictured. Slimmy’s head protruded from a small iron lung built into the
bulkhead, and his head was stretched back so far that the skin on his
neck seemed on the breaking point. His face was bluish; there was a thin
line of foam on his lips, and his breath whispered whistling through the
annunciator.

“Traitorous creature,” piped Its Wonders. “He has taken our advice and
inoculated his companion with the disease.”

Heaven waved his eyestalks. “Where is that Earthman, anyway?”

A loud _thuck! thuck!_ answered his question, as Bell Bellew banged on
the insulated gate to the Martians’ air lock. Heaven reached out a long,
jointless arm and pressed a panel; the door opened.

“Hey,” Bell roared before he was well into the room, “you guys better
come a-runnin’. My partner’s went and got himself some Martian paralysis
and he can’t last much longer.” Bell permitted himself a leer.

“What has that to do with us?” Heaven wanted to know.

“Everything. He has the secret of the Artnan process. His voice is gone
now; all he can do is gurgle. I ain’t telepathic; you are. His gurgles
ought to make some sense to you.”

“You stupid primitive,” squeaked Its Wonders. “What do you mean by
inoculating him and endangering the secret? If he dies with it, we may
never discover it!”

Bell looked sheepish. “Well, it was this way,” he said. “Slimmy figured
it all out. Said it was simple once you got the idea—one of those things
that’s so evident you can’t see it. I asked him what it was. He wouldn’t
say. Said he’d tell me if his life was in danger, but not before. It was
too dangerous for both of us to know. I got to thinking. If we got back
to Earth with the secret, we’d have no chance of keeping it from Mars.
Mars would take the process and kill us for our pains. Why should I get
myself killed? If I tied in with you, I had your promise of protection.
So I slipped him the virus, thinkin’ he’d tell me the process when he
knew what was the matter with him. But it hit him too fast. I can’t
understand a word. Come on—he may be dead before we get there!” So
saying, the big Earthman turned and bolted out of the Martian ship.

The Martians held a shrill consultation and then took out after Bell,
their thin claws eating up the distance. Bell was running with
everything he had, but the Martians passed him before he had gone an
eighth of the way. They were not even breathing hard.

Martian paralysis is sure death to the people of the red planet. When
Bell got to the ship he found the three Martians pressing as close to
Slimmy as they dared, which was about five feet. They were straining to
hear what Slimmy was mumbling, and stared annoyedly when Bell burst in.

“Get away from him,” Bell wheezed. “Dammit, now you’ll never get the
information. He’d die before he’d tell it to a Martian.”

“Be quiet!” snapped Hell. “He is past that. The paralysis strikes first
at the eyes, then at the hearing. He doesn’t know who is here.”

Slimmy’s tortured voice broke from moans into words.
“Bell … process … electrolization of … dying, I guess … lousy
Martian … process … electrolization of—” Suddenly he made a tremendous
effort, lifted his head, and said in a perfectly normal, conversational
tone, “We’re rikbijitting for a dewjaw.” Then his head snapped back and
he lay still.

Bell blundered over to the after bulkhead, ripped open the cold locker,
and tossed three flasks of cocola to the Martians. “Drink up,” he
snapped. “You’re going to need all your brains from now on if you’re
going to savvy _that_.” He waved a hand toward Slimmy, who was babbling
busily away about fortissing a sanzzifranz.

The Martians sucked away eagerly at the frothy liquid; willing to do
anything that would sharpen their senses.

So Slimmy muttered and the Martians guzzled, and in forty minutes Bell
stopped passing out cocola and went to the iron lung and opened it, and
Slimmy climbed out, rubbing his neck and cussing softly.

“That was a long haul, Bell,” he complained.

“You did fine, kid,” said Bell. “I must remember to slip you the real
thing sometime.”

“What are we going to do with these disgustingly intemperate creatures?”
asked Slimmy, indicating the Martians.

They were propped up against the bulkhead, limp eyestalks registering
their impotent rage. They were absolutely helpless, though their
implacable brains were clicking away like high-speed calculating
machines.

Bell thought, and snickered: “You stick around and watch ’em. I’m going
to take a ride. I’ll leave fifty gallons of coke with you. They’re too
plastered to keep you from opening their ugly faces and pouring more
coke in. Don’t let them sober up. Just keep telling them that they’ll
drink it or you’ll drown them in it.”

Together they lifted the limp bodies and dropped them in the sand
outside. “We ought to knock them off,” said Slimmy.

“I thought of that. But if you could see farther than your excuse for a
nose, you might remember that we have nothing but a shrewd guess as to
the accuracy of our idea about the process. If we’re wrong, these guys
might come in handy again.”

“Anything you say,” said Slimmy reluctantly. “I’ll take good care of
them until you get back. After that, I can’t promise. Take care of
yourself, incidentally.”

“Worry not, little man. Ought to be back inside of fifty hours. So
long.” He slapped Slimmy’s back and dove back into the ship.

The port closed with a clang, and the silver ship rose, circled twice,
and dwindled to a point before it slipped under the horizon. Slimmy
looked after it longingly and then turned to the helpless Martians.

“Time for your bottles, babies,” he said, and went to work pouring the
cocola into their gullets.

Bell followed the planet’s surface until he was sure he was out of sight
of the drunken Martians, and then curved up and away into space. As soon
as he was out of the planet’s effective space warp, he slipped into
hyperspace and traveled toward Procyon and its dark companion at many
times the speed of light. Watching his chronometers closely, he spun
dials and flipped switches in each phase of acceleration and
deceleration, and then went spatial again not two thousand miles from
the inner planet. In spite of the almost perfect physical insulation of
the craft, it was already growing warmer in the control room. Bellew set
up a small warp around the ship to convert the heat into light that
could be sent back toward the twin suns, and then began circling the
planet. Delicate instruments felt into the depths of every crater, every
boiling sea of rock on the hot little world. Bell let the ship fall into
an orbit, and with one eye glued to a teleo-spectrograph and the other
to his detector instruments, he searched every inch of area as it passed
beneath him. The hunt didn’t take long—there was uranium aplenty down
there. There were great pits of U-236 and ’37, something he didn’t know
existed in the Universe, so rare are they.

But—and his teeth flashed in a wide grin as he saw it—there were
correspondingly great masses of both ’238 and ’235. He brought the ship
close to the surface, cloaked in its light-building warp, near a fiery
plain where both isotopes could be detected. Through a screened
telescope he saw what he was after—a field of writhing growth, nearly
hidden by a fine dust of spores. They weren’t plants—they were molds;
and at enormous magnification he observed their life cycle as they ate
into the uranium, turning the rarer isotopes into their structures,
throwing out all impurities, including U-235. Their rate of metabolism
was astonishingly fast; and when a colony of them had exhausted all the
uranium near it, the molds cast off their spores and died. The spores,
heavily encysted, drifted about in the hot gases at the surface, until
the nearness of their food drew them to the planet’s semi-molten
surface. Then they sprouted, fed, spored and died again.

Bellew let his ship settle even more, and dropped a tube of berylu-steel
from the hull to a drift of spores. A few of them were drawn upward by
the suction he set up; then, tube and all, he snapped the ship into
space. Once out there, he experimented briefly and thoroughly with his
prize. The mold certainly filled the bill. The cysts apparently could
stay alive without nourishment indefinitely. They germinated readily at
any temperature, as long as they were in the presence of uranium.
Happily, Bellew slipped into hyperspace and dove back toward Artna.

The search of the inner planet and the capture of the spores had taken
considerably longer than Bell had expected; he was twenty hours overdue
when at last he sighted the great Artnan probability wave transmitter.
He cast about anxiously for the spot where he had left Slimmy and the
Martians. There was nothing there but tumbled sand.

Bell flung the ship down and, through a telescope, examined the ground.
There had been a scuffle, apparently, and if Bell knew Slimmy, it must
have been a pip, in spite of the fact that Martians are three times as
strong as any human.

“A hell of a mess,” he murmured, and swung the ship toward the hollow
where lay the Martian cruiser.

Landing next to it, he hunted through Slimmy’s locker until he found
what he wanted, concealed in a cleverly devised secret compartment. Then
he opened the air lock and strode over to the Martian ship.

The port swung open as he approached. Its Wonders stood there,
apparently suffering little from what must have been quite a hangover.
“What do you want?”

“Slimmy. What have you done with him?”

“Your companion is safe. He will be returned to you alive if you give us
what you went away to get.”

“You’ve killed him!”

Its Wonders stood aside. “Come in and see for yourself.”

Bell pushed past him. Slimmy was there, looking very sheepish in the
iron grip of the other two Martians.

“Hiya, boy,” he said.

“Slimmy! What happened?”

“What happened to you in Cincinnati that night we spent at Bert’s
place?”

Bellew remembered the occasion. He wasn’t proud of it. He’d tried to
outdrink half a dozen boron miners and had failed rather miserably. He
remembered with distaste the oily feeling at the pit of his stomach, and
how liquor had suddenly turned from one of the greater pleasures of life
into nothing more nor less than an emetic. “What’s that got to do—”

“They fooled me, that’s all. After you’d been gone about eight hours or
so they stopped trying not to swallow the stuff and began to get greedy.
I missed the gag—I fed it to them as fast as they would take it. They
all got sick. Very sick. Then they started to sober up, and I had to
feed ’em more while they were still weak. Gallon for gallon, they threw
off what I fed them. I don’t know how they did it—they sure can take it.
Anyhow, I ran plumb out of cocola. We shoulda killed ’em.”

“We will,” said Bell grimly, his jaw bunching. “O.K., fellers—let him go
now.” He reached casually into his pocket and pulled out a blue-steel
automatic blaster. The Martians stiffened indignantly.

“Where did you get that?” said Heaven. “We had your promise to allow us
to destroy every weapon you had aboard. You destroyed all of ours. How
is it that you kept that?”

Again Bell found himself wishing that a Martian could express emotion.
He’d have given anything to know just how mad the tall Martian was.

“This,” said Bellew, stepping aside to let the released Slimmy past him,
“is what we call, on Earth, an ace in the hole.”

The Martians started and stopped a concerted rush at Bell as he glanced
over to see if Slimmy was safe in the silver ship, and then turned to
them again.

“Nice to’ve known you,” he said, and backed out.

As the Earth ship rose gently away from Artna, Slimmy looked happily up
from the controls. “You know, Bell, in spite of the fact that it was a
dirty trick to hold out that blaster after giving our word, I’m glad you
did it.”

Bell looked at the blaster and grinned, moving toward the refuse lock.
“Swing her a little left,” he said, sighting through a port. “You got
the wrong idea, chum.” He dropped the gun into the lock, closed the
upper door, and put his hand on the dumping lever. “We promised to let
them destroy all our deadly weapons. They did. Am I glad to do _this!”_
and he threw the lever. The gun curved down and dropped right in front
of the air lock of the Martian ship. Three lanky figures pounced on it,
and a jet of soapy water shot futilely up at them.



BIDDIVER


IT IS EVEN TRUER in fact than in fiction that more important business is
transacted in palaces of pleasure than is ever handled in austere
offices. Such a deal was taking place in such a hangout between two
swarthy individuals who sat in a semiprivate room just off the dance
floor of the Purple Pileus, the most expensive drinkery in the most
exclusive section of the richest city on three planets.

“I thought you might like it,” said one of the two men. “Inside and out,
it’s a standard model—two wheels, gyro-stabilized, antigrav plates to
support it while the wheels drive it; conventional controls. Old George
Carrington himself couldn’t tell it from the latest Carrington ’78.”

“What’s that to me?” said the other. “I’m satisfied with the cars I
have.”

“You won’t be, Eric, when you’ve seen this one. It’s just a little bit
special.”

“With a special price on it, hey?”

“Nothing you couldn’t afford. You can have it for a present if you’ll
play ball with me. I mean”—he added at the other’s quick glance—“if
you’ll allow me to play ball with you.”

“What’s your proposition?”

“Something like this—I am cut to the quick when my own brother is
victimized by such a creature as The Fang. A terrible thing. The finest
ship in your fleet, wasn’t she? And pirated, burned to a cinder, crew
and all, by that spectacular criminal with the melodramatic name. _Tsk,
tsk!”_

“Get to the point,” growled Eric. “Even if I had nothing to do with my
time, you’d still be wasting it.”

“I’ll get there,” said his brother happily. “That piracy—it was
particularly tough on the insurance company, wasn’t it? The cargo was
insured for ten times the value of the ship, which in itself was
plenty.”

“It cost me ten times the value of the ship,” said Eric shortly.

“Of course it did. I read the record of the investigation. A government
man stood by a sealed meter and watched the stuff being pumped into the
tanks. Only thing is, one of my men was watching the flow in your secret
chamber under the loading platform. Every drop that went into the ship
wound up in the tank it came from. Two million barrels of lucasium, the
finest atomic fuel yet synthesized. The insurance company paid you for
it; then you sold it to Martian Spaceways, whose stock you control, at a
phony high price ‘justified’ by the shortage created by The Fang’s
highjacking.”

Eric’s knuckles whitened against the background of the blue champagne in
his glass; otherwise he gave no sign of having heard.

“Before I go on,” continued his brother easily, “I want to point out
that my death will result in the delivery of two cans of sound film to
the government. They tell the whole story. I’ll run off a print of them
for you any time you’d like to see them. In other words, it’ll pay you
to see that nothing happens to me.”

“The air in here,” said Eric absently, “smells of blackmail.”

“Perish the thought!” said the other primly. “Have I demanded anything?”

“Not yet,” said Eric. “And to tell you the truth, that’s what bothers me
a little. I know the way you work—I should, by this time—and I don’t
doubt that you have the film you mentioned. You’re the only man I ever
heard of who was oily enough to get it. What else can you want but a
payoff?”

“I want to help you. I want to fight this menace shoulder to shoulder
with you. After all, blood is thicker than water. Never let it be said
that Budd Arnik wouldn’t risk half the danger that threatens his
brother.”

“I get it. For half the ‘danger,’ half the profits. Right? You got a
busy liver, son, building up all that gall. The answer is _no!”_

Budd stretched out his legs, shoved his hands deep in his pockets and
smiled at his brother. “When I said I could help you, I meant it. You’ve
set yourself up a nice racket there, but you always did lack
imagination. You haven’t begun to tap the possibilities. Now, about that
car I was trying to give you, because I like you so much. It’s—well,
look!” He pointed at the glass brick wall, through which could be seen
the exquisitely landscaped driveway which led up to the Purple Pileus.

A beautifully clean vehicle swept in at the gate, just one long, lean
sliver of chrome and iridescent blue. There was bulk there, and weight,
but it took an engineer to spot it, so fine were its ultra-streamlined
curves. Its two wheels, which thrust themselves far ahead and behind the
car, were individually sprung, and supported the great teardrop about
six feet off the ground. Both wheels ran inside a tread which moved on
shaped tracks, so that they were rounded in front and sharply pointed in
the rear. From the ground up, then, each fore-and-aft cross section of
the machine was a perfect streamline. The car came to a whispering stop
at the entrance, and the wheels retracted, setting the hull swiftly and
gently to the ground. A lovely sight.

“Carrington ’78,” said Eric. “What about it?”

“Just the thing for the man about town, isn’t it? To look at, it is
simply the right vehicle for a man of your position. The one I have
parked outside is exactly the same in every respect—with a slight
difference. It has every feature of a stock car with just one or two
more.”

“Such as—”

“A momentum neutralizer. An automatic refueling screen—repels large
bodies, sweeps in small ones for transmutation into air, food, fuel.
And—an armament. Why, I couldn’t begin to tell you—”

“You don’t have to,” snapped Eric. “What the hell use is a car like that
to me? Or—to my organization?” He sipped slowly, digesting the items
Budd had just reeled off. “What’s the idea of all that gadgetry on a
surface car?”

“The idea is that it isn’t a surface car, obviously. Why, that machine
will operate practically forever without having to stop for fuel and
supplies. It will fly. It will push the speed of light between here and
anything you can see with a telescope. Don’t you see, or is it that you
won’t admit it? It’s the perfect getaway. The perfect front. Piracy?
Pal, you haven’t touched the subject. For example, suppose you ship a
cargo of automobiles to Mars, and there is another regrettable incident
like The Fang’s little coup. The ship just might explode gently enough
to strew that portion of space with parts of the cargo. Thereafter, any
other ship on the same run, sighting an automobile afloat in space,
would pay little attention—until the automobile began spouting atomic
shells and setting up a sleep-destroying field.

“Outlets for the stuff? Well, there’s the colony on Neptune—remember? It
was a prison once, and they revolted just for the privilege of staying
where they were to colonize like free men. I don’t have to tell you
about Mars and Venus and the asteroid colonies. We’d do all right.”

“On principle,” said Eric. “I hate to confess it, but you really have
something there.” He beamed. “Yes, you most certainly—” The two swarthy
heads moved close together over the table.

Neither of the Arnik brothers was in a position to see the man who
stepped out of the blue Carrington and strode purposefully into the
Purple Pileus. Protecting his jauntiness with a hundred-dollar bill, he
evaded the grim headwaiter’s intention of locking him out, and marched
up to the bar.

He was a most extraordinary figure, from the top of his mauve
streamlined hat, through his iridescent vest to his flexi-glastic shoes.
He barely cleared five feet. His body was tubby but his arms apparently
couldn’t understand that, for they were long and scrawny. From his brow
to an inch below his eyes, his nose turned up; from there on, down. His
short upper lip slanted sharply toward his tonsils, which had the effect
of making his chinlessness positively jut. He ordered _lyanka_, which is
the Martian word for “equalizer,” with the air of a man who couldn’t
possibly hold even one but who has just had three. The large bill on the
bar overcame the barkeep’s desire to protect a customer against himself,
and the man was served. He slurped from the goblet and looked around
him.

“So this is the top. This is the—wha’ you call—ul-timate.”

“This is the Poiple Pileus,” said the bartender.

“Oh, yeah … yeah … I know. What I mean, this’s what people work up to.
People put down numbers in books, maybe, drive transports—stuff like
that, five hours a day, five days a week, week in, week out.” He ran out
of breath and inhaled some _lyanka_ with his air.
“People … _fft_ … ‘scuse me … all got the idea someday they’ll be rich.
When they get rich, they come to a place like this. _Fft_. What I want
to know is, why? Get just as drunk at Casey’s Hardwater Store.”

“Casey’s ain’t exclusive,” the barkeep pointed out.

“Take me, now,” said the fantasy on the paying side of the board.
“Biddiver’s my name. Two days ago I’m on the assembly line up at
General, and somebody name of Phoebe Biddiver dies. Yesterday I got two
million bucks, free and clear. Today I buy everything I ever thought I
wanted and go every place I ever wanted to see. An’ now what?”

“What?”

“An’ now I don’t know what to do tomorrow.” The bartender was fascinated
by the way the teardrops proceeded down Biddiver’s amazing nose. One
drop would dash almost halfway, and then hesitate, daunted by the hump.
Then it would be joined by another teardrop, and the two, merging, would
surmount the obstacle and slip down to hang glittering over the
disappearing lip until a sob came along to shake them off. “I ain’t done
nothin’ to nobody,” complained Biddiver brokenly. “I don’t want to do
nothin’ to nobody. What did I do to deserve this?”

“Guys what don’t want to do nothin’ to nobody,” said the bartender, in a
philosophic flash, “most generally don’t amount to nothin’.”

“What do you mean?”

“Just what I say. This place, now, it crawls with big shots. Every one
of them walked up to the top on other guys’ faces. Take that Fang feller
now, that’s in all the papers. Bad egg, sure. But at the top all the
same. Sneaks up on a tanker on the Earth-Venus run, swipes the cargo,
burns the ship and the crew, and disappears. Then he tells three planets
an’ the whole Belt, speakin’ through every ultraradio set that happens
to be turned on, that he is The Fang, an’ he is the one who done it, an’
he’ll do it again whenever he feels like it. Not a direction indicator
in the System can locate where he’s broadcasting from. See what I mean?
He’s smart an’ he doesn’t give a damn about who he roughs up. Now look.
See those two guys in that semiprivate over there? They’re the Arnik
brothers. One’s a shipper an’ the other’s a kind of freelance gorilla.
They operate the same way as The Fang. They must like it or they
wouldn’t keep it up.” He nodded sagely. “If I had as much change as you
do, I wouldn’t get down in the mouth about it. The main idea in gettin’
really rich is to be rich in the first place; then you make your money,
take people out, lose ’em and come back with their bank accounts. I seen
it done right here.”

Biddiver shook his head weakly. “I don’t think I could be that kind of a
heel.”

“You can be. Rich people can’t afford to be nice about things. Only guys
who work for a living can do that, an’ even then they got to watch
themselves or they’ll get took over.” He peered at Biddiver, judging
expertly his state of insobriety, and then pointedly took away his
goblet, rinsed it and put it away.

Biddiver took the hint because, by now, he wasn’t feeling so good. He
waved the change from his bill back to the bartender and weaved out. The
barkeep pocketed the money, shaking his head sourly, quite unaware of
the fact that his little speech had created an interplanetary menace.

Biddiver somehow reached the Carrington and nudged the door open. He
sprawled into the driver’s seat and touched the starting lever. The door
locked as the machine rose up on its two wheels, gyroscopes whirring
ever so faintly. On each side of Biddiver, an upholstered arm swung
upward until it embraced him in foamy comfort. He pressed the panel
which presented itself to his right forefinger; the brakes released
themselves and the machine started forward. Pulling gently with his
right and then his left hand, he turned the car and wheeled it out of
the gate and into the street. Plastered as he was, he realized that in
this machine he had one thing that it would take him a long, long while
to tire of. He pressed the accelerator under his finger, and as he
passed the 150-k.p.h. mark the speedometer’s mechanical whisper cut
in—“One sixty—One sixty-eight—One eighty—” He loved the sleepy surge of
the car, its metrical obedience. “Damn if she won’t up an’ take off one
of these days,” he muttered as he leaned over to turn on the radio.

And when he flipped the switch she did take off.

“What I don’t understand,” said Eric Arnik, “is why you bother to come
to me at all. You have the goods on me, to a certain extent; you have
the car and you have some rather sweet ideas on how to use it.”

“Oh, that.” Budd inspected his stylishly scalloped fingernails. “I have
to have a lot of research done, you see. I could have it taken care of
easily enough, but news gets around, you know. You have all the
facilities in your little undercover laboratories. If I work along with
you, I can get it done right and fast. Particularly since you realize
how much it will be to your own interest.”

“What sort of research?”

“On the car, of course. You don’t think I built it myself, do you? It
was like this—I ran across a bright old fellow who had a few ambitious
ideas along the lines of auto design. I asked him if he could build
something like this baby of mine. He could and he did, but he was
curious about why I wanted it and was fool enough to ask me some
questions. Luckily for all concerned, he died of natural causes.”

“You mean you just naturally slipped him a ticket out?”

“Something like that,” said Budd carelessly. “Terrible, the filtrable
viruses that can get accidentally into a man’s air conditioning unit.
Anyway, here I am with the car and no plans or blueprints of any kind.
I’ll have to get it to someone who can knock it down and duplicate it.
That’s up to your boys.”

“I see. Is the car really on the up-and-up? I mean, have you tested it?”

“And how.” A gleam of enthusiasm crept across Budd’s deadpan face. “Come
on—let’s get out of here. I’ll show you.” Eric paid the bill and they
left. When they were seated in the big blue Carrington Budd said, “Oh—by
the way. I can’t show you any altitude yet. The one thing the old boy
hadn’t quite perfected was the Heaviside screen.”

“He didn’t?” Eric’s face flushed with anger. “Damn it, what good is the
car to us without that? You expect my technicians to build a Heaviside
unit small enough to fit into this jalopy? Why, the smallest one ever
built weighs more than three tons!”

“Take it easy, pal,” soothed his brother. “There are a lot of new
principles involved in this wagon. Your boys are pretty good—they ought
to get a lead after looking over the rest of the equipment.”

“I hope so. Damn that Heaviside business anyway.”

“You ought to be glad that the layer’s there, chum, and that science
knows a way to synthesize one for spacecraft. Did you ever hear what
happens to a man when he’s exposed to unfiltered cosmic radiation?”

“I heard.” Unaccountably, Eric Arnik shuddered. Budd started the car.

Biddiver was in that enviable state of inebriation in which he could not
be surprised. When he threw the switch to get some music and nothing
happened, he did what any trained driver will do—glance far ahead
through the windshield to see if the road is clear enough to allow him
to investigate his controls for a few seconds. Only there wasn’t any
road. He blinked carefully and looked again, and there still was no
road. Just a blankness, with a silly little cloud in the middle of it.
He suddenly realized that he was looking into the sky; but he was
looking, not up, but _ahead_ into it. He grunted surprisedly and hauled
at the left chair arm. The cloud ahead disappeared and was replaced by a
rapidly expanding relief map. It struck Biddiver as a little ominous; he
pulled at the right chair arm until the windshield framed a horizon.

For no reason at all he was reminded of a satire, centuries old, which
he had read, concerning a college boy who yielded to the temptation of
his evil companions, drank a glass of beer and staggered out of the
saloon with delirium tremens. “Been a good boy all m’ life,” he
reflected bitterly, “because I couldn’t afford to be any other way. And
now—four drinks, an’ this.” He wagged his head, hauled back on both arms
at once. When he saw the little cloud again, he let go and slumped down
in his seat. He was quite convinced he was dreaming, but he didn’t want
to dream about a crack-up in a flying automobile, and he felt he would
far rather bump the cloud. He went quite peacefully to sleep then,
ignoring the new whispering voice that joined that of the speedometer:

“Four hundred twelve k.p.h.—”

“Altitude twenty-three thousand fifty—”

“Four eighty-three k.p.h.—”

“Altitude twenty-five thousand, thirty-three—”

But he woke, completely sober, when the car hurtled through the
Heaviside layer.

Twenty minutes after the second Carrington ’78 pulled away from the
Purple Pileus, it swept back again and two men leaped out. One was
flushed and one was pale, but both were furious. They pounced on the
frightened doorman.

“Where’s my car? What happened to the other Carrington?”

“Wh—Mr. Arnik, I—” His eyes bulged in terror. He had heard of the
Arniks. “A gentleman drove off in it. He had only stayed a half hour or
so. His car was exactly like—”

“That’s what you think,” spat Budd, hurling the man down the resilient
plastic steps. The brothers went in and collared the bartender.

That worthy was a true philosopher; that is, his morbid view of life
extended to himself as well as to his fellow man. He came along
uncomplainingly when it was demanded of him, which was immediately after
he had said that he had spoken with the man who drove the Carrington.
They whisked him to Eric’s shipping offices, into an inner room, and
down an elevator whose entrance was under Eric’s desk. Far underground
he was seized by a staff of highly trained men who lived out their lives
in secrecy underground because they dared not show their faces above.

The bartender was given four injections in rapid succession and for the
next six hours was subjected to the most thorough of grillings. He was
powerless to tell anything but the truth. Highly detailed information
about the man in the other Carrington was fed, item by item, into a
monster card-sorting machine. His name; height; weight; probable age;
dress; accent; timbre of voice; physical peculiarities; each of these
was gone into with incredible nicety.

The machine dealt in probabilities; if a man of a given height and
weight reacts in such and such a way to such a statement, uttered so,
then he may have spent a specified number of years in any one of eight
professions. Each of these was taken in order, compared with other
characteristics, canceled out or in. Each result was checked and
rechecked, compared with every other result. At the end of the grilling,
the Arniks had a complete dossier on Biddiver, as well as a slightly
conventionalized full-length portrait. Looking at it, they doubted that
their machine was working correctly, but it hadn’t failed so far.

“Well,” said Budd, scratching his head, “we know what we’re after. Where
is it?”

“It’s probably well out of the way,” said Eric. He turned away to give
orders about the disposal of the mindless wreck that had been the head
bartender of the Purple Pileus. He would be found dead days later, after
wandering through the city, starving because he was incapable of
realizing it, freezing because he couldn’t understand that he needed
shelter. “You see,” he went on, staring at the picture, “from what you
tell me, the space-travel mechanisms on the car had their master switch
where any other Carrington has its radio. This guy was apparently one of
those people who can’t breathe unless a radio’s pounding their ear.
Drunk as he was, you can bet that the first thing he did after he
started the car was to turn on the radio. As soon as he did that, he
took off. He hasn’t crashed; I’d have heard about it if he had. He
hasn’t been seen flying around, either. He must have gone—straight up.”

“And the car isn’t shielded against the cosmics. So—”

“So they probably got the rat. I hope.”

Budd shook his head. “You can’t count on it. What that radiation did to
him depends on factors that no one’s been able to chart. I hope it
killed him. Maybe it didn’t—but what’s the difference? That car’s as
fast as anything in space. By this time it’s reached terminal velocity
and is ‘way out of reach. I’m out an automobile, I guess. Oh, well. I
should kick. At least I’m where I know my dear brother will look out for
me.” He smirked at Eric and the way he made an infinitesimal move toward
his shoulder holster and then visibly thought better of it.

“I can just barely stand you,” gritted Eric after a taut moment. “Don’t
make it any tougher for me by your lip.”

Somewhere in space, a chrome and blue automobile raced the green light
of Earth. Biddiver was quite dead now, if death is complete loss of
personality, of human hopes and dreams and desires. There was another at
the controls, certainly, one who moaned and gibbered and mewed at the
stars spread about him, one who snatched and pawed at the sensitive,
unprotesting controls before him. But it was not Biddiver, any more than
the car itself was the ores and gases and fluids from which it was
fabricated. The car was new, and even newer was the creature at the
controls.

After those first mad moments, he quieted to stare with his new, scarlet
eyes at the car, the dials and meters that now presented themselves in
place of the conventional dashboard that had slid up out of sight when
the car had reached the thousand-k.p.h. mark. He fingered the upholstery
with an animal’s preoccupied attention, touched metal and glass and
fabric with listless hands. Then he looked down at himself, snarled, and
began to strip the clothes from his body. He worked slowly,
systematically, from his shoes upward, ignoring clasps and slides,
depending on the invariable rule that each chain has a weakest link. His
flesh had a greenish cast, and it puffed tautly everywhere except near
the joints, which were all simply skin on bone. When he had tossed the
last tatter over his shoulder, he put both hands to his head and wiped
off his frowsy mane. The hair came quite easily off the puckered skull.
He giggled then, and went to sleep for three Earth days.

“Who’s The Fang?” asked Budd Arnik, a couple of weeks after he had
bulldozed his way into the titular vice-presidency of Eric’s shipping
firm. “I’ve seen some sweet write-ups about him in the tele-facsimiles.
He’s a crazy Martian. He’s an exiled scientist from another solar
system. He’s a refugee from a sunspot. Everybody has a different idea
about him, except you. Seems funny, somehow,” he went on, affecting the
lightly sarcastic tone which he knew infuriated his brother. “The
gentleman steals a cargo which is not aboard a ship, destroys the
vessel, and leaves you with your pockets full of money. I wouldn’t be
curious if I didn’t happen to know that you’ve made no big payoffs to
anyone recently. If you’d hired the guy, it would have cost you plenty.
If you didn’t, why should he scuttle a ship with a nonexistent, heavily
insured cargo, and then announce to the Universe that he is The Fang and
will be heard from again?”

“You found out about the payoff,” growled Eric. “Why bother asking me
any questions at all? Figure it out for yourself.”

“I will,” promised his brother smoothly. “Which reminds me—I have an
idea that’ll make us some money, if The Fang can be depended on to do a
little more work for us. Can he?”

Eric hesitated and then said, “Pretty much.”

“Ah,” said Budd. “Well, you know that uranium mine on Pallas?”

“Mm.”

“Well, there’s a lot of money tied up on it. That uranium, you know, is
about forty per cent 235. U-235 from Pallas supplies most of the System,
since it’s so easy to refine. There’s still plenty of market for it, you
know. Lucasium is more efficient, but it’s a hell of a lot more
expensive. Now—here’s my idea. Just to see if The Fang has any kind of
reputation as yet, we’ll have him threaten the colony. We’ll set a
price—not too much; maybe they’ll pay it—and tell ’em to set it adrift
in space, static, right there in the Asteroid Belt. By the time it has
moved more’n a couple hundred miles toward the Sun, it’ll intersect the
orbits of quite a few planetoids. One of our boys can be roosting there
in a small ship to pick it up.”

Eric sent him a glance. “Is that what you meant when you said you had
imagination?”

“Yeah. Why?”

“I’m surprised, that’s all. It’s not bad. Let’s get going.”

In a very few days they had a ship outfitted. It was decided that Budd
would take her out to the Belt. As they stood in the control room just
before the take-off, Budd asked:

“You’re going to get in touch with The Fang?”

“I’m doing that right now,” said Eric. “You are The Fang.”

“I’m _what?”_

For once in his life Eric Arnik actually laughed. “Certainly. The
incendiary explosion of the tankship was done by time bombs.”

“But—that voice?”

“No trouble. It was recorded and transmitted from little sets set adrift
in space. Any signal transmitted simultaneously from three sources
widely separated makes a direction indicator run around in circles.” He
chuckled. “One transmitter was dropped from the ship a day before she
blew up. Another was in my office. The third was in an orbit around
Eros. They were timed to transmit The Fang’s message twenty days after
the explosion, just about when it would be discovered. I told you you
could have figured it out for yourself. All I had to do was to give my
hypothetical criminal a name like ‘The Fang’ so that the feature writers
would pick it up and plaster it around. That’s what you’re doing now,
dope. Just follow the course that’s in the co-ordinator over there. The
automatic releases will take care of everything for you. You’ll drop
atomic bombs in the path of Pallas, so that the asteroid will strike
them just when its rotation will put the mines on the point of impact.
The message is already recorded. Your course takes you within the
gravitic field of Jupiter; one of the transmitters will swing around
behind the old boy. One will be here, and one will be attached to the
bombs.

Budd was aghast. “So that’s—Holy Kitt! And I was the guy who said you
had no imagination!” He looked at his brother as if he had never seen
him before, and then something of his cockiness returned to him. “May I
ask the master some questions?”

Eric looked at the chronometer. “Fire away. You have twelve minutes.”

“How did the signal blank out all others in every ultraradio set in the
System?”

“I can’t tell you exactly, because I’m not a radio man. One of my boys
fixed it up. The general idea is that every wave frequency has a
corresponding negating frequency—another wave that vibrates node to
trough with the original, and cancels it out. My signals were
transmitted in every frequency; they sounded above and below the ones
that were canceled.”

“How about the time lag between all those transmitters? They were an
awful long way apart.”

“A silly question, son. You know ultraradio. Those vibrations think the
speed of light is a minus quantity!”

Budd rubbed his neck. “So I’m The Fang. I can’t get over it. By the way,
chum, I wouldn’t try killing two birds with one stone on this trip.
You’re liable to be the other bird. I’m talking to a buddy of mine every
twelve hours, until I come back. If I miss a single call, those cans of
film will get to the Feds.”

“Damn it,” said Eric mildly. He walked to the bulkhead, pressed a panel.
A section slid open; he lifted out a compact little piece of destruction
in the form of an atomic bomb. “I was hoping you wouldn’t think of
anything like that,” he said. “This was for you. Oh, well.”

Budd grinned. “Better luck next time. So long, pal. See you anon!”

When the air-lock gates had hissed to a close, he threw a master switch
set into the chronometer housing, lit a cigarette and sat down to read
and look at visirecordings until he had something to do. The chronometer
clicked softly, and the ship hurtled away. It was only then that a
certain detail occurred to Budd—namely, that whether or not the miners
of Pallas and their paymasters agreed to The Fang’s terms, they were
doomed, for the eggs would be laid. Their planetoid would strike the
hovering nest of bombs when, in all probability, they would be looking
for some sort of an attacking ship. Now, what was the good of that?

He reflected a moment, and then laughed aloud. This was all that the
System needed to learn that The Fang was a force to be reckoned with!
Budd had the bright ideas, but it took a brain like Eric’s to really
stretch them out. After this, The Fang could dictate to the Universe!

“My own brother,” Budd chortled. “But, oh Lord, what a man!”

He had changed; he knew that. The tearing radiations that had thrust his
new being into the System had left him memories of puffed green flesh,
bony joints, and a bald, rough skull. The transition was complete now.
Blue-white hair covered the obese body. It was a good three feet long
and beautifully silky. It fell down on each side of his scarlet eyes,
down from his cheeks, his chin. It mantled his whole frame, ending in a
great puff at his knees. The erstwhile chitinous structure of his
fingernails was now flexible, sentient flesh, so that, from the tip of
each finger and thumb a dexterous tentacle about four inches long
extended.

It was a new and glorious world that this creature regarded. To him,
radiant heat was a color, and electricity was a color, and every
vibration between them on the electromagnetic spectrum was a shade.
Thought itself was a visible, physical thing to him. Thought strikes the
average telepath like a hand on the arm of a paralyzed deaf-mute, but to
the creature in the Carrington it was as easy to sense as the handshake
of a friend.

His interest in the interior of the car was soon exhausted, and he spent
many days drinking in the immensities of space. He looked with
understanding and the truest kind of appreciation on mighty Jupiter and
the speckled Belt. His eyes sensed rather than saw Neptune and frozen
Pluto. Then, having had his fill of infinity, he turned again to his
small world and himself.

He regarded the car and its workings not with the eye of science, but
with that of the most superb logic. The ape regards three turns of rope
around a beam as a Gordian knot. A lay human being regards an atomic
power plant as a hopelessly involved technical jumble. Not the
silver-silk being in the Carrington, however. He crawled into the power
compartment, and with the joy of a man who has just found a book he
loved in his childhood, he followed leads, inspected coils and bars and
casings. In a locker he found tools of every kind, spare parts of every
description, and with them he went to work.

The powerful and delicate tentacles at his fingertips worked with a
speed and precision impossible to a human hand. Here he found a busbar a
few millimeters too thick for the light load it carried; there he saw a
mechanical task which could be performed electrically with less drain on
the power source. He looked carefully at the wheel-driving mechanism,
and after an hour’s work on it, went forward to the control chair and
re-calibrated the throttle indicator; for now the machine could not be
operated safely on the ground unless it drew less fuel, due to its new
efficiency. He regarded the antigrav apparatus with some amusement, for
it seemed primitive to him. Hooking his leg around the wheel driveshaft,
he drew a set of tools equipped with spring clips toward him, shut off
the unit, and rebuilt it.

The car kept him busy for some days, and then there was little else he
could do to it; and so he turned his brilliant eyes inward on himself.
He was a creature without precedent. Of the human basic urges, he had
none. He could not know hunger, for the car supplied him with food
tablets as they were needed. Fear did not exist. Wealth, power,
shelter—these things were impossible conceptions, for he had been born
with them all.

He remembered little or nothing about Biddiver. He sent his metrical
mind back along the past few days, searching for clues as to his origin
and that of the automobile. Almost all of it had been blanked out. There
was, however, a recent experience—a voice had spoken to him, and he had
thought it authoritative. He knew himself to be talented and superior,
for had he not improved on the work of a people who manifested a high
degree of scientific knowledge? Then the words he had heard from that
source must be the thought-image of a Power past even his understanding.
If he could only remember when—and where—

That voice had said, “Guys that don’t want to do nothin’ to nobody most
generally don’t amount to nothin’. Big shots—every one of them walked up
to the top on other guys’ faces. The Fang—at the top now.” There were
details about The Fang; the creature suddenly found it difficult to
remember whether he had heard of or been The Fang. “Arnik … Arnik
brothers—” That was a recurring thought-pattern that brought with it a
wondering distaste. There was more, but it was these things that were
most significant. Why?

He opened his eyes and stared through the windshield. All of it had
something to do with the third planet, the green one. There was a
message for him in that voice from the past. He set about the problem as
if it were put together with nuts and bolts.

Arnik—big shots—these, and the things about them, were somehow
unpleasant thoughts. There was pleasure, however, in improvement.
Unpleasant things were made pleasant by improvement. The Arniks, then—

He paused. Everything about him—the car, the stars and planets, the food
he ate and the air he breathed, each of them had a purpose. But he
himself—why was he there? The speedometer was there because it had
something to do—a function. Had he a function? He must have, he
reasoned, or he would not be there. He regarded the green planet
thoughtfully, running his pointed yellow tongue over his lips. Where it
parted the long hair, two great white tusks showed. He laid his hands on
the arms of his chair, and the tentacled tips curled over the ends,
lightly touching the controls. He knew what he had to do.

And that is how the philosophy of a bitter bartender became a space
dweller’s driving creed.

Budd Arnik found time a little heavy on his hands until his ship
approached the Belt, and then he spent most of his time at the forward
port. He dared not touch the controls, for his course was timed and
plotted and automatically steered, and a fraction of a degree one way or
the other would defeat the whole plan.

Power off, the little ship swung into the Belt and into the orbit of
Pallas. Then a few gentle nudges this way and that, to brake her and
steady her in that untenable position, stasis in space. The most
advanced of calculating machinery had been employed to check this one
tiny dot on the astro chart. She hung there for twenty-two hours,
awaiting just the right split second to drop her deadly load. Budd only
felt the infinitesimal lurch because he had waited so long for it—that
tiny swaying as automatic grapples let the bombs go, repelled them a few
feet so they would be clear of the mass of the ship. Then the artificial
gravity and momentum neutralizer cut in, a relay clicked, and the ship
looped over and fled back toward Earth.

Budd slipped into the pilot’s chair with a sigh. This leg of the trip
would be a little more exciting. Although the automatic pilot would take
him unerringly back to his starting point, the explosion on Pallas would
occur long before he got there, and space would be crawling with
Tri-planet Patrol ships. He knew he could outmaneuver and outrun any of
the ships, but he knew he wouldn’t have a chance against an ultraradio
torpedo or a sleep-destroying field. Particularly the latter, for the
range of the field was tremendous, and the penalty of being snared in
one was agonizing death from lack of sleep. He had to rely on his
detector beams to warn him of any approaching ship.

He slept frequently for lack of anything else to do, woke for a few
minutes, checked over his gauges, and dozed off again. And in one of
these periods he dreamed.

He dreamed that a hollow, insistent voice, just like that of The Fang on
Eric’s recordings, was calling him insistently. “Arnik! Arnik! Arnik!”
He was conscious of his own effort to rouse himself, and found he could
not. “Arnik!” said the voice. “Answer! What are you doing? What was the
meaning of those bombs dropped in the path of Pallas?”

And he dreamed that he was bound down by gentle but irresistible forces,
so that he could only cry out against them; but the only cry he could
make was the truth. “We are bombing the mines.”

“Why?” The voice was a glittering steel probe, picking away at his
brain.

“To create fear of The Fang. To make The Fang’s commands law.”

Question by remorseless question he was forced to tell the whole story.
And then, suddenly, he found himself free to awaken. He sat bolt
upright, streaming sweat, sputtering profanity, and carrying the most
terrific headache in the memory of man.

“I’m gettin’ the crawlin’ willies,” he muttered, and then realized that
the detector alarm signal was shrilling. He glanced at the dial. It had
been ringing for two hours and twenty-seven minutes. He shook his head,
nearly shrieked at the pain, and snapped the switch. The signal cut
itself off. From another dial he read the bearing and distance. He
swiveled about, unlimbered a short-range visiscope, and turned it on.
Sharp and clear, the image of the offending vessel showed up on the
screen.

Only it wasn’t a vessel. It was an automobile—an iridescent blue
Carrington ’78.

Budd Arnik grunted, looked again and grinned. “Well, well,” he chuckled.
“Imagine meeting you here!” It was a one-in-a-quadrillion chance, he
thought. That ugly-looking lug who had accidentally swiped his car had
probably gone nuts and died when he broke through the Layer. By some
fluke the car had quit with a corpse at the controls and must now be
caught in somebody’s orbit—probably old Jupiter. And of all people in
the Universe, he, Budd Arnik, had to be the one to find it!

He cut off the automatic pilot and took over, swerving toward the car.
It was traveling in the same direction but in a slightly different
plane. He focused the visiscope and read off the range from the gauge.
The car was nineteen kilometers ahead. He put on a burst of speed,
overtook and circled the automobile. As far as he could see, it was
totally unharmed. He grinned happily, edged closer, and reached for the
magnetic grapple control. But before he could touch it, the car suddenly
faded away from the screen. Budd swore and fiddled with the controls,
bringing it quickly back into focus. It had jumped four kilometers when
he came close. He crept in again, watching carefully. When the range
closed to one kilometer, the car jumped again. Budd frowned. Was that
dope still alive in there?

He lifted his ship above the car and began to settle down toward it. And
again the car jumped away. “What the hell,” growled Budd. “If he don’t
like me, why don’t he turn tail and run?”

He tried it again, and only then did he think of a repellor field. He
hadn’t known that the car possessed one, but then there were probably
half a hundred gadgets on that wagon that he knew nothing about. Most
big spacecraft carried such fields in case of emergency repairs in
space, to guard the hull against small meteorites when the ship was not
able to navigate clear of them.

Budd shrugged. “There’s more ways of killing a cat than stuffing it in a
knee boot,” he growled. He took some sights, punched cards with the
results, and fed them into the co-ordinator. When he had his position,
he lined his ship up with the car on his course, and moved forward. The
car leaped away, and Budd followed grimly, the car preceding him exactly
a kilometer ahead. The two crafts soon attained their terminal velocity,
and Budd turned the controls over to the mike.

He walked over to the ultraradio, noticing that he was an hour or so
late for his usual communiqué to Eric. That gentleman’s face flashed
furiously on the screen. Budd smiled back at it.

“Well?” roared Eric. “What the hell have you got to be so happy about?
Why you double-crossing rat!”

“Easy, pal,” soothed Budd. “I been busy. I’ve got a present for you.”

“Take your present and ram it up—”

_“Tsk, tsk,”_ tsked Budd. “All this excitement over a little tardiness!
Listen, goon. Remember that car we had swiped from us at the Purple
Pileus?”

“Yes, I remember and I don’t give a damn about it.”

“No? Well, give a look!” Budd walked away from the radio, switched on
the visiscope. “Can you see what I’ve got in tow?”

“No, I can’t. Now stop your hogwash and tell me what sort of monkey
business you’re up to!”

Budd sobered. “What are you talking about?”

“Don’t play innocent,” snarled Eric. “What was the idea of blanketing
_my_ signal?”

“When? What signal?”

“The F—” Eric stopped apoplectically, remembering that he was on the air
and that the System was full of ears. “The signals we arranged,” he
said, as if talking to a four-year-old. “Remember?”

“Yeah—”

“They were blanked! The one in my office, I—Hey! You don’t really mean
to tell me that you actually _don’t_ know what happened?” He peered out
of the screen at Budd’s amazed face, rubbed his ear, and went on with a
desperate sort of patience. “O.K. then. My transmitter was blanked, and
so were the others, apparently. Instead of that, I got _this!”_ His face
disappeared, and a recording screen was shoved up against the
transmitter. “Now watch!” said his voice, and the recorder glowed. It
showed a typical radio show, a dancing chorus, a vapid female singing
dourly. Suddenly the scene disappeared and a truly terrible voice rasped
forth.

“I am The Fang,” it said melodramatically. “I have come again to warn
the world. But not, as was expected, to warn you of myself, but of my
masters.”

There was a long, significant pause. Budd’s throat felt very dry.

“I was ordered to destroy the mines on Pallas. I have disobeyed, for my
masters want power they cannot control. I also warn my masters that I
will not rest until they are as I am!” With the last two words, the
screen came alive with a picture.

“God!” said Budd, his eyes bulging.

The screen went dead and was moved away. Eric’s face reappeared.
“There’s something for you to look forward to,” he said snidely. “Hurry
home, babe.” He signed off.

“The son,” growled Budd. “He looks almost happy about it. Great sweet
sidesway what a face!” He slumped into a fearful heap in the pilot’s
chair.

As Budd expected, the car’s repellors cut out when it had been shoved
well within Earth’s gravitic field. He grappled it to his ship’s side
and landed neatly on the stage in front of the Arnik Shipping Co. His
first act on alighting was to release the car and try the door. It
opened readily. He recoiled a little at the heap of rags that littered
the stained control seat, and then he shrugged and climbed in, kicking
them out the rags, and the odd bones they covered. Budd Arnik wasn’t
picky. As the ground crew disposed of the spaceship, Budd tested the
controls. They seemed to be all right. He waved to the foreman and the
car slid smoothly down the ramp.

He could have taken a solenoid car out to Eric’s place and saved twenty
minutes, but he was too tickled at having got his car back. He swept out
of the city, lulled by the whispering speedometer; and when he had the
highway to himself, he leaned over to the conventional radio switch and
then pulled back on the arms. The car soared up effortlessly. He put it
down again and raced to his brother’s place.

Eric was waiting fretfully at the door. “Dammit, why didn’t you take the
solenoid?”

“Brother,” said Budd easily, “when you’ve spent as many weeks as I have
being toted around by a machine that did your thinking for you, you’ll
be glad of the chance to be the boss for a change.”

Eric stared over his shoulder at the house, shrugged nervously and
climbed into the car. “Place gives me the jitters,” he complained. “Go
ahead then—drive. I want to talk to you.”

Budd wheeled the Carrington around in its own length and rolled onto the
highway. Drifting along at a hundred and eighty, he turned to Eric.
“What’s this about jitters? Something new for you, isn’t it?”

Eric looked sheepish. “Yes. No.” He swore fluently. “Budd, you’re a
phony. You’re in this up to your neck.” He sent a glance Buddward from
the corners of his eyes. “And I don’t know that that isn’t the silver
lining they told me about in school, come to think of it. If I get it,
you’ll get it, too. Anyway, you’re a phony. You’re up against something
you can’t laugh off, this trip.”

“You’re talking a lot of nonsense,” said Budd. “You’re all shot, man.
I’ve never heard you go on like this. What’s under your skin?”

Eric began in a low voice that got increasingly higher and hoarser,
until he wound up in a piping whisper. “We create, for our own ends, one
master criminal. Said master criminal consists in ultraradio
transmitters set adrift in space and in time bombs. We do one little job
with our hypothetical criminal’s aid. We start another one. Our
make-believe monster promptly goes on strike because he doesn’t like our
greed. And you ask what’s under my _skin!”_ He gasped for breath, then
went on, in a crazed monotone, “And I’ve been having dreams. Dreaming
with my ears and my eyes while I’m wide awake. I hear that … that
_thing_ laughing. I keep seeing that face. That’s what’s going to happen
to us, you damn fool; don’t you see?”

Budd went right on grinning; then Eric suddenly realized that the grin
was frozen there. Budd said hoarsely, “Yeah. I know. I heard things,
too. Merciful heavens!” he burst out. “We can’t let it get us! Shut up
about it!”

Eric’s gaze dropped between his feet. He clamped them nervously, held it
there. “If it was anything we could understand, we’d know what to
do … but you can’t tell about those things. It might hit you one way, me
another, and yet we’re brothers. You just can’t tell. Anything might
happen—” Eric, due to his morbid attention to his feet, and to the
artificial gravity in the car, did not notice Budd’s turning on the
radio, or the swift leap of the machine off the road. “Who can tell what
it did to that ugly Biddiver fellow? How can we know what he is now? You
can’t predict anything, you can’t even guess—”

“What are you talking about?” snapped Budd.

“Biddiver—the guy that swiped your fancy car by mistake. Biddiver—The
Fang.”

Budd’s face turned a sick gray. “Biddiver is—The Fang?”

“Certainly. That was easy enough to find out. He’s altered—God, yes; but
it’s him all right. Didn’t I tell you? I guess I forgot. I’m shot to
hell.” He shook his head, and sweat flung from his forehead. “The
card-selector—you know, the one we used on that barkeep. It gave us a
portrait and a description. With The Fang I reversed the process. He’s
slightly changed, but underneath all that … that fur—he has the same
bone structure. It clicks … it couldn’t be anyone else. Somewhere he’s
cruising around in that damned automobile. Sooner or later, he’ll get
us.”

“Not ‘that’ damned automobile,” said Budd, and laughed hysterically.
_“ ‘This’_ damned automobile. I tried to tell you about it when I was
out there in space. I thought I picked it up and brought it back. I see
now—it brought me.”

Eric raised his head, stared out of the side window, and screamed. The
Carrington was a thousand kilometers up and going higher. Budd forced
the control arms downward violently; the nose of the car tipped up
instead. He sat like a statue, blood pouring from where he had bitten
through his lip. Eric dove for his gun, snatched it out, put it to his
temple.

A white-furred arm reached almost casually from behind them, lifted the
gun out of Eric’s hand. “Don’t do that,” said The Fang gently. “Not at
this stage. I want you changed. I want you made like me. That,” he
added, “is what I am for.”

They turned slowly and faced the creature. “Do not be frightened,”
droned The Fang. He was regal, magnificent as he stood there, in front
of the door to the power compartment where he had been hiding. His
luminous eyes were separately articulated, and one fixed on each of the
men, held them. His long face hair was swept away on each side from his
chrome-yellow mouth, baring the great tusks.

He held them there while the machine swept up and outward, the whine of
air outside growing fainter as the air thinned.
Stratosphere—ionosphere—and the Heaviside. The Fang watched with
puzzlement growing in his eyes as Eric shrieked and died, as Budd
groveled in pain and then hung limply on the back of his seat. The Fang
picked him up carefully and laid him on the deck. Something was
happening to the man. He tried to scream, and his legs kicked out. He
tried to strike out with an arm, and his head whipped back against the
floor. His eyes widened, the flesh between them thinning, the eyeballs
beginning to fuse. He died, then, for no human being can live when his
medial division starts to go to pieces. Humans are built to operate with
two sets of limbs, two eyes, two ears, two nostrils—the radiations found
that the path of least resistance in Budd Arnik was to do away with that
medial line, and it couldn’t work.

So The Fang was left, keening over the twisted bodies, mourning that he
had not done it the right way, horrified because he had been
mistaken—for he only wanted to help. Perhaps one day he will find his
function.



THE GOLDEN EGG


WHEN TIME ITSELF was half its present age, and at an unthinkable
distance, and in an unknowable dimension, he was born.

He left his world so long before he came to earth that even he did not
know how long he had been in space. He had lived so long on that world
that even he could not remember what he had been before his science
changed his race.

Though we can never know where his world lay in space, we know that it
was in a system of two mighty suns, one blue and one yellow. His planet
had an atmosphere and a great civilization and science beyond humanity’s
most profound visions. He spoke little of his planet because he hated
it.

Too perfect. Their sciences fed them, and controlled the etheric
currents that gave them comfort, and carried them from place to place,
and taught them, and cared for them in every way. For many aeons there
were members set apart to care for the machines, but in time they died
out, for they were no longer needed. There was no struggle and no
discomfort and no disease. There were therefore no frontiers, no goals,
no incentives, and eventually no possible achievements, save one—the
race itself, and the changes possible to it.

Step by step the thing was done. Limbs were not needed and wasted away
from long-lived, lazy bodies, and were replaced, redesigned, or
forgotten. And as the death of an inhabitant became more rare, rarer
still became the advent of new life. It was a mighty race, a powerful
race, a most highly civilized race, and—a sterile race.

The refinement went on endlessly, as occasional flashes of initiative
appeared down through the ages. What was unnecessary was discarded, and
what could be conceivably desirable was attained, until all that was
left was a few thousand glittering golden ovoids, supermental casings,
functionally streamlined, beautiful and bored. The beings could move as
and if they wished, through air or time or space. Everything was done
for them automatically; each was self-sufficient and uncooperative.
Brains they were, armored in a substance indestructible by anything less
powerful than the heat of the mightiest of suns or by the supercosmic
forces each could unleash at will.

But there was no will. There was nothing for them. They hung in small
groups conversing of things unimaginable to us, or they lay on the
plains of their world and lived within themselves until a few short
aeons buried them, all uncaring, in rubble and rock. Some asked to be
killed and were killed. Some were murdered by others because of
quibblings in remote philosophic discussions. Some hurled themselves
into the blue sun, starved for any new sensation, knowing they would
find there an instant’s agony. Most simply vegetated. One came away.

He stopped, in a way known to him—stopped in space so that his world and
solar system and corner of the cosmos fell away from him and left him
free. And then he traveled.

He traveled to many places and in many ways, as his whims dictated. He
extended himself at times around the curve of curved space, until the
ends of him were diametrically opposite; and then he would contract in a
straight line, reforming countless millions of light years from the
point of his extension; and his speed then was, of course, the speed of
light cubed. And sometimes he dropped from his level in time to the
level below, and would then lie poised and thoughtful during one cycle,
until he was returned to the higher level again; and it was thus he
discovered the nature of time, which is a helical band, ever revolving,
never moving in its superspace. And sometimes he would move slowly,
drifting from one gravitic pull to another, searching disinterestedly
for the unusual. It was in such a period that he came to earth.

A goose found him. He lay in some bushes by a country road, distantly
observing the earth and analyzing its elements, and the goose was a
conventional one and blindly proud of its traditional silliness. He
ignored it when it approached him and when it rapped his shell
curiously; but when it turned him over with its beak he felt that it was
being discourteous. He seized it with a paralyzing noose of radiations,
quickly read its minuscule mind for a way to annoy it, and then began
pulling its tail feathers out to see how it would react. It reacted
loudly.

Now, it so happened that Christopher Innes was on that country road,
bringing the young’un home from Sunday school. Chris was an embittered
and cynical mortal, being a normal twelve-year-old who had just learned
that increasing age and masculinity made for superiority, and was about
to be a teenager and find out differently. The young’un was his
five-year-old sister, of whom he was jealous and protective. She had
silly ideas. She was saying:

“But they _tol’_ me in school last week, Chris, so it mus’ be so, so
there. The prince came into the palace an’ everyone was asleep, an’ he
came to the room where _she_ was, an’ she was asleep, too, but he kissed
her an’ she woke up, and then everyone—”

“Aw, shut your fontanel,” said Chris, who had heard that babies shut
their fontanels when they started to grow, though he didn’t know what
one was. “You believe everything you hear. Ol’ Mr. Becker tol’ me once I
could catch a bird by putting salt on its tail, an’ then whaled me for
loadin’ up a twelve-gauge shotgun with rock salt and knockin’ off three
of his Rhode Island Reds. They tell you that stuff so they’ll have a
chance to hit you afterward.”

“I don’t care, so there,” pouted the young’un. “My teacher wouldn’t hit
me for b’lieving her.”

“Somebody will,” Chris said darkly. “What’s all that racket, I wonder?
Sounds like a duck caught in a fox trap. Let’s go see.”

Chris stopped to pick up a piece of stick in case he had a trap to pry
open, and the young’un ran ahead. When he reached her he found her
jumping up and down and clapping her hands and gurgling, “I told you so!
I told you so!” which is the most annoying thing any woman can say to
any man.

“You tol’ me whut?” he asked, and she pointed. He saw a large white
goose digging its feet into the ground, straining to get away from its
invisible bonds, while behind it lay a glittering ovoid. As they
watched, a tail feather detached itself from its anchorage and fell
beside two of its prototypes on the ground.

“Chee!” Chris breathed.

“They tol’ me that story, too!” chortled the young’un. “About the goose
that laid the golden egg. Oh, Chris, if we take that goose home an’ keep
um, we’ll be rich an’ I can have a pony an’ a hundred dolls an’—”

“Chee,” Chris said again and gingerly picked up the golden egg. As he
did so the goose was released suddenly, and its rooted claws shot it
forward face first into the earth, where it lay stunned and quonking
dismally. As only a farm child can, the young’un caught its legs
together and picked it up in her arms.

“We’re rich!” breathed Chris and laughed. Then he remembered his
assertions and frowned. “Aw, it didn’t lay no egg. Someone lost it an’
this ol’ goose jus’ found it here.”

“It’s the golden-egg goose! It is too!” shrilled the young’un.

Chris spat on the egg and rubbed it with his cuff. “It’s sure pretty,”
he said half to himself, and tossed it into the air. He must have stood
there open-mouthed for two full minutes with his hands out, because it
never came down. It vanished.

They found out later that the goose was a gander. Neither of them ever
quite got over it.

“It might be interesting,” thought the armored brain to himself as he
lay in the stratosphere, “to be a biped like that for a while. I believe
I will try it. I wonder which of the two is the more intelligent—the
feathered or unfeathered ones?” He pondered a moment over this nice
distinction and then remembered that the boy had armed himself with a
stick, while the goose had not. “They are a little ungainly,” he
thought, then shrugged mentally. “I shall be one of those.”

He plummeted down to earth, braked off, and shot along just over the
surface until he came to a small town. A movement in a tiny alley caught
his attention; a man there was leveling a gun at another across the
street. Unseen, the being from space flashed between them, and his path
intersected that of the bullet. It struck his smooth side and neither
left a mark nor changed his course by a thousandth of a degree as it
spun into the street four feet below him. The intended victim went his
way unharmed, and the man in the alley swore and went to his room to
take his gun apart wonderingly. He had never missed a shot like that
before!

Just outside the town the brain found what he had been looking for—a
field under which was a huge mass of solid rock. He came to rest in the
field and dropped from sight, sinking through sod and earth and granite
as if it had been water; and in a matter of minutes he had cut himself a
great underground chamber in the rock, with high arched walls and a
vaulted ceiling and a level, polished floor. Hovering for a moment in
midair, he tested the surrounding countryside for its exact chemical
content, sending out delicate high-frequency beams, adjusting them
fractionally for differences in molecular vibrations. The presence of a
certain fine harmonic at any given frequency indicated to him the exact
location of the elements he needed. There were not many. These bipeds
were hardly complex.

“A type—a type,” he thought. “I must have something to work from. I
gather that these creatures are differentiated from each other in
certain ways.”

He slipped up through the roof of his chamber and went back to the town,
where he found a busy corner and hid up under an eave, where he could
watch the people passing.

“Those smaller ones must be the males,” he ruminated, “the ones that
strut and slink and apparently do little work and wear all those blatant
colors and so ridiculously accentuate the color of the oral orifice. And
the large, muscular ones, I suppose, are females. How drab.”

He projected a beam that would carry thought impulses to him. It touched
the mind of a young man who was mooning after a trim blonde just ahead
of him. He was a hesitant and shy young man, and a passionate one, and
the battle he fought within himself, between his inclinations and his
diffidence, almost dislodged the creature in the eaves.

“Whew!” thought the golden ovoid. “An emotional monstrosity! And it
appears that I was a little mistaken about males and females. How very
quaint!

“I shall be one of the males,” he decided at length.

Wisely, he searched about until he found a girl who was suffering from
every “osis” in the advertisements, as well as an inferiority complex,
acne, bunions, and tone-deafness, knowing that her idea of an ideal man
would be really something. Inserting gentle thought tendrils into her
mind, he coaxed her to dream a lovely dream of her ideal man as she
walked along, and carefully filed away all the essentials, disregarding
only the passion the dream man showered on the poor starved creature.
Enveloped by the dream he had induced, she walked into the path of an
automobile and was rather badly hurt, which was all right, because she
later married the driver.

The brain sped back to the laboratory, nursing his mental picture of a
muscular, suave, urbane, sophisticated, and considerate demigod, and
began to assemble his machinery.

Now the brain had no powers, as such. What he had was _control_. The
engineer of a twenty-car train would be stupid even to dream about
hurling such a train at a hundred and twenty miles an hour along a track
if had to do so himself with his own physical powers. But with his
controls the thing is easy. In the case of the brain, his controls were
as weak compared with the final results of it as is a man’s arm compared
with the two thousand horsepower delivered by a locomotive. But the
brain knew the true nature of space: that it is not empty, but a mass of
balanced forces.

Press two pencils together, end to end. As long as the pressure is even
and balanced the effect is the same as if the pencils were just resting
their ends together. Now get some tiny force to press on the point where
the pencils come together. They snap out of line; they deliver a
powerful resultant, out of all proportion to the push which upset the
equilibrium, and you probably break a knuckle. The resultant is at right
angles to the original equalized forces; it goes just so far and then
the forces come together in equilibrium again, knuckles notwithstanding.

We live in a resilient universe; the momentary upset is negligible,
since the slack is taken up to infinity. Such a control had the brain
from space. Any and every form of energy—and matter is energy—was his to
control, to any degree. The resultant from one tiny upset balance could
be used to upset another; and a chain like this could be extended _ad
infinitum_. Fortunately, the brain knew how not to make mistakes!

He made his apparatus quickly and efficiently. A long table; tanks and
small bins of pure elements; a highly complex machine with projectors
and reflectors capable of handling any radiation that can be indicated
on a circular spectrum, for compounding and conditioning the basic
materials. The machine had no switches, no indicators, no dials. It was
built to do a certain job, and as soon as it was completed it began
working. When the job was done it quit. It was the kind of machine whose
perfection ruined the brain’s civilization, and has undoubtedly ruined
others, and will most certainly ruin more.

On the surface of the table appeared a shadow. Cell by cell appeared as
the carbon-magnesium-calcium mixtures were coordinated and projected by
the machine. A human skeleton was almost suddenly complete—that is, an
almost human skeleton. The brain was impatient with unnecessary detail,
and if there were fewer vertebrae and more but finer ribs, and later, a
lack of appendix, tonsils, sinal cavities, and _abductors minimi
digiti_, then it was only in the interest of logic. The flesh formed
over the skeleton, fiber by perfect fiber. Blood vessels were flat,
their insides sealed to each other until the body was complete enough to
start distributing blood. The thing was “born” with a full stomach; it
began its functions long before it was complete enough for the brain’s
entry.

While it was forming, the brain lay in a corner of the room reasoning it
out. He knew its construction and had carried it out. Now he asked the
reasons for its being this way, and calculated its functions. Hearing,
sight with light, communication by vibrating tissues, degree of
telepathy, organs of balance, possible and probable mental and physical
reflexes, all such elementary things were carefully reasoned out and
recorded on that fathomless brain. It was not necessary to examine the
body itself or to look at it. He had planned it, and it would be as he
had planned. If he wished to study any part of it before it formed, he
had his memory.

The body lay complete eventually. It was a young and strong and noble
creature. It lay there breathing deeply and slowly, and under its broad,
intellectual forehead its eyes glowed with the pale light of idiocy. The
heart beat firmly, and a tiny switch in the left thigh developed and
disappeared as the cells adjusted themselves to each other. The hair was
glossy and black and was in a pronounced widow’s peak. The hairline was
the line separating the two parts of the head, for the top part was a
hinged lid which now gaped open. The white matter of the brain was
formed completely and relaid to make room for the metal-encased creator.

He drifted up to the head of the table and settled into the open skull.
A moment, and then it snapped shut. The young man—for such he was
now—lay quiet for a long while, as the brain checked the various
senses—temperature, pressure, balance, and sight. Slowly the right arm
raised and lowered, and then the left, and then the legs rose together
and swung over the edge of the table and the young man sat up. He shook
his head and gazed about with his rapidly clearing eyes, turned his head
stiffly, and got to his feet. His knees buckled slightly; he grasped the
table spasmodically, not bending his fingers because he hadn’t thought
of it yet. His mouth opened and closed, and he ran his tongue over the
inside of his mouth and lips and teeth.

“What an awkward way to get around,” he thought, trying his weight on
one leg and then the other. He flexed his arms and hands and hopped up
and down cautiously.

“Agh!” he said waveringly. “A-a-a-gh-ha-agh!” He listened to himself,
enchanted by this new way of expressing himself. “Ka. Pa. Ta. Sa. Ha.
Ga. La. Ra,” he said, testing the possibilities of linguals, gutturals,
sibilants, palatals, labials, singly and in combination.
“Ho-o-o-o-owe-e-e-e!” he howled, trying sustained tones from low to high
pitch.

He tottered to the wall, and with one hand on it began padding up and
down the room. Soon the support was no longer necessary, and he walked
alone; and then he went faster and faster and ran round and round,
hooting strangely. He was a little disgusted to find that violent
activity made his heart beat fast and his breathing harder. Flimsy
things, these bipeds. He sat panting on the table and began testing his
senses of taste and touch, his muscular and oral and aural and visual
memories.

Chauncey Thomas was an aristocrat. No one had ever seen him in patchy
pants or broken shoes. They would, though, he reflected bitterly, if he
didn’t get a chance to steal some soon. “What de hell,” he muttered.
“All I ast is t’ree meals a day and good clo’es, an’ a house an’ stuff,
an’ no work to do. Heh! An’ dey tell me I can get t’ings by workin’. It
ain’t worth it. It just ain’t worth it!”

He had every right to be bitter, he thought. Not only do they throw him
down three flights of stairs in the town’s most exclusive apartment
house just because he was sleeping on the landing, but they stick him in
jail for it. Did he get a chance to rest in jail? He did not. They made
him work. They made him whitewash cells. That was hardly right. Then
they gave him the bum’s rush out of town. It was unfair. What if it was
the ninth time they had booked him? “I got to find me another town,” he
decided. He was thinking of the sheriff’s remark that next time he was
run in the sheriff would pin a murder on him if he had to kill one of
his deputies to do it.

Chauncey turned his slow, unwilling feet onto the Springfield Turnpike
and headed away from town. The night was two hours old and very warm.
Chauncey slouched along with his hands in his pockets, feeling
misunderstood. A slight movement in the shadows beside the road escaped
his attention, and he never realized that anyone was there until he
found himself picked up by the slack of his trousers and dangling
uncomfortably from a mighty fist.

“I ain’t done nothin’!” he squalled immediately, resorting to a
conversational reflex of his. “Le’s talk this over, now bud. Aw, come
on, now; you got nothin’ on me. You—_awk!”_

Chauncey’s mouthings became wordless when he had managed, by twisting
around in his oversize clothes, to see his captor. The vision of a
muscular giant, at least six feet five, regarding him out of fathomless,
shadowy eyes as he held him at arm’s length was too much for Chauncey
Thomas. He broke down and wailed.

The naked Apollo spun the bum about in midair and caught him by the
belt. He plucked curiously at the worn jacket, reached down and tore a
piece of leather out of the side of an outsize sport shoe as if it had
been made of blotting paper, studied it carefully, tossed it aside.

“Lemme go!” shrieked Chauncey. “Gee, boss, I wasn’t doin’ nothin’,
honest I wasn’t. I’m goin’ to Springfield, I’ll get a job or somethin’,
boss!” The words burned his mouth as he said them, but this was an
emergency and he had to say something.

“Gha!” grunted the giant, and dropped him on his ear in the middle of
the road.

Chauncey scrambled to his feet and scuttled off down the road. The giant
stood watching him as he slowed, made a U-turn, and came running back
under the influence of a powerful hypnotic suggestion emanating from
that great clean body. He stood awed and trembling before the newborn
one, wishing he were dead, wishing he were away from there—even in jail.

“Who-who are you?” he faltered.

The other caught Chauncey’s shifty eyes in his own deep gaze. The hobo’s
shaken mind was soothed; he blinked twice and sat down on his knees
beside the road, staring upward into the inscrutable face of this
frightening, fascinating man. Something seemed to be crawling into
Chauncey’s mind, creeping about there. He felt himself being drawn out;
his memories examined; his knowledge of human society and human customs
and traditions and history. Things he thought he had forgotten and
wanted to forget popped up, and he felt them being mulled over. Within a
few minutes the giant had as complete a knowledge of human conduct and
speech as Chauncey Thomas had ever had.

He stepped back, and Chauncey slumped gasping to the ground. He felt
depleted.

“Get up, bum,” said the big man in Chauncey’s own idiom.

Chauncey got up; there was no mistaking the command in that resonant
voice. He cringed before him and whined: “Whatcha gonna do wit’ me,
boss? I ain’t—”

“Shut up!” said the other. “I ain’t gonna hurt you.”

Chauncey looked at the immobile face. “Well … I … I guess I’ll be on my
way.”

“Aw, stick around. Whatcha scared of?”

“Well … nothin’ … but, who are you, anyway?”

“I’m Elron,” said the giant, using the first euphonious syllables that
came to mind.

“Oh. Where’s yer clo’es? You been rolled?”

“Naw. Well, yeah. Wait here for me; I think I can—”

Elron bounded over the hedge, not wanting to astound the little tramp
too much. From Chauncey’s mind he had stolen a mental photograph of what
Chauncey considered a beautiful outfit. It was a plaid suit with a
diamond-checked vest and yellow shoes; a wing collar and a ten-gallon
hat. Slipping into his underground laboratory, Elron threw back the
casing of the complex projector that had built him his body, and made a
few swift adjustments. A moment later he joined Chauncey, fully clad in
Chauncey’s own spectacular idea of tailoring to taste.

“Hully gee!” breathed Chauncey.

They walked along the road together, Chauncey quite speechless, Elron
pensive. A few cars passed them; Chauncey automatically and without hope
flung a practiced thumb toward each. They were both surprised when a
lavish roadster ground to a stop ahead of them. The door was flung open;
Chauncey slid in front of Elron and would have climbed in but for
Elron’s grasping him by the scruff of the neck and hauling him back.

“In the rumble, lug,” he ground out.

“Nuttin’ good ever happens t’ me,” muttered Chauncey as he followed
orders. He had seen the driver. She was lovely.

“Where are you bound?” she asked as Elron closed the door.

“Springfield,” he said, remembering from something Chauncey had said
that the town was on this road. He looked at this newest acquaintance.
She was as tiny and perfect as he was big and perfect, and she handled
the car with real artistry. Her eyes were deep auburn to match her hair.
Judging by human standards, Elron thought her very pleasing to look
upon.

“I’ll take you there,” she said.

“T’anks, lady.”

She looked at him quickly.

“What’s up, babe?” he asked.

“Oh—nothing. Don’t call me ‘babe.’ ”

“Okay, okay.”

Again she flashed him a look. “Are you—kidding me?” she asked.

“What about?”

“You look—oh, I don’t know.”

“Spill it, sister.”

“Oh, sort of—well, not like the kind who calls girls ‘babe.’ ”

“Oh,” he said. “You mean—you’d say it different, like.” He was having
trouble with Chauncey’s limited vocabulary.

“Something like that. What are you going to do in Springfield?”

“Just look around a little, I guess. I want to see a city.”

“Don’t tell me you never saw a city!”

“Listen,” he snapped, covering up his error by falling back on one of
Chauncey’s devices, “it ain’t worryin’ you any, is it? What do you
care?”

“Oh, I’m sorry,” she said acidly. He sensed something strained about the
silence that followed.

“Mad, huh?”

She looked at him scornfully and sniffed.

The trivial impasse intrigued him. “Stop here,” he ordered her.

_“What?”_ she asked furiously.

He leaned forward and caught her eye. _“Stop here!”_

She cut the ignition and the big car slid to a stop. Elron took her
shoulder and turned her to him. She almost struggled but hadn’t time.

Tendrils of thought stole into her brain, explored her memories, her
tastes, her opinions and philosophies and vocabulary. He learned why it
was _déclassé_ to address a woman as “babe,” and that among civilized
people ten-gallon hats were not worn with wing collars. He liked the
language she used a little better than Chauncey’s harsh inadequacies. He
learned what music was, and a great deal about money, which, strangely
enough, was something that almost never crossed Chauncey’s mind. He had
learned something of the girl herself; her name was Ariadne Drew, she
had a great deal of wealth she had not earned, and she was so used to
being treated according to her station in life that she was careless
about such things as picking up hitchhikers on the road.

He let her go, snatching the memory of the incident from its place in
her mind, so that she started the car and drove off.

“Now what on earth did I stop for?”

“So I could check up on that rear tire,” he ad-libbed. He thought back
about things he had discovered that might interest her. Clothes were a
big item.

“I must apologize,” he said to her, word for word in her own vernacular,
“for this hat. It’s just too, too revolting. I saw a cute little number
the other day in a shoppe on the avenue, and I mean to get it. My dear,
I _mean!”_

She glanced aghast at his noble profile and bulging shoulders. He
chatted on.

“I saw Suzy Greenfield the other day. You know Suzy. Oh, she didn’t see
_me!_ I took care of that! And do you know who she was _with?_ That
horrible Jenkins person!”

“Who _are_ you?” she asked him.

“I hear that Suzy is—What? Who am I? Oh, yes; about Suzy. You’ve
probably heard this awful gossip before”—she had!—“so stop me if you
have. But she told her husband—”

“This is as far as I go,” snapped the girl, wheeling the car over to the
curb.

“Well, I—” Elron sensed that the right thing to do would be to get out
of the car. He opened the door and turned to her.

“Thank you for the lift, darling. Let me know if I can do the same for
you sometime.” He stepped up onto the walk, and she slammed the door and
rolled the window open.

“You’ve forgotten to polish your fingernails,” she said nastily, and
slammed the car into gear.

“Now what the hell did you do?” asked a voice at the side. Chauncey was
looking longingly after the roadster.

“Don’t swear,” said Elron. “It’s vulgar. You are very crude, Chauncey. I
don’t want to have you around. Good-by, darling.” Could Elron help it if
Ariadne Drew called everybody “darling”?

The little bum stood open-mouthed, staring after the Greek god in his
noisy plaid suit, and then followed slowly. “Dat mug’ll bear watchin’!”
he muttered. “Hully gee!”

Elron, with his new-found knowledge of human affairs, had little trouble
securing a few dollars from a man he passed on the street—all he had to
do was to demand it—and getting a hotel room for his body. From
Ariadne’s mind he had found out what handwriting was, and he signed the
register and paid for a room without a hitch. Once his body was parked
conventionally in bed, he popped the head open and slipped out. He felt
that the body would relax a little better without him.

He drifted out of the window and hung for a while high above the town,
searching for a familiar vibration—the impulses of Ariadne’s mind. Freed
from the cumbersome human body, Elron was far more sensitive to such
things. He wanted to observe Ariadne now because he wanted to check up
on his performance.

He caught it soon. It was to him as a gentle perfume is to us. He
whisked over to the outskirts of the city and settled down toward a
massive red brick pile surrounded by lovely landscaping. He circled it
twice, finding her exact place in the house, and then dropped down the
chimney. He hovered just above the artificial logs in the fireplace and
began his eavesdropping.

Ariadne was sitting in her extravagant living room, chatting with—of all
people—the redoubtable Suzy Greenfield. Suzy was a small-souled,
graceless girl with the ability to draw a remark out of any given
acquaintance, and by ardent agreement she could cull enough back-biting
comment to keep her busy for weeks. She looked like a buck-toothed
sparrow, dressed like a sweepstakes winner from Dubuque, and had a
personality as soothing as the seven-year itch.

“Well, what have you _heard_ today?” she asked expectantly.

Ariadne was gazing into far distances, and she only smiled. “Oh, Ari,”
said Suzy, “come on! I know something must have happened today from the
way you’re acting. Please; you never tell me _anything!”_

Ariadne, being a woman, ignored this untruth and would have changed the
subject had not Elron, in the chimney, gently stroked certain of her
brain convolutions with his intangible tentacles. She stared up
suddenly, turned to Suzy. Elron could have had her reaction directly,
but he was interested in the way she would express it to another and in
the way the other would receive it.

“If you must know,” said Ariadne, “I met someone today. A man.” She
sighed. Suzy leaned forward happily. When she was not all mouth she was
all ears.

“Where?”

“Picked him up on the road. Sue, you never saw such a pair as those two.
They looked like a couple of comedians. One was a tramp—at first I
thought they both were. The little one got into the rumble and the nice
handsome one rode in front.”

“Handsome?”

“Darling, you don’t _know!_ I’ve never seen—”

“But you said they were comic!”

_“Looked_ comic, dear.” In the fireplace the golden-armored brain gave
the equivalent of a nod and sent a thought current out to Ariadne. As if
answering a question, she said, “He would have looked _so_ nice in a
soft gray suit and a Homburg. And—I don’t know what he is, but I think
he should be an adventurer. A sort of poet-writer-adventurer.”

“But what _was_ he?”

Ariadne suddenly felt it possible to speak of other things. She got Suzy
started on the peccadilloes of her long-suffering spouse and soon had
completely eclipsed all thought of her volatile mystery man. Elron was
gone.

Back at the hotel, the ovoid hovered over his sleeping body and thought
bitter thoughts. He was ashamed of himself for underestimating the
subtle nuances of human behavior. He had succeeded in making something
ridiculous out of this biped he had created, and the fact annoyed him.
There was a challenge in it; Elron could control powers that would
easily disintegrate this whole tiny galaxy and spread its dust through
seven dimensions, if he so wished it; and yet he was most certainly
being made a fool of by a woman. It occurred to him that in all the
universes there was nothing quite as devious and demanding as a woman’s
mind. It likewise occurred to him that a woman is easy to control as
long as she always has her way. He was determined to see how closely a
man could resemble a woman’s ideal and still exist; and he was going to
do it with this man he had made himself responsible for.

It was a long and eventful three months before Ari Drew saw Elron again.
He went away in his ten-gallon hat and his blatant plaids and his yellow
shoes; and he took away with him his conversational variants and
Chauncey the bum. He went to the greatest city of them all and sought
out people who knew about the things that he must be to achieve the
phenomenal status of a man good enough for Ariadne.

He found it a fascinating game. In the corridors of universities, in
prizefight training camps, in girls’ schools and kindergartens and gin
mills and honkytonks and factories he cornered people, spoke with them,
strained and drained and absorbed what their minds held. Sorting and
blending, he built himself an intellect, the kind of mentality that awed
lightweights like Suzy Greenfield, who spell Intellect with a capital I.
Instead of trying to suit each man’s speech by using each man’s speech,
he developed a slightly accented idiom of his own, something personal
and highly original. He gave himself an earthly past, from a neatly
photostated birth certificate to gilt-edged rent receipts. He sounded
out the minds of editors and publishers, and through the welter of odd
tastes and chaotic ideology therein he extracted sound and workable
ideas on what work was needed. He actually sold poetry.

While his body slept in luxury, his mind hurtled over the earth, carried
by its illimitably powerful golden shell. Elron could lecture a New York
audience on the interesting people he had met in Melbourne, Australia,
and the next day produce a cablegram from one or two of those people
whom he had visited during the night. Scattered all over the earth were
individuals who believed they had known this phenomenal young man for
years.

It was at one of those pale-pink and puffy poetry teas that Ariadne saw
Elron again. Suzy gave the tea as a current-celebrity show. Ari came
gracefully late, looking lovely in something powder-blue, chastely
sophisticated. Elron was scheduled to speak—something about
“Metempsychosis and Modern Life.” Ari was scheduled to sing. But she—

He was watching for her. He was dressed in soft gray, and the Homburg
awaited him by the door. Her entrance was as ever in the grand manner,
and all realized it; but for her it was that breath-catching experience
of realizing that she was putting on the show for just one person in all
that crowded room. She’d heard of him, of course. He was the “rage,”
which is a term used in polite society to describe current successes.
Would-bes and has-beens are known as outrages.

But she had never seen him that she remembered. He rose and stood over
her and smiled, and he wordlessly took her arm, bowed at the hostess,
and led her out. Just like that. Poor Suzy. Her protruding teeth barely
hid the tiny line of foam that formed on her lips.

“Well!” Ariadne said as they reached the street. “That was a terrible
thing to do!”

_“Tsk, tsk!”_ he said, and helped her into his new sixteen-cylinder
puddle-jumper. “I imagine Suzy will get over it. Think of all the people
she’ll be able to tell!”

Ari laughed a little, looking at him strangely. “Mr. Elron, you’re
not … not the same man that—”

“That you picked up on the pike three months ago, dressed like a
comedian?”

She blushed.

“Yes, I’m the man.”

“I was … rude when I left you.”

“You had a right to be, Ariadne.”

“What happened to that hideous little tramp you were traveling with?”

“Chauncey!” Elron bellowed, and the trimly uniformed chauffeur swiveled
around and nodded and smiled.

“Good heavens!” said Ariadne.

“He doesn’t offend any more with his atrocious diction,” said Elron
precisely. “I found it possible to change his attitude toward work, but
to change his diction was beyond even me. He no longer speaks.”

She looked at him for quite a while as the huge car rolled out into the
country. “You’re everything I thought you might possibly be,” she
breathed.

He knew that.

That was their first evening together. There were many others, and Elron
conducted himself perfectly, as befitted a brilliant and urbane biped.
Catering to every wish and whim of Ari’s amused him, for she was as
moody as a beautiful woman can be, and he delighted in predicting and
anticipating her moods. He adjusted himself to her hour by hour, day by
day. He was ideal. He was perfect.

So—she got bored. He adjusted himself to that, too, and she was furious.
If she didn’t care, neither did he. Bad tactics, and something that
supercosmic forces could do nothing about.

Oh, he tried; yes, indeed. He questioned her and he psychoanalyzed her
and he even killed off all the streptococci in her bloodstream to see if
that was the trouble. But all he got was a passive resentment from her.
Half as old as time itself, he knew something of patience; but his
patience began to give way under the pressure applied by this very human
woman.

And, of course, there was a showdown. It was one afternoon at her home,
and it was highly spectacular. He could read her mind with ease, but he
could know only what thoughts she had formed. She knew he annoyed her.
She also knew she liked him immensely; and for that reason she made no
attempt to analyze her hostility toward him, and therefore he was
helpless, tangled in her tenuous resentment.

It started with a very little thing—he came into the room and she stood
at the window with her back to him and would not turn around. She did
not speak or act coldly toward him, but simply would not face him. A
very petty thing. After ten minutes of that he strode across the room
and spun her around. She caught her heel in the rug, lost her footing,
fell against the mantel, and stretched becomingly unconscious on the
floor in a welter of broken gew-gaws. Elron stood a moment feeling
foolish, and then lifted her in his arms. Before he could set her down
she had twined her arms around his neck and was kissing him
passionately. Poor, magnficent thing, he didn’t know what to do.

“Oh, Elron,” she blubbered. “You brute! You struck me. Oh, darling! I
love you so! I never thought you would do it!”

A great light of understanding burst for Elron. _That_ was the basic
secret of this thing called woman! She could not love him when he acted
in a perfectly rational way. She could not love him when he was what she
thought was ideal. But when he did something “brutish”—a word synonymous
with “unintelligent”—she loved him. He looked down at her beautiful lips
and her beautiful black eye, and he laughed and kissed her and then set
her down gently.

“Be back in a couple of days, darling,” he said, and strode out,
ignoring her cries.

He knew what to do now. He was grateful to her for amusing him for a
while and for teaching him something new. But he could not afford to
upset himself by associating with her any longer. To keep her happy he
would have to act unintelligent periodically; and that was one thing he
could not stand. He went away. He got into his huge automobile and drove
away down the turnpike.

“It’s a pity that I’m not a man,” he reflected as he drove. “I’d really
like to be, but—Oh, I can’t be bothered keeping track of anything as
complicated as Ariadne!”

He pulled up at the outskirts of a small town and found his laboratory.
Once inside, he lay down on the table, popped open his skull and
emerged. Going to the machine in the corner, he added and took away and
changed and tinkered, and the glow began to form again around the still
body. Something was happening inside the skull. Something took shape
inside, and as it happened the skull slowly closed. In three hours Elron
the man climbed off the table and stood looking about him. The golden
egg flew up to his shoulder and nestled there.

“Thank you for this … this consciousness,” said Elron.

“Oh, that’s all right,” replied the ovoid telepathically. “You’ve had it
for some months, anyway. Only I’ve just given you what you needed to
appreciate it with.”

“What am I to do?” asked the man.

“Go back to Ariadne. Carry on from where I left off. You can—you’re a
man, perfect in every cell and gland and tissue.”

“Thank you for that. I have wanted her but was never directed—”

“Never mind that. Marry her and make her happy. Never tell her about
me—you have history enough to carry you through your lifetime, and
brains enough, now, to do the work you have been doing. Ari’s been good
to me; I owe her this much.”

“Anything else?”

“Yes. Just one thing; but burn this in your brain in letters of fire: A
woman can’t possibly love a man unless he’s part dope. Be a little
stupid all the time and very stupid once in a while. But _don’t_ be
perfect!”

“Okay. So long.”

“Be happy … er … son—”

Elron the man left the laboratory and went out into the sunlight. The
golden egg settled to the floor and lay there an hour or so. He laughed
once within himself and said, “Too perfect!”

Then he felt terribly, terribly lonely.



TWO PERCENT INSPIRATION


DR. BJORNSEN WAS a thorough man. He thought that way and acted that way
and expected others to exceed him in thoroughness. Since this was an
impossibility, he expressed an almost vicious disappointment in
incompetents, and took delight in pointing out the erring one’s
shortcomings. He was in an ideal position for this sort of thing, being
principal of the Nudnick Institute.

Endowed by Professor Thaddeus MacIlhainy Nudnick, the institute was
conducted for the purpose of supplying brilliant young assistants to
Professor Nudnick. It enrolled two thousand students every year, and the
top three of the graduating class were given subsistence and a
considerable salary for the privilege of entering Nudnick’s eight-year
secondary course, where they underwent some real study before they began
as assistants in the Nudnick laboratories.

Bjornsen never congratulated an honor student, for they had behaved as
expected. He found many an opportunity of delivering a kick or two in
the slats to those who had fallen by the wayside; and of these
opportunities, the ones that pleased him the most were the ones
involving expulsion. He considered himself an expert disciplinarian, and
he was more than proud of his forte for invective.

It was with pleasurable anticipation that he summoned one Hughie
McCauley to his office one afternoon. Hughie was a second-year student,
and made ideal bait for Bjornsen’s particular line of attack. The kid
was intelligent to a degree, and fairly well read, so that he could
understand Bjornsen’s more subtle insults. He was highly sensitive, so
that he could be hurt by what Bjornsen said, and he showed it. He lacked
sense, so that he continually retorted to Bjornsen’s comments, giving
the principal blurted statements to pick meticulously apart while the
victim writhed. Hughie was such perfect material for persecution that
Bjornsen rather hated to expel him; but he comforted himself by
recalling the fact that there were hundreds of others who could be made
to squirm. He’d take his time with Hughie, however; stretch it out,
savor the boy’s suffering before he kicked him out of the school.

“Send him in,” Bjornsen told the built-in communicator on his luxurious
desk. He leaned back in his chair, put the tips of his fingers together,
lowered his head so that only the whites of his eyes were visible as he
stared through his shaggy brows at the door, and waited.

Hughie came in, his hair plastered unwillingly down, his fear and
resentment sticking out all over him. The kid’s knees knocked together
so that he stumbled against the doorpost. There was a gloss of cold
sweat on his forehead. From previous experience, he had no difficulty in
taking up the front-and-center position before the principal’s desk.

“Y-yes, sir!”

Bjornsen made a kissing noise with his wrinkled lips before he spoke,
threw back his head and glared. “You might,” he said quietly, “have
washed your ears before you came in here.” He knew that there is no more
painfully undignified attack for an adolescent, particularly if it is
not true. Hughie flushed and stuck out his lower lip.

Bjornsen said, “You are an insult to this institution. You were in a
position, certainly, to know yourself before you applied for admission;
therefore, the very act of applying was dishonest and insincere. You
must have known that you were unfit even to enter these buildings, to
say nothing of daring to perpetuate the mistake of the board of
examiners in staying here. I am thoroughly disgusted with you.” Bjornsen
smiled his disgust, and it was a smile that perfectly matched his words.
He bent to flip the switch on the communicator, cutting off its mellow
buzz. “Yes?”

“Dr. Bjornsen! Professor Nudnick is—”

The annunciator’s hollow voice was drowned out in the crashing of a
hard, old foot against the door. Nudnick kicked it open because he knew
it could not be slammed, and he liked startling Bjornsen. “What sort of
nonsense is this?” he demanded, in a voice that sounded like flatulence
through ten feet of lead pipe. “Since when has that vinegar-visaged
female out there been instructed to announce me? Damn it, you’ll see me
whether you’re busy or not!”

Bjornsen had bounced out of his chair to indulge in every sort of
sycophantism short of curtsying. “Professor Nudnick! I am delighted to
see you!” This was perfect. The only thing that could possibly increase
Hughie McCauley’s agony was to have an audience to his dismissal; and
what better audience could he have than the great endower of the school
himself? Bjornsen rubbed his hands, which yielded an unpleasant dry
sound, and began.

“Professor Nudnick,” he said, catching Hughie’s trembling shoulder and
using it to thrust the attached boy between him and Nudnick, “you could
not have picked a better time to arrive. This shivering example of
negation is typical of the trash that has been getting by the examiners
recently. Now I may prove to you that my recent letter on the subject
was justified.”

Nudnick looked calmly at Hughie. “I don’t read your letters,” he said.
“They bore me. What’s he done?”

Bjornsen, a little taken aback, put this new resentment into his words.
“Done? What he hasn’t done is more important. He has neglected to tidy
up his thinking habits. He indulges in reading imaginative fiction
during his hours of relaxation instead of reading books pertaining in
some way to his studies. He whistles in corridors. He asks impertinent
questions of his instructors. He was actually discovered writing a
letter to a … a _girl!”_

_“Tsk, tsk,”_ chuckled the professor. “This during classes?”

“Certainly not! Even he would not go that far, though I expect it
hourly.”

“Hm-m-m. Is he intelligent?”

“Not very.”

“What kind of questions does he ask?”

“Oh—stupid ones. About the nature of a space-warp, whatever that may be,
and about whether or not time travel is possible. A dreamer—that’s what
he is, and a scientific institution is no place for dreamers.”

“What are you going to do with him?”

“Expel him, of course.”

Nudnick reached over and pulled the boy out of Bjornsens’s claw. “Then
why not post him as expelled and spare him this agony? It so happens,
Bjornsen, that this is just the kind of boy I came here to get. I’m
going to take him with me on a trip to the Asteroid Belt. Salary at two
thousand a month, if he’s willing. Are you, what’s-your-name?”

Hughie nodded swimmingly.

“Eh.” Beckoning the boy, Nudnick started for the door. “My advice to
you, Bjornsen,” grated the scientist, “is as follows. Keep your nose out
of the students’ lives on their off hours. If you must continue in these
little habits of yours, take it out in pulling the wings off flies. And
get married. Take this advice or hand in your resignation effective this
date next month.”

Hughie paused at the door, looking back. Nudnick gave him a quick look,
shoved him toward Bjornsen. “Go ahead, kid. I’d like it, too.”

Hughie grinned, walked up to Bjornsen, and with a quick one-two knocked
the principal colder than a cake of ice.

They were eight days out now, and these were the eight:

The day when the unpredictable Professor Nudnick had whisked Hughie up
to his mountain laboratory, and had put him to work loading the last of
an astonishingly inclusive list of stores into the good ship
_Stoutfella_. Hughie began to regard the professor as a little less than
the god he had imagined, and a little more as a human being. The old man
was perpetually cheerful, pointing out Hughie’s stupidities and his
little triumphs without differentiating between them. He treated Hughie
with a happy tolerance, and seemed to be more delighted with the lad’s
ignorance than by his comparatively meager knowledge. When Hughie had
haltingly asked if he might take a suitcase full of fiction with him,
Nudnick had chuckled dryly and sent him off to the nearest town with a
pocketful of money. Hughie arrived back at the laboratory laden and
blissful. They took off.

And the day when they heard the last broadcast news report before they
whisked through the Heaviside layer. Among other items was one to the
effect that Dr. Emil Bjornsen, principal of the Nudnick Institute, had
resigned to accept a government job. Hughie had laughed gleefully at
this, but Nudnick shook his shaggy old head. “Not funny, Hughie,” he
said. “Bjornsen’s a shrewd man. I’ve an idea why he did that, and it has
nothing to do with my … our … ultimatum.”

Struck by the scientist’s sober tone, Hughie calmed down to ask, “What
did he do it for?”

Nudnick clapped a perforated course card into the automatic pilot,
reeled its lower edge into the integrator, and checked his controls
before switching them over to the “Iron Mike.”

“It has to do with this trip,” he said, waving the kid into the opposite
seat, “and it’s about time you knew what this is all about. What we’re
after is a mineral deposit of incalculable value. How it is, I don’t
know, but somewhere in that mess of nonsense out there”—he indicated the
Asteroid Belt—“is a freak. It’s a lump like the rest of the asteroids,
but it differs from the rest of them. It must’ve been a wanderer,
drifting heaven alone knows how far in space until it got caught in the
Belt. It’s almost pure, through and through—an oxide of prosydium. That
mean anything to you?”

Hughie pushed a couple of freckles together over his nose. “Yeah. Rare
Earth element. Used for … lessee … something to do with Nudnick Metal,
isn’t it?”

“That’s right. Do you know what Nudnick Metal is?”

“No. Far as I know it’s a trade secret, known only to the workers in the
Isopolis Laboratories.” The Isopolis Laboratories were half heaven and
half prison. By government grant, the great Nudnick plant there turned
out the expensive metal. It was manned by workers who would never again
set foot outside the walls—men who did not have to, for everything they
could possibly want was supplied to them. There was no secret about the
way they lived, nor about anything in the fifty-square-mile enclosure
except the process itself. “Nudnick Metal is a synthetic element,
thousands of times denser than anything else known. That’s about all I
remember,” Hughie finished lamely.

Nudnick chuckled. “I’ll let you in on it. The metal is the ideal
substance for coating spaceships, because it’s as near being
impenetrable as anything in the Universe. This ship, for instance, is
coated with a layer of the stuff less than one
one-hundred-fifty-thousandths of an inch thick, and yet is protected
against practically anything. We could run full tilt into an object the
size of Earth, and though the impact would drill a molten hole thirty
miles deep and most likely kill us a little bit, the hull wouldn’t even
be scratched. Heh. Want to know what Nudnick Metal is? I’ll tell you.
Copper. Just plain, ordinary, everyday Cu!”

Hughie said, “Copper? But what makes it—How is it—”

“Easy enough. You know, Hughie, it’s the simple things that are really
effective. Try to remember that. Nudnick Metal is _collapsed_ copper;
collapsed in the way that the elements of the companions of Sirius and
Procyon are collapsed. You know the analogy—pile wine-glasses into a
barrel, and there’ll be a definite, small number of glasses that can be
packed in. But crush them to fine powder, and then start packing. The
barrel will hold thousands upon thousands more. The molecules of Nudnick
Metal are crushed that way. You could build four hundred ships this
size, from stem to stern of solid copper, and you’d use less copper than
that which was used to coat this hull.

“The process is only guessed at because copper is synthesized from the
uranium we ship into Isopolis ostensibly for power. As you just said, it
is known that we import prosydium. That’s the only clue anyone but I and
the Isopolites have as to the nature of the process. But prosydium isn’t
an ingredient. It’s more like a catalyst. Of all the elements, only
prosydium can, by its atomic disintegration, absorb the unbelievable
heat liberated by the collapse of the copper molecules. I won’t go into
the details of it, but the energy thus absorbed and transmuted can be
turned back to hasten the collapsing process. The tough thing about
prosydium is that it’s as rare as a hairy egg, and so far no one’s been
able to synthesize it in usable quanities. All of which makes Nudnick
Metal a trifle on the expensive side. This lump of prosydium in the Belt
will cut the manufacturing cost way down, and the man or concern or
planet that gets hold of it can write his—its—own ticket. See?”

“I will,” said Hughie slowly, “if you’ll say all that over again a few
thousand times a day for the next couple of years.” The boy was
enormously flattered by the scientist’s confiding in him. Though he
himself was not qualified to use it, he knew that the information he had
just received was worth countless millions in the right quarters. It
frightened him a little. He wanted to keep the old man talking, and so
reached for a question. “Why do we have to sneak out in a little ship
like this? Why not take a flotilla of destroyers from Earth and take
possession?”

“Can’t do things that way, son. The Joint Patrol puts the kibosh on
that. You can blame the jolly old idealism of the Interplanetary Peace
Congress for that, and the Equal Armament Amendment. You see, Mars and
Earth are forced by mutual agreement to maintain absolutely equal
armament, to share all new developments and to police space with a Joint
Patrol. A flotilla of Earth ships taking off without the knowledge or
consent of the Patrol constitutes an act of war. War is a nasty business
for a lot of people who weren’t in on starting it. We can’t do it that
way. But if I turn over the location of my find to the Patrol, it
becomes the property of the Joint Patrol, neatly tied up in red tape,
and it doesn’t do anybody any good—particularly the Nudnick
Laboratories. However—here’s where we come in.

“If an independent expedition lands on, or takes in tow, any body in
space that is not the satellite of a planet, said body becomes the sole
property of that expedition. Therefore, I’ve got to keep this expedition
as secret from Earth as from Mars, so that Earth—and Nudnick—can get the
ultimate benefit. In two months my little treasure will be in opposition
with Earth. If I have taken it in tow by then, I can announce my
discovery by ultraradio. The signal reaches Earth before it reaches
Mars; by the time the little red men can send out a pirate to erase me,
I am surrounded by a Patrol Fleet, and quite safe. But if Mars gets wind
of what I am up to, son, we are going to be intercepted, followed, and
rubbed out for the glory and profit of the red planet. Get it?”

“I get it. But what’s all this got to do with Bjornsen?”

The old scientist scratched his nose. “I don’t know. Bjornsen’s a most
peculiar egg, Hughie. He worked most of his life to get to be principal
of the Institute, and it seems to me he didn’t do it just for the salary
and prestige attached. More than once that egocentric martinet tried to
pump me for information about what I was doing, about the Nudnick Metal
process, about a hundred things of the sort. I’m sure he hasn’t got any
real information, but he might possibly have a hunch. A good hunch is
plenty to put a Martian ship on our tail and a lot of money in
Bjornsen’s pocket. We’ll see.”

And then there was the day when Hughie had made bold enough to ask
Nudnick why he had picked him for the trip, when he had his choice of
thousands upon thousands of other assistants. Nudnick unwrapped his
white teeth in one of his indescribable grins.

“Lots of reasons, son, among which are the fact that I delight in
displeasing the contents of Bjornsen’s stuffed shirt, and the fact that
I dislike being bored, and since I must needs make this trip myself, I
might as well be amused while I am cooped up. Also, I have found that
baby geniuses are inclined to be a little cocky about what they know,
and the fact that they knew it at such a tender age. A trained
assistant, on the other hand, is almost certain to be a specialist of
sorts, and specialists have inflexible and dogmatic minds. Bjornsen said
that one of your cardinal crimes was that you relaxed in fantasy. I,
with all of my scientific savvy, can find it in me to admire a mind
which can conceive of the possibility of a space-warp, or time travel.
Don’t look at me that way—I’m not kidding you. I can’t possibly imagine
such a thing—my mind is far too cluttered up with facts. I don’t know
whether or not a Martian ship will pick up our trail on this trip. If
one does, it will take fantastic thinking to duck him. I’m incapable of
thinking that way, so it’s up to you.”

Hughie, hearing the old man’s voice, watching his eyes as he spoke,
recognized the sincerity there, and began to realize that he carried an
unimaginable responsibility on his shoulders.

On the fourth and fifth days out, there was little to do and Hughie
amused both of them by reading aloud, at Nudnick’s insistence, from some
of his store of books and magazines. At first Hughie was diffident; he
could not believe that Nudnick, who had so outdone any fictional
scientist, could be genuinely interested; but Nudnick put it as an
order, and Hughie began to read, with many a glance at the old man to
see if he could find the first glimmerings of derision. He found
difficulty in controlling his voice and his saliva until Nudnick slowed
him down. Soon he was lost in the yarn. It was a good one.

It concerned one Satan Strong, Scientist, Scourge of the Spaceways and
Supporter of the Serialized Short-story. Satan was a bad egg whose
criminality was surpassed only by his forte for Science on the Spot.
Pursued particularly by the Earth sections of the Space Patrol, Satan
Strong was always succeeding in the most dastardly deeds, which always
turned out to be the preliminaries to greater evils which were always
thwarted by the quick thinking of Captain Jaundess of the Patrol,
following which, by “turning to the micro-ultra-philtmeter he rapidly
tore out a dozen connections, spot-welded twenty-seven busbars, and
converted the machine into an improved von Krockmeier hyperspace lever,
which bent space like the blade of a rapier and hurtled him in a flash
from hilt to point” and effected his escape until the next issue.
Nudnick was entranced.

“It’s pseudoscience,” he chuckled. “I might even say that it’s
pseudological pseudoscience. But, it’s lovely!” He regarded his withered
frame quizzically. “Pity I don’t have muscles and a widow’s peak,” he
said. “I’ve got the science but I rather fear I lack glamour. Have you
the next issue?”

Hughie had.

Then, on the sixth day, Hughie’s reading was interrupted by a shrill
whine from the forward instrument panel. A light flashed under a screen;
Nudnick walked over to it and flipped a switch. The screen glowed,
showing the blackness of space and its crystal points of light. He
turned a knob; the points of light swung slowly across the screen until
the tiny black ring of the juncture of the crosshairs encircled a
slightly luminous spot.

“What is it?” Hughie asked, regretfully laying down his book.

“Company,” said Nudnick tersely. “No telling who it is at this distance,
unless they want to tell us about themselves by ultraradio. They’re on
our course, and overtaking.”

Hughie stared into the screen. “You had this stern detector running all
the time, didn’t you? Gee—You don’t think it’s a pirate, do you?” There
was something hopeful in Hughie’s tone. Nudnick laughed.

“You want to see science in action, don’t you? Heh. I’m afraid I’m going
to be a disappointment to you, youngster. We can’t travel any faster
than we are going now, and that ship quite obviously can.” Hughie
flushed. “Well, professor, if you think it’s all right—” Nudnick shook
his head. “I don’t think it’s all right,” he said. “Now that we have
established that fact, let’s get back to your story. To think that
Captain Jaundess would be careless enough to let his betrothed get into
the clutches of that evil fellow! What will he do to her?”

“But, Professor Nudnick—”

Nudnick took Hughie’s arm and steered him across the control room to his
chair. “My dear, overanxious young crew, the ship that is pursuing us
presents no problem until it overtakes us. That will be in forty-eight
hours. In the meantime, Captain Jaundess’ girl friend is in far greater
danger than we are. Pray proceed.”

Most unwillingly, Hughie read on.

Forty-eight hours later, the brisk crackle of an ultraradio ordered them
to stand by to be boarded in the name of the Joint Patrol. The destroyer
pulled alongside, and a lifeboat carried a slim, strong cable around the
_Stoutfella_ and, through the mooring eyes, back to the Patrol ship. The
cable was used because magnetic grapples are useless on a Nudnick Metal
hull. A winch drew the craft together, and a “wind tunnel” boarding
stage groped against the outside of the _Stoutfella_’s air lock.

“What are you going to do?” asked Hughie desperately.

“We are going to say as little as possible,” said Nudnick meaningly,
“and we are going to let them in, of course.” He actuated the airlock
controls; the boarding stage was hermetically sealed to their hull as
the outer and inner doors slid back.

A purple-uniformed Martian yeoman stepped down into the room, followed
by his equally ranking shipmate from Earth. The Martian swore and shut
his nostril flaps on the sides of his stringy neck with an unpleasant
click. “This air is saturated,” he squeaked. “You might have had the
courtesy to dehydrate it.”

“What?” grinned the Earth Patrolman. “And deprive me of the only breath
of decent air I’ve had in nineteen days?” He drew a grateful breath,
letting the moisture sink into his half-parched lungs.

The air in Patrol ships was always, since there was no happy medium, too
dry for Earthlings and too humid for Martians; for the Martians, living
for countless generations on a water-starved planet, had developed a
water-hoarding metabolism which had never evolved a use for a water
surplus.

“Who is in command?” piped the Martian. Nudnick gestured; the Martian
immediately turned his back on Hughie. “We have orders from headquarters
that this ship is to be searched and disarmed according to Section 398
of the Earth-Mars Code.”

“Suspicion of piracy,” supplemented the Earthman.

“Piracy?” shouted Hughie, his resentment at last breaking through.
“Piracy? Who do you think you are? What do you mean by—”

Three tiny eyes in the back of the Martian’s head flipped open. “Has
this unpleasantly noisy infant a function?” he demanded, fingering the
blaster at his hip.

“He’s my crew. Be quiet, Hughie.”

“Yeah—take it easy, kiddo,” said the Earthman, not unkindly. “Orders are
orders in this outfit. You got no fight with us. We just work here.”

“Let them alone, Hughie,” chimed in Nudnick. “We’ve little enough
armament and they’re welcome to it. They have every right.” While the
Martian stalked out, the scientist turned to the other Patrolman. “This
is a Patrol Council order?”

“Of course.”

“Who signed it?”

“Councilman Emil Bjornsen.”

“Bjornsen? The new member? How has he the right?”

“Council regulations. ‘If any matter should be put to a vote, the
resulting decision shall be executed in the name of the president of the
council, except in such cases where the decision is carried by one vote,
when the order shall be executed in the name of the councilman whose
vote carrried the measure.’ Bjornsen, as the most recently appointed
councilman, has the last vote. In this case the action was deadlocked
and his vote carried it.”

“I see. Thank you. I suppose you can’t tell me who proposed this order?”

“Sorry.”

The Patrolman moved swiftly about the room, covering every inch of
space. In spite of his resentment, Hughie had to admire the man’s
efficiency. The kid stood sullenly against the bulkhead; when the man
came to him, he ran his hands quickly over the boy, and with the skill
of a practiced “dip,” extracted a low-powered pellet-gun from Hughie’s
side pocket. “You won’t want this,” he said. “It won’t kill anything but
cockroaches and they’re too easily fumigated.” Glancing around swiftly
to see if the Martian had returned from the storerooms yet, he clapped
his hand over Hughie’s mouth and whispered something. When the Martian
came back, the Patrolman was finishing up on the other side of the room,
and Hughie was staring at him with an affectionately resentful
wonderment.

“Hardly a thing,” complained the Martian shrilly, displaying a sparse
armload of side arms and one neuro ray bow chaser. “Never heard of a
Martian councilman sending a destroyer after a couple of nitwits on a
pleasure cruise.”

They saluted and left. In two minutes the ships drifted apart; in five,
the destroyer was nothing but a memory and a dwindling spot on the stern
visiscreen. Nudnick smiled at Hughie.

_“Tsk!_ You certainly flew off the handle, Hughie. When that fellow took
away your peashooter, I thought you were going to bite him.”

“Nah,” said Hughie, embarrassed. “He was O.K. I guess I didn’t want the
gun much anyhow.”

There was a silence, while Nudnick inspected the inner airlock gate and
then the air-pressure indicator. Finally Nudnick asked:

“Well, aren’t you going to tell me?”

“What?”

“What it was that the Patrolman whispered in your ear. Or are you going
to save it for a climax in the best science-fiction tradition?”

Hughie was saving it for just that. “You don’t miss much, do you?” he
said. “It wasn’t nothing much. He said, ‘There’s a lousy little Martian
private ship on your tail. Probably will stay on our spot on your
visiscreen for a few days and be on top of you before you know it.
Better watch him.”

“Hm-m-m.” Nudnick stared at the screen. “Anything else?” He spoke as if
he knew damn well there was something else. Hughie blushed, robbed of
the choicest part of his secret.

“Only just that Bjornsen’s aboard.”

“That still isn’t all.” Nudnick approached the boy, absolutely dead pan.

“Honest,” stammered Hughie, wide-eyed.

Nudnick shook his head, put his hand in his pocket, gave something to
Hughie. “There’s just this,” he said. “He slipped it into my pocket on
the way out, just as easily as he slipped it out of yours.”

Hughie stared at the gun in his hand with a delight approaching tears.

“A very efficient young man,” said Nudnick. “You will notice that he
unloaded it.”

Three weeks later Professor Nudnick took it upon himself to disconnect
the stern visiscreen because Hughie could not pry himself loose from it.
The Patrolman had been right; the destroyer had dwindled there until it
reached a .008 intensity and then had stayed right there for several
days, after which it had grown again until the boy could make out the
ship itself. It was no longer the destroyer, it was a plump-lined wicked
little Martian sportster. He knew without asking that the little ship
was fast and maneuverable beyond all comparison with the _Stoutfella_.
It annoyed him almost as much as Nudnick’s calm acceptance of the fact
that they were being followed, and that there was every possibility of
their never returning to Earth, to say nothing of locating and claiming
the prosydium asteroid. He took the trouble to say as much. Nudnick
merely raised his eyebrows to uncover his logic and said:

“Don’t go off half-cocked, younker. Granted, the Martian is following
us. I was apparently right about Bjornsen’s hunch; he knows that I have
been looking all over the system for prosydium and that it is rather
unusual for me to go sailing off personally into space. Ergo, I must
have found some. But he doesn’t want me, or you. All he wants is the
prosydium. He can get it only by following this ship. Until we tie on to
something, we’re as safe as a babe in a bassinet. So why worry?”

“Why worry?” The kid’s brains almost crackled audibly in their attempt
to transmit his worry to the scientist. “Here’s something! Has it
occurred to you that all the Martian has to do is to determine our
course, continue it ahead on a chart, and then know our destination?”

“It has occurred to me,” said Nudnick gently. “Our course will intercept
Mercury in twenty days.”

“Mercury!” Hughie cried. “You told me the prosydium was on an asteroid!”

“It is on an asteroid.” Nudnick was being assiduously patient. “You know
it, and I know it. But our course is for Mercury. That’s all _they_
know. If we lose them, we will change course for the Belt. If we don’t
lose them, we will go to Mercury. If they’re persistent, we’ll go back
to Earth and try again some time, though I will admit there’s only a
billion to one chance of our slipping away without being followed
again.”

“I’m sorry,” said Hughie after a while. “I have no business in trying to
tell you off, Professor Nudnick. Only I hate like hell to see that
Bjornsen guy keep you away from what you want to get. That heel. That
lousy wart on the nose of progress!”

“End quotes,” said Nudnick dryly. “Captain Jaundess.”

“O.K., O.K.,” said Hughie, grinning in spite of himself. “But I can’t
seem to get over that guy Bjornsen. He got in my hair for nearly two
years at school, and now that he’s kicked me out he seems to want to get
under my scalp as well. I dunno—I never saw a guy like that before. I
can’t figger him—the way he thinks. That rotten business of ganging up
on kids. He’s inhuman!”

“You may be right,” said Nudnick slowly. “You may just possibly be
right.” After a long pause, he said, “I picked the right assistant,
Hughie. You’re doing fine.”

Hughie was so tickled by that remark that he didn’t think to ask what
provoked it.

Two days before they were due on Mercury, the professor heaved a sigh,
glanced at Hughie, and connected up the stern visiscreen. “There you
are,” he said quietly. Hughie looked up from his magazine, dropped it
with a gasp of horror. The Martian ship was not two hundred yards behind
them, looming up, filling the screen. He sprang to his feet.

“Professor Nudnick! _Do_ something!”

Nudnick shook his head, spread his hands. “Any ideas?”

“There must be something. Can’t you blast them, professor?”

“With what? The Patrol took even our little neuro ray.”

Hughie waved the defeatist philosophy aside impatiently. “There ought to
be something you could do. Heck—you’re supposed to be ten times the
scientist that Harry Petrou is—”

“I beg your pardon?”

“Harry Petrou … Petrou!” Hughie swept up the magazine, thrust the
too-bright cover in the scientist’s face. “The writer! The author of—”

“Satan Strong!” The dried-up old man let out an astonishingly hearty
peal of laughter.

“Well,” said Hughie defensively, “anyway—” Furiously he began to shout
half-hysterical phrases. He was scared, and he had a bad case of hero
worship, and he was also very young. He said, “You go ahead and laugh.
But Harry Petrou has some pretty damn good ideas. Maybe they’re not
scientific. Not what you’d call scientific. Why doesn’t anybody ever do
anything scientific without studying for fifty years in a dusty old
laboratory? Why does one of the greatest scientists in history,” he half
sobbed, “sit back and b-be bullied by a l-louse like Bjornsen?”

“Hughie—take it easy, there.” Nudnick put out his hand, then turned away
from those young, accusing eyes. “Things aren’t done that way, Hughie.
Science isn’t like that—made to order for melodramatic adventures. I
know—you’d like me to burrow into the air conditioner, throw a few
connections around, and come out with a space-warp.”

Hughie turned on the lower forward screen. It showed, blindingly, the
flaming crescent of the inner planet. They were descending swiftly
toward the night-edge of the twilight strip, the automatic pilot taking
care of every detail of deceleration and gravity control.

“You’re quitting,” said Hughie, his lip quivering. “You’re running
away!” And he turned his back to Nudnick, to stare at the evil menacing
bulk of the Martian ship.

Nudnick sighed, went and sat at the controls, and took over the ship
from the pilot.

After two silent hours, Hughie observed that Nudnick was preparing to
land. He said in a dead voice:

“If you land, they’ll catch us.”

“That’s right.” Nudnick’s voice was brisk.

“And if they catch us, they’ll torture us.”

“Yep.” Nudnick glanced over his shoulder. “Will you obey my orders
implicitly?”

“Sure,” said Hughie hopelessly. His eyes were fixed in fearful
fascination on the Martian ship.

“Start now, then. Get rid of all the metal on your clothes. Belt buckle,
buttons—everything. You have fiber soled boots?

“Mm-m-m.”

“Put them on. Snap into it!”

An hour later the _Stoutfella_ grated on a sandy clearing not far from a
red and rocky bluff. The choking atmosphere of Mercury swirled about the
portholes. Nudnick climbed out of the pilot seat and tore a pair of
fiber boots out of a locker. He had already ripped his buttons off,
tossed his wrist radio and identification ring on the chart table. “Come
on!” he snapped.

“You … we’re not going out there?”

“You’re damn right we are!”

Hughie looked at him. If this old man was willing—He shrugged, picked up
a magazine. It seemed as if he—stroked it. Then he tossed it aside and
strode with Nudnick into the airlock.

As the inner gate shut them out of the little world that the ship
afforded, Nudnick clapped him on the back. “Chin up, kiddo,” he said
warmly. “Now listen—do exactly as I tell you. When we get outside, move
as fast as you can toward that bluff. The Martians won’t shoot as long
as they think we have any information. Na—no questions—there isn’t time!
Listen. It’s hot out there. As hot as the oven my dear old mother used
to bake ten-egg cakes in. The air is not so good, but we can breathe
it—for a while. Long enough, I guess. Ready?”

The outer gate slid back and they plunged out.

It was hot. In seconds acrid dust was packing on Hughie’s skin, washing
away in veritable gushes of sweat, packing the pores again. He saw the
reason for taking off all metal clothing. He had left his identification
ring on; it began to sear his hand. He tore it off, and blistered flesh
with it.

The air lacerated his throat, stung his eyes. Somehow he knew the
location of three things—the red bluff, the hovering Martian ship, and
the professor. He pounded on. Once he tripped, went down on one knee.
His breeches burst into flame. Nudnick saw and helped him slap it out.
Inside the charred edges of cloth he caught a glimpse of his own
kneecap, a tiny spot of bone amid a circle of cooked flesh, where his
knee had ground into the burning sand.

Nudnick tugged at his elbow. “How far do you think we are?” he wheezed.

Hughie suddenly realized that Nudnick’s old eyes couldn’t see very far
in this kind of heat; he had to be eyes for two people now.
“Ship—hundred and fifty—yards—”

“Not—far enough! Go—on!”

They struggled on, helping each other, hindering each other. The ground
rose sharply; Nudnick stopped. “Beginning of … bluff … far … enough—” He
began coughing.

Hughie held him up until he had finished. He began to understand. He had
heard vague stories about Martian torture. Nudnick would rather die this
way, then. They could have starved slowly in the ship. Maybe this was
better—

Nudnick’s shrill, dust-choked whisper reached him. “Martians?”

Hughie put one hand over his eyes and peered through the fingers. The
Martian ship had settled down beside the _Stoutfella_. The port swung
open, three figures, two tall and lanky, one short and shriveled.
“Three … coming … two Martians … Bjornsen.” Talking was torture.
Breathing was pulling living fire into the lungs. He heard a noise and
looked down. Nudnick was clutching him and making the noise. Slowly he
realized that the old man was laughing.

They lurched toward the three figures, clinging to each other. The two
Martians grasped them, and just in time, or they would have fallen and
died.

“Of all the crazy damn things to do!” shrilled Bjornsen. In spite of the
blasting breeze, the insufferable heat, the old gestures returned to
him, and he rubbed his hands together in that familiar, despised
gesture.

Nudnick forced his eyes open and stared at the councilman worriedly, and
then turned to each of the Martians. They were wilting a little bit in
the heat, but their grip was still strong. Bjornsen spoke a few squeaky
words in the Martian tongue, and the five of them began to struggle
toward the ships.

Suddenly the Martian who had Hughie’s arm began to cry out in a
piercing, ululating whine. It was quite the most ghastly sound the boy
had ever heard; he shuddered in spite of the heat and thrust at the
creature. To his utter amazement the Martian slumped to the ground,
arched his back as it began to scorch, screamed deafeningly and then lay
still. Nudnick laughed cacklingly again and shoved at his Martian,
tripping him at the same time. The second Martian stumbled, regained his
balance, and then began screaming. In a matter of seconds he fell. He
took longer, but died also—

Bjornsen stood in front of them, watching the Martians, and then,
shouting agonized curses, began a stumbling run toward his ship.

“Damn it, he’s going to make it!” cried Nudnick; and stooping, he caught
up a hot stone and hurled it.

Straight as an explosive pellet it flew, and caught Bjornsen between his
narrow shoulders. Bjornsen threw up his hands, trying wildly to keep his
feet. Gibbering crazily, Nudnick threw another stone. It missed by
twenty feet. Hughie caught the old man as he fell exhausted. When next
he looked at Bjornsen, the councilman was, down on his knees, his hand
clutching at the sill of the Martians’ airlock. He sagged, writhed, and
died there.

Hughie stood for five seconds, tottering; then he shook his head, bent
and let the scientist’s limp body fall across his shoulder. It took him
an eternity to straighten up, and then eternities to locate his nearby
ship and begin that long, long fifty-foot journey. Hughie knew later
that if it had been five—three—feet more, he could not possibly have
made it. But somehow he did—somehow he tumbled the old man into the
lock, pitched forward on top of him. He scrabbled weakly around, found
the lock control, pressed it.

Hughie screamed when he came out of it. Then he opened his eyes and saw
that he wasn’t in that fiery desert. He closed them again and realized
that his knee hurt terribly. Then Nudnick was beside him, bathing his
face, talking.

“Good stuff, kid. Fix you up in no time. Heh! Long chance just for a few
tons of prosydium, eh? Well, we’ll get it now. No one else around. No
one else around.”

“Bjornsen?”

“Dead. Remember? Like the Martians.”

“Martians.” The words brought horror into the heat-reddened young face.
He raised his head and Nudnick slipped another pillow under it. “What
happened to those Martians?”

Nudnick grinned. “They died of ignorance, son, and let that be a lesson
to you.” Hughie just stared. “You see, for generations now, Martians
have lived on Earth and Earthmen on Mars. It made ’em forget
something—that one little fact I was talking about before we landed.
Water-hoarders, Hughie. _Martians can’t sweat!_ You see? A human can
live beside a steak that’s cooking, because he sweats. The evaporation
cools him down. A Martian can’t stand that kind of heat—he cooks like a
steak!”

“But … Bjornsen wasn’t—”

“Ah. You’re wrong there. Bjornsen _was!_ A freak, Hughie. Look at
Martians. Unemotional—logical—well, isn’t that Bjornsen? Y’know, when I
walked in on him when he was ganging up on you at the Institute, I heard
him rub his hands together. I knew I’d heard it somewhere before, but I
don’t know just where. But the other day when you said he was inhuman,
it clicked. Bjornsen didn’t have no mamma and no poppa, kiddo. He came
out of a Martian biochemical laboratory, or I miss my guess. Clever
fellers, those Martians. Trained him from birth for that job. A key man
in the middle of my little old institute. There may be more like him.
I’ll see to that. Heh! I won’t be the first boss that’s told his
employees, ‘Work up a sweat or get canned!’ ”

Hughie at last managed to grin a little. Nudnick kept on talking
happily. “That knee’ll be all right in a couple weeks. By that time
we’ll hook on to the prosydium. You’re fixed for life, fella. Ah—hey,
I’ve got a confession to make to you.”

Hughie turned weak, amused eyes on him. The old man wagged his head.
“Yep. About that prosydium. Didn’t you wonder how I knew about it? I’ll
tell you. I was coming from Mars last year on a Martian liner. Very
elegant. Humidifiers in every room. Radio. Recorded music. Lots of
apparatus built into the staterooms. Would’ve delighted the heart of
Satan Strong. Anyway, I got messing around. I … er—” He paused guiltily,
then went on. “I sort of tore out some connections and spot-welded some
busbars. Built me a dandy detectograph. Located that prosydium as we
passed the edge of the Belt. Sheer luck. Spotted it, by golly, right
from a stateroom in a Martian ship!”

Hughie laughed admiringly. “You old son of a gun,” he said
disrespectfully. “And you sneered at Satan Strong!”

“Me?” The old man shook his head and stood up. “Why should I sneer at
Satan Strong? I _like_ Satan Strong. I ought to. I _write_ those
stories!”



THE JUMPER


MY PILOT WAS ANNOYED with me, which was understandable, since he was an
earnest young man and regretted the substitution of a Canadian medical
officer for three fifty-pound bombs. Bombs would do his work over
Germany, he reasoned; and they would do it without observing him and his
gunner, without making constant notations in a military blank book. But
the war office wanted these observations of R.A.F. lads under stress,
and to us, the war office was at the top of the heap.

I wasn’t subjected to his annoyance long, more’s the pity. The youngster
guided us skillfully through the black over Europe to within forty miles
of our objective and then swallowed a German tracer that puffed in
through the cowling. He screamed and threw up his hands, and we went
into a dive with benefit of engines. A Me-110 whipped past with a sound
for all the world like a mighty belch, and the right auxiliary petrol
tank spewed flames all over the fuselage. It all happened bloody fast,
and there was nothing to be done, so I went over the wall. Pulling my
ripcord a few seconds later, I saw the pale gleam of the gunner’s ‘chute
moving about me in a great circle. That’s the way it was, because I
couldn’t see that I was spinning—and I couldn’t see anything but his
‘chute, and the meteor that had been a slim blue-gray bomber. It crashed
tremendously a couple of minutes later, and the _whump_ of the
concussion jerked at my shroud lines. The intensity of the dead lad’s
purpose must have carried him through, for the flaming carcass carried
its basket of eggs right into the middle of a crowded railroad yard, as
I saw by the flash and the flame.

Then Archy opened up on us, and I thought that was just about the
outside edge. Five hundred guineas’ worth of H.E. and shrapnel for two
men dangling from parachutes. Myself, I might try my aim with an
automatic rifle at a Hun in a ‘chute. I used to be a pretty fair duck
hunter. But shrapnel? Deuced unsporting. I had the nasty feeling that
the gunner and I had been reduced to a bet on a bottle of beer between
two bored Jerries.

Archy shared half a dozen rounds with us. I was too busy spilling wind
out of the silk to see how the other chap made out. He was taking his
chances on riding it straight down. I miscalculated my altitude, what
with Jerry banging away and all that spilling, and I came down pretty
fast. Landed with a bit of a bump and broke both of my legs. The
umbrella dragged me cross country because I couldn’t roll over, and the
jarring compounded one of the fractures. I lay down then, when the silk
fouled on a sapling, and wished that the fall had knocked me out. Just
by crazy chance, the gunner came down within twenty feet of me. His
‘chute seemed to set him down like a thistle seed. The breeze quit and
let him fold up gently, but not before I saw that shrapnel had taken his
shoulders out from under his head. Then the great white ‘chute billowed
down over both of us.

They treated us pretty well at the camp. I call it a camp because it’s
known as a camp to the press, but it was really a castle. Polish. We had
the run of two-thirds of the place, including a wide garden. Keep your
eyes away from the walls and you’d think you were in England, though no
Englishman would let his garden run riot the way this one was. This one
had been so well planted that it was all the better for its neglect. I
used to clump about it after my legs had knit well enough to bear my
weight. Jerry had done more than was humanly possible for that right
leg. A less skilled medico would have amputated and thereby given me
more of a limp but a lot less pain. I suppose it’s better to have your
own limbs in any condition, but there were times when I didn’t think so.

The whole set-up had all the elements of being bearable. They fed us
adequately, and anybody can get used to _ersatz_ coffee made from tulip
bulbs and turnips. They allowed us half a dozen Tommies to keep the
rooms and mess hall clean, and they were decent about letting packages
from home get through. Well, the German military is that way, anyhow.
There’s a new government in Berlin, a new Germany in men’s minds and on
the maps; but it hasn’t killed the traditionalism of the armed forces.
To the Prussian mind, an officer is an officer, be he German, English or
Guatemalan, and as such he is entitled to respect and subordination. He
may be a prisoner, but if he is, no man without rank may give him
orders. The party would like to do something about that, but the party
is a little too shrewd to interfere with the military during wartime.
Wait till it’s over; then the factions will blossom out. Then the army
will have its chance to even up a few scores—and it will, it will.

Richter was a party man. Richter had reached the ripe old age of
twenty-two and had six devoted and bloody years of party work behind
him. At sixteen he had reported his uncle and aunt to the Nazis because
they had made some derogatory remarks about the leader. Richter was in
an ideal spot to spy on them since they were supporting him. He made it
his business to investigate the family of his childhood sweetheart,
found that the girl was one-eighth Jewish, held the fact over her head
until he was tired of her, and then had her sent to a camp equipped with
sundry abrasions and a condition associated with so much bitterness that
not even mother love would override it. He was a charter member of the
_Jugend;_ he had worn his brown shirt with pride and plain clothes with
poisonous efficiency. He had clung to the _Landwehr_ as long as he
could, on the theory that his loyal talents were of more use to the
party in spying on his associates than in pulling a more honest trigger.
He was in the army now, but he had been sent to the prison to check up
on its administration; a fact that he made no bones about. He was tall
and broad, with rotten teeth and eyes set too close together, and I do
believe he bleached his hair.

But he was a private. He used his low rank on German and British
officers alike, begging to be disciplined for his insubordinate conduct
so that he could send in a lying report to Berlin. He was sly—he clung
impeccably to the letter of his Soldier’s Manual. But the spirit of
it—that was his toy. The Jerries loathed him as only soldiers can loathe
political theorists. The English—well, at least they had the freedom of
being his admitted enemy.

I ran afoul of him the very day I first got out of bed. I was sitting in
the garden, smoking my pipe, a pair of crutches on one side of me and an
R.A.F. flight commander on the other. We were talking quite casually
about something he had read when we realized that Richter had
pussyfooted up behind us. McCarthy, the flier, went right on talking.
“—and that’s something I’ve noticed in all his books,” he said. “I have
to agree with him. There is nothing on earth quite as revolting as a
criminal doing as he pleases under the holy name of patriotism. A man
who would do that would report his relatives to the authorities. More—he
would eavesdrop on his superiors. Richter,” he said without turning,
“Captain LaFarge’s pipe has gone out. Light it for him like a good
chap.”

Richter came around where we could see him. He was speechless with rage.
Indirection and irony were completely foreign to his malignant mind;
they baffled and hurt him.

“I haf not a match,” he said stiffly.

“Very well,” said McCarthy. “Carry on, then,” and he waved the German
away. McCarthy gazed after him. He was English—Northumberland—and a
brilliant man. He had been a corporation lawyer before the war, and was
the kind of soldier that Goebbels tries to teach Germany to disbelieve
in. “That creature,” said McCarthy softly, “is going to figure
prominently in a murder very soon. He’d better see to it that he’s the
party of the first part.”

I laughed loud enough to annoy Richter, for he must know that we were
talking about him. “Is he always like that?”

“That, or worse,” said McCarthy. He spat. “I don’t know if there’ll be
an exchange so I can get out of here, but if I do, I have a pretty
little problem posed for myself. I’m certain that I could find this
place from the air. There’s an air field not three hundred yards from
here—military objective. Knowing that, would I bomb the whole layout on
the off-chance of killing all the English here, if I knew I’d get
Richter in the process?”

“Hardly,” I said. “You _can’t_ dislike a man so thoroughly that you’d
slaughter a hundred of your own to get to him.”

“Can’t I, though?” He rose. He was a steady sort, and it surprised me to
see that his hands were trembling. “You’ll find out for yourself soon
enough.” He glared at the gate through which the Nazi had disappeared,
wiped his palms on his trousers. “Well, I’m going to wash up. Dinner in
ten minutes, you know.”

“I’ll be along,” I said. He went into the building, and I sat there
watching a flight of Me’s coming in from the west, watched them circle
to get the wind and drop down until the high garden wall concealed them
from me. I remember thinking that perhaps McCarthy was letting the
prison get the better of him.

Richter came back, with his usual arrogant marching stride. He halted in
front of me—I could almost hear a master sergeant yelling, _“Halt!_
One—_two!”_ as he did it—and extended a box of matches.

“Oh. Thank you, Richter.”

He waited until I had begun to light my pipe, right-faced, and marched
back to the castle. On the way he put out his hand, caught up my
crutches, dragged them thirty yards away, and dropped them. I called
him, furiously, but he apparently did not hear me.

I finished lighting my pipe because there was nothing else I could do. I
knew he would be somewhere where he could watch me, ready to enjoy it if
I called out for help, for I couldn’t move without the crutches. I knew
he was praying that I would, rather than call out, crawl in the dirt
until I could reach them. So I did neither.

It was a long wait. Because I was just out of the hospital, there was no
place set for me at table, and I was not missed until after nightfall.
Obermeier found me. He was the prison adjutant.

“Captain LaFarge!”

He floundered through the weeds. “Captain! Why have you not to your room
reported?”

“I’ve been delayed,” I said. “If you’ll be good enough to fetch me my
crutches, I’ll go in with you.”

He peered at me through the gloom, his fat cheeks shining with sweat. It
goes hard with these men if there’s a prison break. “Krodges?” He looked
up and down the bench.

“Over there,” I said. He brought them to me.

“How is this that they are over there the krodges?”

“I must’ve dropped them. Silly of me, wasn’t it?”

He looked carefully all around the dark garden and suddenly sat beside
me. “Herr Captain,” he whispered, “that Richter—did he—”

“It was what we call a practical joke,” I said. “Very funny. If one of
the British did it, you can’t expect me to tell you his name, can you?”
He blinked at me owlishly. “And if it was Richter, I gather that what he
wants is a complaint against him for an action to which there were no
witnesses. That being what he wants, we’ll do otherwise.” I climbed to
my feet; Obermeier was gentleman enough not to try to help me. “Forget
it,” I said.

He walked slowly beside me. Finally he said, “If the British like you
all are, Germany and England friends is.”

“All the British _are_ like me,” I said.

“This I am not allowed to believe,” he grinned, and went inside.

I missed osteomyelitis by a hair, and in a couple of months could
navigate by myself. I had a lump on one leg and a limp in the other, and
one of my ankles was rigid, while the other refused to be. The result
was a syncopated shamble in which Richter took the greatest delight.
When I was alone in the garden he used to patrol the wall with an
automatic rifle, mimicking me. He had mimicry down to a fine art. Not
only physical things like my gimpy walk, but Morris’ lisp and poor old
Ruffing’s _tic doloro_ and Beauchamp’s voice. Richter spoke a
regurgitative sort of English, and I had, at times, to admit that his
imitations were as clever as they were crass. He was careful; to the
prison authorities he was never guilty of anything tangible. To the
prisoners he was a torturer and a tyrant.

McCarthy asked me about that one day. “You used to be a psychologist,”
he said. “What would you call that warp of Richter’s?”

“ ‘Warp’ is scarcely the right term,” I said. “Richter isn’t a normal
man gone haywire. He’s a nicely integrated personality. He’s rational,
controlled, quite sane. There’s no excuse for his ingrained criminality.
Nothing causes it—it just growed. It’s a little something of his very
own.”

“I’ve heard wonderful things about psychoanalysis,” said McCarthy
thoughtfully. “Couldn’t we perhaps—”

“No,” I said. “Psychoanalysis isn’t the high-speed panacea the novelists
would have us believe. A thorough analysis of a fairly normal man takes
three years and costs upward of six hundred pounds. It demands a hell of
a lot of work, and incidentally, the complete and utterly sincere
cooperation of the subject. I can just see Richter giving us that!”

McCarthy pulled at his lip. He was acting rather strangely, I thought,
as if he were on the point of laughing uproariously—or screaming. His
features were drawn, and he moved stiffly, which was rather odd for a
man who had been doing the most bewildering gymnastics only three
minutes ago. He was remarkably fit, and a very able tumbler, and he had
a routine he used to go through that he called a
round-off-back-handspring-layout-back-somersault with a full twist,
which I assure you was as amazing as it sounds. He moved metrically and
gracefully, and the spot he appropriated each evening for these
gyrations had become marked with his gymnastic spoor—a depression where
his leading hand struck on the round-off, two bare patches in the grass
where his feet struck, two lighter ones where his hands touched on the
handspring, two sets of footprints marking the somersault. McCarthy was
very much a creature of habit.

“Three years!” he said disappointedly. “Isn’t there something faster
than that?”

“A well-placed blow on the side of the jaw,” I said.

McCarthy tossed his head in irritation. “You know he never does his
filthy work in close quarters,” he said.

“What’s he done now?”

In answer he extended the hand he had been holding behind his back. It
dripped dark blood. A slender steel spike had entered his palm and was
sticking up out of the back of his hand. I took his wrist gently. “Good
Lord! What is it?”

“An icepick,” he said. “I never saw the damned thing. That’s what I get
for working out on the same spot of ground every evening. Anyone could
tell to a fraction of an inch where my hand would come down. The pick
was buried point up right where I was due to hit. It went through my
hand and broke off. I was already into the handspring when I felt it,
and I imagine I tore it up a little when my hands came down the second
time.”

I set up a yell for Obermeier and swiftly yanked the pick out of his
hand. “Let it bleed free,” I said, “The dirty—”

The adjutant took him inside and had him bandaged up. I sat there
foaming and wondering why a man with a pick through his hand would come
to me and start up a casual conversation about psychoanalysis. Perhaps
he was just cold-blooded. More likely he had to say something to
somebody before he dropped dead with rage. McCarthy was a peculiar bird.

Down at the end of the garden I could see Richter patrolling the top of
the wall. He turned toward me, grinned, pulled out a white handkerchief,
elaborately bandaged his hand with it, grinned again, and resumed his
patrol.

I began to think seriously about whether or not there _was_ something
faster than psychoanalysis, that you could use on a man who kept out of
range of a well-placed blow on the side of the jaw.

You wouldn’t think that a creature like Richter could be in any way
sensitive, but he was, to an extraordinary degree. Not to any of the
humanities, not to music, but to—well, let me tell you how I first
noticed it.

He was standing in the corner of the garden wall, leaning casually on
his rifle, but so poised that he could club it and kill any prisoner who
made a move toward him. He was enjoying himself thoroughly, singing a
rasping paraphrase on a popular wartime song—something about “The little
old church where England stood.” There was no escaping his voice, no
ignoring his ingeniously improvised lyrics. We tried loud talking, but
it petered out. There was no going inside, out of earshot, for the
polite but inflexible prison routine demanded our presence in the
garden.

But for once in his life Richter was caught napping. Obermeier came out
of the castle and was halfway across the garden before the private saw
him.

“Richter!” barked the adjutant. Richter stopped singing, paled visibly,
and dropped his rifle. They stood staring fixedly at each other, arms
hanging loosely, legs apart. In German, Obermeier said, “Richter! You
are on guard duty, no?”

Richter didn’t move.

“When has the army allowed a guard on duty to indulge in light opera?”
Obermeier was furious, but his native caution was in high gear. He
meticulously avoided any reference to the song, or to Richter’s obvious
reasons for singing it, knowing that if he did, the party would be
informed that he was turning pro-British. He had caught Richter in a
petty departure from regulations, and for that alone he was reprimanding
him. What astonished me was that Richter did not snap into attention. He
mouthed silently when Obermeier spoke, glared unmoving when he ceased.

“Attention!” blasted Obermeier. “What ails you, man?”

Richter’s face worked, but he didn’t move. Obermeier flushed angrily,
opened his mouth to speak, closed it and scratched his neck instead.
Then he turned on his heel and started back up the path. And then that
astonishing thing happened. Richter started up after him. He was ten
yards behind, but he walked step for step with the adjutant. I heard one
of the imperials say, “Look at th’ blighter! He’s aping his own officer
now!”

The gravel path took a right-angle turn up near the building. As he
reached it, Obermeier called, “Teubner! Rausch!” I assumed he was
calling a couple of guards to take care of Richter. And then he turned
the corner.

And ten yards behind him, Richter called, “Teubner! Rausch!” in exactly
the same tone of voice, exactly as loud, and _exactly at the same time_
as Obermeier. So perfectly synchronized were the two voices that the
effect was like having two radios playing the same program in the same
room. Most of us heard it, for we were between the two of them; but I am
certain that Obermeier did not, for his own voice drowned out that of
Richter. It was something considerably more than mimicry. It was
uncanny. But even more so was that when Obermeier took the turn in the
path, Richter also made a right turn. It took him off the walk, through
a bed of tulips, and briskly into a heavy marble bench. His kneecap
struck it with a sickening crack, and over it he went. He did not put
out his arms as he fell, and he brought up with his head against the
concrete edge of a lily pool. And there he lay, cold as a cake of ice,
blood slowly trickling over the yellow cement. The crash of his fall
made Obermeier turn his head; he took one look, trotted to the castle
and disappeared inside. A few minutes later Rausch and Teubner came out
on the run, gathered him up and carried him inside.

McCarthy ranged up beside me as I stood smiling, staring at the patch of
Richter’s blood. “What the devil do you make of that?”

“Richter overplayed it,” I said noncommittally.

He looked at me shrewdly. McCarthy was very fast on the uptake. “You
have an idea, haven’t you, LaFarge? You know what happened just now?”

“Well,” I said slowly, “it does remind me of something. I’ve seen
French-Canadian loggers in Quebec act that way. Jumpers, they call them.
I’ve heard of it happening to members of certain Siberian tribes. In
Malaya they call it _latah_. But damn if I ever heard of an Aryan being
like that. I don’t know why he shouldn’t, though, come to think of it.
No one knows much about it.”

“But what on earth is it?” asked McCarthy impatiently.

“Oh, it’s a peculiar kind of hypnotism. For some reason, certain persons
are subject to attacks of what you might call ‘abject imitativeness.’
Their minds slip into rapport with that of another individual, and they
have to imitate him. Sometimes they don’t realize what they’re doing,
more often they do and can’t help it.”

“That’s the most extraord’ry thing I ever heard,” said McCarthy. “What
starts it?”

“Depends on the individual. Generally a jumper’ll start imitating
someone when his attention is suddenly and forcibly attracted to another
person. Richter’s was, you know. He was shocked and surprised when
Obermeier bellowed at him. Did you notice that he was entranced all the
while that Obermeier faced him, and as soon as Obermeier turned he began
to move in perfect synchronization with him? Some jumpers get the
condition so badly that they slip into a state of _latah_ for no reason
at all.”

“How long does it last?”

“Seconds or weeks. I remember reading about a Malayan who followed his
high priest around that way for two solid months. The priest decided
that the man was possessed, and that he himself was haunted. But he
couldn’t get anyone to kill the fellow, because the tribal laws
prohibited laying hands on a priest, and the tribe regarded the two of
them as one and the same person. So the priest walked up a river bank,
made a sharp turn and started across a cane bridge. The man in _latah_
made the right turn at the same time, but there wasn’t any bridge. He
cured his _latah_ all right. The poor beggar drowned.”

McCarthy grunted and got out his pipe. “Drowned, did he?” he said around
the stem. “Hm-m-m. I find that most interesting.”

Thinking it over, I did, too.

What account Richter gave to the adjutant for his peculiar actions, I’ll
never know. He was on sick leave for three days, and in the guardhouse
for four, and he was much sobered when he resumed his duties. The
prisoners and the guard left each other tensely alone, but we knew that
it was only a matter of time before he would start his peculiar brand of
torture again. He did, and he started on me.

My legs were still shaky, and I was making my way over to my favorite
bench one afternoon when I became conscious of a faint creaking. For a
nasty moment I thought it was me, for with every step I took I heard a
creak; a long one for my right leg, a short one for my left. I stopped;
so did the noise. I took two more steps. _C-r-r-r—ik!_ Puzzled, I looked
around me, and saw Richter standing just inside the old summerhouse,
airily looking at all the world but me. He had one hand on the doorknob,
and it was that door that needed the oiling, not my leg. I ground my
teeth and said nothing; and all the way over to the bench he kept up the
crude stunt. I made myself so busy packing my pipe that I jumped when I
realized McCarthy had seated himself beside me.

“I saw that,” said Mac casually, nodding toward the summerhouse.

“Yep,” I said. “Here we go again.”

Mac shook his head. “Things are going to be a bit different,” he said.
“Let’s us make that jumper jump.”

“Have you been thinking about that, too?” I grinned.

“Right-o. Let’s see what we can do with him before he gets too
rambunctious.” He swiftly outlined his plan. It was a honey.

I got up and limped over to the summerhouse. “Richter!”

He stood sullenly at attention, his little pig eyes roving up and down
me, finally settling insultingly on my crooked leg.

“How do you feel?” I said conversationally.

He looked out at the castle, saw that the coast was clear, and leaned up
against the doorpost. “_Gut,”_ he grunted, and spat out the door just
past my head.

The finest of the filthy spray settled on my cheek. I gasped with rage,
got a four-handed grip on myself. “You know, you remind me of my cousin
Julius in Winnipeg,” I chatted.

He regarded me with a sort of disgusted wonder on his face as I gabbled
on in disconnected sentences. He was completely at a loss. Just as he
was about to burst into my prattle, I heard a faint tap on the wall of
the summerhouse. I don’t think I have ever moved faster in my life.

I reached out, took him by the shoulders and hauled him out of the door,
spinning him around at the same time. McCarthy, who had been stealthily
circling the building while I held the Nazi in conversation, leaped out
of hiding with a rush, four feet in front of us. Richter froze, scared
out of his wits.

For an interminable moment I was in doubt. Mac and the German held each
other’s eyes while I held Richter’s shoulders, and all three of us were
afraid to breathe. Then Mac knotted his jaw, turned around and walked
off. Richter shuddered, moaned a very tiny moan, and—followed him.

“Got him!” I cried happily.

“Good stuff,” said two voices, speaking as one. It was an astonishing
effect. Mac stopped and turned around. “What are we going to do with the
blighter?” they asked me.

“Can’t do much with the two of you as close together as that,” I said.
“Steer him into the wall.”

“Right-o,” they said in unison. Mac gauged his distances, walked up to
the corner of the summerhouse, left-faced and disappeared around the
corner. Richter marched up to the wall, hit it with a bump, and kept on
marching futilely. I moved over to where I could see both of them.

“How’s this?” asked Richter. It was Mac speaking, but he was too far
away for me to hear the low-voiced question. Talk about your wireless
transmission!

“That’s dandy,” I said. They both stopped and turned; Mac came back to
me while Richter plowed through flower beds. When the Englishman reached
me, Richter was well out in the open spot where Mac used to do his
tumbling.

“Now what?” asked Mac.

“Now Herr Richter is going to put on a bit of a show,” I said gleefully.
“See if you can make the silly fool get his gun out.”

He began fumbling about the region of his side pocket. He had to make
eight or ten passes, but finally got it right.

“Up in the air,” I said. “Just once.”

The Mauser roared. Richter, carefully guided by Mac and me, holstered it
and stared raptly into the sky. A thudding of boots, and Rausch skidded
to a stop in front of him. In rather low German, he wanted to know what
the hell. Fortunately, Mac’s German was flawless.

“Didn’t you see it?” said Richter. “A Hawker Hurricane!”

Rausch was big and dumb. He stared up into the sky, and then said he
didn’t see any airplane.

“Of course you don’t,” said Richter. “I shot him down.” He beckoned
Rausch closer and whispered, “It was Rudolph Hess flying back.” Rausch
went a little popeyed. “He had to get out,” said Richter. “The British
Isles have been torpedoed and sunk.” They gazed solemnly at each other,
and then Richter burst into rich Northumberland laughter. He slapped
Rausch on the back, and Rausch, suddenly conscious that he was being
kidded, uttered a complementary guffaw, took a deep breath, forced out
another laugh, and then beat a hasty retreat.

“Halt!” snapped Richter. “Come back here, my friend. I want to tell you
a fine English joke I learned from one of these dirty prisoners. You
don’t speak any English, do you?”

Rausch shook his head.

“All the better,” said Richter jovially. “Now listen to me. The next
time you see Herr Obermeier, you say these words in English.” He
repeated a phrase a few times, and the gullible Rausch said it over and
over until he had it right.

I have always regretted that I wasn’t around when Rausch walked into
Obermeier’s quarters and said, “Thumbs up, you old prince!” (I think it
was “prince” he was told to say.) “There’ll always be an England!”

Richter stood out there humming an air called “The Tinker He Went
Walking” that Mac hadn’t learned in Sunday school until Obermeier
erupted violently out into the garden. “Richter!”

“Ja! Heil Hitler!”

“Heil Hitler!” sputtered the adjutant. “Are you responsible for sending
that blockhead in to me with those seditious utterances?”

Richter put a finger to his lips. “There’s going to be a revolution,” he
said gravely.

“A revolution? Traitor! Marxist! Jew!”

“It is the truth, Herr Obermeier. Look.” And Richter rose off the ground
in a perfect back somersault. Obermeier stepped back in alarm. Richter
spread his hands and smiled. “You see? There was a revolution. I
revolved, no?”

Obermeier’s face went into travail and delivered a laugh. Once he had
laughed out loud he found that it was an easy and pleasant thing to do,
and he roared until the tears ran down his cheeks. “Richter,” he gasped
after a time. “I have thought hardly of you. I have never credited you
with a sense of humor.” His features suddenly went wooden. “But this is
war. This for such foolishness is no time.”

Richter said easily, “Hate is all the stronger if you give it a rest. I
respectfully suggest to the adjutant that the prisoners should be served
beer this evening.”

“A profound thought,” said the adjutant, after thinking it over. “That
will do, Richter.” He eased his conscience by speaking very severely.
“And hereafter curb your nonsense!” He went briskly into the castle. As
he went through the door his voice drifted back—“Revolution. Hah! _Das
is gut!”_

“What are we going to do with the fool now?” asked Mac. I looked out at
the fine young specimen of Aryan manhood and grunted. “Pity we can’t
send him to Berchtesgaden,” I said. “I’d like to pull that ‘There’ll
always be an England’ gag on der Fuehrer.”

“That would be jolly—fine.” Mac swayed suddenly, mumbled something.

“What?” I asked.

“Jolly—_Ach! Ich neine_—_“_ He shook his head drunkenly.

“Mac!” I rapped. “Mac! What’s the matter?”

Sirens suddenly screamed outside the walls. As they died down I heard
the growl of many motors. Torn between Mac and the noises outside, I
dragged him to the door and looked up. There was a clutter of aircraft
in the sky, attack bombers and pursuits. A formation of Messerschmitts
climbed into the sky, and three lovely P-37S howled down to meet them.

Mac said, “Feel deuced queer, old boy. I—” Suddenly he whipped away from
me, snarling. _“Schmutzig Englisch schweinhund, du!”_ he spat, and he
clawed at his hip, pulled a nonexistent Mauser out of his nonexistent
holster, filled me full of imaginary holes. Every time his forefinger
twitched there was a report outside. Richter had his gun out, was
banging away at the garden wall. The sound of his shots was lost in the
unholy racket from above.

“Mac!” I screamed, shaking him, slapping him. “Mac! What’s—”

He closed his eyes, opened them slowly. “This bloody thing works both
ways,” he gritted. “The damned—goosestepper’s—fighting—” He rallied and
said briskly, “What’s going on—air raid?”

“Yes. Mac, are you all right?”

“I can hold him off, I th—Ah-h-h! _Heil, mein Fuehrer! Der fleigand_—_”_
He drifted off into a hopeless jumble of words. Then, “LaFarge,” he
said, “remember I said I’d like a chance at that air field if I ever get
out of here? Well, I probably won’t, but maybe I can give someone else a
break. I’ll wager those lads up there don’t know they have anything like
that right under them. Are the Huns sending up any planes from here?”

I looked out. “No. Dammit, you’re right! They’ve got it camouflaged.
They don’t want it bombed, and it’s likely because they have a man-sized
gasoline dump around here!”

“We’ve got to—get word—” He groaned, came back strongly. He seemed to be
putting up a tremendous battle. “Richter’s getting the knack of it,” he
said grimly. “For a minute there I thought I was out in the garden. I
ran my tongue around my mouth and felt a lot of rotten teeth. Ugh!” He
shuddered. “Got—shaving mirror?” I had one of those unbreakable trench
mirrors in my tunic. Mac waved me outside. “Give it to the Hun,” he
said. “Right hand. Hurry, now, I don’t know if I—” And he went into one
of those bilingual paroxysms. I ran out to Richter.

As I thrust the mirror into his hand he eyed me viciously, reached for
his gun, paused, grinned. “Good stuff, chum,” he said. “Thumbs—_für der
Reich_—be an England!”

It occurred to me what Mac had wanted him to have the mirror for.
Heliograph. But what was the use of that puny flash of sunlight? How
could it attract the attention of a pilot in a dogfight? Off chance. Why
didn’t he want me to get out there and signal? I glanced around, saw
guards on the walls, Obermeier running around like a brood hen. Richter
_might_ not be noticed, standing there in the garden with the mirror in
his palm. I hobbled back to the summerhouse and ducked inside.

“Give me your watch,” said Mac. For the moment he was completely
himself. I handed it to him, and he moved into the doorway where the
late, bright afternoon sun streamed in. He let it play on the back of
the watch, threw a spot on the ceiling, and began twitching his wrist
steadily. Out in the garden Richter stood firm, eyes upward, right hand
extended. Mac began to send.

_Dot-dash-dot. Dot-dash. Dot-dot-dash-dot. R.A.F_.

I don’t know how long that went on. Mac and Richter were engaged in a
monumental struggle, weaving now and then on their feet, features
working, sweat—and all the while, almost without a break, Mac sent those
three letters. Twice he screamed in pain, and both times it was in
Richter’s guttural tones. McCarthy. Renfrew McCarthy, of
Northumberlandshire. Never was there such a man!

Once Richter threw the mirror from him, and I had to limp out and put it
in his hand again. And Mac kept sending.

There was a growing, screaming roar. I looked up and saw a Messerschmitt
110 on the tail of a P-37. They seemed to be heading right for us,
coming down, coming incredibly fast. At about two hundred feet, the
Curtiss began to pull out of it. The Me began to try. The Curtiss made
it. The Me didn’t. God bless the Nazis for building ships that are
sloppy on the turns! The Me whipped low over my head, crashed into the
garden wall. The P-37 groaned upward, lost speed, stalled into a
wingover, and began to circle at about eight hundred feet.

“Mac!” I screamed. “He’s seen us! He’s seen us!”

Mac, his face green-white and beaded, chuckled hoarsely and kept
sending. Fascinated, I watched that bouncing spot of light on the
ceiling. Now it said. _“Cam.—air field_—_300 yds—SSE.”_ He repeated it,
repeated it again. Now he was sending, _“Castle—munition dump.”_ And
then the two of them were mixed: _“Camstle_—_300 munition—SSE.”_

“Mac—are there munitions in the castle?”

“No, dammit, Richter’s sending that! I think I’m driving him under,
LaFarge! But—he’s going to see to it that if bombs are dropped, we get
them, too!”

The circling P-37 waggled its wings and started to climb. I could almost
feel the crisp bur of its radio, calling for bombs. A flight of
Blenheims swelled up out of the west, wheeled toward us.

“Right-o, Mac,” I said quietly. “We better get as near underground as we
can.” I put an arm around him. He leaned so heavily against me that my
legs hurt me. He was dead beat. “Chin up,” I gritted, and began dragging
him across the garden.

Outside the walls there was a flash of flame, and the ground shook. It
shook again, and again. Ahead of us, Richter floundered crazily. When we
reached the castle door I propped Mac against the jamb and looked back
while I got my wind.

The whole skyline was aflame. There was gasoline there, but plenty. A
huge Kurier waddled into the air, and a Hurricane cut it down, and I
wondered why in hell they tried to get that monster into the air at a
time like this. A bomb landed just outside the wall and blew it inward,
and the debris swept Richter off his feet. I mean that word for word. I
looked at his body and saw that he was all broken up about it. When the
rubble hit Richter, Mac shrieked and passed out.

I’d no sooner got him inside when the next load of eggs were laid on the
roof right over our heads. Richter’s message had been right. There was
an ammunition dump in the castle. The whole bloody business came
crashing and crushing down on us. So they got us and most of the other
imperials. But we got an air field and an ammunition dump. And Richter.
We got game, set and match.



STORY NOTES



BY PAUL WILLIAMS


Theodore Sturgeon sold his first short story in May 1938, to the McClure
Newspaper Syndicate. He was 20 years old, a seaman in the merchant
marine. In January of 1939 he moved to New York City and began to write
full-time. The only markets he successfully sold to were the newspaper
syndicate, which primarily bought short-short stories from him, and,
beginning in May 1939, two magazines edited by John W. Campbell, Jr.:
_Astounding Science-Fiction_ and _Unknown_ (the latter specialized in
fantasy and horror).

Sturgeon shipped out again between July and October of 1939, doing some
writing while at sea, and then returned to New York. In March of 1940 he
married his high school sweetheart Dorothe Fillingame, and moved from
Manhattan to Staten Island (his birthplace). Their daughter Patricia was
born in December 1940, and in June 1941 the three of them left New York
and moved to the British West Indies, to manage a resort hotel in
Jamaica owned by Sturgeon’s mother’s family.

Sturgeon’s last McClure story was published in March 1940. He did some
writing for hire in 1940 and 1941, primarily scripts for comic books,
but most of his income until he left New York was from selling stories
to _Astounding_ and _Unknown_. Sturgeon’s bibliography shows him
appearing regularly in the two magazines over a five-year period, but
this is misleading. In fact, the move to the tropics, which was intended
to make it easier for him to write, resulted in his doing no writing at
all between July 1941 and April 1944. All of the Sturgeon stories that
appeared in _Astounding_ and _Unknown_ in 1941, 1942, and 1943 were
written and sold by June of 1941.

The first volume of _The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon_ covered
the period from December 1937, when the story he sold in May 1938 was
penned, until spring of 1940. The stories in this second volume were all
written between April of 1940 and June 1941. All were published in
_Astounding_ or _Unknown_ except for “The Anonymous,” presumably
submitted to Campbell and rejected, and “Two Sidecars,” an unpublished
story that contains no fantasy or science fiction element and therefore
could not have been aimed at Campbell. There is evidence that Sturgeon
wrote other non-fantasy stories during this period, but no manuscripts
survive. It is also probable that he submitted a few stories to other
fantasy magazines, but without success.

The period covered in Volume 1 was well documented in Sturgeon’s
correspondence; he was writing regularly to his mother, who was living
in Scotland, and to his fiancée in Philadelphia. By contrast, there is
almost no documentation of the chronology, or circumstances of writing,
of the stories in this volume; Ted had stopped writing to his fiancée
now that she was his wife and living in the same house, and he wrote
much less frequently to his mother. No other correspondence (or
record-keeping) survives. As a result, the sequence of stories in this
volume is somewhat arbitrary. “Cargo” belongs near the beginning; “The
Jumper” near the end; and some of the other stories can be dated at
least within a few months. But the precise order of composition is
unknown. (Campbell did not necessarily publish them in the order
received.)

“CARGO”: first published in _Unknown_, November 1940. Probably written
in June, 1940. Sturgeon’s introduction to the story in his 1948
collection _Without Sorcery_ reports:

_The story of the origin of “Cargo” will gladden the heart of the
string-saver. The reader may remember that in “The Ultimate Egoist” the
protagonist at one point debated the advisability of going to sea. In
the first draft of that tale, he actually did, and for some three
thousand words found himself on a tankship on which weird things
happened. I realized suddenly that I was getting far away from my story,
and cut back. But instead of throwing away these extraneous pages, I
saved them and expanded them: “Cargo” is the result_.

Some surviving manuscript pages among Sturgeon’s papers confirm this,
although in fact the primary contribution of the “Egoist” pages seems to
be paragraphs 2–6 of “Cargo” and the general idea of a story about
strange events on a renegade oil tanker engaged in war profiteering.
Sturgeon’s papers also yield the first few pages of a 1939 story
(probably never finished) again about a renegade tanker and a skipper
referred to as the Old Man.

The rich detail in the story is attributable to the author’s extensive
experience as a merchant seaman between 1937 and 1939, serving primarily
on “coastwise” oil tankers—New York to Texas and sometimes further
south. No Atlantic crossings. (Although in 1937 Sturgeon fantasized
about a trip to Spain on an oil tanker. He told his mother, in a letter
written at sea on September 6, _I hope to be in Europe within the next
month or so, but I doubt whether I’ll be able to see you. I’ll only be
in port 18 hours and it will be a Spanish port at that. The whole idea
is strictly mercenary on my part, because the oil companies are paying
huge bonuses to crews entering the_ [Spanish Civil] _war zone. As for
the theoretical side of it, you can be sure I’ll ship on a cargo of
Loyal oil. Texas Co., like all the others, sells to both sides._)

“Cargo” was also included in the last collection of Sturgeon stories
published in his lifetime, _Alien Cargo_ (1984). Introducing the story
in that book, TS wrote:

_—either alien, or very definitely not alien, just different. Depends on
how you use the word. Also written in ’39 or early ’40; England was at
war, and I wrote out of my experience in the Merchant Marine. Also, it
was a fun story. Later on, I stopped writing fun stories for a very long
time. I got pretty grim, I did …_ (I can’t think of any period when
Sturgeon was actively writing for which this comment seems accurate.)

In an undated letter probably written in late August, 1940, Sturgeon
told his mother: _You notice this missive is written in two types. I
just got this, my precious, back_. (He’s referring to his typewriter
with a script typeface, on which he wrote most of these early stories.)
_It wrote my baby masterpiece, “Cargo,” and then quit—absolutely refused
to write another word until it was rebuilt. I didn’t mind—it was a great
big check for a lovely yarn about a crummy old outlaw tankship that was
taken over by war refugees—all the Little People who didn’t like bombs
and shells and thought that this country would be a nice haven. Ye ed.
was nuts about it, bought it on sight, and begged me for a sequel_.
(Sturgeon’s concern for his mother—he urges in the same letter that she
return to the U.S. in order to escape the war in Europe—may have helped
inspire the story-idea).

_Unknown_ typically ran story blurbs (teasers written by the editor) in
as many as three places: on the cover, on the contents page, and on the
title page of the story. The title page blurb for “Cargo” read: THE OLD
TRAMP STEAMER WAS UTTERLY DISREPUTABLE AND MANNED BY A CREW OF WANTED
MEN. AND SOMEWHERE OFF THE COAST OF EUROPE SHE PICKED UP THE WEIRDEST
CARGO ON RECORD!

“SHOTTLE BOP”: first published in _Unknown_, February 1941. This one is
the descendant of a story called “Abraxas,” written January 1940. The
first seven pages of the earlier story survive among Sturgeon’s papers,
and they tell basically the same story as the opening pages of “Shottle
Bop.” On January 26, 1940, TS wrote to Dorothe:

_Hope I never have to live thru another such week … Sunday settled down
to work on “Abraxas.” Finished it Tuesday morning; no sleep Sun or
Mon … stopping only to eat, eating only oatmeal and cocoa because that’s
all there was … took it down to JC, came home and passed out … up at
9:30 that nite, over to Woodie’s; bed again at 2, slept till 2 Wed.
afternoon … so to work again on “Salty Peanut.” It came back. “Abraxas”
came back. I’m working for nothing and the more I work the lousier it is
and the less I eat … you_ would _ask me to write a letter instead of a
card … Wed. nite worked all nite. Thursday nite worked till twelve, went
over to Martin’s where I met my two protegés … they wanted some
back-number McClure releases so brought them home with me … bull-session
lasted until ten this morning … so that’s two more nites without
sleep … didn’t known then about “Abraxas”; was hoping for a check. Hung
around until 2nd mail, still nothing, called up JC who said come down
and talk it over … dead on my feet I went down, first to McClure’s to
pick up a life-saving finn for the rent … they’ve owed it to me for two
weeks but I was saving it for just this eventuality … JC commented as I
expected and feared he would; story had too many ramifications, spread
out so much it couldn’t support its weight … tremendous amount of
material in it; comedy, horror, Gnosticism, Basilidian Philosopy,
possession, and so on … hero wound up to be not only the Messiah but the
f—ing Holy Ghost … too big … JC calmly suggests that I knock it down and
make at least five shorts out of it … so as soon as I get to bed, which
is right after I finish this, will get to work on it … and that means
another two day stretch with oatmeal and cocoa … good diet. Vitamins
ABB1CD and roughage … pound of sugar every three days, can of milk every
day. Thrive on it_.

The opening paragraph of “Abraxas” is: _Seems to me either you have an
inferiority complex or you just don’t admit you have one. Phooey. There,
in its entirety, was my attitude on the day I bought bottles_.

At the time he began writing this story (the evidence from his
correspondence is that he didn’t write the published version till spring
or summer), Sturgeon was living at 146 Tenth Avenue, Manhattan, not far
from the Shottle Bop’s fictional location.

TS’s introduction to “Shottle Bop” in _Without Sorcery:_

_This one almost disqualified the book-title. I maintain stoutly,
however, that the plot strikes sorcery only a glancing blow. The verse
was included as an experiment to see if I could get the two-bits a line
the magazine was paying for poetry, with verse put into the body of a
story. I didn’t get it, a fact which has denied posterity, to its great
benefit, several bushels of my doggerel. I think it pertinent to cite
this story as an example of the “blind grope” technique of story
telling. Start with a situation, give it a vaguely directional push, and
let happen what may. If the author does not know what is to happen next,
the reader cannot possibly know_.

The blurb on the original magazine cover read: A VERY QUAINT LITTLE
STORE, WITH A SIGN THAT SAID ONLY ‘SHOTTLE BOP—WE SELL BOTTLES WITH
THINGS IN THEM.’ BUT THE THINGS IN THE BOTTLES WERE—THINGS!

“YESTERDAY WAS MONDAY”: first published in _Unknown_, June 1941. Because
John Campbell had already selected it for his 1948 anthology _From
Unknown Worlds_, this gem was not included in Sturgeon’s first
collection _Without Sorcery_ (also 1948). It continued to be overlooked
until _The Golden Helix_, 1979. Sturgeon’s introduction to the story
from the 1979 collection:

_“Where do you get your crazy ideas?”_

_Every writer gets this question in various inflections, some of them
downright insulting. Where this one came from is a mystery; why I set
about writing it is another. Everything I had said about “The Ultimate
Egoist”_ [earlier in the same collection] _applies to this one too: I
was a beginner, I was unpracticed, I was eager—ready to write everything
that came into my head. Often I would write myself into situations in
which I had no idea where I was going or what might happen before the
end. I do not recommend this as a technique; but if it does happen and
you find a way out, you have written a story which doesn’t ‘telegraph’
to the reader what the ending will be. If the author doesn’t know, the
reader can’t_.

_This is one of those. And also: it was fun to do_.

“Yesterday Was Monday” is an example, like “Microcosmic God,” of
Sturgeon presenting an idea that is not new to fantasy or science
fiction (or literature in general), but executing it so well that it is
the Sturgeon version that leaves a permanent impression on anyone who
encounters it. It seems likely that Robert A. Heinlein’s short novel
“The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag” and the “heaven” sequences
in _Stranger in a Strange Land_ were influenced by this story; one also
hears its echoes in the many “constructed realities” of Philip K. Dick,
especially _The Cosmic Puppets_ and _Time Out of Joint_.

“Yesterday Was Monday” was adapted as an episode of the television
program “The New Twilight Zone.”

Original magazine blurb (from the contents page): THE ACTOR SLIPPED
BEHIND THE SCENES—TO FIND THE SCENE-SHIFTERS AT WORK BUILDING YESTERDAY
AND TOMORROW!

“BRAT”: first published in _Unknown Worlds_ (same magazine as _Unknown;_
the title changed with the 10/41 issue), December 1941. It would be
interesting to know whether this was written before or after the birth
of the Sturgeons’ first child (Patricia, born Dec. 21, 1940), but I have
seen no hard evidence either way. I’m guessing it was written in
anticipation rather than from first-hand experience—placing it as,
perhaps, a summer 1940 story. In any case it’s intriguing that in
Theodore and Dorothe’s divorce decree, the name of their second child is
not Cynthia, as she has always been known, but Michaele.

Story introduction from _Without Sorcery:_

_When this was written, I had the bad habit of running out all my copy
in one draft, without a carbon. As a result, there were actually a
half-dozen stories which I forgot entirely. Some appeared during the war
when I was out of the country and could not get copies. When I returned
I spent many a narcissistic night in reading my own stuff. It was with
great joy that I ran across this one; I had absolutely no recollection
whatever of having written it. I wandered around for days murmuring,
“Did I write ‘Brat’? Did I really?”_

The above is a proper tribute to an underrrated story that in some ways
is a breakthrough work: a true story of transformation (and thus one of
the first truly characteristic Sturgeon stories), a transformation
arising not through the author’s preconceived plot but from something
that happens to him and his characters as the tale tells itself.

There are times, however, when a literary caretaker wants to kick the
author (who in turn, we can be sure, often feels the same way about the
caretaker). In 1984, for _Alien Cargo_, Sturgeon wrote:

_Not fun. A horrid little fantasy, derived from true-life observations
by a man who loved children, but not children like this one. Those
ones_.

If you are reading these notes after reading the story in question—and
if not, shoo, scram, go away, you’re doing it wrong—you will immediately
realize that this latter introduction was written by an author who had
not recently read the story he was commenting on; who had, as it were,
absolutely no recollection of what it was about emotionally. (Emotional
content is primary in most Sturgeon stories—for example, the real power
of “It,” and that story’s influence on later horror writers, lies not in
the concept of the creature but in the emotional impact of the
characterization and the setting.) Sturgeon couldn’t have written this
1984 comment after actually rereading “Brat” and re-meeting its four
characters.

Sturgeon’s descriptions of his interactions with his paternal aunt Alice
Waldo, in letters to his mother in 1938, suggest she may have been a
model for the prissy Aunt Jonquil as she is portrayed at the start of
“Brat.”

Magazine blurb, from the contents page: ‘BUTCH’ LOOKED LIKE A
NINE-MONTH-OLD BABY. BUT HE LIKED HIS STEAKS RARE, AND HIS COFFEE
BLACK—AND TROUBLE IN MASSIVE DOSES!

“THE ANONYMOUS”: unpublished. From the trunk left behind by Sturgeon on
Staten Island in 1941 and returned to him in 1972. The typeface of the
manuscript and the inscription on it saying “please note change of
address” both identify it as having been written or completed circa
August 1940.

The date is significant because the story (in my opinion) is so flat and
energyless, yet seems to have been written during a period of time when
the author was also producing excellent and exciting work. While many
authors appear to grow in self-confidence (for better or worse) as their
careers progress, Sturgeon from the beginning of his writing career
found himself moving almost cyclically between real extremes of
self-assurance and self-doubt. Highs and lows. Some of these cycles, in
terms of his writing, were in periods of years (of writing a lot and
writing nothing at all). But there is also considerable evidence in
Sturgeon’s correspondence of brief, intense fluctuations between energy
and paralysis tormenting him even during relatively productive or
prolific periods.

_I’ve applied for a job with the British Purchasing Commission_, he
wrote his mother in December 1940, shortly before his daughter was born.
_The idea is to establish some sort of regularity to my income, which,
although ample, isn’t steady enough to live comfortably on. My checks
are large and fairly frequent, but just one reject can throw me out
completely for weeks. The more work I do the worse I feel, the worse I
feel the less money I make. Bounce two stories in a row—and science
fiction is very hard to write—and I start having bad dreams when I’m
wide awake. And I mean_ bad _dreams—horror is my specialty. Can’t sell
stories while that goes on. But when I sell a couple a week or two
apart, I go on a spurt, and months go by in the life of Riley …_

Sturgeon did submit his 1940-era rejects to other markets—the magazine
_Weird Tales_ for one, and no doubt other science fiction or fantasy
magazines—but not very persistently and certainly not successfully (he
sold no sf or fantasy to any magazine editor other than John Campbell
until 1946).

A comment in a letter from TS to his mother and stepfather March 20,
1938, after thanking them for sending his birth certificate and adoption
papers as requested, shows Sturgeon already chewing on the notion of
identity alteration: _For quite a while now I have had an idea buzzing
around in my sconce to the effect that someday, sometime, I would like
to change my identity—notice, I said identity, not just name, and
disappear most melodramatically from the sight and mind of man. Sort of
a Jekyll-and-Hyde affair, you know; I’ve always thought that it would be
amusing to start a verbal war on some subject with myself through the
public press. Well, it’s all conjecture and daydreaming; but like a good
scout I must be semper paratus. And don’t worry about it; I’ll most
certainly keep you informed_.

“TWO SIDECARS”: unpublished. Also from the trunk left on Staten Island.

The only specific mention in the surviving correspondence from 1940 and
1941 of Sturgeon attempting to write for markets other than _Astounding_
and _Unknown_ (and the Street & Smith comic books he wrote scripts for)
is in a letter to his mother dated April 22, 1941: _Another thing we are
hopeful about is the_ Writer’s Digest _contest, in which I entered two
stories. First prize of two hundred prizes is $250; all winning entries
go to_ Liberty _magazine, and those that are printed there knock down an
additional hundred. It would make me very happy to win, I think!_ This
story could have been for that contest, or could have been written much
earlier (anytime between August 1940 and spring 1941) for submission to
a non-fantasy market.

A sidecar, according to my dictionary, contains “brandy, an
orange-flavored liqueur, and lemon juice.” This story and “Nightmare
Island” might raise the question of Sturgeon’s own relationship with
alcohol. He did drink, of course, in his years as a merchant seaman, and
afterward (February 1940: _New Year’s wasn’t bad. I went to Philly, did
the rounds with Wally, got pleasantly tight four times in three days_),
but there is no suggestion in his correspondence that it was ever a
problem for him. Nor is there much specific evidence that he used
alcohol to help him write, though he no doubt tried it. But his
drugs-of-choice for writing seem to have always been coffee and
sleep-deprivation (but in a 1952 letter included in the chapbook
_Argyll_ he also speaks of writing under the influence of dexedrine and
“soggy with beer”).

However, although alcohol wasn’t the problem, the utter paralysis of the
husband in this story in the face of his imminent loss of his wife is an
eerie foreshadowing of the circumstances of Ted and Dorothe’s divorce in
1945 (as described by Sturgeon himself in correspondence and later
fiction).

“MICROCOSMIC GOD”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
April 1941. I date it as having been written after August 1940, based on
a comment in a letter apparently written that month: _I’m only selling
to one market_—Unknown, _I have five stories coming up in that, and one
in_ Astounding—_a sequel to “Ether Breather.”_ This suggests that
“Microcosmic God,” “Completely Automatic,” and “Poker Face,” all
published in _Astounding_ near the start of 1941, were written in the
fall of 1940. “Microcosmic God” is further dated by the existence of
five pages of an early draft, typed on the script (or italic) typewriter
and with the return address that was used starting in mid-August 1940.

Sturgeon’s 1948 comments on the story, from _Without Sorcery: This was
written just at the beginning of the shooting phase of World War II, and
is the result of mulling over a possible end product—in miniature—of
dictatorship and isolationism. I have been asked repeatedly to do a
sequel to this. I know better!_

And his 1984 comments, from _Alien Cargo:_

_I have always disliked this story—not for its basic idea, which has
been called unique, but for its writing. Just out of my ‘teens, I had
not yet learned that nobody is ever and altogether good, and nobody is
all bad. Ignorant of that, one can produce 100% purified vintage
dyed-in-the-wool cardboard characters. The story’s basic idea, however,
is indeed unique, and many years later, at the Artificial Intelligence
offices in M.I.T., a truly great scientist introduced himself to me, to
tell me (as many scientists have) that he had gotten into science in the
first place because of reading science fiction as a youngster, and
further, that he had gotten into microbiology because of this one story.
And this is a guy who might win a Nobel Prize! So … what price literary
judgments?_

Science fiction historian Sam Moskowitz offers a different perspective
in his book _Seekers of Tomorrow_ (1967):

“ ‘Microcosmic God’ … had all the reaction of a bomb with a fast fuse.
It was not that the idea was new; the concept of intelligent creatures
in a microscopic world producing inventions at an accelerated rate
relative to their own time span had been used in ‘Out of the Sub
Universe’ by R. F. Starzl (_Amazing Stories Quarterly_, summer 1928),
had been defined in complete detail by Edmond Hamilton in ‘Fessenden’s
World’ (_Weird Tales_, April 1937), and had been recognized as a
poignant classic in Calvin Peregoy’s ‘Short-Wave Castle’ (_Astounding
Stories_, February 1934)—but Sturgeon did it best.” [James Gunn in
_Alternate Worlds_ (1975) credits Fitz-James O’Brien’s 1858 story “The
Diamond Lens” as the first in the general category of “world in a
microcosm” stories.]

Moskowitz goes on, drawing partly on his 1961 interview with Sturgeon:
“The modest fame as master of fantasy which Sturgeon had attained with
‘It’ was far transcended by the acclaim brought to him by ‘Microcosmic
God.’ Far from being pleased, Sturgeon was first annoyed and then
infuriated. The kindest thing he could say for ‘Microcosmic God’ was
that it was ‘fast paced.’ He deplored the fact that it did not have the
‘literary cadence’ of many of his other less complimented works and he
deeply resented the fact that readers didn’t even seem to get the point:
that a superman need not be a powerful, commanding person.

“He failed to understand that he had struck the universal chord. Stories
like ‘Shottle Bop,’ where you got what you wanted by ‘wishing,’ were
good fun but nobody in this modern technological age believed them. On
the contrary, a story like ‘Microcosmic God,’ where a man could get
anything he wanted by logical scientific means, made possible the
complete suspension of disbelief and utter absorption of the reader by
the story. That was the story’s appeal.”

In any case, the extent and durability of the story’s appeal were
demonstrated in 1969, when members of the Science Fiction Writers of
America were asked to vote on “the greatest science fiction stories of
all time” (for inclusion in a book entitled _Science Fiction Hall of
Fame_). “Microcosmic God” tied for #4 in total votes—one of the five
best or most popular sf stories ever written (through 1965), according
to a poll of “virtually everyone now living who has ever had science
fiction published in the United States” (quote and voting results from
Robert Silverberg’s introduction to _SF Hall of Fame_).

“Microcosmic God” was included in the first paperback science fiction
anthology published in the United States, _The Pocket Book of Science
Fiction_ (edited by Donald A. Wollheim) in 1943. As a result many
readers associate it with their discovery of science fiction. (“The
first [sf] story I read was ‘Microcosmic God’ by Theodore Sturgeon. It
has sometimes occurred to me that it has all been downhill from
there.”—Gene Wolfe, in his introduction to _The Complete Stories of
Theodore Sturgeon, Vol. I_)

John W. Campbell, Jr., summarized the story well in the March 1941
_Astounding_ (in a section where the editor talks about next month’s
issue): “Theodore Sturgeon has a novellette coming up, too. The tale of
a man who played god to a homemade microcosm and forgot that he still
had to live and get along in his greater world himself.” His blurb for
the story when it appeared (title page) was: KIDDER HAD A SYSTEM FOR
INVENTING THINGS IN A HURRY—AND HE THOUGHT HE HAD A SYSTEM FOR HANDLING
THE RESULTS. HIS METHOD WAS INHUMAN—BUT HIS AGENT WAS HUMAN—AND
DANGEROUS!

The unfinished early draft of “Microcosmic God,” the text of which is
included at the end of these story notes, reveals that the Neoterics
evolved in the author’s mind from ants … and thereby makes a small link
between this story and Sturgeon’s 1953 classic “Mr. Costello,
Hero”—which in turn suggests that in Sturgeon’s universe Senator Joe
McCarthy and Adolf Hitler may be perceived as examples of the archetype
called Mad Scientist.

The early draft also reveals that “Microcosmic God” evolved out of a
hoary “Sunday supplement reporter comes to interview eccentric
inventor/scientist” plot frame that Sturgeon had been trying to use for
several years (on the evidence of other unfinished story-beginnings
found among the Sturgeon papers from the Staten Island trunk).

The second sentence of the early draft casually summarizes the main
gimmick of “The Anonymous,” suggesting, I guess, that when Sturgeon had
something on his mind he didn’t mind repeating himself. (In fact, as in
the case of his reflex put-downs of “Microcosmic God,” he was quite
capable of repeating himself almost verbatim over a period of 40 years.
The patience of his wives etc. is legendary.)

“THE HAUNT”: first published in _Unknown_, April 1941. Sturgeon’s
interest since childhood in building crystal radios shows up in a number
of his stories, notably “The Bones” and “The Martian and the Moron.”
Ghost stories (“Niobe,” “Shottle Bop,” “Ghost of a Chance”) are another
recurring theme. The following quote (from a letter TS wrote his mother
in October 1937) could well have been included in the notes on “Cargo”
or “Turkish Delight” (_Vol_. I), but I think it fits here as well:

_This ship is supposed to be haunted, a propos of your remarks about the
worker’s influence on his product. It seems that two people have jumped
overboard from the foc’sle head where I stand my lookout watches. And
for apparently no reason. I had only one unusual experience up there,
but it really was something to remember. One night about three AM I was
standing up there, absolutely groggy for want of sleep. I forget just
why; I think that tank-mucking_ [work in the gas tanks, under the
influence of the fumes] _was responsible for it. Finally I could stand
it no longer. I crawled down between the riding-chocks on the
anchor-engine and went to sleep. Suddenly I found myself wide awake, in
a cold sweat, and staring up into a threatening sky; I saw nothing that
could have awakened me with such a start, and so lay back and dozed off.
Immediately I awoke with such a jolt that it threw me right up on my
feet, and then I heard, gradually fading away, and already almost
imperceptible, the most extraneous possible sound for my environment. Of
all impossible things, the skirling of bagpipes! I stood absolutely
frozen, staring out over the bow, and there, dead ahead, at two hundred
yards, the ugly stub snout of a Swedish freighter poked out of a
fogbank, throwing two fountains of spray as she headed unerringly for
our port bow. I whipped around to the bell behind me and rang three
times (“Dead Ahead!”) and yelled “Hard left!” as loud as I could bellow.
Yes, we missed her, but only just. It was one of those awful moments
that you dream about, but never see the end of. We practically scraped;
to be more accurate, I should say that we missed her by about 40 feet.
Later, when the excitement had died down, and I had taken the wheel, the
mate told me that he had seen absolutely nothing until almost a minute
after I rang the bell. What would have happened if those phantom pipes
had not been so insistent? Note: I never sleep on watch any more!!_

Magazine blurb (title page): IT SEEMED A GOOD IDEA TO CRACK THE
CAST-IRON POISE OF THE GIRL BY A LITTLE SYNTHETIC HAUNT. SOUND EFFECTS,
RADIO VARIETY, WERE INTENDED, BUT—

“COMPLETELY AUTOMATIC”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
February 1941. Written fall 1940.

Two pages of an early draft of this story survive in Sturgeon’s papers.
As with the “Microcosmic God” draft, they show an author who has his
basic story idea and is experimenting with how to tell it. It’s possible
that these two pages were all Sturgeon wrote before rethinking the story
and writing it in its present form. The early draft does not have the
“one space-sailor tells another a story” narrative structure. Instead
the story starts with a new, green crewman meeting his bunkmate (and
being razzed by him), a very skeletal version of the Babson-meets-Fuzzy
scene in the finished story. This is followed by a long, incomplete
clump of exposition, concerning the funkiness of the _Maggie Northern_
and the recent elimination of the “Apprentice Chemical Controller” job
aboard this automated ore-ship. One imagines Sturgeon stopping at the
bottom of the second page and saying, okay, I think I’m ready to start
writing now.

When Sturgeon wrote “Completely Automatic” and “Microcosmic God,” he had
already sold at least eight fantasy stories to _Unknown_, but his only
science fiction sales were the two “Ether Breather” stories. He was
still trying to find his voice as a science fiction writer.

Magazine blurb (from the title page): A YARN ABOUT A PERFECTLY AUTOMATIC
SHIP, AND HER PERFECTLY INCOMPETENT CREW, HER HOPELESS, PRACTICALLY
MINDLESS CREW TRAPPED BY HER PERFECT MECHANISMS WHEN THINGS WENT WRONG.

“POKER FACE”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, March
1941. Written fall 1940. Moskowitz in _Seekers of Tomorrow_ says “Poker
Face” is “historically important as one of the earliest science fiction
stories based on the notion that otherworldly aliens [_sic;_ actually in
this case it’s men from the future] are living and working among us.” It
could also be considered a forerunner of Arthur C. Clarke’s vision of
the perfect city at the end of time, lost in a self-sustained stasis.

Sturgeon (from _Without Sorcery_): _No one can change my conviction that
there are people among us like “Face.” Not necessarily people from his
strange point of origin, but from many. The reasons these folk have for
concealing themselves are more obvious than any they might have for
self-advertisement. You do not attempt to alter what you see on your
visits to a museum—or to a zoo …_

And later, from _Alien Cargo:_

_I’m so very glad to see this one back in print. Written sometime in
early 1940, this and the next four were written in an extraordinarily
prolific (for me) period in early 1940, during which my editor, the late
John Campbell, hoarded them and pieced them out; I saw none of them in
print until I returned to the States after managing a hotel in Jamaica,
then, when the U.S. got into the war, working as a heavy equipment
operator in Jamaica (for the Army) and in Puerto Rico (for the Navy).
From 1940 until late ’46 I wrote only one story (a novelette called
“Killdozer!”)—six solid years of “writer’s block”—the worst I have ever
known_.

_But about “Poker Face,” 1940: I wonder what was in George Orwell’s mind
just then, eight years before he wrote his terrifyingly prescient_ 1984?

Sturgeon’s account (written in 1984) requires a few factual corrections:
his “writer’s block” began in June 1941, when he moved to Jamaica; and
he began writing again on a regular basis near the end of 1945.

When Sturgeon put together his first collection of stories in 1948, he
evidently did some light editing on several of the stories (one,
“Maturity,” was substantially rewritten). The text included here is the
book version. In the case of “Poker Face,” two sentences have been
trimmed from the middle of the first paragraph of the magazine version,
four sentences cut from Face’s description of how he arranged the cards,
and, more significantly, there are several large cuts from Face’s
description of his future city, cuts that may help explain why Sturgeon
remembered his story as being related to the dystopic vision of _1984_.
The biggest cut starts at the end of the paragraph that starts, _“I came
from that city.”_ In the magazine it ends, _Imagine it if you can—let me
describe the life of an individual to you_. And goes on:

_“He was born when he was needed. He was an individual from a mold. He
was a certain weight, not the thousandth of a gram more or less than
that of any of his contemporaries. He was fed the same food as they,
slept exactly the same hours, learned precisely the same things at the
same time. His pulse, mental powers, rate of metabolism, physical
strength, range of vision—all were exactly the same as those of the same
age. He needed no individual attention. He fought no disease, because
there was no disease in the city. He was fed and clothed and housed by
machines, and he was taught by them and quickly learned the way of them.
When he was adult he was bred. When he was eighteen he had been schooled
for two hours a day for eight years. He then spent one year working two
hours a day tending one of the millions of machines that took their
power from interstellar space and transmuted it into usable energies for
the people and the structures. When he had finished that year he spent
an hour each day for eight months in teaching the young the things he
had observed about the work he had done. He gave instruction for twenty
days less each year for twelve years and then died because he ceased to
get fed, as there was nothing left for him to do. His body was
transformed into raw materials of various kinds, with no waste. There
was never any waste in the city_.

_“Now the city was divided into two halves, like the halves of a great
brain. One half was dedicated to the supply of power, and one to
materials. There were forty-five million people in each half, equally
divided in age and sex. The flawless smoothness of the city’s operation
depended on the maintenance of that exact balance between supply and
demand, manufacture and the means to manufacture. For every death there
was a birth …”_

The paragraph that begins, “Face shook his head,” originally ended with
these added sentences: _Remember—it wasn’t only that these people were
educated that way and brought up in those surroundings. They were bred
for those traits.”_

And slightly later, the paragraph that begins “I was coming to that,”
had these added sentences at the end: _Now the machines which supplied
the people with everything from baby pap to muscle rubs, transportation
to air conditioning, naturally covered such a vast number of highly
specialized fields that it was necessary to maintain quite a number of
men educated along these lines. There was only one of these men detailed
to each field—astronomy, astrophysics, biology, and so on. He learned
what his predecessor knew and spent the years of his life learning what
else he might and teaching it to the next in line_.

No text was added or rewritten for the later version, although there are
additions and light rewritings on the text of another _Without Sorcery_
story, “The Ultimate Egoist.”

Magazine blurb (title page): “FACE” WAS A REMARKABLE POKER PLAYER. EVEN
MORE REMARKABLE THAN HIS FELLOW PLAYERS THOUGHT. IT WASN’T JUST THE WAY
HE STACKED DECKS—

“NIGHTMARE ISLAND”: first published in _Unknown_, June 1941, under the
pseudonym E. Waldo Hunter. This was the exciting month that Sturgeon had
four stories published at the same time, two in _Unknown_ and two in
_Astounding_. One story in each magazine was under his name; “The Purple
Light,” in _Astounding_, was published under the pseudonym Sturgeon had
used earlier in _Unknown_ (for “The Ultimate Egoist”), “E. Hunter
Waldo.” But “Nightmare Island” was credited to “E. Waldo Hunter.”
Campbell, in the next issue of _Unknown_, explained: “Waldo sort of
forgot whether he’d put the ‘Hunter’ before or after ‘Waldo’ and we
forgot to check. Hence the discrepancy of the name on ‘The Ultimate
Egoist’ and ‘Nightmare Island.’ ” Sturgeon, in a letter in that same
issue, says, _It will no doubt surprise a great many people to learn
that I was christened Edward Waldo, and that Hunter is my grandmother’s
maiden name. Of course, I was only a kid at the time_. The letter is
signed, “E. Hunter Waldo Hunter.”

Sam Moskowitz reports (based on his 1961 conversation with Sturgeon)
that the idea for “Nightmare Island” was “derived from a reference in a
1910 edition of the _Encyclopaedia Britannica_, concerning the ‘tube
worm’.”

The tropical setting of the story seems to conjure up Sturgeon’s years
in Jamaica, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands, but in fact it was
written (and published) before he left New York. He had, however, had
some transient experiences in the tropics already, traveling through the
Gulf and the Florida Keys as a merchant seaman. (To his mother, 12/3/37:
_Now please don’t try to tempt me away from the coastwise runs again; in
the first place, they are ideal for winter weather, as we are so often
south of Florida_. He had recently made what may have been his only
Latin American run as a merchant seaman, stopping in Panama and
Guatemala; but every trip between New York and Port Arthur, Texas took
him through the Bahamian waters where this story probably takes place.)

Magazine blurb (contents page): ONLY A MAN WHO’D BEEN IN HIS CONDITION
FOR A LONG TIME COULD HAVE UNDERSTOOD, ACCEPTED, AND ACTED REASONABLY ON
NIGHTMARE ISLAND.

“THE PURPLE LIGHT”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_,
June 1941, under the psedudonym E. Hunter Waldo. A science-fictional
rewrite of Sturgeon’s 1939 vignette “Watch My Smoke.”

Magazine blurb (contents page): ONCE IN A WHILE, IT’S A SMART IDEA TO
CRAWL RIGHT INTO THE MIDDLE OF TROUBLE!

“ARTNAN PROCESS”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, June
1941. Written early December 1940. TS to his mother, 12/6/40: _This
morning I finished a science-fiction opus dealing with
isotope-transmutation as she is done on the third planet of the Procyon
system. It will with certitude bounce: I didn’t like the idea before I
started the yarn_. Same letter, now 12/12/40: _Ye ed. seemed to think
highly enough of my vegetative-metabolistic transmutation process to pay
me a hundred and a quarter for it. That pays the hospital bill and feeds
us for a week, though it leaves damn little for Christmas_.

A manuscript fragment from the Sturgeon papers indicates that there was
an earlier (probably incomplete) draft of this story, also starring
Slimmy and Bellew, in which Mars is not a factor; the cheap power deal
is directly between Artna and Earth.

Introduction from _Without Sorcery_ (1948):

_This opus, sheer “spaced-opera,”_ [_sic;_ changed in the paperback
version to “space-opera,” a familiar sf term for clichéd or
old-fashioned science fiction melodramas] _is included here primarily
because with it I can modestly take my place among the prognosticators.
Based on the problem of isotope separation, it was written three years
before the organization of the Manhattan Project. Major Groves’ brain
trust tried five methods to accomplish the trick of separating U-235
from U-238, in a mass of metal which was all chemically pure uranium.
Here’s one they never thought of …_

_This year, incidentally, the layman is beginning to hear of the
Probability Wave in connection with nuclear physics …_

Sometime in the mid-1950s (after reading a statement by Philip Van Doren
Stern that said, “Never set pen to paper until you can state your theme
in one single, simple declarative sentence”), Sturgeon began making a
list entitled: _IN ONE SENTENCE—What Sturgeon stories said_. He only
typed five entries, including one for this story, which says, _“Artnan
Process”: Any dictatorship is bad, even if beneficent_.

TS to Paul Williams, interview, December 6, 1975: _The only really
important story I wrote in that so-called entertainment period was
“Microcosmic God.” It’s a story I have never liked … But that was a
blockbuster. The other stories I wrote, they were fun, “The God in the
Garden” and “Helix the Cat,” all these funny kind of humorous things,
“Biddiver” and all that, were lightweight amusing stories and they
hadn’t anything too heavy to say. What’s that one about the Martian, and
these two guys are so—they fed the Martians Coca-Cola until they got
drunk?_

Magazine blurb (contents page): THE ARTNANS HAD A MONOPOLY ON THE U-235
BECAUSE OF A REFINING PROCESS. BUT THEY WERE PERFECTLY WILLING TO LET
ANYONE FIGURE IT OUT—IF HE COULD!

“BIDDIVER”: first published in _Astounding Science-Fiction_, August
1941. Sturgeon’s “in one sentence—what Sturgeon stories said” for this
one (circa 1954) was: _In the weakest of us lives a friendly giant_.

The insurance fraud at the start of the story harkens back to TS’s first
published story, “Heavy Insurance.”

Sturgeon did own an automobile at the time he wrote “Biddiver”—_a deep
maroon Buick coupé with chromium wheels and my initials on the doors_
(letter to his mother, circa August 1940).

Another element of what Sturgeon later called his “optimum man” theme
(he told David Hartwell in 1972 that his stories since 1945 _have all
had this preoccupation with the optimum man_) begins to emerge here: the
superman looking for a purpose (“Maturity,” _More Than Human_).

Magazine blurb (title page): BIDDIVER WAS A LITTLE MAN WHO GOT RICH, GOT
DRUNK, GOT INTO THE WRONG “AUTOMOBILE” AND—BECAUSE IT WASN’T AN
AUTOMOBILE BUT SOMETHING ELSE—GOT CHANGED!

“THE GOLDEN EGG”: first published in _Unknown_, August 1941. It would be
interesting to know why John Campbell chose to run this story in his
fantasy magazine rather than in his science fiction magazine.

The “phenomenal young man” aspect of this story makes it an early
appearance of a recurring Sturgeon character, the superman/aesthete
(Robin English in “Maturity,” Horty Bluett in _The Dreaming Jewels_).
The attractive adult male who knows nothing of the world (because he’s a
created human, or an alien, or an amnesiac) and has to be educated is
another recurring character: for example, Nemo in “The Clinic,” Anson in
“The Other Man,” the reborn Guy Gibbon in “When You Care, When You
Love.”

Sturgeon’s unfinished manuscript “Cory Drew,” dating perhaps from
January 1940, also concerns a “very handsome” adult male newly created
(in a laboratory by a couple of mad scientists), his childlike nature,
and what happens when he meets a woman who falls in love with him.
Ariadne Drew in “The Golden Egg” has the same last name as the hero of
that unfinished effort. Sturgeon had evidently forgotten that he’d
already used the name in “It” (which, although a very different sort of
story, shares with “Egg” the driven, detached curiosity of its nonhuman
entity).

One common thread in these “education” stories, illustrated by the comic
sequence in “The Golden Egg” when Elron talks first like a hobo and then
like a debutante, is Sturgeon’s interest in how ordinary human behavior
would appear to the proverbial “man from Mars,” the outsider who knows
nothing of our built-in cultural contexts and assumptions.

Why Sturgeon chose the name “Elron” is not known. He was certainly aware
of and a reader of fellow sf writer L. Ron Hubbard.

Magazine blurb (title page): THE GOLDEN EGG WAS ANCIENT BEYOND MAN’S
UNDERSTANDING—AND WANTED A MEASURE OF AMUSEMENT IN MAN’S SMALL WORLD—

“TWO PERCENT INSPIRATION”: first published in _Astounding
Science-Fiction_, October 1941. In a 1953 essay, “Why So Much Syzygy?”
(reprinted in _Turning Points_, Damon Knight, ed., Harper & Row 1977),
Sturgeon describes his fiction as a series of investigations of “this
matter of love,” and lists the “love motivations” driving some of his
stories: _In “Two Percent Inspiration” it was hero worship, a kid and a
great scientist_.

1948 introduction (_Without Sorcery_): _The title, of course, is from
the old saw about genius—“ninety-eight percent perspiration.” I have
since revised my conception of genius and now define it as an infinite
capacity for taking beer. This story is the only one I ever wrote which
has three (count ’em) plot twists at the end. I am proud of one thing in
it: Satan Strong, Scourge of the Spaceways, Supporter of the Serialized
Short Story, and Specialist in Science on the Spot_.

1984 introduction _(Alien Cargo): More early don’t-give-a-damn fun;
actually a lampoon on some of the more dreadful contemporary (1940)
examples of science fiction. So come on and meet, Satan Strong_ [etc.].

Although this seems to me a quite minor Sturgeon story, and granted the
existence of many common sources (E. E. Smith’s _The Skylark of Space_,
for one), it is intriguing how much it anticipates, in tone as well as
content, the excellent series of young adult science fiction novels
Robert Heinlein wrote between 1947 and 1958. Heinlein’s _The Rolling
Stones_ even features a space-going engineer who makes a living writing
trashy sci-fi, possibly an acknowledgement of the influence of “Two
Percent Inspiration.”

The pre-story fragment surviving in Sturgeon’s papers, in this one
instance a kind of plot summary of “Two Percent” rather than a false
start/early draft, seems worthy of inclusion here in its entirety. Read
in conjunction with the story, it provides us a good glimpse of how
Sturgeon transformed plot (note that the plot outline in this case also
establishes the mood of the story) into narrative, circa 1941:

_Professor Thaddeus MacIlhainy Nudnick, followed by ninety-three
sections of the alphabet, was a genius. He found himself aboard the good
ship_ Stoutfella, _named after a mythological character from the
literature of the ancients who was always popping up in In-lish
writings. Also aboard is a man-child by the name of Hughie, who was
addicted to trashy literature in general and science-fiction in
particular. Hughie was always pining away for an emergency, and
dramatizing the possibility, particularly this trip; for he knew
Professor Nudnick and some of his feats. He knew in his heart that come
the emergency, the prof would take down the ultraradio, swiftly twist
two wires, weld a connection, wind a coil, and—zooie! Everyone would be
safe in the Betelgeuse system via space-warp. Or something_.

_Comes the Emergency. The Earth-Mars Navigation Board, which is composed
of an equal number of both races and decides by majority vote, is under
the thumb of one Arthur Horn, who, oiled by Mars, has frightened the
rest of the Earthmen on the Board to vote the way he wants. It seems
that the_ Stoutfella _has discovered a huge deposit of prosydium, a
rare-earth metal invaluable as an “atomic catalyst” in the
molecular-collapse process for hardening copper. Nudnick is aboard to
guide them to it; he spotted it by improvising a detector when he was
travelling on a Martian pasenger liner. He has kept his mouth shut
because if the existence of this unclaimed treasure were ever made
known, it would precipitate a deadly war between the planets.
Independently, Nudnick is trying to claim it for Earth; he can’t
acquaint the Earth Government of it for fear of their sending an armed
fleet to seize it, which in space law is an act of war. He considers the
headstrong government stupid fools for such characteristics. The
prosydium asteroid is much nearer Earth than Mars anyway; once he has
claimed it Earth can protect it. Anyhoo, this feller Horn has got some
suspicions that Nudnick is up to something, and so has the_ Stoutfella
_stopped and completely disarmed on suspicion of piracy, knowing that
when he later sends a private ship to squeeze the secret out of Nudnick,
the old boy won’t blast them, as he has every right to do. Nudnick
annoyedly gives up his weapons, even to sidearms_.

_The_ Stoutfella _proceeds; since Nudnick is wise to the fact that Horn
is up to some monkey business, he leads Horn’s little Martian-crewed
ship a gay chase. He can’t, however, keep this up forever; he is an old
man and his ship will have to be fueled one of these days. The kid,
meanwhile, is completely disgusted with the scientist. Keeps on quoting
science-fiction to him, saying, “Why don’t you blast ’em? Why don’t you
go into hyperspace? Why don’t you make a light-deflector so the ship
will be invisible? Why don’t you do something really scientific?” The
old guy just laughed at him and slapped him on the back. The kid tried a
couple of things himself word for word out of the science-fiction rags,
with little or no effect. Finally, with fuel almost gone, the_
Stoutfella _is forced down on Mercury, on the twilight strip a bit
toward the day side. It is hot and damn windy; the two of them sit the
ship down and jump out, hightailing it for the mountings_ [sic]. _The
Martians come right away after them, land beside their ship and come
ashore. A futile chase, and the Earthmen are caught. Halfway back to the
Martian ship for torturing, the Martians drop dead. The only gadget
Nudnick_ has _whipped together is a beamed spy-ray, and he has forced
the dying Martians to confess “all” about Horn, out there in the heat.
Once back in the ship, explanation and delight_.

The opening scene of the completed story seems to draw partly on
Sturgeon’s childhood punishments at the hands of his professor
stepfather, as described in his 1965 essay “Argyll,” and perhaps also on
the “bloody unfair” brutalization he and other cadets suffered at the
hands of upperclassmen and officers at the Penn State Nautical School in
1936. However, the idealized brilliant professor Nudnick also probably
derives to some degree from Sturgeon’s childhood admiration of his
Scottish stepfather Argyll.

Magazine blurb (contents page): A MARTIAN MIGHT BE AS GOOD AS ANY
EARTHMAN IN MOST THINGS—BUT WHEN IT CAME TO A SHORT HIKE ON MERCURY—

“THE JUMPER”: first published in _Unknown Worlds_, August 1942. Written
before July 1941.

This is an early example of Sturgeon examining the psychopathic
personality, who seems compelled to manipulate and irritate the people
around him just because he can (see “When You’re Smiling,” “The Other
Man”). The “jumper” is another fascinating, though unrelated,
psychological or parapsychological conceit (Sturgeon may have learned of
this when visiting his uncle in Canada). But unlike later Sturgeon
stories, the psychological ideas are merely presented, not explored in a
rigorous or imaginative fashion.

Magazine blurb (title page): THE NAZI PRISON GUARD WAS PLAIN NASTY—AND
SOMETHING MORE. THE CANADIAN RECOGNIZED THE SYMPTOMS—AND MADE THE
VICIOUS GUARD SIGNAL THE R.A.F. FOR HIM!

_Corrections and addenda:_

I have not had the opportunity to compare the texts of all the stories
that were collected in _Without Sorcery_ with their original magazine
texts (manuscripts are unavailable for most of these stories). The
reader is advised that there may be textual variants in such stories as
“Microcosmic God,” and “It” and “Ether Breather” from the first volume.
We have used the _Without Sorcery_ text as the source in this series for
all stories included in that book.

A comparison has been made of the texts of the story “The Ultimate
Egoist” since the first volume was published. Sturgeon evidently went
over the story carefully, removing (or adding) a word or a phrase from a
sentence to improve the flow of the writing, and rewriting awkward
sentences. The most significant changes are the dropping of a passage of
reminiscence from the start of the paragraph that begins “Looking at
Drip, putting sugar in his coffee” (_Vol. 1_, p. 295), and the
conversion of the last two paragraphs of the story from past tense to
present tense, which considerably heightens the dramatic effect.

The passage dropped from the magazine version reads: _I poured him a cup
of coffee, thinking about the ships, thinking of the live surge of a
steel deck, and the whip of a wind, and of a double rainbow by moonlight
in the Caribbean. The pulsing rustle of valves and pistons. Aces backed
up in a marathon stud game in the messroom. Heat in the fireroom, making
your lungs too big for your chest. Breakdown in a hurricane off a rocky
coast, and you smell death in the wind—death and kerosene. A load of
high-test aviation gas, so your ship is a five-hundred-foot stick of
dynamite. A Louisiana Cajun using his knife and a Boston Irishman using
his feet. Breath of life, the very warmth in a man’s blood, these
things, once he’s been to sea_.

With rare exceptions, Sturgeon did not revise his texts for book
publication for his collections after the first one (he did revise his
novels that were based on magazine material, _The Dreaming Jewels_ and
_More Than Human_). It is possible that he may have revised a story
before it was anthologized by another editor, in the early years of his
writing career, and that we may have missed such changes by working from
the magazine text rather than the anthology text.

I have now examined the May 1947 issue of _Argosy_ in which “Bianca’s
Hands” first apppeared and can confirm that the text is the same as in
Sturgeon’s collection _E Pluribus Unicorn_. The introduction to the
story in the magazine reads, “It is with pride that _Argosy_ presents
the prize-winning story in our £250 competition. Its strange imaginative
quality and the brilliance of its technique convince us of the author’s
sure mastery of the art of short story writing. The sinister and
beautiful hands of Bianca will linger long in the memory of all who read
this story. We congratulate the winner, Theodore Sturgeon, on a powerful
and moving piece of work.”

The editor would appreciate hearing from readers who have information
about alternate texts or stories omitted from Sturgeon bibliographies,
or who notice errors or omissions in these notes.



MICROCOSMIC GOD
UNFINISHED EARLY DRAFT


HE OPENED THE door wide to me. He looked like the kind of man you forget
easily because you see so many like him.

“Yes?” But his voice wasn’t one to be forgotten.

“Mr. Samuel Kidder?”

“Yes?” A different intonation, a different attitude. He was a gentleman,
and the force of his mind was an aura about him. I said, “I’m a
freelance writer, Mr. Kidder. I’ve heard of you and your work and would
like to do an article. May I—”

He stood aside. “Certainly. Come in.” I did. I couldn’t keep my eyes off
him except to glance around the room and back again, and that was
looking at him too, for this was his room, so much of the man himself. A
weird place. Stacks of magazine fiction. A pulmotor. Velvet drapes. A
platinum cigarette case on the same small table with a hookah, or water
pipe. Window-frames like picture frames; windows scattered about the
walls like pictures. There were plenty of things in the room, but there
was no clutter. The place was different from all other places, but you
wouldn’t say it was a crazy place. The place was like the man that way
too.

Kidder’s papers had been read before the Geographic Society; the
Psychical Society; the Institute for Psychological Research. He was an
authority on atomic power; naval architecture; thermodynamics; Romansh
literature. And yet he had, as far as anyone could find out, never
graduated from any college or university. He had, or claimed, no titles.
He was Samuel Kidder. _Mr_. Samuel Kidder. Period.

“What do you want to know, Mr.—”

“Egan,” I said. “Just—who you are, why you do the things you do—you
know. I’ll write it. You say it. Just tell me what you’d like to read
about yourself in a Sunday supplement.”

“If I did,” said Kidder, smiling, “I’d take up your time in talking
about someone else.” He motioned. “However—come on. I’ll show you
around.”

I followed him. He flung aside one of the great drapes, stepped into a
low doorway behind it. We found ourselves in a huge room with balconies
on two sides. Kidder flipped a switch; scarlet light blazed from forty
or fifty four-foot squares of plate glass set evenly around the walls.
Brilliant as the light was, I could barely make out the features of the
man beside me. It looked like hell, and I’m not trying to be funny.

“What is it?” I whispered the question, because I had to. You have to in
a church too.

“Just red light with a lot of infrared thrown in,” he said. “They can’t
see it. Don’t know when they’re being watched.”

“Who can’t?”

“The ants. Come over here.” We went to the red-lit glass nearest the
door. I had to stare for nearly a minute before I realized what I was
looking at. An anthill, cross-sectioned, up against the glass. I looked
around. The room was lined with them. It was like an aquarium, with ants
instead. I made a surprised noise.

“Savages,” said Kidder softly. He lifted a pointed stick from a rack
over his head, began using it. “See there? That big black one?”

His pointer indicated a monster black ant which crept slowly along one
of the bisected corridors in the anthill.

“Big,” I said, for lack of anything else to say. “What is it—a queen?”

Kidder looked at me and back at the ant. “King,” he said, and I saw his
teeth flash redly in the light.

“I never heard of—” He silenced me with a wave of his hand, pointed with
the stick. A smaller ant was coming the other way along the corridor.

“He better get out of the way,” breathed Kidder.

He didn’t. The big ant’s antennae whipped out, struck the other’s from
side to side. Then he lunged forward, over the small one’s back. His
powerful mandibles caught just behind the other’s thorax, sliced
through. The king idled on, disappeared up a side corridor.

“And that’s why he’s king,” said Kidder, as he pulled me over to the
next window.

“Wait a minute,” I said. “Hold on. What’s the idea of all this? What did
you mean by ‘king’ ant? I never heard of a king ant!”

“One thing at a time. ‘The idea of all this’ is a study of the mass
psychology of my ants. As for the king ant—Yes, I know you never heard
of one. These ants are—different. You never heard of one ant attacking
another in his own hill, either, did you?”

“No; but then I don’t know very much about ants.”

“Forget everything you know about ants, then. These aren’t really ants,
you know. They’re under treatment.” Before I could ask anything more, he
was pointing out a clodlike lump of grayish sand in the second ant
village.

“The first temple,” he said. “That’s all there is here to differentiate
this village from the last. It’s all due to the presence of one ant,
too. I call him John. He rates as something of a prophet among the rest.
Know why? He is just barely sensitive to red light rays. Heh!
He’s—psychic!”

“I think,” I said grimly, “I’ll shut up and learn. Mr. Kidder, all this
is Greek to me.”

He laughed. He had a good laugh, which is a rare thing. Keep your ears
peeled if you don’t believe it. “You’d find it a little hard to take all
in one dose, Mr. Egan. What I meant by saying that these aren’t really
ants is about what you’d say about the guinea pigs they tried insulin
shock on. They weren’t normal guinea pigs, with normal appetites and
normal actions. They were temporarily something different. So with my
ants, although my particular treatment is a far, far cry from insulin.
About John here, my psychic ant. Watch him.”

There was a great deal of activity around the clod Kidder had designated
as a temple. By accident or design, one whole wall of it was formed by
the glass, so it was easy enough to see everything that went on. A
five-legged ant was holding off swarms of others who crowded in. As we
watched the throng quieted down, seemed to be watching intently. The
five-legged one turned around, facing us, and spread out his legs so
that his quarter-inch black body lay on the floor of the temple.

“Watch the others,” murmured Kidder. I did. One by one they imitated
John’s pose, sank their tiny fractions of inches to the pounded floor.

“I’m damned!”

Kidder looked at me for a long moment. “You are,” he said.

“I’ve never seen ants like these!”

“No one has,” he said. “There never have been any.”

“They—they _think_ like primitive men!”

“They think. Men are also creatures that think. At the risk of seeming
to belabor a point, Mr. Egan, let me put it this way; men and these ants
are creatures which think. Grant a living thing intelligence and it will
conduct itself as a thinking being. Ant or human or anything else, there
can be no basic difference. Varying details—yes. You don’t plan the same
period furniture for a sestoped that you do for a biped. You have no
heating to plan for ant architecture, for ants are without body heat.
For humans there is a whole art and science dedicated to clothing. For
ants, there is an art and industry to oviparous eugenics. But by and
large, the results are the same when the bases are the same.”

“But—” I licked my lips, swallowed. “That may be true. But—ants! They
can’t think. They’re creatures of instinct!”

“Quite right, Egan. Quite right. But not these ants.”

“Why not?”

“Because they have intelligence. Come—I’ll show you more.” He took my
elbow and led me to the next window.



BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON


_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry Medusa_](1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well…_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore_ _Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News…_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (2010)

[]
