[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon, in front of his 1964 VW bug with extra big wheels, at
his Echo Park, Los Angeles home, 1976.

[]

Copyright © 2009 by the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust; except for the
afterword, copyright 1986 Spider Robinson, used by permission.
Previously published materials © 1955, 1970, 1971, 1972 by Theodore
Sturgeon, renewed by the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. All rights
reserved. No portion of this book, except for brief review, may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise—without the written permission of the publisher. For
information contact North Atlantic Books.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover photo collage design by Paula Morrison

_Slow Sculpture: Volume XII of The Complete Stories of Theodore
Sturgeon_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of Native Arts and
Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose goals are to develop
an educational and cross-cultural perspective linking various
scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a holistic view of
arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish and distribute
literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

North Atlantic Books’ publications are available through most
bookstores. For further information, visit our website at
www.northatlanticbooks.com or call 800-733-3000.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:
Sturgeon, Theodore.
  Slow sculpture / Theodore Sturgeon; edited by Noël Sturgeon; foreword
by Connie Willis; afterword by Spider Robinson.
      p. cm. — (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon; v. 12)
  eISBN: 978-1-58394-756-2
 1. Science fiction, American. I. Title.
 PS3569.T875 A6 1994 vol. 12
 813′.54—dc22

2009031693      

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


Theodore Hamilton Sturgeon was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the twelfth volume in a series that collects all of his
short fiction. The last volume, _Why Dolphins Don’t Bite_, will be
published in 2010. The stories are mostly arranged chronologically by
order of composition. With two exceptions (“The [Widget], the [Wadget],
and Boff,” 1955, and the previously unpublished “The Beholders,” 1964),
this volume contains stories written between 1970 and 1972, including
the Hugo and Nebula Award-winning story, “Slow Sculpture.”

My deepest thanks go to Paul Williams, editor of all the previous
volumes. To have _all_ of Sturgeon’s stories published was Paul’s
personal vision, and his gentle persistence, hard work, and encyclopedic
knowledge of Sturgeon made it happen. He started this project in 1991
and stayed with it until Alzheimer’s from a brain injury made it
impossible for him to continue. Though he could not contribute to this
volume, I would like to dedicate it to him. My attempt at replicating
his excellent story notes is sure to fall short of his stellar example.
Those who wish to give back to him for his lifetime of important work
(for the science fiction community in particular) should visit
www.paulwillams.com in order to help Paul and his family with his
full-time care.

For their significant assistance in preparing this twelfth volume, I
would like to thank Connie Willis, Spider Robinson, Debbie Notkin,
Marion Sturgeon, Tandy Sturgeon, John Wolff, Tina Krauss, Elizabeth
Kennedy, Philip Smith, Paula Morrison, Eric Weeks, William F. Seabrook,
Hart Sturgeon-Reed, T.V. Reed, Chris Lotts of Ralph Vincinanza, Ltd.,
Vince Gerardis of CreatedBy, Lindy Hough, Richard Grossinger, Wina
Sturgeon, Jayne Williams, and all of you who have expressed your support
and interest.

Noël Sturgeon

Trustee, Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust

(http://www.physics.emory.edu/~weeks/sturgeon)

BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON

_Without Sorcery_ (1948)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man_] (1950)

_More Than Human_ (1953)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (1953)

_Caviar_ (1955)

_A Way Home_ (1955)

_The King and Four Queens_ (1956)

_I, Libertine_ (1956)

_A Touch of Strange_ (1958)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry_ Medusa] (1958)

_Aliens 4_ (1959)

_Venus Plus X_ (1960)

_Beyond_ (1960)

_Some of Your Blood_ (1961)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (1961)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (1963)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (1964)

_Starshine_ (1966)

_The Rare Breed_ (1966)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (1971)

_The Worlds of Theodore_ _Sturgeon_ (1972)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (1973)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (1974)

_Visions and Venturers_ (1978)

_Maturity_ (1979)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (1979)

_The Golden Helix_ (1979)

_Alien Cargo_ (1984)

_Godbody_ (1986)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (1987)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (1989)

_Argyll_ (1993)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (1996)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (1994)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (1995)

3. _Killdozer!_ (1996)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (1997)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (1998)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (1999)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (2000)

8. _Bright Segment_ (2002)

9. _And Now the News …_ (2003)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (2005)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (2007)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (2009)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (2010)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

Editor’s Note

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword:
Theodore Sturgeon and “The Man Who Lost the Sea”
by Connie Willis

The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff

The Beholders

It’s You!

Slow Sculpture

The Girl Who Knew What They Meant

The Patterns of Dorne

Crate

Suicide

Uncle Fremmis

Necessary and Sufficient

The Verity File

Occam’s Scalpel

Dazed

Pruzy’s Pot

Afterword to “Pruzy’s Pot” by Spider Robinson

Story Notes by Noël Sturgeon

About Theodore Sturgeon



FOREWORD



THEODORE STURGEON AND “THE MAN WHO LOST THE SEA”: AN APPRECIATION


Connie Willis

I read my first Theodore Sturgeon story when I was thirteen. It was “A
Saucer of Loneliness,” and it was an extraordinary story. All Sturgeon
stories are extraordinary, of course, but I didn’t know that then. I
_did_ know, however, that he was writing about different things than the
other authors were in whatever anthology “Saucer” was in, about aliens
who weren’t trying to invade and flying saucers that weren’t trying to
attack, about longing and isolation and problems that can’t be solved.

That last was what impressed me most. So many of the science fiction
stories I read firmly believed that any problem could be solved with
ingenuity and determination. Sturgeon knew better.

He also knew that love is not the gooey, sentimental thing most people
(and especially science fiction authors) think it is. He understood that
love is problematic, dangerous, and even, at its most triumphant,
ultimately tragic. And that it was just as legitimate a subject for
serious consideration and scientific analysis as courage or gravity or
death (and, in fact, held elements of all of those.)

And he wrote about these incredibly complicated things in a simple and
eminently readable style, with no information dumps, no sermons, no
indication of how difficult this was to do. Like Fred Astaire, Theodore
Sturgeon made it look easy. So easy, in fact, that you weren’t really
aware of just how good it was till long after, when you measured the
story’s impact on you.

After that first encounter with Sturgeon, I began actively seeking out
his stories. I found and read “Killdozer” and “The Hurkle is a Happy
Beast” and “Memorial” and “The Comedian’s Children” and dozens of
others. My favorite was “And Now the News,” a troubling story about the
constant bombardment of information we have to endure and its effect on
us that I find more relevant now in our
twittering-online-CNNed-hyperconnected-globalized world even than it was
when I first read it.

But I also found “Slow Sculpture” and “The Other Man” and “The Nail and
the Oracle.” And came to admire more and more Sturgeon’s skill and style
and subtlety of thought with each story.

I was not the only one. Every science fiction writer I knew revered him
as a consummate storyteller and someone whose stories had not only
heart, but brains and depth. He was frequently discussed (I think only
other writers, who know how hard all this stuff is to do and especially
how difficult it is to make it look effortless, fully appreciate
Sturgeon) and generally considered to be the best short story writer the
field had ever produced.

It was during one of those discussions a few years ago that someone
mentioned, “The Man Who Lost the Sea.” “I don’t think I’ve ever read
that one,” I said innocently, and everyone in the group was horrified.

“Oh, my God, you’re kidding!” they said. “How can you have been in the
field all this time and not have read it?”

It was as if I’d just confessed to being illiterate. And in a way, I
had. Nobody who hasn’t read Sturgeon’s story can really understand what
science fiction’s all about. And I’d never read it.

“You _have_ to read it!” they said. “It’s amazing!”

“What’s it about?” I asked, but they refused to tell me.

“Just read it,” they said.

So I read it. And they were right. It’s his best story. I still love
“And Now the News” and “A Saucer of Loneliness,” and “Memorial,” but
“The Man Who Lost the Sea” is in a class by itself.

It starts off unassumingly enough with: “Say you’re a kid, and one dark
night you’re running along the cold sand with this helicopter in your
hand, saying very fast witchy-witchy-witchy”—a casual, conversational
line that could be the opener of Robert A. Heinlein’s _Have Space Suit,
Will Travel_.

But Sturgeon’s taking us to an entirely different place. Through
seemingly random reminiscences and ordinary, familiar details—Sputnik
beeping overhead, a pestering kid, that time in gym class when you fell
off the parallel bars, the crash of the surf—he’s leading us straight
into the heart of darkness.

No, that’s not right. It’s not a straightforward journey at all. The
first time I read “The Man Who Lost the Sea,” I thought of it as an
onion, with layers being peeled off one after the other to get to the
core, but that’s not right either. It’s more like a plane making passes
at a landing field, circling closer and closer each time. Or like a
hawk, circling in on its prey.

And it has to be done that way because the direct route won’t work.
Circling, veering off at the last minute, taking off on talkative
tangents, circling back, are the only way we can get to the secrets
inside the story—and inside us. The only way we can bear to face what
frightens us, to look at the terrible truth.

And Sturgeon’s merciless. He’s not going to spare us anything. He’s
going to make us look squarely at the things we want to avert our gaze
from. And he’s not even going to let us hang on to those things that
gave us cause for hope along the way—that resourceful problem-solving
kid, the trail of Friday-like footprints heading off along the beach,
the comforting murmur of the sea in our ears. It’s a brilliant, brutal,
beautifully written story, at the same time heartbreaking and soaringly
triumphant. The best thing he ever wrote.

I said before that nobody who hasn’t read “The Man Who Lost the Sea” can
really understand science fiction. I stand by that, but at the same time
the story’s not like any other science fiction story. It’s unique.

So was its author. That’s why it’s an incredible privilege for me to be
able to write about the wonderful story and this wonderful storyteller
and possibly introduce one or both of them to new readers.

And to say the things I never got the chance to say to tell Theodore
Sturgeon in life. Thank you, thank you, thank you for writing all your
stories and letting me read them. And especially for writing “The Man
Who Lost the Sea.”

Your devoted reader,

Connie Willis

[“The Man Who Lost the Sea” is in Volume X of _The Complete Stories of
Theodore Sturgeon_.]



THE [WIDGET], THE [WADGET], AND BOFF


Part One

Throughout the continuum as we know it (and a good deal more, as we
don’t know it) there are cultures that fly and cultures that swim; there
are boron folk and fluorine fellowships, cuproco-prophages and (roughly
speaking) immaterial life-forms which swim and swirl around each other
in space like so many pelagic shards of metaphysics. And some organize
into superentities like a beehive or a slime-mold so that they live
plurally to become singular, and some have even more singular ideas of
plurality.

Now, no matter how an organized culture of intelligent beings is put
together or where, regardless of what it’s made of or how it lives,
there is one thing all cultures have in common, and it is the most
obvious of traits. There are as many names for it as there are cultures,
of course, but in all it works the same way—the same way the inner ear
functions (with its contributory synapses) in a human being when he
steps on Junior’s roller skate. He doesn’t think about how far away the
wall is, some wires or your wife, or in which direction: he _grabs_,
and, more often than not, he _gets_—accurately and without analysis.
Just so does an individual reflexively adjust when imbalanced in his
socio-cultural matrix: he experiences the reflex of reflexes, a thing as
large as the legendary view afforded a drowning man of his entire past,
in a single illuminated instant wherein the mind moves, as it were, at
right angles to time and travels high and far for its survey.

And this is true of every culture everywhere, the cosmos over. So
obvious and necessary a thing is seldom examined: but it was once, by a
culture which called this super-reflex “Synapse Beta sub Sixteen.”

What came out of the calculator surprised them. They were, after all,
expecting an answer.

Human eyes would never have recognized the device for what it was. Its
memory bank was an atomic cloud, each particle of which was sealed away
from the others by a self-sustaining envelope of force. Subtle
differences in nuclei, in probability shells, and in internal tensions
were the coding, and fields of almost infinite variability were used to
call up the particles in the desired combinations. These were channeled
in a way beyond description in earthly mathematics, detected by a
principle as yet unknown to us, and translated into language (or, more
accurately, an analog of what we understand as language). Since this
happened so far away, temporally, spatially, and culturally, proper
nouns are hardly proper; it suffices to say that it yielded results, in
this particular setting, which were surprising. These were correlated
into a report, the gist of which was this:

_Prognosis positive, or prognosis negative, depending upon presence or
absence of Synapse Beta sub Sixteen_.

The pertinent catalog listed the synapse in question as “indetectible
except by field survey.” Therefore an expedition was sent.

All of which may seem fairly remote until one realizes that the
prognosis was being drawn for that youthful and dangerous aggregate of
bubbling yeasts called “human culture,” and that when the term
“prognosis negative” was used it meant _finis_, the end, zero, _ne plus
ultra_ altogether.

It must be understood that the possessors of the calculator, the
personnel of the expedition to Earth, were not Watchers in the Sky and
Arbiters of Our Fate. Living in our midst, here and now, is a man who
occupies himself with the weight-gain of amoebæ from their natal instant
to the moment they fission. There is a man who, having produced neurosis
in cats, turns them into alcoholics for study. Someone has at long last
settled the matter of the camel’s capacity for, and retention of, water.
People like these are innocent of designs on the destinies of _all_
amoebæ, cats, camels and cultures; there are simply certain things they
want to _know_. This is the case no matter how unusual, elaborate, or
ingenious their methods might be. So—an expedition came here for
information.

EXCERPT FROM FIELD EXPEDITION [NOTEBOOK] [VOLUME] I:

CONCLUSION … to restate the obvious, [we] have been on Earth long enough
and more than long enough to have discovered anything and everything
[we] [wished] about any [sensible-predictable-readable] culture
anywhere. This one, however, is quite beyond
[understanding-accounting-for]. At first sight, [one] was tempted to
conclude immediately that it possesses the Synapse, because no
previously known culture has advanced to this degree without it, ergo.…
And then [we] checked it with [our] [instruments] [! ! !] [Our]
[gimmick] and our [kickshaw] gave [us] absolutely negative readings, so
[we] activated a high-sensitivity [snivvy] and got results which
approximate nonsense: the Synapse is scattered through the population
randomly, here non-existent or dormant, there in brief full activity at
[unheard-of] high levels. [I] thought [Smith] would go [out of (his)
mind] and as for [myself], [I] had a crippling attack of the [      ]s
at the very concept. More for [our] own protection than for the
furtherance of the Expedition, [we] submitted all our data to [our]
[ship]’s [computer] and got what appeared to be even further nonsense:
the conclusion that this species possesses the Synapse but to all
intents and purposes does not use it.

How can a species possess Synapse Beta sub Sixteen and not use it?
Nonsense, nonsense, nonsense!

So complex and contradictory are [our] data that [we] can only fall back
on a microcosmic analysis and proceed by its guidance. [We] shall
therefore isolate a group of specimens under [laboratory] control, even
though it means using a [miserable] [primitive] [battery]-powered
[wadget]. [We]’ll put our new-model [widget] on the job, too. [We]’ve
had enough of this [uncanny, uncomfortable] feeling of standing in the
presence of [apology-for-obscenity] paradox.¹


I

The town was old enough to have slums, large enough to have no specific
“tracks” with a right and a wrong side. Its nature was such that a
boarding house could, without being unusual, contain such varied rungs
on the social ladder as a young, widowed night-club hostess and her
three-year-old son; a very good vocational guidance expert; a young law
clerk; the librarian from the high school; and a stage-struck maiden
from a very small small town. They said Sam Bittelman, who nominally
owned and operated the boarding house, could have been an engineer, and
if he had been, a marine architect as well, but instead he had never
risen higher than shop foreman. Whether this constituted failure or
success is speculative; apply to a chief petty officer or top sergeant
who won’t accept a commission, and to the president of your local bank,
and take your pick of their arguments. It probably never occurred to Sam
to examine the matter. He had other things to amuse him. Tolerant,
curious, intensely alive, old Sam had apparently never retired from
anything but his job at the shipyards back east.

He in turn was owned and operated by his wife, whom everyone called
“Bitty” and who possessed the harshest countenance and the most acid
idiom ever found in a charter member of the Suckers for Sick Kittens and
Sob Stories Society. Between them they took care of their roomers in
that special way possible only in boarding houses which feature a big
dining table and a place set for everyone. Such places are less than a
family, or more if you value your freedom. They are more than a hotel,
or less if you like formality. To Mary Haunt, who claimed to be
twenty-two and lied, the place was the most forgettable and
soon-to-be-forgotten of stepping stones; to Robin it was home and more;
it was the world and the universe, an environment as ubiquitous,
unnoticed, and unquestioned as the water around a fish; but Robin would,
of course, feel differently later. He was only three. The only other one
of the Bittelmans’ boarders who breathed what was uniquely the Bittelman
quality as if it were air was Phil Halvorsen, a thoughtful young man in
the vocational guidance field, whose mind was on food and housing only
when they annoyed him, and since the Bittelmans made him quite
comfortable, in effect they were invisible. Reta Schmidt appreciated the
Bittelmans for a number of things, prime among which was the lengths to
which her dollar went with them, for Miss Schmidt’s employers were a
Board of Education. Mr. Anthony O’Banion permitted himself a genuine
admiration of almost nothing in these parts. So it remained for Sue
Martin to be the only one in the place who respected and admired them,
right from the start, with something approaching their due. Sue was
Robin’s widowed mother and worked in a night club as hostess and
sometime entertainer. She had done, in the past, both better and worse.
She still might do better for herself, but only that which would be
worse for Robin. The Bittelmans were her godsend. Robin adored them, and
the only thing they would not do for him was to spoil him. The
Bittelmans were there to give him breakfast in the mornings, to dress
him when he went out to play, to watch over him and keep him amused and
content until Sue rose at 11. The rest of the day was for Sue and Robin
together, right up to his bedtime, when she tucked him in and storied
him to sleep. And when she left for work at 9 P.M., the Bittelmans were
there, safe and certain, ready and willing to cope with anything from a
bladder to a blaze. They were like insurance and fire extinguishers,
hardly ever used but comforting by their presence. So she valued
them … but then, Sue Martin was different from most people. So was
Robin; however this is a truism when speaking of three-year-olds.

Such was the population of Bittelman’s boarding house, and if they seem
too many and too varied to sort out all at once, have patience and
remember that each of them felt the same way on meeting all the others.


II

A pawnshop is a dismal place.

A pawnshop in the rain. A closed pawnshop in the rain, on a Sunday.

Philip Halvorsen did not object. He had a liking for harmony, and the
atmosphere suited him well just now, his thoughts, his feelings. A
sunbeam would have been an intrusion. A flower shop could not have
contributed so much. People, just now, would have been intolerable.

He leaned his forehead against the wet black steel of the burglar-proof
gate and idly inventoried the contents of the window and his thoughts
about them. Like the window and its contents, and the dark recesses
inside, his thoughts were miscellaneous, cluttered, captured in that
purgatory of uselessness wherein things are not dead, only finished with
what they have been and uncaring of what will happen to them and when.
His thoughts were binoculars without eyes, cameras without film, silent
guitars and unwound watches.

He found himself approving more of the guitars than the two dirty
violins hanging in the window. He almost wondered why this should be,
almost let the question disappear into lethargy, and at last sighed and
ran the matter down because he knew it would bother him otherwise and he
was in no mood to be bothered. He looked at the instruments lazily, one,
the other, analyzing and comparing. They had a great deal in common, and
some significant differences. Having a somewhat sticky mind, to which
windblown oddments of fact had been adhering for nearly thirty years
now, he knew of the trial-and-error evolution of those
resonance-chambers and of the high degree of perfection they had come
to. Given that design followed function in both the violin and the
guitar, and aside from any preference in the sounds they made (actually
Halvorsen was completely indifferent to music anyway), then why should
he intuitively prefer the guitars he saw over the violins? Size,
proportion, number of strings, design of bridge, frets or lack of them,
finish, peg and tailpiece mechanics—all these had their differences and
all were perfect for the work they did.

Suddenly, then, he saw it, and his mind swiftly thumbed through the
mental pictures of all the violins he had ever seen. They all checked
out. One flickering glance at the guitars in the window settled the
matter.

All violins have a scroll carved at the end of the neck—_all_ of them.
There is scrollwork on some guitars, none on others; it’s obviously
optional. The back-bending spiral at the end of a violin’s neck is not
optional, but traditional, and it has no function. Halvorsen nodded
slightly and permitted his mind to wander away from the matter. It
wasn’t important—not in itself; only settling it was important. His
original, intuitive approval of guitars over violins was not a matter of
moment either; his preference for the functional over the purely
traditional was just that—a preference.

None of this required much of Halvorsen’s conscious effort or attention.
The survey, the sequence, was virtually reflexive, and his thoughts
moved as fish in some deep clear pool might move, hanging and hanging,
fanning, then suddenly darting about with a swirl and a splash, to hang
again fanning, alive and waiting.

He stood motionless, the fine rain soaking into the back of his collar
and his eyes unseeking but receptive. Binoculars with mother-of-pearl;
binoculars without. A watch with glass rubies in the face. Display
cards: cheap combs, cheap wallets, cheap pens. An electric steam iron
with a frayed cord. A rack of second-hand clothing.

Guns.

He felt again that vague dissatisfaction, set up a certain amount of
lethargic resistance to it, and when it came through anyway he patiently
gave it its head. He looked at the guns. What bothered him about the
guns?

One had a pearl handle and rococo etching along the barrel, but that
wasn’t it. He glanced down the row and settled on a .38 automatic, about
as functional an artifact as could be imagined—small, square, here
knurled and there polished, with the palm safety and lock-safety just
where they should be. And still he felt that faint disapproval, that
dissatisfaction that spelled criticism. He widened his scan to all the
guns, and felt it just as much. Just as little.

It was categorical then. It had to do with all these guns, or with all
guns. He looked again, and again, and within this scope found no crevice
for the prying of his reason, so he turned the problem on its back and
looked again: what would a gun be like if it satisfied this fastidious
intuition of his?

It came in a flash, and he hardly believed it: a flimsy structure of
rolled sheet metal with a simple firing pin on a piece hinged and sprung
like the business part of a rat-trap. There was no butt, there were no
sights. No trigger either; just a simple catch and—what was that? —and a
piece of string. He visualized it sitting on a polished surface on a
wire stand, its thin barrel angled upwards about 45°, like a toy cannon.
Its caliber was about .38. The feature which struck him most was the
feeling of fragility, lightness, in the whole design. Design! What would
an object like that be designed _for?_

He looked again at the pawned guns. Among the things they had in common
was massiveness. Breeches were cast steel, muzzles thick-walled,
probably all rifled; parts were tempered, hardened, milled, designed,
and built to contain and direct repeated explosions, repeated internal
assaults by hot hurtling metal.

It was as if a little red signal-light flickered on the concept
_repeated_. Was that it, that all these guns were designed for repeated
use? Was he dissatisfied with that? Why?

He conjured up the image of a single-shot dueling pistol he had once
handled: long-barreled, muzzle-loading, with a powder-pan for priming
and a chip of flint fixed to the hammer. To his surprise he found the
little metal red light still aflicker; this was a design that displeased
him too, somewhere in the area labeled _repeated_.

Even a single-shot pistol was designed to be used over again; that must
be it. Then to him, a gun satisfied its true function only if it was
designed to be used only once. _Enough_ is the criterion of optimum
design, and in this case once was enough.

Halvorsen snorted angrily. He disliked being led by rational means to a
patently irrational conclusion. He cast back over his reasoning, looking
for the particular crossroads where he must have taken a wrong turning.

There was none.

At this point his leisurely, almost self-powered curiosity was replaced
by an incandescent ferocity of examination. Logic burned in Halvorsen as
fury did in other men, and he had no tolerance for the irrational. He
attacked it as a personal indignity, and would not let up until he had
wrapped it up, tied it down, in the fabric of his understanding.

He let himself visualize the “gun” of his satisfied imagination, with
its mousetrap firing mechanism, its piece of string, its almost useless
flimsiness, and for a moment pictured police, cattlemen, Army officers
handling such a ridiculous object. But the vision dissolved and he shook
his head; the guns ordinarily used by such people satisfied his sense of
function perfectly. He slipped (hypothetically) into the consciousness
of such a man and regarded his gun—_a_ gun—any gun with satisfaction.
No, this seemed a personal matter, unlike the dissatisfaction everyone
should feel (if they cared) about the extraordinary fact that
automobiles are streamlined only where they show, and are powered by a
heat-engine which is inoperable without a cooling system.

What’s so special about my mousetrap gun? he demanded of himself, and
turned his eye inward to look at it again. There it sat, on a polished
surface—table-top, was it? —with its silly piece of string leading
forward toward him and its muzzle tilted upward, unabashedly showing off
its sleazy construction.

Why could he see how thin the metal of that muzzle was? Because it was
aimed right at the bridge of his nose.

Make a statement, Halvorsen, and test it. Statement: Other guns satisfy
other men because they can be used over and over again. This gun
satisfies me because it goes off once, and once is enough.

Test: A dueling pistol goes off only once; yet it can be reloaded and
used again. Why not this? Answer: Because whoever uses a dueling pistol
expects to be able to use it again. Whoever sees it used expects it will
be used again, because the world goes on.

After Halvorsen’s mousetrap gun went off, the world wouldn’t go on. Not
for Halvorsen—which of course is the same thing. “I am the core and the
center of the universe” is a fair statement for anyone.

So restate, and conclude: The optimum gun design is that which, having
shot Halvorsen between the eyes, need no longer exist. Since _optimum_
carried with it the flavor of _preferred performance_, it is fair to
state that within himself Halvorsen found a preference for being shot to
death. More specifically, for dying. Correction: for being dead—gladly.

Momentarily, Halvorsen felt such pleasure at having solved his problem
that he neglected to look at the solution, and when he did, it chilled
him far more than the fine rain could.

_Why should he want to be dead?_

He glanced at the racked guns in the pawnshop and saw them as if for the
first time, each one very real and genuinely menacing. He shuddered,
clung for a moment to the wet black steel of the gate, then abruptly
turned away.

In all his thoughtful—thought-_filled_—life he had never consciously
entertained such a concept. Perhaps this was because he was a receptive
person rather than a transmissive one. What he collected he used on his
external world—his job—rather than on himself. He had no need for the
explanations and apologies, the interpretations and demands-to-be-heard
of the outgoing person, so he had no need to indulge in self-seeking and
the complicated semantics of ego-translation. He was rather a
clearing-house for the facts he found, taking knowledge and experience
from _here_ and storing them virtually untouched until they could be
applied _there_.

He walked slowly homeward, in a state that would be numbness except for
the whirling, wondering core which turned and poked and worried at this
revelation. Why should he want to be dead?

Philip Halvorsen loved being alive. Correction: He enjoyed being alive.
(Question: Why the correction? File for later.) He was a vocational
guidance worker employed by a national social service organization. He
was paid what he should be, according to his sense of values, and thanks
to the Bittelmans he lived a little better on it than he might
otherwise. He did not work for money, anyway; his work was a way of
thinking, a way of life. He found it intriguing, engrossing, deeply
satisfying. Each applicant was a challenge, each placement a victory
over one or more of the enemies that plague mankind—insecurity,
inferiority, blindness, and ignorance. Each time he looked up from his
desk and saw a new applicant entering his cubicle, he experienced a
strange silent excitement. It was a pressure, a power, like flicking on
the master switch of a computing machine; he sat there with all relays
open and all circuits blank, waiting for the answers to those first two
questions: “What are you doing now?” and “What do you want to do?” Just
that; it was enough for that indefinable sense of satisfaction or
dissatisfaction to make itself known to him. And just as he had analyzed
its source in the matter of guns, so he analyzed his clients. That
flickering light signaling wrongness, misapplication, malfunction,
misevaluation—all the flaws in design, the false goals, the frustrations
and hurts of those who wonder if they have chosen the right
vocation—that light burned on while he worked on each case, and would
not go out until he found the answer. Once or twice he had wished,
whimsically, that his imagined signal light would illuminate a sign for
the client which said STEEPLEJACK and for that one which said FROG
FARMER, but it refused to be so obliging. It only told him when he was
wrong. Being right involved laborious and meticulous work, but he did it
gladly. And when at last he was satisfied, he frequently found that his
work had just begun: to tell an eighty-dollar-a-week bank clerk that his
proper niche is in freight-handling with a two-year apprenticeship at
fifty is initially a thankless task. But Halvorsen knew how to be quiet
and wait, and had become a past master at the art of letting a client
fight himself, defeat himself, reconstruct himself, and at last persuade
himself that the vocational counselor was right. And all of it,
Halvorsen liked, from the challenge to the accomplishment. Why, why
should there be a wish in him to have this cease, to end the world in
which all these intriguing problems existed? And to be glad of its
ending?

What would he advise a client, a stranger, if that stranger blurted out
such a desire?

Well, he wouldn’t. It would depend. He would simply throw that in with
everything else about the client—age, education, temperament, marital
status, I.Q., and all the rest of it, and let the death-wish throw its
weight along with all the other factors. It would, however, predispose
him to conclude that the man was intolerably misplaced in some area: in
a marriage, a family situation, a social beartrap of some kind … or his
job. His job. Was he, Halvorsen, judge and arbiter of occupations—was he
in the wrong job?

He slouched along in the rain, huddled down into himself to escape a far
more penetrating chill than this drenching mist. So uncharacteristically
wrapped in his inward thought was he that he had taken three steps on
dry pavement before he became aware of it. He stopped and took his
bearings.

He stood under the marquee of the smallest and cheapest of the town’s
four theaters. It was closed and dark, this being Sunday in a “blue-law”
district, but dead bulbs and locked doors did not modify the shrillness
of its decorations. Over the main entrance were two groups of huge
letters, one for each of the two features on the bill. SIN FOR SALE, one
shrieked, and the other blared back SLAVES OF THE HELL-FLOWER. Under
these was a third sign, offering as a special added attraction Love
Rites of a South Sea Eden. From the sidewalk on the far left, up to the
marquee, across and down the other side was an arch of cardboard
cut-outs of women, wilting and wet, unnaturally proportioned and
inhumanly posed, with scraps of ribbon and drape, locks of hair and
induced shadows performing a sort of indicative concealment on their
unbelievable bodies. Over the box-office was the stern advice: ADULTS
ONLY! ! ! and papering the supporting pillars just inside the mirrored
cavern of a lobby were still photographs of highlights of the pictures:
A bare-backed female with her hands trussed to a high tree-branch, being
whipped; a man standing, gun in hand, over a delectable corpse whose
head hung back and down over the edge of the bed so that her carefully
arranged hair swept the floor, and some flyblown samples of the South
Sea Eden with the portraits of its inhabitants smeared strategically
with rubberstamp ink in angry and careless obedience to some local
by-law.

At the best of times this sort of display left Phil Halvorsen cold. At
the worst of times (up to now) he would have felt a mild disgust
leavened by enough amusement at the outhouse crudity of it to make it
supportable—and forgettable. But at the moment things were a little
worse than the worst had ever been before. It was as if his earlier
unpleasant revelation had in some obscure way softened him up, opened a
seam in a totally unexpected place in his armor. The display smote him
like a blast of heat. He blinked and stepped back a pace, half-raising
his hands and screwing his eyes shut. Behind the lids, the picture of
his ridiculous one-shot cannon rose up roaring. He thought he could see
a bullet emerging from its smoking muzzle like the tip of a hot black
tongue. He shuddered away from the millisecond nightmare and opened his
eyes, only to get a second and even more overwhelming reaction from the
theater-front.

_My God, what’s happening to me?_ he silently screamed to himself. He
pounded his forehead with his fists twice, then put his head down and
ran up the street, up the hill. His photographic eye had picked up the
banner inside the lobby, and as he ran, part of him coldly read it:

SEE (in flaming scarlet) the big-city orgies.

SEE the temptation of a teen-ager.

SEE lust run riot.

SEE the uncensored rites of an island cult.

SEE … SEE …

There was more. As he ran, he moaned. And then he thought, at the
Bittelmans there are people, it is light, it is warm, it is almost home.

He began to run to something instead of away.


III

The Bittelmans’ kitchen was a vague “backstairs” area to O’Banion and a
functional adjunct of the boarding house to Halvorsen; to Miss Schmidt
it was forbidden ground which excited no special interest for
that—almost all the world was forbidden ground to Miss Schmidt. In it
Sue Martin was as content as she was anywhere, and among the torments of
Mary Haunt, the kitchen was a special hell. But in Robin’s world it was
central, more so than the bedroom he shared with his mother, more so
than his crib. He ate in the kitchen, played there when it was raining
or especially cold. When he went outdoors it was through the kitchen
door, and it was a place to come back to with a bruised knee, with a
hollow stomach, with a sudden flood of loneliness or of a
three-year-old’s wild manic passion. It was big and warm and full of
friends.

The most resourceful of these friends was, of course, Bitty, who without
ever losing her gruffness knew the right time to apply a cookie or a
story (usually about a little boy with a beautiful mother) or a swat on
the bottom. Sam was a friend, too, mostly as something safe to climb on.
Of late, O’Banion had carved a rather special niche for himself, and
Robin had always liked a limited amount of Miss Schmidt’s self-conscious
passiveness; she was a wonderful listener. He treated Halvorsen with
cheerful respect, and Mary Haunt as if she did not exist. There were
other people, too, every bit as much so as anyone who ate and had a job
and occupied rooms elsewhere in the house. There was the electric mixer
and the washing machine—in Robin’s economical language “Washeen”—the
blender and the coffeepot; in short, everything which had a motor in it.
(The presence or absence of motors in percolators is arguable only by
those with preconceptions.) To him they were all alive, responsive and
articulate, and he held converse with them all. He showed them his toys
and he told them the news, he bade them goodbye and good morning, hello,
what’s the matter, and happy birthday.

And besides all these people, there were Boff and Googie, who, though by
no means limited to the kitchen, were often there.

They were not there on that dark Sunday while the sky grieved and
Halvorsen fought his personal devils outdoors. “Mitster, Boff an’ Googie
gone for ride,” Robin informed the electric mixer. Its name, Mitster,
was identical in his vocabulary with “Mister” and was a clear link
between the machine and the males he heard spoken of, and just another
proof of the living personality he assigned to it. He got a kitchen
chair and carried it effortfully over to the work-table, where he put it
down and climbed on it. He tilted the mixer up and back and turned its
control-cowling, and it began to hum softly. Bitty kept the beaters in a
high drawer well out of his reach and let him play with the therefore
harmless machine to his heart’s content. “A_ts_ right, Mitster,” he
crooned. “Eat your yunch. Hey, Washeen!” he called to the washing
machine, “Mitster’s eatin’ his yunch all up, I go’ give him a cookie,
he’s a _good_ boy.” He revved the control up and down, the machine
whining obediently. He spun the turntable, turned the motor off,
listened to the ball-bearings clicking away in the turntable, stopped it
and turned on the motor again. He turned suddenly at the nudge of some
sixth sense and saw O’Banion in the doorway. “Goo’ morning Tonio,” he
called, beaming. “Go picnic now?”

“Not today, it’s raining,” said O’Banion, “and it’s ‘good afternoon’
now.” He crossed to the table. “What you up to, fellow?”

“Mitster eatin’ his yunch.”

“Your mother asleep?”

“Yis.”

O’Banion stood watching the child’s complete preoccupation with the
machine. Little son of a gun, he thought, how did you do it?

The question was all he could express about the strangely rewarding
friendship which flowered between him and Robin. He had never liked
(nor, for that matter, disliked) a child in his life. He had never been
exposed to one before; his only sibling was an older sister and he had
never associated with anyone but contemporaries since he was a child
himself.

Robin had caught him alone one day and had demanded to know his name.
“Tony O’Banion,” he had growled reluctantly. “Tonio?” “Tony O’Banion,”
he had corrected distinctly. “Tonio,” Robin had said positively, and
from then on that was inalterably that. And surprisingly, O’Banion had
come to like it. And when, on the outskirts of town, someone had set up
something called a Kiddie Karnival, a sort of miniature amusement park,
and he had been assigned to handle land rentals there for his firm, he
found himself thinking of Robin every time he saw the place, and of the
Karnival every time he saw Robin, until one warm Sunday he startled
himself and everyone else concerned by asking Sue Martin if he could
take the boy there. She had looked at him gravely for a moment and said,
“Why?”

“I think he might like it.”

“Well, thanks,” she had said warmly, “I think that’s wonderful.” And so
he and Robin had gone.

And they’d gone again, several times, mostly on Sundays when Sue Martin
was taking her one luxurious afternoon nap of the week, but a couple of
times during the week too, when O’Banion had business out there and
could conveniently pick the child up on the way out from the office and
drop him again on the way back. And then, just for a change, a picnic,
Robin’s very first, by the bank of a brook where they had watched
jewel-eyed baby frogs and darting minnows and a terrifying miniature
monster that he later identified as a dragonfly nymph; and Robin had
asked so many questions that he had gone to a bookstore the next day and
bought a bird book and a wild-flower guide.

Occasionally he asked himself _why?_ What was he getting out of it? and
found the answers either uncomfortable or elusive. Perhaps it was the
relaxation: for the first time he could have communion with another
human being without the cautious and watchful attention he usually paid
to “Where did you go to school?” and “Who are your people?” Perhaps it
was the warmth of friendship radiating from a face so disturbingly like
the one which still intruded itself between his eyes and his work once
in a while, and which was so masked and controlled when he encountered
it in the flesh.

And there had been the Sunday when Sue Martin, after having given her
permission for one of these outings, had suddenly said, “I haven’t much
to do this afternoon. Are these excursions of yours strictly stag?”
“Yes,” he had said immediately, “they are.” He’d told _her_. But—it
didn’t feel like a victory, and she had not seemed defeated when she
shrugged and smiled and said, “Let me know when you go coeducational.”
After that she didn’t put a stop to the picnics, either, which would
have pleased him by permitting him to resent her. He found himself
wishing she would ask again, but he knew she would not, not ever. And if
he should ask her to come, and she should refuse … he could not bear the
thought. Sometimes he thought the whole business of amusing the child
was done to impress the mother; he had overheard Mary Haunt make a
remark to Miss Schmidt once that intimated as much, and had furiously
sworn off for all of six hours, which was when Robin asked him where
they would go next. As long as it was simple, a matter between him and
the child, it required no excuses or explanations. As soon as he placed
the matter in any matrix, he became confused and uncertain. He therefore
avoided analyses, and asked himself admiringly and academically, little
son of a gun, how did you do it? while he watched Robin’s animated
conversation with the electric mixer.

He rumpled Robin’s hair and went to the stove, where he picked up the
coffeepot and swirled it. It was almost full, and he lit the gas under
it.

“Wha’ you do, Tonio? Make coffee?”

“Yea bo.”

“Okay,” said Robin, as if granting permission. “Boff doesn’t drink
coffee, Tonio,” he confided. “Oh no.”

“He doesn’t, hm?” O’Banion looked around and up. “Is Boff here?”

“No,” said Robin. “He not here.”

“Where’d he go? Out with the Bittelmans?”

“Yis.” The coffeepot grumbled and Robin said, “_Hello_, Coffeepot.”

Halvorsen came in and stood blindly in the doorway. O’Banion looked up
and greeted him, then said under his breath, “My God!” and crossed the
room. “You all right, Halvorsen?”

Halvorsen directed blind eyes at the sound of his voice, and O’Banion
could watch seeing enter them slowly, like the fade-in on a movie
screen. “What?” His face was wet with the rain, fish-belly pale, and he
stood slumping like a man with a weight on his back, raising his face to
look up rather than lifting his head.

“You’d better sit down,” said O’Banion. He told himself that this
unwonted concern for the tribulations of a fellow-human was purely a
selfish matter of not wanting to shovel the stunned creature up off the
floor. Yet as Halvorsen turned toward the ell with its wooden chairs,
O’Banion caught at the open front of Halvorsen’s coat. “Let me take
this, it’s sopping.”

“No,” said Halvorsen. “No.” But he let O’Banion take the coat; rather,
he walked out of it, leaving O’Banion with it foolishly in his hands.
O’Banion cast about him, then hung it up on the broom-hook and turned
again to Halvorsen, who had just fallen heavily back into a chair.

Again Halvorsen went through that slow transition from blindness to
sight, from isolation to awareness. He made some difficult, internal
effort and then said, “Supper ready?”

“We roll our own,” said O’Banion. “Bitty and Sam are taking their
once-a-month trip to the fleshpots.”

“Fleshpots,” said Robin, without turning his head.

Carefully controlling his face and his voice, O’Banion continued, “They
said to raid the refrigerator, only hands off the leg o’ lamb, that’s
for tomorrow.” Motioning toward Robin with his head, he added, “He
doesn’t miss a trick,” and at last released a broad grin.

Halvorsen said, “I’m not hungry.”

“I’ve got some coffee going.”

“Good.”

O’Banion dropped a round asbestos mat on the table and went for the
coffeepot. On the way back he got a cup and saucer. He put them on the
table and sat down. Sugar was already there; spoons were in a tumbler,
handles down, country-style. He poured and added sugar and stirred. He
looked across at Halvorsen, and saw something on that reserved face that
he had read about but had never seen before; the man’s lips were blue.
Only then did it occur to him to get a cup for Halvorsen. He went for
it, and remembered milk, too, just in case. He brought them back,
hesitated, and then poured the second cup. He put a spoon in the saucer,
and with sudden shyness pushed it and the milk toward the other man.
“Hey!”

“What?” Halvorsen said in the same dead, flat tone, and “Oh. Oh! Thanks,
O’Banion, thanks very I’m sorry.” Suddenly he laughed forcefully and
without mirth. He covered his eyes and said plaintively, “What’s the
_matter_ with me?”

It was a question neither could answer, and they sat sipping coffee
uncomfortably, a man who didn’t know how to unburden himself and a man
who had never taken up another’s burden. Into this tableau walked Mary
Haunt. She had on a startling yellow hostess gown and had a magazine
tucked under her arm. She threw one swift gaze around the room and
curled her lip.

“Grand Central Station,” she growled and walked out.

O’Banion’s anger came as a great relief to him at just that moment; he
was almost grateful to the girl. “One of these days someone’s going to
grab that kid by the scruff of the neck and housebreak her,” he snorted.

Halvorsen found a voice, too, and probably was as grateful for the
change in focus. “It won’t last,” he said.

“What do you mean?”

“I mean she can’t go on that way much longer,” said Halvorsen
thoughtfully. He paused and closed his eyes; O’Banion could see him
pulling himself hand over hand out of his personal swamp, moving to dry
ground, high ground, where he could look with familiarity at a real
world again. When he opened his eyes he gave O’Banion a strange little
smile and said, as if in parenthesis, “Thanks for the coffee, O’Banion,”
and went on: “She’s waiting for the Big Break. She thinks she deserves
it and that it will come to her if she only waits. She really believes
that. You’ve heard of high-school kids who perch on drugstore stools
hoping for a movie scout to come along and discover them. That’s
harmless as long as they do it an hour or two a day. But Mary Haunt does
it every minute she’s out of this house. None of us here could help her,
so she treats us the way anyone treats useless things. But you ought to
see her down at the station.”

“What station?”

“She types continuities at the radio station,” said Halvorsen. “From
what I hear, she’s not very good, but on the other hand they don’t pay
her much money, so nobody kicks. But to her a radio station is the edge
of the world she wants to crash—it starts there and goes to TV and to
the movies. I’ll bet you anything you like she has a scene all rehearsed
in her mind, where a big producer or director stops here and drops in at
the radio station to see someone, and _bang!_ our Mary’s a starlet being
groomed for the top.”

“She’d better learn some manners,” grumbled O’Banion.

“Oh, she’s got manners when she thinks they’ll do her some good.”

“Why doesn’t she use them on you, for example?”

“Me?”

“Yes. Don’t you get people better jobs, that sort of thing?”

“I see a lot of people, a lot of different kinds of people,” said
Halvorsen, “but they have one thing in common: they aren’t sure what
they want to do, to be.” He pointed his spoon at the doorway. “She is.
She may be wrong, but she’s certain.”

“Well, what about Sue Martin?” said O’Banion. He pursued the subject
quickly, almost thoughtlessly, because of a vague feeling that if he
didn’t, Halvorsen would slip back into that uncomfortable introspective
silence. “Surely there’s a lot about show business Mary Haunt could
learn from her.”

Halvorsen gave the nearest thing yet to a grin and reached for the
coffeepot. “Mrs. Martin’s a nightclub entertainer,” he said “and as far
as Mary Haunt’s concerned, night clubs are slums.”

O’Banion blushed violently and cursed himself for it. “Why that
little—no background, no—no—how could _she_ look down on … I mean, she’s
a little _nobody!_” Conscious that he was spluttering under the direct
and passionless gaze of Halvorsen’s dark eyes, he reached for the first
thing he could think of that was not an absolute non sequitur: “One
night a couple of months ago Mrs. Martin and I saw her throw a fit of
hysterics over something … oh, Miss Schmidt had a magazine she
wanted … anyway, after it was all over, Mrs. Martin said something about
Mary Haunt that could have been a compliment. I mean, to some people. I
can’t think of Mary Haunt ever doing as much for her.”

“What did she say?”

“Mrs. Martin? Oh, she said anybody who gets between Mary Haunt and what
she wants is going to have a Mary-sized hole through them.”

“It wasn’t a compliment,” said Halvorsen immediately. “Mrs. Martin knows
as well as you or I do what’s between that girl and her Big Break.”

“What is?”

“Mary Haunt.”

O’Banion thought about that for a moment and then chuckled. “A
Mary-sized hole wouldn’t leave much.” He looked up. “You’re quite a
psychologist.”

“Me?” said Halvorsen in genuine surprise. At that moment Robin, who had
all this while been murmuring confidences to the mixer, switched off the
machine and looked up. _“Boff!”_ he cried joyously. “Hello, Boff!” He
watched something move toward him, turning slightly to follow it with
his eyes until it settled on the spice shelf over his table. “Wash you
doin’, Boff? Come for dinner?” Then he laughed, as if he had thought of
something pleasant and very funny.

“I thought Boff was out with the Bittelmans, Robin,” O’Banion called.

“No, he hide,” said Robin, and laughed uproariously. “Boff right here.
He come back.”

Halvorsen watched this with a dazed smile. “Who on earth is Boff?” he
asked O’Banion.

“Imaginary playmate,” said O’Banion knowledgeably. “I’m used to it now
but I don’t mind telling you it gave me the creeps at first. Lots of
kids have them. My sister did, or so Mother says—Sister doesn’t remember
it now. A little girl called Ginny who used to live in the butler’s
pantry. You laugh off this ‘Boff’ and the other one—her name’s
Googie—until you see Robin holding the door open to let them in, or
refusing to go out to play until they get downstairs. And he isn’t
kidding. That’s a nice little kid most of the time, Halvorsen, but some
things will make him blow up like a little bottle of nitro, and one of
’em is to deny that Boff and Googie are real. I know. I tried to once
and it took half a day and six rides on a merry-go-round to calm him
down.” He emphasized with a forefinger: “Six rides for Boff and Googie
too.”

Halvorsen watched the child: “I’ll be darned.” He shook his head
slightly. “Is that—unhealthy?”

“I bought a book,” said O’Banion, and, unaccountably, found himself
blushing again, “and it says no, long as the child has good contact with
reality, and believe me, he has. They grow out of it. Nothing to worry
about.”

Just then Robin cocked his head up to the spice shelf, as if he had
heard a sound. Then he said, “Okay, Boff,” climbed down from his chair,
carried the chair across the kitchen to its place against the wall, and
said cheerfully, “Tonio, Boff wan see cars. Okay. Shall we?”

O’Banion rose, laughing. “My master’s voice. I got the _Popular
Electronics_ special issue on this year’s automobiles and Boff and Robin
can’t get enough of it.”

“Oh?” Halvorsen smiled. “What do they like this year?”

“Red ones. Come on, Robin. See you, Halvorsen.”

“See you.”

Robin trotted after O’Banion, paused near the door. “Come _on_, Boff!”

He waved violently at Halvorsen. “See you, Have-sum-gum.”

Halvorsen waved back, and they were gone.

Halvorsen sat numbly for a while, his hand still raised. The presence of
the other man and the child had been a diversion from his strange inner
explosion and its shock-waves. Now they were gone, but he would not
permit himself to sink into that welter of approaching bullet,
rain-damped torsos, _why do I want to be dead?_ So he hung motionless
for a moment between disturbance and diversion. He thought of following
O’Banion into the parlor. He thought of sinking back into his panic,
facing it, fighting it. But he wasn’t ready to fight, not yet, and he
didn’t want to run … and he couldn’t stay like this. It was like not
breathing. Anyone can stop breathing, but not for long.

“Mr. Halvorsen?”

Soft-footed, soft-voiced, timidly peering about her to be sure she was
not intruding, Miss Schmidt came in. Halvorsen could have hugged her.
“Come in, come in!” he cried warmly.

The half-alive smile brightened like fanned embers at his tone. “Good
afternoon, Mr. Halvorsen. I was looking, that is, wondering, you know,
if Mr. Bittelman was back yet, and I thought perhaps that …” She wet her
lips and apparently thought it was worth another try. “I wanted to see
him about—I mean to say, ask him if he—about something.” She exhaled,
took a breath, and would surely have come out with more of the same, but
Halvorsen broke in.

“No, not yet. Sure picked a miserable day for a joy-ride.”

“It doesn’t seem to matter to the Bittelmans. Every fourth week, like
clockwork.” She suddenly uttered a soft little bleat of a laugh. “I’m
sure I don’t mean clockwork, Mr. Halvorsen, I mean, four weeks.”

He laughed politely, for her sake. “I know what you mean.” He saw her
drop her eyes to her kneading hands, divined that her next movement
would be toward the door. He felt he couldn’t bear that, not just now.
“How about—uh—a cup of tea or something. Sandwich. I was just going to—”
He rose.

She went pink and smiled again. “Why, I—”

There was a short, sibilant sound in the doorway, a sniff, a small snort
of anger. Mary Haunt stood there glowering. Miss Schmidt said, faintly,
“No, no thank you, I’d better, I mean, just go and … I only wanted to
see if Mr. Bittelman was—” She faded out altogether and tiptoed
apologetically to the door. Mary Haunt swung her shoulders but did not
move her feet. Miss Schmidt slid out and escaped past her.

Halvorsen found himself standing, half angry, half foolish. His own last
words echoed in his mind: “Sandwich. I was just going to—” and he let
them push him to the other end of the kitchen. He was furious, but why?
Nothing had happened; a lot had happened. He would have liked to rear
back on his hind legs and blast her for persecuting a little defenseless
rabbit like Miss Schmidt; yet what had she actually done? Couldn’t she
say with absolute truth, “Why, I never said a word to her!”? He felt
ineffectual, unmanned; and the picture of the flimsy gun flickered
inside his eyelids and shocked him. He trembled, pulled himself
together, painfully aware of the bright angry eyes watching his back
from the doorway. He fumbled into the breadbox and took out half a loaf
of Bitty’s magnificent home-baked bread. He took down the breadboard and
got a knife from the drawer, and began to saw. Behind him he heard a
sharp slap as Mary Haunt tossed her magazine on the table beside the
coffeepot, and then he was conscious of her at his elbow. If she had
said one word, she would have faced a blaze of anger out of all
proportion to anything that had happened. But she didn’t, and didn’t:
she simply stood there and watched him. He finished cutting the first
slice, started on the second. He almost swung to face her but checked
the motion, whereupon the knife bit into the first joint of his thumb.
He closed his eyes, finished cutting the bread, and turned away to the
refrigerator. He opened it and then bent over the shelves, holding his
cut thumb in his other hand.

“What do you think you’re doing?” asked the girl.

“What’s it look like?” he growled. His cut suddenly began to hurt.

“I couldn’t say,” said Mary Haunt. She stepped to the breadboard, picked
up the knife and with it whisked the bread he had cut into the sink.

“Hey!”

“You better push that cut up against the freezer coils for a second,”
she said with composure. She put a hand on the loaf and with one sweep
straightened its hacked end. “Sit down,” she said as he filled his lungs
to roar at her. “If there’s anything I hate it’s to see someone clumsy
paddling around in food.” One, two, three, four even slices fell to the
board as she spoke. And again she interrupted him just as he was forming
a wounded-bear bellow, “You want a sandwich or not? Just sit down over
there and stay out from underfoot.”

Slackjawed, he watched her. Was she doing him a kindness? Mary Haunt
doing someone a _kindness?_

He found himself obeying her, pressing his cut against the freezer
coils. It felt good. He withdrew his hand just as she came toward the
refrigerator, and dodged out of her way. He backed to the table, sat
down, and watched her.

She was something to watch. The pale, over-manicured hands flew. She set
out mayonnaise, cream cheese, a platter of cold-cuts, parsley, radishes.
With almost a single motion she put a small frying pan and a
butter-melter on the stove and lit the fire under them. Into the frying
pan went a couple of strips of bacon; into the other, two tablespoons of
water and half the fluid from a jar of capers. She added spices, “by
ear”—a shake, a pinch: poultry seasoning, oregano, garlic salt. The tiny
pan began to hiss, and suddenly the kitchen smelt like the delivery
entrance to paradise. She snatched it off, scraped the contents into a
bowl, added cream cheese and mayonnaise, and thrust it under the
electric mixer. She turned the bacon, shoved two of the bread slices
into the toaster, and busied herself with a paring knife and the
radishes.

Halvorsen shook his head unbelievingly and muttered an exclamation. The
girl threw him a look of such intense scorn that he dropped his eyes. He
found them resting on her magazine. It was called _Family Day_ and was a
home-making publication from a chain supermarket—in no way a movie
magazine.

Out of the frying pan came the bacon, crackling. She drained it on a
paper towel and crumbled it into the bowl where the mixer was working.
As if some kitchen choreographer was directing the work, the toast
popped up as she reached her hand for it. She dropped in the other two
slices and went back to her alchemy with the radishes. In a moment she
turned off the mixer and spread the contents of the bowl on the toast.
On this she laid cold-cuts, narrow strips of various kinds, deftly
weaving them so they formed a beautiful basket pattern. As she finished
the first two, the second pair popped out of the toaster; it was a
continuous thing, the way she did all the different things she did; it
was like music or a landscape flowing by a train window.

She did something swift with the knife, and set the results out on two
plates: bite-sized sandwiches arranged like a star, and in the center
what looked like a tiny bouquet of rosebuds—the radishes, prepared with
curled petals and nested in a neat bed of parsley, its stems all drawn
together by one clever half-hitch in one of them. The whole amazing
performance had taken perhaps six minutes. “You can make your own
coffee,” she snapped.

He came over and picked up one of the plates. “Why, this is—is—well,
_thanks!_” He looked at her and smiled. “Come on, let’s sit down.”

“With _you?_” She stalked to the table, carrying the other plate, and
scooped up the magazine as if it were a guilty secret. She went to the
door. “You can clean up,” she said, “and if you ever tell anyone about
this I’ll snatch you baldheaded.”

Staring after her, stunned, he absently picked up one of the sandwiches
and bit into it, and for a moment forgot even his amazement, it was so
delicious. He sat down slowly, and for the first time since he had
started comparing violins with guitars in the pawn-shop, he gave himself
up completely to his senses and forgot his troubles. He ate the
sandwiches slowly and appreciatively and let them own him.

EXCERPT FROM FIELD EXPEDITION [NOTEBOOK]:

So [weary-irritated] [I] can barely [write]. As if this kind of research
wasn’t arduous enough at the best of times, which this is not, with the
best of equipment, which [we] lack, [I] am plagued by a
[partner-teammate] with insuperable enthusiasm and a quality [I] can
only describe as headlong stubbornness. [Smith] means well, of course,
but the universe is full of well-meaning [individuals] [who] have
succeeded only in making [ ]s of themselves.

All during the tedious and infuriating process of re[charging] the
[wadget] [Smith] argued that purely objective observation would get [us]
nowhere and would take [forever]; that [we] have sufficient data now to
apply stimuli to these specimens and determine once and for all if a
reliable, functional condition of Synapse Beta sub Sixteen is possible
to them. [I] of course objected that it is against [our] highest [ethic]
to apply [force] to alien species; [Smith] then argued that it would not
really be [force], but only the [magnification-amplification-increased
efficiency] of that which they already possessed. [I] then pointed out
that even if [we] succeed, [we] can only test the final result by means
which may readily kill some or all of the specimens. This [Smith] is
willing to worry about only when the time comes. [I] pointed out further
that in order to supply the necessary stimuli [we] shall have to
re[wire] not only the [widget], but that [     ]ed, inefficient, [stone]
age excuse for a [mechanism], the [wadget]. [Smith] readily agreed, and
while [I] went on arguing [he] began re[wiring], and [I] argued, and
[he] [wired], and by the time [I]’d [made my point] [he] was practically
finished and [I] found [myself] holding the [light] as well.

[I] forgot to ask [Smith] what [he] planned to do if one of the
specimens finds out what [we)’re up to. Kill it? Kill them all? It
wouldn’t [surprise] [me]. In the name of [research] [Smith] would
happily [watch] [his] [elderly forebear]’s [knuckles] being [knurled].


IV

Miss Schmidt, muffled up to the pharynx in a quilted robe, bed-socked,
slippered and shawled, half-dozed in her easy chair. When she heard the
sounds she had waited for, she jumped up, went to her door, which was
ajar, and stood a moment to listen and be sure. Then she tightened her
sash, checked the hooks-and-eyes under her chin, tugged her voluminous
robe downward at the hips, and pulled the shawl a little higher on her
shoulders. She crossed her arms at the wrists and pressed her hands
modestly against her collarbones, and scurried silently past the
bathroom, down the long hall to the foyer. Bitty was in the kitchen and
Sam Bittelman was hanging up a damp trench coat on the hall tree.

“Mr. Bittelman—”

“Sam,” he corrected jovially. “Top of the morning to you, Miss Schmidt.
It turned morning, y’know, ten minutes ago.”

“Oh dear yes, I know it’s late,” she whispered. “And I’m terribly sorry,
really I am, I wouldn’t for the world trouble you. I mean, I _am_ sorry,
I don’t want to be a nuisance. Oh _dear!_” Her perennially frightened
face crinkled with her small explosion of distress.

“Now you just tell me what’s troubling you, lady, and we’ll get it
fixed,” he said warmly.

“You’re very kind. Very kind. It happens there is something. I mean,
something to fix. In … in my _room_.” She bent forward with this, as
with a deep confidence.

“Well, let’s go have a look. Bitty!” Miss Schmidt put a shocked hand
over her lips as he raised his voice. “I’m going to fix something for
the lady. Be right with you.” He turned back to Miss Schmidt and made a
jocular bow. “Lead on.”

“We mustn’t wake the … anybody,” she reproved him, then blushed because
she had. He only grinned, and followed her back to her room. She
entered, opened the door as wide as it would go, and self-consciously
picked up the wastepaper basket and set it to hold the door open. She
looked up from this task right into Sam’s twinkling eyes, and sent up a
prayer that he wouldn’t tease her about it. One never knew what Sam was
going to say; sometimes he was beyond understanding and sometimes he was
just—awful. “The window,” she said. “The blind.”

He looked at it. “Oh, that again. Durn things are always getting the
cords frayed.” The venetian blind hung askew, the bottom slats almost
vertical, leaving a lower corner of the window exposed. Sam tugged at
the raising-cord. It was double; one part was jammed tight and the other
ran free. He pulled it all the way out and ruefully exhibited the broken
end. “See? That’s it, all right. Have to see if I can’t put in a new
cord for you in the morning, if I can find one.”

“In the morning? But— I mean, well, Mr. uh—Sam, what about now? That is,
what am I going to _do?”_

“Why, just don’t worry your pretty little head about it! Get your
beauty-sleep, little lady, and by the time you’re back from school
tomorrow I’ll have it—”

“You don’t understand,” she wailed softly, “I can’t go to bed with it
like that. That’s why I waited up for you. I’ve tried everything. The
drapes won’t go across it and there’s nothing to hang a towel to and the
chair-back isn’t high enough to cover it and—and—oh, _dear!_”

“Oh-h-h.”

Struck by something in his single, slow syllable, she looked sharply at
him. There was something—what was it? like a hum in the room. But it
wasn’t a sound. He hadn’t changed … and yet there was something in his
eyes she had never seen before. She had never seen it in anyone’s eyes.
About Sam Bittelman there had always been a leisurely strength, and it
was there now but easier, stronger, more comforting than ever. To her,
with her multiple indecisions, unsurenesses, his friendly certitude was
more wondrous than a halo might have been. He said, “Just what bothers
you about the window?”

Her usual self moved quite clearly to indicate, indignantly, that part
of the window was uncovered and surely that spoke for itself; yet her
usual self was unaccountably silent, and she gave him his answer:
“Somebody might look _in!_”

“You know what’s outside that window?”

“Wh— Oh. Oh, the back of the garage.”

“So nobody’s going to see in. Well now, suppose there was no garage, and
you turned out your lights. Could anybody see in?”

“N-no …”

“But it still bothers you.”

“Yes, of course it does.” She looked at the triangle of exposed glass,
black with night outside, and shuddered. He leaned against the doorpost
and scratched his head. “Let me ask you something,” he said, as if her
permission might make a difference. “S’pose we took away the garage, and
you forgot and left your light on, _and_ somebody saw you?”

She squeaked.

“Really bothers you, don’t it?” He laughed easily. And instead of
infuriating her, the sound flooded her with comfort. “What exactly is
bothersome about that, aside from the fact that it’s bothersome?”

“Why … why,” she said breathlessly, “I know what _I’d_ think of a hussy
that would parade around that way with the lights on and—”

“I didn’t say parade. Nor ‘prance,’ either, which is the other word
people use, I don’t know why. So what really bothers you is what some
peepin’ Tom might think, hm? Now, Miss Schmidt, is that really anything
to worry about? What do you care what he thinks you are? Don’t you know
what you are?” He paused, but she had nothing to say. “You ever sleep
naked?”

She gasped, and, round-eyed, shook her head.

“Why not?” he demanded.

“Why I— I—” She had to answer him; she had to. Fear rose like a thin
column of smoke within her, and then a swift glance at his open,
friendly face dispelled it completely. It was extraordinary,
uncomfortable, exhilarating, disturbing, exciting all at once. He
compelled her and comforted her at the same time.

She found her voice and answered him. “I just couldn’t sleep … like
that. Suppose there was a fire?”

“Who said that?” he snapped.

“I beg your—”

“Who said ‘suppose there’s a fire?’ Who told you that?”

“Why, I suppose it—yes, it was my mother.”

“Not your idea then. Figured as much. ‘Thou shalt not kill.’ Do you
believe that?”

“Of course!”

“You do. How old were you when you learned that?”

“I don’t—know. All children—”

“Children seven, eight, nine? All right. How old were you when you were
taught not to unpin your diapers? Not to let anyone _see_ you?”

She did not answer but the answer was there.

“Wouldn’t you say you’d learned ‘thou shalt not expose thy body’
earlier, better, more down-deep than ‘thou shalt not kill?”

“I—yes.”

“Do you realize it’s a deeper commandment with you than any of the Ten?
And aside from right-’n-wrong, isn’t it deeper than the deepest,
strongest one of all—save thyself? Can’t you see yourself dying under a
bush rather than walk naked out on the road and flag a car? ‘Suppose
there’s a fire?’ Can’t you see yourself burn to death rather’n jump out
a window without your bathrobe?”

She didn’t answer except from her round eyes and her whole heart.

“Does that make any _sense_, to believe a thing like that?”

“I don’t know,” she whispered. “I—have to think.”

Surprisingly, he said, “Retroactive.” He pointed to the window. “What
can we do about that?” he asked.

Absently she glanced at it. “Never mind it tonight, Mr. Bittelman.”

“Sam. Okay. Goodnight, little lady.”

She felt herself, abruptly, tottering on the edge of a bottomless pit.
He had walked in here and disoriented her, ripped into shreds a whole
idea-matrix which had rested undisturbed in the foundations of her
thinking, like a cornerstone. Just at this startled second she had not
made the admission, but she would have to admit to herself soon that she
must think “retroactive,” as he had put it, and that when she did she
would find that the clothes convention was not the only one she would
have to reappraise. The inescapable, horizonless, unfamiliar task loomed
over her like a black cloud—her only comfort, her only handhold was Sam
Bittelman, and he was leaving. “No!” she cried. “No! No! No!”

He turned back, smiling, and that magic happened again, his sureness and
ease. She stood gasping as if she had run up a hill.

“It’s all right, little lady.”

“Why did you tell me all this? Why?” she asked pathetically.

“You know something? I didn’t tell you a thing,” he said. “I just asked
questions. They were all questions you could’ve asked yourself. And
what’s got you scared is answers—answers that came from here—” He put a
gentle knuckle against her damp forehead. “—and not from me. You’ve
lived with it all quite a while; you got nothing to fear from it now.”
And before she could answer he had waved one capable hand, winked, and
was gone.

For a long time she stood there, trembling and afraid to think. At last
she let her open eyes see again, and although they saw nothing but the
open door, it was as if some of Sam’s comfort slipped in with vision.
She turned around, and around again, taking in the whole room and
reaping comfort and more comfort from the walls, as if Sam had hung it
for her to gather like ripe berries. She put it all in the new empty
place within her, not to fill, but at least to be there and to live with
until she could get more. Suddenly her gaze met the silly little
wastebasket sitting against the door, holding it open, and to her utter
astonishment she laughed at it. She picked it up, shook her head at it
as if it had been a ridiculous puppy which had been eating her talcum
powder; she even spanked it lightly, once, and put it down, and closed
the door. She got into bed and put out the light without even looking at
the window.


V

“Aw, you shouldn’t!” cried Bitty with a joyous sort of chagrin as she
pushed open Sue Martin’s door. “Here I’ve got all your fresh linen and
you’ve went and made the bed!”

Sue Martin, sleep-tousled and lovely in a dark negligee, rose from the
writing desk. “I’m sorry, Bitty. I forgot it was Thursday.”

“Well, Thursday it is,” the older woman scolded, “and now I’ll have to
do it up all over again. Young lady, I’ve told and _told_ you I’ll take
care of the room.”

“You have plenty to do,” Sue smiled. “Here, I’ll help. What’s Robin up
to?”

Together they took down the spread, the light blanket, then the sheets
from the big double bed. “Kidnapped by that young idiot O’Banion again.
He’s driving out to the new project over Huttonville way and thought
Robin might want to see the bulldozers.”

“Robin loves bulldozers. He’s not an idiot.”

“He’s an idiot,” said Bitty gruffly, apparently needing no translation
of the two parts of Sue’s statement. “Time this was turned, since we’re
both here,” she said, swatting the mattress.

“All right,” Sue Martin loosely folded the spread and blanket and
carried them to the chest. “Robin just loves him.”

“So do you.”

Sue’s eyes widened. She shot a look at the other woman, but Bitty’s back
was turned as she bent over the bed. When she spoke, her voice was
perfectly controlled. “Yes, for some time.” She went to stand beside
Bitty and they laid hold of the mattress straps. “Ready?” Together they
heaved and the mattress rose up, teetered for a moment on edge, and fell
back the other way. They pulled it straight.

“Well, what are you doing about it?” Bitty demanded.

Sue found her eyes captured by Bitty’s for a strange moment. She saw
herself, in a flash of analog, walking purposefully away from some
tired, dark place toward something she wanted; and as she walked there
appeared humming softly behind her, around her, something like a moving
wall. She had a deep certainty that she could not stop nor turn aside;
but that as long as she kept moving at the same speed, in the same
direction, the moving wall could not affect her. She—and it—were moving
toward what she wanted, just as fast as she cared to go. While this was
the case, she was not being restrained or compelled, helped nor
hindered. So she would not fear this thing, fight it or even question
it. It could not possibly change anything. In effect, irresistible as it
might be, it need not and therefore did not exist for her. Here and now,
some inexplicable something had happened to make it impossible not to
answer Bitty’s questions—and this compulsion was of no moment at all for
her as long as Bitty asked questions she wanted to answer. “What are you
doing about it?” was such a question.

“Everything I should do,” said Sue Martin. “Nothing at all.” Bitty
grunted noncommittally. She took a folded sheet from the top of the
highboy and shook it out across the bed. Sue Martin went round to the
other side and caught it. She said, “He has to know why, that’s all, and
he can’t do anything or say anything until he does know.”

“Why what?” Bitty asked bluntly.

“Why he loves me.”

“Oh—you know that, do you?”

This was one question, compulsion or no, that Sue Martin did not bother
to answer. It was on the order of “Is this really a bed?” or “Is it
Thursday?” So Bitty asked another: “And you’re just waiting, like a
little edelweiss on an Alp, for him to climb the mountain and pick you?”

“Waiting?” Sue repeated, puzzled.

“You’re not doing anything about it, are you?”

“I’m being myself,” said Sue Martin. “I’m living my life. What I have to
give him—anyone who’s _right_ for me—is all I am, all I do for the rest
of my life. As long as he wants something more, or something different,
nothing can happen.” She closed her eyes for a moment. “No, I’m not
waiting, exactly. Put it this way: I know how to be content with what I
am and what I’m doing. Either Tony will knock down that barrier he’s
built, or he won’t. Either way I know what’s going to happen, and it’s
good.”

“That wall—why don’t you take a pickax and beat it down?”

She flashed the older woman a smile, “He’d defend it. Men get very fond
of the things they defend, especially when they find themselves
defending something stupid.”

Bitty shook out the second sheet. “And don’t you have any of his kind of
trouble—wondering _why_ you love him?”

Sue Martin laughed. “Wouldn’t we live in a funny world if we had to
understand everything that was real, or it wouldn’t exist? It’s always
good to know _why_. It isn’t always necessary. Tony’ll find that out one
day.” She sobered. “Or he won’t. Hand me a pillowslip.”

They finished their task in silence. Bitty bundled up the old linen and
trudged out. Sue Martin stood looking after her. “I hope she wasn’t
disappointed,” she murmured, and, “I don’t think so … and what did I
mean by that?”


VI

One morning Mary Haunt opened her eyes and refused to believe them. For
a moment she lay still looking at the window numbly; there was something
wrong with it, and a wrong feeling about the whole room. Then she
identified it: there was sunlight streaming in and down through the
venetian blind where no sunlight should be at her rising time. She
snatched her watch off the night table and squinted at it, and moaned.
She reared up in bed and peered at the alarm clock, then turned and
punched furiously at the pillow. She bounded out of bed, struggled into
her yellow robe, and flew out of the room with her bare feet slapping
angrily down the long corridor. Sam Bittelman was sitting at the kitchen
table peering at the morning paper over the tops of his black rimmed
reading-glasses. Bitty was at the sink. “What ’m I, the forgotten man or
something?” Mary Haunt demanded harshly.

Sam put down his paper and only then began to remove his gaze from it.
“M-m-m? Oh, good morning, gal.” Bitty went on with her business.

“Good _nothing!_ Don’t you know what time it is?”

“Sure do.”

“What’s the big fat idea leaving me to sleep like this? You know I got
to get to work in the morning.”

“Who called you four times?” said Bitty without turning around or
raising her voice. “Who went in and shook you, and got told _get out of
my room_ for it?”

Mary Haunt poised between pace and pace, between syllables. Now that
Bitty mentioned it, she _did_ half-remember a vague hammering somewhere,
a hand on her shoulder … but that was a dream, or the middle of the
night or—or had she really chased the old lady out? _“Arrgh,”_ she
growled disgustedly. She stamped out into the foyer and snatched up the
phone. She dialed. “Get me Muller,” she snapped at the voice that
answered.

“Muller,” said the phone.

“Mary Haunt here. I’m sick today. I’m not coming in.”

“So with this phone call,” said the telephone, “I’ll notice.”

“Why you lousy Heine, without me you couldn’t run a yo-yo, let alone a
radio station!” she shouted, but she had hung up before she started to
shout.

She padded back into the kitchen and sat down at the table. “Got
coffee?”

Bitty, still with her back turned, nodded in the appropriate direction
and said, “On the stove,” but Sam folded his paper and got up. He went
to the stove, touched the pot briefly with the back of his hand, picking
up a cup and saucer on the way. “You’ll want milk.”

“You know better than that,” she said, arching her lean body. While she
poured herself a cup, Sam sat down at the other end of the table. He
leaned his weight on his elbows, his forearms and worn hands flat on the
table. Something like the almost-silent whisper from a high-speed fan
made her look up. “What are you looking at?”

He didn’t answer her question. “Why do you claim to be twenty-two?” he
asked instead, and quick as the rebound of billiard ball from cue ball,
propelled by hostility, inclusive as buckshot, her reply jetted up:
_“What’s it to you?”_ But it never reached her lips; instead she said,
“I have to,” and then sat there astounded. Once she had worn out a
favored phonograph record, knew every note, every beat of it, and she
had replaced it; and for once the record company had made a mistake and
the record was not what the label said it was. The first half-second of
that new record was like this, a moment of expectation and stunned
disbelief. This was even more immediate and personal, however; it was
like mounting ten steps in the dark and finding, shockingly, that there
were only nine in the flight. From this moment until she left the
kitchen, she was internally numb and frightened, yet fascinated, as her
mind formed one set of words and others came out.

“You have to,” asked Sam mildly, “the way you have to be in the movies?
You just _have_ to?”

The snarl, _have I kept it a secret?_ came out, “It’s what I want.”

“Is it?”

There didn’t seem to be any answer to that, on any level. She waited,
tense.

“What you’re doing—the job at the radio station—living here in this town
instead of someplace else—all of it; is what you’re doing the best way
to get what you want?”

_Why else would I put up with it all—the town, the people—you?_ But she
said, “I think so.” Then she said, “I’ve thought so.”

“Why don’t you talk to young Halvorsen? He might be able to find
something you’d do even better’n going to Hollywood.”

“I don’t _want_ to find anything better!” This time there was no
confusion.

From the other end of the room, Bitty asked, “Were you always so
all-fired pretty, Mary Haunt? Even when you were a little girl?”

“Everyone always said so.”

“Ever wish you weren’t?”

_Are you out of your mind?_ “I … don’t think so,” she whispered.

Gently, Sam asked her, “Did they throw you out, gal? Make you leave
home?”

Defiantly, defensively, _They treated me like a little princess at home,
like a piece of fine glassware. They carried my books and felt good all
day if I smiled. They did what I wanted, what they thought I wanted, at
home or in town. They acted as if I was too good to walk that ground,
breathe that air, they jumped at the chance to take advantage of being
at the same place at the same time; they did everything for me they
could think of doing, as if they had to hurry or I’d be gone. Throw me
out? Why, you old fool!_ “I left home my own self,” she said. “Because I
had to, like—” But here words failed her, and she determined not to cry,
and she determined not to cry, and she cried.

“Better drink your coffee.”

She did, and then she wanted something to eat with it, but couldn’t bear
to sit with these people any longer. She sniffed angrily. “I don’t know
what’s the matter with me,” she said. “I never overslept before.”

“Long as you know what you want,” said Sam, and whether that was the
stupid, non-sequitur remark of a doddering dotard, or something quite
different, she did not know. “Well,” she said, rising abruptly; and then
felt foolish because there was nothing else to say. She escaped back to
her room and to bed, and huddled there most of the day dully regarding
the two coddled ends of her life, pampering in the past and pampering in
the future, while trying to ignore today with its empty stomach and its
buzzing head.


VII

During Prohibition it had been a restaurant, in that category which is
better than just “nice” but not as good as “exclusive”; the town was too
small then to have anything exclusive. Now it was a bar as well, and
although there was imitation Carrara on some walls, and a good deal of
cove-lighting, the balcony had never been altered and still boasted the
turned-spoke railing all the way around, looking like a picket fence
that had gone to heaven. There was a little service bar up there, and a
man could stay all evening watching what went on down below without
being seen. This was what Tony O’Banion was doing, and he was doing it
because he had felt like a drink and had never been to the club before,
and he wanted to see what kind of place it was and what Sue Martin did
there; and every one of these reasons were superficial—if he preceded
them with “Why,” he felt lost. Within him were the things he believed,
about the right sort of people, about background, breeding, and blood.
Around him was this place, as real as the things he believed in. _Why_
he was here, why he wanted a drink just now, why he wanted to see the
place and what happened in it—this was a bridge between one reality and
the other, and a misty, maddening, nebulous bridge it was. He drank, and
waited to see her emerge from the small door by the bandstand, and when
she did he watched her move to the piano and help the pianist, a
disheveled young man, stack and restack and shuffle his music, and he
drank. He drank, and watched her go to the cashier and spend a time over
a ledger and a pile of checks. She disappeared through the swinging
doors into the kitchen, and he drank; he drank and she came out talking
to a glossy man in a tuxedo, and he winced when they laughed.

At length the lights dimmed and the glossy man introduced her and she
sang in a full, pleasant voice something about a boy next door, and
someone else played an accordion which was the barest shade out of tune
with the piano. Then the piano had a solo, and the man sang the last
chorus, after which the lights came up again and he asked the folks to
stick around for the main show at ten sharp. Then the accordion and the
piano began to make dance music. It was all unremarkable, and Tony
didn’t know why he stayed. He stayed, though: “Waiter! Do it again.”

“Do it twice.”

Tony spun around. “Time someone else bought, hm?” said Sam Bittelman. He
sat down.

“Sam! Well, sit down. Oh, you _are_.” Tony laughed embarrassedly. His
tongue was thick and he was immeasurably glad to see the old man. He was
going to wonder why until he remembered that he’d sworn off wondering
why just now. He was going to ask what Sam was doing there and then
decided Sam would only ask him the same, and it was a question he didn’t
want to fool with just now. Yes he did.

“I’m down here slumming in the fleshpots and watching the lower orders
cavorting and carousing,” he blurted, making an immense effort to be
funny. He wasn’t funny. He sounded like a little snob, and a tight
little snob at that.

Sam regarded him gravely, not disapproving, not approving. “Sue Martin
know you’re here?”

“No.”

“Good.”

The waiter came just in time; Sam’s single syllable had given him a hard
hurt; but for all the pain, it was an impersonal thing, like getting hit
by a golfer on his backswing. When the waiter had gone Sam asked
quietly, “Why don’t you marry the girl?”

“What’re ya—kidding?”

Sam shook his head. O’Banion looked into his eyes and away, then down at
Sue Martin where she leaned against the piano, leafing through some
music. _Why don’t you marry the girl?_ “You mean if she’d have me?” It
was not the way he felt, but it was something to say. He glanced at
Sam’s face, which was still waiting for a real answer. All right then.
“It wouldn’t be right.”

“ ‘Right?” Sam repeated.

O’Banion nipped his thick tongue in the hope it might wake his brains
up. The rightness of it … vividly he recalled his Mother’s words on the
subject: “Aside from the amount of trouble you’ll save yourself,
Anthony, you must remember that it’s not only your right, it’s your
_duty_ not to marry beneath your class. Fine hounds, fine horses, fine
humans, my dear; it’s breeding that matters.” That was all very well,
but how to say it to the kind old man, himself obviously a manual worker
all his life? O’Banion was not a cruel man, and he was well aware that
coarse origins did not always mean dull sensibilities. Actually, some of
these people were very sensitive. So he made a genuinely noble try at
simultaneous truth and kindness: “I’ve always felt it’s wiser to form
relationships like that with—uh—people of one’s own kind.”

“You mean, people with as much money as you got?”

“No!” O’Banion was genuinely shocked. “That’s no longer a standard to go
by, and it probably never was, not by itself.” He laughed ruefully and
added, “Besides, there hasn’t been any money in my family since I can
remember. Not since 1929.”

“Then what’s your kind of people?”

How? How? “It’s … a way of life,” he said at length. That pleased him.
“A way of life,” he repeated, and took a drink. He hoped Sam wouldn’t
pursue the subject any further. Why examine something when you’re
content with it the way it is?

“Why are you here anyway, boy?” Sam asked. “I mean, in this town instead
of in the city, or New York or some place?”

“I’m good for a junior partnership in another year or so. Then I can
transfer as a junior partner to a big firm. If I’d gone straight to the
city it would take me twice as long to get up there.”

Sam nodded. “Pretty cute. Why the law? I always figured lawyer’s work
was pretty tough and pretty dusty for a young man.”

His Mother had said, “Of course the law field’s being invaded by all
sorts of riffraff now—but what isn’t? However, it’s still possible for a
gentleman to do a gentleman’s part in law.” Well, that wouldn’t do. He’d
have to go deeper. He averted his eyes from old Sam’s casual penetration
and said, “Tough, yes. But there’s something about law work …” He
wondered if the old man would follow this. “Look, Sam, did it ever occur
to you that the law is the biggest thing ever built? It’s bigger’n
bridges, bigger’n buildings because they’re all built _on_ it. A
lawyer’s a part of the law, and the law is part of everything
else—everything we own, the way we run governments, everything we make
and carry and use. Ever think of that?”

“Can’t say I did,” said Sam. “Tell me something—the law, is it
finished?”

“Finished?”

“What I mean, this rock everything’s built on, how solid is it? Is it
going to change much? Didn’t it change a whole lot to get the way it
is?”

“Well, sure! Everything changes a lot while it’s growing up.”

“Ah. It’s grown up.”

“Don’t you think it has?” O’Banion asked with sudden truculence.

Sam grinned easily. “Shucks, boy, I don’t think. I just ask questions.
You were saying about ‘your sort of people’: you think you-all _belong_
in the law?”

“Yes!” said O’Banion, and saw immediately that Sam would not be
satisfied with so little. “We do in this sense,” he said earnestly. “All
through the ages men have worked and built and—and owned. And among them
there rose a few who were born and bred and trained to—to—” He took
another drink, but it and the preceding liquor seemed not to be helping
him. He wanted to say _to rule_ and he wanted to say _to own_, but he
had wit enough about him to recognize that Sam would misunderstand. So
he tried again. “Born and bred to—live that—uh—way of life I mentioned
before. It’s to the interest of those few people to invest their lives
in things as they are, to keep them that way; in other words, to work
for and uphold the law.” He leaned back with a flourish that somehow
wasn’t as eloquent as he had hoped and very nearly upset his glass to
boot.

“Don’t the law contradict itself once in a while?”

“Naturally!” O’Banion’s crystallizing concept of the nobility of his
work was beginning to intoxicate him more than anything else. “But the
very nature of our courts is a process of refinement, constant
purification.” He leaned forward excitedly. “Look, laws are dreams, when
they’re first thought of—inspirations! There’s something … uh … holy
about that, something beyond the world of men. And that’s why when the
world of men comes into contact with it, the wording of the inspiration
has to be redone in the books, or interpreted in the courtroom. That’s
what we mean by ‘precedents’—that’s what the big dusty books are for, to
create and maintain consistency under the law.”

“What about justice?” murmured Sam, and then quickly, as if he hadn’t
meant to change the subject, “That’s not what I meant by contradictin’,
counselor. I mean all laws that all men have dreamed up and lived by and
got theirselves killed over. Tell me something, counselor, is there even
one single law so right for men that it shows up in every country that
is or was?”

O’Banion made a startled sound, as half a dozen excellent examples
flashed into his mind at once, collided, and, under the first
examination, faded away.

“Because,” said Sam in a voice which was friendly and almost apologetic,
“if there ain’t such a law, you might say every set of laws ever dreamed
up, even the sets that were bigger and older and lasted longer than the
one you practice, even any set you can imagine for the future-they’re
all goin’ to contradict one another some way or other. So, who’s really
to say whose set of laws are right—or fit to build anything on, or breed
up a handful of folks fit to run it?”

O’Banion stared at his glass without touching it. For an awful moment he
was totally disoriented; a churning pit yawned under his feet and he
must surely topple into it. He thought wildly, you can’t leave me here,
old man! You’d better say something else, and fast, or I … or I …

There was a sort of pressure in his ears, like sound too high-pitched
for humans. Sam said softly, “You really think Sue Martin ain’t good
enough for you?”

“I didn’t say that, I didn’t say that!” O’Banion blurted, hoarse with
indignation, and fright, and relief as well. He shuddered back and away
from the lip of this personal precipice and looked redly at the composed
old face. “I said different, too different, that’s all. I’m thinking of
her as well as—”

For once Sam bluntly interrupted, as if he had no patience with what
O’Banion was saying. “What’s different?”

“Background, I told you. Don’t you know what that is?”

“You mean the closer a girl’s background is to yours, the better chance
you’d have bein’ happy the rest of your life?”

“Isn’t it obvious?” The perfect example popped into his mind, and he
speared a finger out and downward toward the piano. “Did you hear what
she was singing just before you got here? ‘The boy next door.’ Don’t you
understand what that really means, why that song, that idea, hits home
to so many people? Everybody understands that; it’s the appeal of what’s
familiar, close by—the similar background I’m talking about!”

“You have to shout?” chuckled Sam. Sobering, he said, “Well, counselor,
if you’re goin’ to think consistently, like you said, couldn’t you dream
up a background even more sim’lar than your next-door neighbor?”

O’Banion stared at him blankly, and old Sam Bittelman asked, “Are you an
only child, counselor?”

O’Banion closed his eyes and saw the precipice there waiting; he snapped
them open in sheer self-defense. His hands hurt and he looked down, and
slowly released them from the edge of the table. He whispered, “What are
you trying to tell me?”

His bland face the very portrait of candor, Sam said, “Shucks, son, I
couldn’t tell you a thing, not a blessed thing. Why, I don’t know
anything you don’t know to tell you! I ain’t asked you a single question
you couldn’t’ve asked yourself, and the answers were all yours, not
mine. Hey …” he breathed, “you better come along home. You wouldn’t want
Miz Martin to see you looking the way you do right now.”

Numbly, Anthony Dunglass O’Banion followed him out.


VIII

It was hot, so hot that apparently even Bitty felt it, and after supper
went to sit on the verandah. It was very late when at last she came in
to do the dishes, but she went ahead without hurrying, doing her usual
steady, thorough job. Sam had gone to bed, Mary Haunt was sulking in her
room after yet another of those brief, violent brushes with Miss
Schmidt. O’Banion was crouching sweatily over some law-books in the
parlor, and Halvorsen—

Halvorsen was standing behind her, just inside the kitchen. On his face
was a mixture of expressions far too complicated to analyze, but simple
in sum—a sort of anxious wistfulness. In his hands was a paper sack, the
mouth of which he held as if it were full of tarantulas. His stance was
peculiar, strained, and off-balance, one foot advanced, his shoulders
askew; his resolution had equated with his diffidence and immobilized
him, and there he stayed like a bee in amber.

Bitty did not turn. She went right on working steadily, her back to him,
until she finished the pot she was scouring. Still without turning, she
reached for another and said, “Well, come on in, Philip.”

Halvorsen literally sagged as her flat, matter-of-fact voice reached
him, shattering with its exterior touch his interior deadlock. He
grinned, or just bared his teeth, and approached her. “You _do_ have
eyes in the back of your head.”

“Nup.” She rapped once with her knuckle on the windowpane over the sink.
Night had turned it to black glass. Halvorsen watched the little cone of
suds her hand had left, then refocused his eyes on the image in the
glass—vivid, the kitchen and everything in it. Hoarsely, he said, “I’m
disappointed.”

“I don’t keep things I don’t need,” she said bluntly, as if they’d been
talking about apple-corers. “What’s on your mind? Hungry?”

“No.” He looked down at his hands, tightened them still more on the bag.
“No,” he said again, “I have, I wanted …” He noticed that she had
stopped working and was standing still, inhumanly still, with her hands
in the dishwater and her eyes on the windowpane. “Turn around, Bitty.”

When she would not, he supported the bottom of the paper bag with one
hand and with the other scrabbled it open. He put his hands down inside
it. “Please,” he tried to say, but it was only a hiss.

She calmly shook water off her hands, wiped them on a paper towel. When
she turned around her face was eloquent—as always, and only because it
always was. Its lines were eloquent, and the shape of her penetrating
eyes, and the light in them. As a photograph or a painting such a face
is eloquent. It is a frightening thing to look into one and realize for
the first time that behind it nothing need be moving. Behind the lines
of wisdom and experience and the curved spoor of laughter, something
utterly immobile could be waiting. Only waiting.

Halvorsen said, “I think all the time.” He wet his lips. “I never stop
thinking, I don’t know how. It’s … there’s something wrong.”

Flatly, “What’s wrong?”

“You, Sam,” said Halvorsen with difficulty. He looked down at the bag
over his hand. She did not. “I’ve had the … feeling … for a long time
now. I didn’t know what it was. Just something wrong. So I talked to
O’Banion. Miss Schmidt too. Just, you know, talk.” He swallowed. “I
found out. What’s wrong, I mean. It’s the way you and Sam talk to us,
all of us.” He gestured with the paper bag. “_You never say anything!_
You only ask questions!”

“Is that all?” asked Bitty good-humoredly.

“No,” he said, his eyes fixed on hers. He stepped back a pace.

“Aren’t you afraid that paper bag’ll spoil your aim, Philip?”

He shook his head. His face turned the color of putty.

“You didn’t go out and buy a gun just for me, did you?”

“You see?” he breathed. “Questions. You see?”

“You already had it, didn’t you, Philip? Bought it for something else?”

“Stay away from me,” he whispered, but she had not moved. He said, “Who
are you? What are you after?”

“Philip,” she said gently—and now she smiled. “Philip—_why do you want
to be dead?_”


Part Two

SPECIAL ENTRY IN FIELD EXPEDITION [NOTEBOOK]: Since it is now [my]
intention to prefer charges against [my] [partner-teammate] [Smith] and
to use these [notes] as a formal [document] in the matter, [I] shall now
summarize in detail the particulars of the case: [We] have been on Earth
for [expression of time-units] on a field expedition to determine
whether or not the dominant species here possesses the Synapse known to
our [catalog] as Beta sub Sixteen, the master [computer] [at home]
having concluded that without the Synapse, this Earth culture must
become extinct. Needless to [say] [we] are here to observe and not to
interfere; to add to the [memory-banks] of the master [computer] only,
it being a matter of no significance otherwise.

On arrival [we] set up the usual [detectors], expecting to get our
information in a [expression of very short time-unit] or so; but to our
[great astonishment] the readings on the [kickshaw], the [gimmick] and
our high-sensitivity [snivvy] were mixed; it appears that this culture
possessed the Synapse but did not use it. [!!!]

[We] therefore decided to conduct a [microcosmic] observation on each of
the specimens in a small group, under [laboratory] conditions, to
discover to what extent the Synapse exists in them, and under what
circumstances it might become functional. We have set up for this
purpose [the analog of] a [], or [residence], called, in Terrestrial
terms, _small town boarding house_, and have attracted to it:

PHILIP HALVORSEN, a young vocational guidance expert, who has a
ceaselessly active analytical mind, and a kind of instinct for illogic:
he knows when a person or situation is, in some way, wrong, and will not
rest until he finds out why. He has recently followed his own logic to
the conclusion that he wants to be dead—and he can’t find out why!… MARY
HAUNT, a beautiful girl who claims to be twenty-two [and lies], and who
wants to be a movie star with an ambition transcending all reason. She
is employed in a very minor capacity at the local radio station, and is
always angry at everyone.… ANTHONY DUNGLASS O’BANION, a young lawyer,
deeply convinced that his family background, “breeding,” “culture” and
occupation set him apart from everyone else in town; he is desperately
fighting a growing conviction that he is in love with … SUE MARTIN,
young widowed night-club hostess (whom O’Banion’s Mother, if she were
here, would certainly refer to as a “woman of that sort”). Sue Martin, a
woman of unusual equilibrium, loves O’Banion but will not submit herself
to his snobbery and therefore keeps her feelings very much to herself.…
Her young son ROBIN, who is three, and is friends with everyone
everywhere including his invisible, “imaginary” playmates Boff and
Googie. Robin’s special friend is the lawyer O’Banion; they get along
very well indeed.… Finally, MISS SCHMIDT, the high-school librarian, who
is a soft-voiced, timid little rabbit of a woman, afraid of the world
and abjectly obedient to propriety.

The retired couple who run the boarding house are SAM and BITTY
BITTELMAN, wise, relaxed, helpful, observant. They are available always
except for one day a month when they go out “for a ride.”

That, in Terrestrial terms, is [our] laboratory setup. [We] installed a
[widget] and [rigged-up] a [wadget] as complementary [observation-
and-control] even though it meant using a [miserable] [inefficient]
[old-fashioned] power supply on the [wadget], which has to be
re[charged] every [equivalent of Earth month]. Everything proceeded
satisfactorily until [Smith], plagued by what [I] can only, in the most
cosmic breadth of generosity, call an excess of enthusiasm, insisted
that [we] speed up our research by stimulating the Synapse in these
specimens. In spite of [my] warnings and [my] caution, [he] [bulled]
ahead giving [me] no choice but to assist [him] in re[wiring] the
[machines] for this purpose. But let it be on the [record] that [I]
specifically warned [him] of the dangers of revealing [our] presence
here. [I] for [one] dread the idea of being responsible for the
destruction of organized life. Even if only one of the specimens should
detect [us], there is so much intercommunication in this small group
that it would be virtually impossible to remove or destroy one without
alerting and disturbing all. The least effect would be to negate all
[our] efforts so far; the most is something [I] cannot [ethically] live
with.

Under these [unhappy] circumstances [we] proceeded with the stimulation;
Old Sam Bittelman went to Miss Schmidt’s room when she reported her
venetian blind broken and unable to close. She suddenly found it
impossible not to answer Sam’s questions, which probed at the very roots
of her timidity. Shocked to these roots, but more thoughtful than she
had ever been in her life, before, she went to bed forgetting the blind
and thinking about the fact that her conditioning to keep her body
covered was more deeply instilled into her than _Thou shalt not
kill_—and other, equally unsettling concepts.

Mary Haunt overslept, for the very first time, and went into the
kitchen, furious. Sam and Bitty were there, and suddenly the girl _had_
to answer the questions they shot at her. She escaped quickly, but spent
the rest of the day in bed, miserable and disoriented, wondering if,
after all, she did want Hollywood.…

Anthony O’Banion went down to the night club where Sue Martin worked,
and sat out of sight on the balcony. Suddenly Sam Bittelman was at the
table with him, asking him deeply troubling questions about the law and
why he practiced it, about his convictions of blood and breeding, and
about his feelings for Sue Martin. Dizzied and speechless, O’Banion was
led home by kind old Sam.

Bitty found Sue Martin alone in her room one morning, and asked her some
pointed questions, all of which Sue answered with ease, quite
undisturbed, quite willing. Yes, she loved O’Banion. No, she wouldn’t do
anything about it; that was O’Banion’s problem. Sue Martin was no
trouble at all to Bitty.…

Late one hot evening Halvorsen walked into the kitchen with a gun in his
hand, saying there was something wrong, something he couldn’t name … but
_“Who are you and what do you want?”_ Bitty calmly asked him why he had
bought a gun: “It was for yourself, wasn’t it, Philip? _Why do you want
to be dead?_” [I] submit that [Smith] is guilty of carelessness and
[unethical] conduct. [I] see no solution but to destroy this specimen
and perhaps the others. [I] declare that this situation has arisen only
because [Smith] ignored [my] clearly [stated] warning. As [I] [write],
this alerted, frightened specimen stands ready to commit violence on
[our] [equipment] and thereby itself. [I] hereby serve notice on [Smith]
that [he] got [us] into this and [he] can [ ]ing well get [us] out.


IX

_“Why do you want to be dead?”_

Phil Halvorsen stood gaping at the old woman, and the gun, still
shrouded in its silly paper bag, began whispering softly as he trembled.
The butt fitted his hand as his hand fitted the butt; _It’s holding me_,
he thought hysterically, knowing clearly that his hysteria was a cloud,
a cloak, a defense against that which he was not equipped to think
about … well, maybe not ready to think about; but how had she known?

For nearly two days he had been worrying and gnawing at this sense of
wrongness about him. Back and back he would come to it, only to reach
bafflement and kick it away angrily; not eating enough, hardly sleeping
at all; _let me sleep first!_ something wailed within him, and as he
sensed it he kicked it away again: more hysteria, not letting him think.
And then a word from O’Banion, a phrase from Miss Schmidt, and his own
ragbag memory: The Bittelmans never said—they always asked. It was as if
they could reach into a man’s mind, piece together questions from the
unused lumber stored there, and from it build shapes he couldn’t bear to
look at. _How many terrible questions have I locked away?_ And has she
broken the lock? He said, “Don’t … ask me that.… Why did you ask me
that?”

“Well, why ever not?”

“You’re a … you can read my mind.”

“Can I?”

“_Say_ something!” he shouted. The paper bag stopped whispering. He
thought she noticed it.

“Am I reading your mind,” she asked reasonably, “if I see you walk in
here the way you did looking like the wrath o’ God, holding that thing
out in front of you and shying away from it at the same time, and then
tell you that if you accidentally pull the trigger you might have to die
for it? Read minds? Isn’t it enough to read the papers?”

Oh, he thought.… Oh-h. He looked at her sharply. She was quite calm,
waiting, leaving it to him. He knew, suddenly and certainly, that this
woman could outthink him, outtalk him, seven ways from Sunday without
turning a hair. This meant either that he was completely and
embarrassingly wrong, or that her easy explanations weren’t true
ones … which was the thing that had been bothering him in the first
place. “Why did you say I bought the gun for something else?” he
snapped.

She gave him that brief, very-warm smile. “Didn’t say; I asked you,
right? How could I really know?”

For one further moment he hesitated, and it came to him that if this
flickering doubt about her was justified, the chances were that a gun
would be as ineffective as an argument. And besides … it was like a
silent current in the room, a sort of almost-sound, or the aural
pressure he could feel sometimes when a car was braking near him; but
here it came out feeling like comfort.

He let the bag fall until it swung from its mouth. He twisted it closed.
“Will you—I mean,” he bumbled, “I don’t want it.”

“Now what would I do with a gun?” she asked.

“I don’t know. I just don’t want it around. I can throw it away. I don’t
want to have anything to do with it. I thought maybe you could put it
away somewhere.”

“You know, you’d better sit down,” said Bitty. She didn’t exactly push
him but he had to move back to get out of her way as she approached, and
when the back of his knees hit a chair he had to sit down or fall down.
Bitty continued across the kitchen, opened a high cupboard and put the
bag on the topmost shelf. “Only place in the house Robin can’t climb
into.”

“Robin. Oh yes,” he said, seeing the possibilities. “I’m sorry. I’m
sorry.”

“You’d better talk it out, Philip,” she said in her flat, kind way.
“You’re fixing to bust wide open. I won’t have you messing up my
kitchen.”

“There’s nothing to talk about.”

She paused on her way back to the sink, in a strange hesitation like one
listening. Suddenly she turned and sat down at the table with him. “What
did you want with a gun, Philip?” she demanded; and just as abruptly, he
answered her, as if she had hurled something at him and it had bounced
straight back into her waiting hands, “I was thinking about killing
myself.”

If he thought this would elicit surprise; or an exclamation, or any more
questions, he was disappointed. She seemed only to be waiting, so he
said, with considerably more care, “I don’t know why I told you that but
it came out right. I said I was thinking about doing it. I didn’t say I
was going to do it.” He looked at her. Not enough? Okay then: “I
couldn’t be sure exactly what I was thinking until I bought a gun. Does
that make any sense to you?”

“Why not?”

“I don’t ever know exactly what I think unless I try it out. Or get all
the pieces laid out ready to try.”

“Or tell somebody?”

“I couldn’t tell anybody about this.”

“Did you try?”

“_Damn_ it!” It was a whisper, but it emerged under frightening
pressure. Then normally, “I’m sorry, Bitty, I’m real sorry. I suddenly
got mad at the language, you know what I mean? You say something in
words of one syllable and it comes out meaning something you never
meant. I told you, ‘I couldn’t tell anybody about this.’ That sounds as
if I knew all about it and was just shy or something. So you ask me,
‘Did you try?’ But what I really mean was that this whole thing,
everything about it, is a bunch of—of feelings, and—well, crazy ideas
_that I couldn’t tell anyone about_.”

Bitty’s rare smile flickered. “Did you try?”

“Well I’ll be. You’re worse than ever,” he said, this time without
anger. “You _do_ know what I’m thinking.”

“So what were you thinking?”

He sobered immediately. “Things … all crazy. I think all the time,
Bitty, like a radio was playing all day, all night, and I can’t turn it
off. Wouldn’t want to; wouldn’t know how to live without it. Ask me is
it going to rain and off I go, thinking about rain, where it comes from,
about clouds, how many different kinds there are; about air-currents and
jet-streams and everything else you pick up reading those little
paragraphs at the bottom of newspaper columns; about—”

“About why you bought a gun?”

“Huh? Oh … all right, all right, I won’t ramble.” He closed his eyes to
hear his thoughts, and frowned at them. “Anyway, at the tail end of
these run-downs is always some single thing that stops the chain—for the
time. It might be the answer to some question I asked myself, or someone
asks me, or it might just be as far as the things I know will take me.

“So one day a few weeks ago I got to thinking about guns, and never mind
the way I went, but what I arrived at was the idea of a gun killing me,
and then just the idea of being dead. And the more I thought, the more
scared I got.”

After waiting what seemed to be long enough, Bitty said, “Scared.”

“It wasn’t kil— being dead that scared me. It was the feeling I had
about it. I was glad about it. I wanted it. That’s what scared me.”

“Why do you want to be dead?”

“That’s what I don’t know.” His voice fell. “Don’t know, I just don’t
know,” he mumbled. “So I couldn’t get it out of my head and I couldn’t
make any sense out of it, and I thought the only thing I could do was to
get a gun and load it and—get everything ready, to see how I felt then.”
He looked up at her. “That sounds real crazy, I bet.”

Bitty shrugged. Either she denied the statement or it didn’t matter.
Halvorsen looked down again and said to his clenched hands, “I sat there
in my room with the muzzle in my mouth and all the safeties off, and
hooked my thumb around the trigger.”

“Learn anything?”

His mouth moved but he couldn’t find words to fit the movement. “Well,”
said Bitty sharply, “why didn’t you pull it?”

“I just—” He closed his eyes in one of those long, inward-reading
pauses. “—couldn’t. I mean, _didn’t_. I wasn’t afraid, if that’s what
you want to know.” He glanced at her and couldn’t tell what she wanted
to know. “Sitting there, that way, I came to realize that this wasn’t
the way it should happen,” he said with some difficulty.

“What is the way?”

“Like this: if ever there was an earthquake, or I looked up and saw a
safe falling on me, or some other thing like that, something from
outside myself—I wouldn’t move aside. I’d let it happen.”

“Is there a difference between that and shooting yourself?”

“Yes!” he said, with more animation than he had shown so far. “Put it
like this: there’s part of me that’s dead, and wants the rest of me
dead. There’s a part of me that’s alive, and wants all of me alive.” He
looked that over and nodded at it. “My hand, my arm, my thumb on the
trigger—they’re alive. All the live parts of me want to help me go on
living, d’you see? No live part should help the dead part get what it
wants. The way it’ll happen, the way it should happen, is not when I do
something to make it happen. It’ll be when I don’t do something. I won’t
get out of the way, and that’s it, and thanks for keeping the gun for
me, it’s no use to me.” He stood up and found his eyes locked with hers,
and sat right down again, breathing hard.

“Why do you want to be dead?” she asked flatly.

He put his head down on his hands and began to rock it slowly to and
fro.

“Don’t you want to know?”

Muffled, his voice came up from the edge of the table. “No.” Abruptly he
sat up, staring. “No? What made me say no? Bitty,” he demanded, “what
made me say that?”

She shrugged. He jumped up and began pacing swiftly up and down the
kitchen. “I’ll be dogged,” he murmured once, and “Well, what d’ye kn—”

Bitty watched him, and catching him on a turn when their eyes could
meet, she asked, “Well—why do you want to—”

“Shut up,” he said. He said it, not to her, but to any interruption. His
figmentary signal-light, which indicated dissatisfaction, unrightness,
was casting its glow all over his interior landscape. To be hounded half
to death by something like this, then to discover that basically he
didn’t want to investigate it … He sat down and faced her, his eyes
alight. “I don’t know yet,” he said, “but I will, I will.” He took a
deep breath. “It’s like being chased by something that’s gaining on you,
and you duck into an alley, and then you find it’s blind, there’s only a
brick wall; so you sit down to wait, it’s all you can do. And all of a
sudden you find a door in the wall. Been there all the time. Just didn’t
look.”

“Why do you want to be dead?”

“B—because I—I shouldn’t be alive. Because the average guy—Different,
that’s what I am, different, unfit.”

“Different, unfit.” Bitty’s eyebrows raised slightly. “They the same
thing, Philip?”

“Well, sure.”

“You can’t jump like a kangaroo, you can’t eat grass raw like a
cow—different. You unfit because you can’t do those things?”

He made an annoyed laugh. “Not that, not that. People, I mean.”

“You can’t fly a plane. You can’t sing like Sue Martin. You can’t spout
law like Tony O’Banion. That kind of different?”

“No,” he said, and in a surge of anguish, “No, no! I can’t talk about
it, Bitty!” He looked at her and again saw that rare, deep smile. He
answered it in kind, but weakly, remembering that he had said that to
her before. “This time I mean I can’t talk about such things to you. To
a lady,” he said in abrupt, unbearable confusion.

“I’m no lady,” said Bitty with conviction. Suddenly she punched his
forearm; he thought it was the first time she had ever touched him. “To
you I’m not even a human being. Not even another person. I mean it,” she
said warmly. “Have I asked you a single question you couldn’t’ve asked
yourself? Have I told you anything you didn’t know?”

His peculiar linear mind cast rapidly back and up again. He felt an odd
instant of disorientation. It was not unpleasant. Bitty said gently, “Go
on talking to yourself, boy. Who knows—you might find yourself in good
company.”

“Aw … thanks, Bitty,” he mumbled. His eyes stung and he shook his head.
“All right, all _right_, then … it just came to me, one big flash, and I
guess I couldn’t sit here—here,” he said, waving his arm to include the
scrubbed, friendly kitchen, “and look at you, and think about these—uh
this—all at once.” He swallowed heavily. “Well, that time I told you
about, that day I found out I wanted to be dead, it was like getting hit
on the head. Right after that, only a couple of minutes, I got hit on
the head just as hard by something else. I didn’t know—want to know till
now that they were connected, some way.” He closed his eyes. “It was a
theater, that rathole down across the Circle. You know. It—it hit out at
me when I wasn’t looking. It was all covered with … pictures and—and it
said SEE this and SEE that and SEE some dirty other thing, adults only,
you know what I mean.” He opened his eyes to see what Bitty was doing,
but Bitty was doing nothing at all. Waiting. He turned his face away
from her, and said indistinctly into his shoulder, “All my life those
things meant nothing to me. _There!_” he shouted, “you see? Different,
different!”

But she wouldn’t see. Or she wouldn’t see until he did, himself, more
clearly. She still waited.

He said, “Down at work, there’s a fellow, Scodie. This Scodie, he’s a
good man, really can turn out a day’s work. I mean, he likes what he’s
doing, he cares. Except every time a girl goes by, everything stops. He
snaps up out of what he’s doing, he watches her. I mean, _every_ time.
It’s like he can’t help himself. He does it the way a cadet salutes an
officer on the street. He does it like that crossing-guard on the toy
train, that pops out of his little house every time his little light
goes on. He watches until the girl’s gone by, and then he says
‘mmm_yuh!_’ and looks over at me and winks.”

“What do you do, every time?”

“Well, I—” He laughed uncertainly. “I guess I wink back at him and I
say, mm_-hm!_ But I know why I do it, it’s because he expects me to;
he’d think it was sort of peculiar if I didn’t. But he doesn’t do it for
me; I don’t expect anything of him one way or the other. He does it—”
Words failed him, and he tried again. “Doing that, he’s part
of—everybody. What he does is the same thing every song on every radio
says every minute. Every ad in every magazine does it if it possibly
can, even if it means a girl in her underwear with stillson wrenches for
sale.” He leapt to his feet and began to pace excitedly. “You got to
back off a little to see it,” he told Bitty, who smiled behind his back.
“You got to look at the whole thing all at once, to see how _much_ there
is of it, the jokes people tell—yeah, you got to laugh at them,
whatever, you even have to know a couple, or they’ll … The window
displays, the television, the movies … somebody’s writing an article
about transistors or termites or something, and every once in a while he
figures he’s been away from it long enough and he has to say something
about the birds and the bees and ‘Gentlemen prefer.’ Everywhere you turn
the whole world’s at it, chipping and chipping away at it—”

He stamped back to the table and looked into Bitty’s face intently. “You
got to back away and look at it all at once,” he cautioned again. “I’m
not in kindergarten, I know what it’s all about. I’m not a woman-hater.
I’ve been in love. I’ll get married, some day. Go ahead and tell me I’m
talking about one of the biggest, strongest, down-deep urges we
have—I’ll buy that. That’s what I _mean_, that’s what I’m _talking_
about.” His forehead was pink and shiny; he took out a crumpled
handkerchief and batted at it. “So much of it, all around you, all the
time, filling a big hungry need in average people. I don’t mean the urge
itself; I mean all this _reminding_, this what do you call it,
indoctrination. It’s a need or folks wouldn’t stand for so much of it,
comic books, lipstick, that air-jet in the floor at the funny house at
the Fair.” He thumped into his chair, panting. “Do you begin to see what
I mean about _different?_”

“Do you?” asked Bitty, but Halvorsen didn’t hear her; he was talking
again. “Different, because I don’t feel that hunger to be reminded, I
don’t need all that high-pressure salesmanship, I don’t want it. Every
time I tell one of my jokes, every time I wink back at old Scodie, I
feel like a fool, like some sort of liar. But you got to protect
yourself; you can’t let anyone find out. You know why? Because the
average guy, the guy-by-the-millions that needs all that noise so much,
he’ll let you be the way he is, or he’ll let you be … I’m sorry, Bitty.
Don’t make me go into a lot of dirty details. You see what I mean, don’t
you?

“What do you mean?”

Irritated, he blew a single sharp blast from his nostrils. “Well, what I
mean is, they’ll let you be the way they are, or you have to be … sick,
crippled. You can’t be anything else! You can’t be Phil Halvorsen who
isn’t sick and who isn’t crippled but who just doesn’t naturally go
around banging his antlers against the rocks so the whole world can hear
it.”

“So—that’s what you mean by unfit?”

“That’s why I wanted to be dead. I just don’t think the way other people
do; if I act the way other people do I feel … feel guilty. I guess I had
this piling up in me for years, and that day with the guns, when I found
out what I wanted to do … and then that theater-front, yawping over me
like a wet mouth full of dirty teeth …” He giggled foolishly. “Listen to
me, will you … Bitty, I’m sorry.”

She utterly ignored this. “High-pressure salesmanship,” she said.

“What?”

“You said it, I didn’t.… Isn’t hunger one of those big deep needs,
Philip? Suppose you had a bunch of folks starving on an island and
dropped them a ton of food—would they need high-pressure salesmanship?”

It was as if he stood at the edge of a bottomless hole—more, the very
outer edge of the world, so close his very toes projected over the
emptiness. It filled him with wonder; he was startled, but not really
afraid, because it might well be that to fall down and down into that
endless place might be a very peaceful thing. He closed his eyes and
slowly, very slowly, came back to reality, the kitchen. Bitty, Bitty’s
words. “You mean … the av—the ordin—you mean, people aren’t really
interested?”

“Not that interested.”

He blinked; he felt as if he had ceased to exist in his world and had
been plunked down in a very similar, but totally new one. It was far
less lonely here.

He hit the table and laughed into Bitty’s calm face. “I’m going to
sleep,” he said, and got up; and he knew she had caught his exact shade
of meaning when she said gently, “Sure you can.”

EXCERPT FROM FIELD EXPEDITION [NOTEBOOK]: [I] had thought up to now that
in [Smith)’s [immorally] excessive enthusiasm and [bullheadedness] [I]
had encountered the utmost in [irritants]. [I] was in [error]; [he] now
surpasses these, and without effort. In the first place, having placated
and outwitted the alerted specimen, [he] has destroyed [my] preliminary
detailed [report] on him; this is [irritat]ing not only because it was
done without consulting [me], not only because of the trouble [I] went
to [write] it all up, but mostly because [he] is technically within
[his] [ethics-rights]—the emergency created by [his] [bumbling
mismanagement] no longer exists. [I] have [force]fully pointed out to
[him] that it was only by the application of [my] kind of cautious
resourcefulness that [he] succeeded, but [he] just [gloats]. [I] [most
strongly affirm-and-bind-myself], the instant [we] get back home and are
released from Expeditionary [ethic-discipline], [I] shall [bend] [his]
[]s over [his] [ ] and [tie a knot in] them.

[We] have now, no [credit-thanks] to [Smith], reached a point where all
our specimens are in a state of [heavy] preconditioning of their
unaccountably random Synapse Beta sub Sixteen. Being a synapse, it will
of course come into full operation only on a reflexive level and in an
extreme emergency, which [we] are now setting up.

Unless [Smith] produces yet more [stupidities], the specimens should
live through this.


X

It had become impossibly hot, and very still. Leaves dropped at
impossible angles, and still the dust lay on them. Sounds seemed too
enervated to travel very far. The sky was brass all day, and at night,
for want of ambition, the overcast was no more than a gauzy hood of
haze.

It was the Bittelmans’ “day off” again, and without them the spine had
been snatched out of the household. The boarders ate pokily, lightly, at
random, and somehow got through the time when there was nothing to do
but sit up late enough to get tired enough to get whatever rest the
temperature would permit. It was too hot, even, to talk, and no one
attempted it. They drifted to their rooms to wait for sleep; they
slumped in front of the fans and took cold showers which generated more
heat than they dissipated. When at last darkness came, it was a relief
only to the eyes. The household pulse beat slowly and slower; by eight
o’clock it was library-quiet, by nine quite silent, so that the soft
brushing of knuckles on Miss Schmidt’s door struck her like a shout.

“Wh—who is it?” she quavered, when she recovered her breath.

“Sue.”

“Oh—oh. Oh, do come in.” She pulled the damp sheet tight up against her
throat.

“Oh, you’re in bed already. I’m sorry.”

“_I’m_ sorry. It’s all right.”

Sue Martin swung the door shut and came all the way in. She was wearing
an off-the-shoulder peasant blouse and a pleated skirt with three times
more filmy nylon in it than one would guess until she turned, when it
drifted like smoke. “My,” said Miss Schmidt enviously. “You look cool.”

“State of mind,” Sue smiled. “I’m about to go to work and I wish I
didn’t have to.”

“And Bitty’s out. I’m honorary baby-sitter again.”

“You’re an angel.”

“No, oh, no!” cried Miss Schmidt. “I wish everything I had to do was
that easy. Why, in all the time I’ve known you, every time I’ve done it,
I—I’ve had nothing to do!”

“He sleeps pretty soundly. Clear conscience, I guess.”

“I think it’s because he’s happy. He smiles when he sleeps.”

“Smiles? Sometimes he laughs out loud,” said Sue Martin. “I was a little
worried tonight, for a while. He was so flushed and wide-awake—”

“Well, it’s _hot_.”

“It wasn’t that.” Sue chuckled. “His precious Boff was all over the
place, ‘fixin’ things,’ Robin said. What he was fixing all over the
walls and ceiling, Robin didn’t say. Whatever it was, it’s finished now,
though, and Robin’s sound asleep. I’m sure you won’t even have to go in.
And Bitty ought to be home soon.”

“You’ll leave your door open?”

Sue Martin nodded and glanced up at the large open transom over Miss
Schmidt’s door. “You’ll hear him if he so much as blinks.… I’ve got to
run. Thanks _so_ much.”

“Oh, really, Mrs. M—uh, Sue. Don’t thank me. Just run along.”

“Good night.”

Sue Martin slipped out, silently closing the door behind her. Miss
Schmidt sighed and looked up at the transom. After Sue’s light footsteps
had faded away, she listened, listened as hard as she could, trying to
pour part of herself through the transom, across the hall, through Sue
Martin’s open door. A light sleeper at any time, she knew confidently
that she was on guard now and would wake if anything happened. If she
slept at all in this sticky heat.

She might sleep, at that, she thought after a while. She shifted herself
luxuriously, and edged to a slightly cooler spot on the bed. “That
wicked Sam,” she murmured, and blushed in the dark. But he had been
right. A _nightgown_ in weather like this?

Suddenly, she slept.

In O’Banion’s room, there was a soft sound. He had put off taking a
shower until suddenly he had used up his energy, and could hardly stir.
I’ll just rest my eyes, he thought, and bowed his head. The soft sound
was made by his forehead striking the book.

Halvorsen lay rigid on his bed, staring at the ceiling. There, almost as
if it was projected, was the image of a flimsy cylinder vomiting smoke.
Go ahead, he thought, detachedly. Or go away. I don’t care which. Before
I talked to Bitty, I wanted you. Now, I don’t care. Is that better? He
closed his eyes, but the image was still there. He lay very quietly,
watching the insides of his eyelids. It was like being asleep. When he
was asleep the thing was there too.

Mary Haunt sat by her window, pretending it was cooler there than in
bed. There was no anger in her, just now as she lay back and dreamed.
The Big Break, the pillars of light at her premiere, her name two
stories tall over a Broadway marquee—these had no place in this
particular favorite dream. I’ll do over Mom’s room, she thought, dimity,
this time, and full, full skirts on the vanity and the night table. She
closed her eyes, putting herself in Mom’s room with such vividness that
she could almost smell the cool faint odor of lavender sachets and the
special freshness of sheets dried in the sun. Yes, and something else,
outside the room, barely, just barely she knew bread was baking, so that
the kitchen would be heavenly with it; the bread would dominate the
spice-shelf for a while, until it was out of the oven and cooled. “Oh,
Mom …” she whispered. She lay still in her easy chair, holding and
holding to the vision until this room, this house, this town didn’t
matter any more.

Some hours went by.

Robin floated in a luminous ocean of sleep where there was nothing to
fear and where, if he just turned to look, there were love and laughter
waiting for him. His left hand uncurled and he thrust the second and
third fingers into his mouth. Somehow he was a big bulldozer with a
motor that sounded like Mitster and tracks that clattered along like
Coffeepot, and Boff and Googie were riding along with him and laughing.
Then without effort he was a glittery Ferris wheel, but he could watch
himself too in one of the cars, screaming his delight and leaning
against Tonio’s hard arm. All this, yet he was still afloat in that deep
bright place where there was no fear, where love and laughter hid around
some indescribable corner, waiting. Brighter, brighter. Warm, warm,
warmer … oh, hot _hot!_


XI

Miss Schmidt opened her eyes to an impossible orange glare and a roar
like the end of the world. For one full second she lay still, paralyzed
by an utter disbelief; no light could have become so bright, no sound
could have risen to this volume, without waking her as it began. Then
she found a way to focus her eyes against the radiance, and saw the
flames, and in what was left to her of her immobile second, she
explained the whole thing to herself and said redly, of course, of
course; it’s only a nightmare and _suppose there’s a fire?_ —and that’s
so _silly_, Sam— And then she was out of bed in a single bound, standing
in the center of the room, face to flaming face with reality. Everything
was burning—everything! The drapes had already gone and the slats of the
venetian blind, their cords gone, were heaped on the floor, going like a
campfire. Even as she watched the screen sagged and crumpled, its pine
frame glaring and spitting pitch through blistering paint. It fell
outside.

Outside, outside! The window’s open, you’re on the ground floor; yes,
and there on the chair, not burning yet, your bathrobe; take the robe
and jump, quick!

Then, beyond belief, there was a second louder than the earth-filling
roar, and different; fine hot powder and a hot hail of plaster showered
on her shoulders; she looked up to see the main beam, right over her
head, sag toward her and hang groaning, one part reaching to the other
with broken flat fingers of splintered wood which gloved themselves in
flame as she saw them. She cowered, and just then the handle of the door
turned and a gout of smoke slammed it open and whisked out of sight in
the updraft; and there in the hall stood Robin, grinding a fat little
fist into one abruptly wakened eye. She could see his lips move, though
she could hear nothing in this mighty bellow of sound. She knew it,
though, and heard it clearly in her mind: “What’s ’at noice?”

The beam overhead grumbled and again she was showered with plaster. She
batted it off her shoulders, and whimpered. A great flame must have
burst from the roof above her just then, for through the window she saw
a brilliant glare reflected from the white clapboards of the garage wall
outside. The glare tugged at her—_jump!_ —and besides, her robe.…

The beam thundered and began to fall. Now she must make a choice, in
microseconds. The swiftest thought would not be fast enough to weigh and
consider and decide; all that could matter now was what was inside her,
throwing switches (some so worn and easy to move!). A giant was throwing
them, and he was strong; his strength was a conditioning deeper than
_thou shalt not kill;_ he was a lesson learned before she had learned to
love God, or to walk, or to talk. He was her mother’s authority and the
fear of all the hairy, sweaty, dangerous mysteries from which she had
shielded herself all her life; and his name and title were Cover
Thyself! With him, helping him, was the reflexive Save Thyself! and
against these—Robin, whom she loved (but love is what she felt, once,
for a canary, and once for a Raggedy Ann doll) and her sense of duty to
Sue Martin (but so lightly promised, and at the time such a meaningless
formality). There could be no choice in such a battle, though she must
live with the consequences for all her years.

Then—

—it was as if a mighty voice had called _Stop!_ and the very flames
froze. Half a foot above her hung the jagged end of the burning beam,
and chunks of plaster, splinters and scraps of shattered lath and
glowing joist stopped in midair. Yet during this sliver of a fraction of
time, she knew that the phenomenon was a mental something, a figment,
and the idea of time-cessation only a clumsy effort of her mind’s to
account for what was happening.

_Save Thyself was_ still there, hysterical hands clutching for the
controls, but _Cover Thyself_ disappeared into the background. Save
herself she would, but it would be on new terms. She was in the grip of
a reflex of reflexes, one which took into consideration all the factors
a normal reflex would, to the end goal of survival. But along with
these, it called up everything Reta Schmidt had ever done, everything
she had been. In a single soundless flash, a new kind of light was
thrown into every crevice and cranny of her existence. It was her total
self now, reacting to a total situation far wider than that which
obtained here in this burning room. It illuminated even the future—that
much of it which depended upon these events, between them and the next
probable major “crossroads.” It canceled past misjudgments and illogics
and replaced them with rightness, even for the times she had known what
was right and had done otherwise. It came and was gone even while she
leaped, while she took two bounding steps across the floor and the beam
crashed and crushed and showered sparks where she had been standing.

She scooped up the child and ran down the hall, through the foyer, into
the kitchen. It was dark there, thick with swirling smoke, but the glass
panels on the kitchen door glared with some unfamiliar light from
outdoors. She began to cough violently, but grimly aimed at the light
and drove ahead. It was eclipsed suddenly by a monstrous shadow, and
suddenly it exploded inward. There were lights out there she had never
seen before, and half-silhouetted in the broken doorway was a big man
with a gleaming helmet and an axe. She tried to call, or perhaps it was
only a scream, but instead she went into a spasm of coughing.

“Somebody in here?” asked the man. A beam of light, apparently from the
street, lit up the shield on the front of his helmet as he leaned
forward. He stepped inside. “Whew! Where are you?”

She went blindly to him and pushed Robin against his coat. “The baby,”
she croaked. “Get him out of this smoke.”

He grunted and suddenly Robin was gone from her arms. “You all right?”
He was peering into the black and the smoke.

“Take him out,” she said. “Then I’ll want your coat.”

He went out. Miss Schmidt could hear Robin’s clear voice: “You a
fireman?”

“I sure am,” rumbled the man. “Want to see my fire engine? Then sit
right there on the grass and wait one second. Okay?”

“Okay.”

The coat flew through the doorway.

“Got it?”

“Thank you.” She put the huge garment on and went out. The fireman
waited there, again holding Robin in his arms. “You all right, ma’am?”

Her lungs were an agony and she had burns on her feet and shoulders. Her
hair was singed and one of her hands was flayed across its back. “I’m
just fine,” she said.

They began to walk up the road. Robin squirmed around in the man’s arms
and popped his head out to look back at the brightly burning house.

“ ’Bye, Boff,” he said happily, and then gave his heart to the fire
engine.


XII

_“Mother, the bread’s burning!”_

Mary Haunt opened her eyes to an impossible glare and a great roaring.
She shrieked and flailed out blindly, as if she could frighten it away,
whatever it was; and then she came enough to her senses to realize that
she still sat in her chair by the window, and that the house was on
fire. She leaped to her feet, sending the heavy chair skittering across
the room where it toppled over against the clothespress. As it always
did when it was bumped, the clothespress calmly opened its doors.

But Mary Haunt didn’t wait for that or anything else. She struck the
screen with the flat of her hand. It popped out easily, and she hit the
ground almost at the same time it did. She ran off a few steps, and
then, like Lot’s wife, curiosity overtook her and she stopped. She
turned around in fascination.

Great wavering flames leapt fifty and sixty feet in the air and all the
windows were alight. From the town side she could hear the shriek and
clang of fire engines, and the windows and doors opening, and running
feet. But the biggest sound of all was the roar of the fire, like a
giant’s blowtorch.

She looked back at her own window. She could see into the room easily,
the chair on its side, the bed with its chenille top-spread sprouting
measles of spark and char, and the gaping doors of the— “My clothes! My
clothes!”

Furiously she ran back to the window, paused a moment in horror to see
fire run along the picture-molding of the inside wall like a nightmare
caterpillar. “My clothes,” she whispered. She didn’t make much money at
her job, but every cent that wasn’t used in bed and board went on her
back. She mouthed something, and from her throat came that animal growl
of hers; she put both hands on the sill and leaped, and tumbled back
into the house.

She was prepared for the heat but not for that intensity of light, and
the noise was worst of all. She recoiled from it and stood for a moment
with her hands over her eyes, swaying with the impact of it. Then she
ground her teeth and made her way across to the clothespress. She swept
open the bottom drawer and turned out the neatly folded clothes. Down at
the bottom was a cotton print dress, wrapped around a picture frame. She
lifted it out and hugged it, and ran across to the window with it. She
leaned far out and dropped it gently on the grass, then turned back in
again.

The far wall, by the door, began to buckle high up, and suddenly there
was fire up there. The corner near the ceiling toppled into the room
with a crash and a cloud of white dust and greasy-looking smoke, and
then the whole wall fell, not toward her, but away, so that her room now
included a section of the corridor outside. As the dust settled
somebody, a man, came roaring inarticulately and battering through the
rubble. She could not know who it was. He apparently meant to travel the
corridor whether it was all there or not, and he did, disappearing again
into the inferno.

She staggered back toward the clothespress. She felt mad, drunk, crazy.
Maybe it was the de-oxygenated atmosphere and maybe it was fear and
reaction, but it was sort of wonderful, too; she felt her face writhing
and part of her was numb with astonishment at what the rest of her was
doing; she was laughing. She slammed into the clothespress, gasping for
breath, filled her lungs and delivered up a shrill peal of laughter.
Almost helpless from it, she fumbled down a dull satin evening gown with
a long silver sash. She held it up in front of her and laughed again,
doubling over it, and then straightened up, rolling the dress up into a
ball as she did so. With all her might she hurled it into the rubble of
the hallway. Next was a simple black dress with no back and a little
bolero; with an expression on her face that can only be described as
cheerful, she threw it after the evening gown. Then the blue, and the
organdy with the taffeta underskirt, and the black and orange one she
used to call her Hallowe’en dress; each one she dragged out, held up,
and hurled: “You,” she growled between her convulsions of laughter,
“you, and you, and _you_.” When the press was empty, she ran to the
bureau and snatched open her scarf drawer, uncovering a flowerbed of
dainty, filmy silk and nylon and satin shawls, scarves, and kerchiefs.
She whipped out an over-sized babushka, barely heavier than the air that
floated it, and ran with it to the flaming mass where her door once was.
She dipped and turned like a dancer, fluttering it through flame, and
when it was burning she bounced back to the bureau and put it in the
drawer with the others. Fire streamed out of the drawer and she laughed
and laughed.…

And something nipped her sharply on the calves; she yelped and turned
and found the lace of her black negligee was on fire. She twisted back
and gathered the cloth and ripped it away. The pain had sobered her and
she was bewildered now, weak and beginning to be frightened. She started
for the window and tripped and fell heavily, and when she got up the
smoke was suddenly like a scalding blanket over her head and shoulders
and she didn’t know which way to go. She knelt and peered and found the
window in an unexpected direction, and made for it. As she tumbled
through, the ceiling behind her fell, and the roof after it.

On her belly she clawed away from the house, sobbing, and at last rose
to her knees. She smelt of smoke and burned hair and all her lovely
fingernails were broken. She squatted on the ground, staring at the
flaming shell of the house, and cried like a little girl. But when her
swollen eyes rested on that square patch in the grass, she stopped
crying and got up and limped over to it. Her cotton print, and the
picture … she picked the tidy package up and went tiredly away with it
into the shadows where the hedge met the garage.


XIII

O’Banion raised his head groggily from the fly-leaf of his _Blackstone_
and the neat inscription written there:

_The law doth punish man or woman_

_That steals the goose from off the common_,

_But let the greater felon loose_,

_That steals the common from the goose_.

—a piece of eighteenth-century japery which O’Banion deplored. However,
it had been written there by Opdycke when he was in law school, and the
Opdyckes were a darn fine family. Princeton people, of course, but
nobody minded.

All this flickered through his mind as he swam up out of sleep, along
with “What’s the matter with my head?” because any roaring that loud
must be in his ears; it would be too incredible anywhere else, and
“What’s the matter with the light?”

Then he was fully awake, and on his feet. “My _God!_”

He ran to the door and snatched it open. Flame squirted at him as if
from a hose; in a split second he felt his eyebrows disappear. He yelled
and staggered back from it, and it pursued him. He turned and dove out
the window, landing clumsily on his stomach with his fists clenched over
his solar plexus. His own weight drove the fists deep, and for a full
minute he lay groaning for air. At last he got up, shook himself, and
pelted around the house to the front. One fire engine was already
standing by the curb. There was a police car and the knot of bug-eyed
spectators who spring apparently out of the ground at the scene of any
accident anywhere at any hour. At the far end of the Bittelman lot,
there was a sharp scream of rubber and a glare of lights as a taxicab
pulled in as close to the police barrier as it could get. The door was
already open; a figure left it, half running, half thrown out by the
sudden stop.

_“Sue!”_ But no one heard him—everyone else was yelling too: “Look!”
“Somebody stop her!” “Hey!” “Hey, you!”

O’Banion backed off a little to cup his hands and yell again, when
directly over his head a cheerful small voice said, “Mommy runs _fast!_”

“Robin! You’re all right—” He was perched on top of the fire engine with
one arm around the shining brass bell, looking like a Botticelli seraph.
Someone beside him—good heavens, it was Miss Schmidt, disheveled and
bright-eyed, wrapped up in some tentlike garment—Miss Schmidt screamed,
“Stop her, stop her, I’ve got the baby here!”

Robin said to Miss Schmidt, “Tonio runs fast too, shall we?”

Now they were all yelling at O’Banion, but in four paces he could hear
nothing but the roar ahead of him. He had never seen a house burn like
this, all over, all at once. He took the porch steps in one bound and
had just time to turn his shoulder to the door. It was ajar, but
couldn’t swing fast enough under such an impact. It went down flat and
slid, and for one crazy moment O’Banion was riding it like an aquaplane
in a sea of fire, for the foyer floor was ablaze. Then the leading edge
of the door caught on something and spilled him off. He rolled over
twice in fuming debris and then got his feet under him. It was like a
particularly bad dream, so familiar, so confusing. He turned completely
around to orient himself, found the corridor, and started up it, yelling
for Sue at the top of his voice. He saw a left-hand wall lean down
toward him and had to scamper back out of the way. It had barely poured
its rubble down when he was on, in, and through it. Over the crash and
roar, over his own hoarse bellowing, he thought he heard a crazy woman
laughing somewhere in the fire. Even in his near-hysteria, he could say,
“Not Sue, that’s not Sue Martin.…” And he was, before he knew it, at and
past Sue Martin’s room. He flung out a hand. He bounced off the end wall
and turned as he did so, like a sprint swimmer, and swung into Sue
Martin’s room. “Sue! Sue!”

Was he mistaken? Did someone call, “Robin—Robin honey …”?

He dropped to his knees, where he could see in relatively clearer air.
“Sue, oh Sue!”

She lay half buried in rubble from the fallen ceiling. He threw off
scorched and broken two-by-fours and burning lath, took her by the
shoulders and lifted her out of the heap of broken plaster—thank the
powers for that! it had protected her to some degree. “Sue?”

“Robin,” she croaked.

He shook her. “He’s all right, he’s outside, I saw him.”

She opened her eyes and frowned at him. Not at him; at what he had said.
“He’s here somewhere.”

“I saw him. Come on!” He lifted her to her feet, and as she dragged,
“It’s the truth; do you think _I_ would lie to you?”

He felt strength surge into her body. “You forgot to say, ‘I, an
O’Banion,’ ” she said, but it didn’t hurt. They stumbled to the window
and he pushed her through it and leaped after her. For two painful
breaths they lay gulping clean air, and then O’Banion got to his feet.
His head was spinning and he almost lay down again. He set his jaw and
helped Sue Martin up. “Too close!” he shouted. Holding her up, he
half-dragged her no more than a step when she suddenly straightened, and
with unexpected and irresistible strength leapt back toward the burning
wall, pulling him with her. He caught at her to regain his balance, and
she put her arms tight around him. “The wall!” he screamed, as it leaned
out over them. She said nothing, but her arms tightened even more, and
he could have moved more easily if he had been bound to a post with
steel chains. The wall came down then, thunder and sparks, like the end
of the world; madly, it occurred to him just then that he could solve
one of his problem cases by defining the unorthodox contract under suit
as a stock certificate.

But instead of dying he took a stinging blow on his right shoulder, and
that was all. He opened his eyes. He and Sue Martin still stood locked
together, and all around them was flame like a flowerbed with the rough
outline of the house wall and its peaked roof. Around their feet was the
four-foot circular frame of the attic vent, which had ringed them like a
quoit.

The woman slumped in his arms, and he lifted her and picked his way,
staggering, into the friendly dark and the welcome hands of the firemen.
But when they tried to lift her away from him she held his arm and would
not let go. “Put me down, just put me down,” she said. “I’m all right.
Put me down.”

They did and she leaned against O’Banion. He said, “We’re okay now.
We’ll go up to the road. Don’t mind about us.” The firemen hesitated,
but when they began to walk, they were apparently reassured, and ran
back to their work. Hopeless work, O’Banion amended. But for a few
sagging studs and the two chimneys, the house was little more than a pit
of flames.

“Is Robin really—”

“Shh. He’s really. Miss Schmidt got him out, I think. Anyway, he’s
sitting on the fire engine enjoying every minute. He watched you going
in. He approves of your speed.”

“You—”

“I saw you too. I yelled.”

“And then you came after me.” They walked a slow pace or so. “Why?”

Robin was safe, of course, he was about to say, so you didn’t have
to—and then there was within him a soundless white flash that lit up all
he had ever done and been, everything he had read, people and places and
ideas. Where he had acted right, he felt the right proven; where he had
been wrong, he could see now the right in full force, even when for
years he had justified his wrong. He saw fully now what old Sam
Bittelman had almost convinced him of intellectually with his searching
questions. He had fought away Sam’s suggestion that there was something
ludicrous, contradictory about the law and its pretensions to
permanence. Now he saw that the law, as he knew it, was not under attack
at all. As long as a man treated the body of law like a great stone
buttress, based in bedrock and propping up civilization, he was
fortifying a dead thing which could only kill the thing it was built to
uphold. But if he saw civilization as an intricate, _moving entity_, the
function of law changed. It was governor, stabilizer, inhibitor,
_control_ of something dynamic and progressive, subject to the
punishments and privileges of evolution like a living thing. His whole
idea of the hair-splitting search for “precedent” as a refining process
in law was wrong. It was an adaptive process instead. The suggestion
that not one single law is common to all human cultures, past and
present, was suddenly no insult to law at all, but a living compliment;
to nail a culture to permanent laws now seemed as ridiculous a concept
as man conventionally refusing to shed his scales and his gills.

And with this revelation of the viability of man and his works, O’Banion
experienced a profound realignment in his (or was it really his)
attitude toward himself, his effortful preoccupation to defend and
justify his blood and breeding and his gentleman’s place in the world.
It came to him now that although the law may say here that men _are_
born equal, and there that they must receive equal treatment before the
law, no one but a complete fool would insist that men are equal. Men,
wherever they come from, whatever they claim for themselves, are only
what’s in their heads and what’s in their hearts. The purest royal blood
that yields a weak king will yield a failure; a strong peasant can rise
higher and accomplish more, and if what he accomplishes is compatible
with human good, he is surely no worse than a beneficent king. Over and
above anything else, however, shone the fact that a good man needs least
of all to prove it by claiming that he comes from a line of good men.
And for him to assume the privileges and postures of the landed gentry
after the land is gone is pure buffoonery. Time enough for sharp
vertical differentiations between men when the differences become so
great that the highest may not cross-breed with the lowest; until then,
in the broad view, differences are so subtle as to be negligible, and
the concept “to marry out of one’s class” belongs with the genesis of
hippogriffs and gryphons—in mythology.

All this, and a thousand times more, unfolded and was clear to O’Banion
in this illuminated instant, so short it took virtually no time at all,
so bright it lit up all the days of his past and part of his future as
well. And it had happened between pace and pace, when Sue Martin said,
“You followed me. Why?”

“I love you,” he said instantly.

“Why?” she whispered.

He laughed joyously. “It doesn’t matter.”

Sue Martin—_Sue Martin!_ —began to cry.


XIV

Phil Halvorsen opened his eyes and saw that the house was on fire. He
lay still, watching the flames feed, and thought, isn’t this what I was
waiting for?

Now there can be an end to it, he thought peacefully. Now I never need
worry again that I’m wrong to be as I am, and other people’s needs, the
appetites and rituals of the great Average will no longer accuse me. I
cannot be excluded unless I exist, so here’s an end to being excluded. I
cannot be looked down on when I can no longer be seen.

The ceiling began to develop a tan patch, and hot white powder fell from
it to his face. He covered it with the pillow. He was resigned to later,
final agonies because they would be final, but he saw no reason to put
up with the preliminaries. Just then most of the plaster came down on
him. It didn’t hurt much, and it meant the thing would be over sooner
than he thought.

He heard faintly, over the colossal roaring, a woman scream. He lay
still. As much as anyone—perhaps more—he would ordinarily be concerned
about the others. But not now. Not now. Such concern is for a man who
expects to live with a conscience afterward.

Something—it sounded like an inside wall—went down very near. It jolted
the foot of his bed and he felt its hot exhalation and the taste of its
soot, but otherwise it did not reach him. “So come on,” he said tightly,
“get it over with, will you?” and hurled the pillow away.

As if in direct and obedient answer the ceiling over him opened up—_up;_
apparently a beam had broken and was tipping down into an adjoining
room, upward here. Then the tangle of stringers it carried fell away and
started down. High above was blackness, suddenly rent by smoky orange
light—the inside of the roof, a section of which was falling in with the
stringers.

“All right,” said Halvorsen, as if someone had asked him a question. He
closed his eyes.

He closed his eyes on a flash of something like an inner and unearthly
light, and time stood still … or perhaps it was only that subjectively
he had all the time in the world to examine this shadowless internal
cosmos.

Most immediately, it laid out before him the sequence of events which
had brought him here, awaiting death on a burning bed. In this sequence
a single term smote him with that “well, of _course!_” revelation that
rewarded his plodding, directive thoughts when they were successful for
him. The term was “Average,” and his revelation came like a burst of
laughter: for anyone else this would have been a truism, an inarguable
axiom; like a fool he had let his convoluted thinking breeze past
“Average,” use “Average,” worry about “Average” without ever looking at
it.

But “Average”—Average Appetite—was here for him to see, a line drawn
from side to side on a huge graph. And all over the graph were
spots—millions of them. (He was in a place where he could actually see
and comprehend “millions.”) On that line lived this creation, this
demigod, to whom he had felt subservient for so long, whose hungers and
whose sense of fitness ought to have been—_had_ been—Halvorsen’s
bench-mark, his reference point. Halvorsen had always felt himself a
member of a minority—a minority which shrank as he examined it, and he
was always examining it. All the world catered to Average Man and his
“normal” urges, and this must be proper, for he was aware of the
reciprocities: Average Man got these things because these things were
what Average Man wanted and needed.

Want and need … and there was the extraordinary discovery he had made
when Bitty asked him: if people really needed it, would there have to be
so much high-pressure salesmanship?

This he threw on the graph like a transparent overlay; it too bore a
line from side to side, but much lower down, indicating with much more
accuracy just how interested Average Man was in the specific appetite
about which he made so much noise. Now bend close and look at those
millions of spots—individual people all, each with his true need for the
kind of cultural pressure which was driving a man, here, to his death
from guilt.

The first thing Halvorsen saw was that the dots were scattered so widely
that the actual number falling on the line Average Man was negligible:
there were countless millions more unaverage people. It came to him that
those who obey the gospel of Average Man are, in their efforts to be
like the mass of humanity, obeying the dictates of one of the smallest
minorities of all. The next thing to strike him was that it took the
presence of _all_ these dots to place that line just where it was; there
was no question of better, or worse, or more or less fit. Except for the
few down here and their opposite numbers up there, the handful of sick,
insane, incomplete, or distorted individuals whose sexual appetites were
nonexistent or extreme, the vast majority above and below the true
average were basically “normal.” And here where he, Halvorsen might
appear on the graph—he had plenty of company.

He’d never known that! The magazine covers, the advertisements, the
dirty jokes—they hadn’t let him know it.

He understood now, the mechanism of this cultural preoccupation; it came
to him in the recollection that he had appeared at work for three
hundred consecutive working days and nobody noticed his ears. And then
one day a sebaceous cyst in his left lobe had become infected, and the
doctor removed it and he showed up at work with a bandage covering his
ear. _Everybody began to think about Halvorsen’s ear!_ Every interview
had to begin with an explanation of his ear or the applicant would keep
straying his attention to it. And he’d noticed, too, that after he
explained about the cyst, the interviewee would always glance at
Halvorsen’s other ear before he got back to business. Now, in this
silver place where all interrelationships were true ones, he could
equate his covered and noticeable ear with a Bikini bathing suit, and
see clearly how normal interest-disinterest—acceptance—can be put under
forced draft.

It came to him also _why_ this particular cultural matrix did this to
itself. In its large subconscious, it probably knew quite clearly the
true status of its sensual appetites. It must reason, then, that unless
it kept these appetites whipped up to a froth at all times, it might not
increase itself, and it felt it must increase. This was not a pretty
thought, but neither is the pounce of a cat on a baby bird; yet one
cannot argue with the drive behind it.

So it was that Halvorsen’s reasons for not living ceased to be reasons;
with the purest of truth he could say I am not unmanned; I am not unfit;
I am not abnormal.… I am not alone.

All this in no-time, as he closed his eyes to await the mass even now
falling on him. And the reflex of reflexes acted just as eyelids met; he
spun off the bed, bounced out of the nearby window, and was on the grass
outside as the ceiling and walls together met the floor in a gout of
flame.


XV

The girl climbed up to the front seat of the fire engine. “Move over.”

Miss Schmidt swung her worried gaze away from the burning house, and
said in a preoccupied tone, “I don’t think you’d be allowed to, little
girl. We’re from that hou— Why, it’s Mary Haunt!”

“Didn’t recognize me, huh?” said Mary Haunt. She swung a hip and shunted
Miss Schmidt over. “Can’t say I blame you. What a mess!” she said,
indicating the house.

“Mr. O’Banion is in there; he went after Mrs. Martin. And have you seen
Mr. Halvorsen?”

“No.”

“Tonio! Tonio!” Robin suddenly cried.

“Shh, dear. He’ll be along.”

“Dare he _iss!_ Dare he iss! Mom_ee!_” he shrieked, “Come see my fire
engine, shall we?”

“Oh, thank God, thank God they’re safe,” said Miss Schmidt. She hugged
Robin until he grunted.

“I’m all choked up,” growled Mary Haunt. Again she made the angry
gesture at the house. “_What_ a mess. Everything I own—the war-paint,
the clothes, all my magazines—everything, gone. You know what that
means. I—”

_I’ve got to go home now_. And it was here, on the slightest matter of
phrasing that the strange flash of silver suffused Mary Haunt; not under
the descending scythe of Death, nor under the impact of soul found,
heart found: just for the nudge of a word, she had her timeless instant.

All her life and the meaning of her life and all the things in it: the
dimity curtains and home-baked bread, Jackie and Seth whamming away at
each other for the privilege of carrying her books, the spice-shelf and
the daffodils under the parlor windows. She’d loved it so, and reigned
over it; and mostly, she’d been a gentle princess and ruled kindly.

_Did they throw you out, gal?_

She’d never known where it started, how it came about, until now. Now,
with astonishment, she did. Daddy started it, before she was old enough
to walk, Daddy one of the millions who had applauded a child actress
called Shirley Temple, one of the thousands who had idolized her, one of
the hundreds who had deified her. “Little Mary Hollywood,” he’d called
his daughter, and it had been “When you’re in pictures, honey—” Every
morning was a fountain to empty the reservoir of his dreams; every night
he filled again from the depthless well of his ambition for her.

And everyone believed him. Mom came to believe him, and her kid brother,
and finally everyone in town. They had to; Daddy’s unswerving,
undoubting conviction overrode any alternatives, and she herself
clinched it, just by being what she was, an exquisite child exquisitely
groomed, who grew more beautiful (by Hollywood standards) every year.
She wanted what every child wants: loving attention. She got it in
fullest measure. She wanted to do what every child wants to do: gain the
approval of her elders. She tried; and indeed, no other course was open
to her.

_Did they throw you out, gal?_

Perhaps Daddy might have outgrown it; or if not, perhaps he’d have
known, or found out, how to accomplish his dream in a real world. But
Daddy died when she was six, and Mom took over his dream as if it had
been a flower from his dead hand. She did not nourish it; she pressed it
between the leaves of her treasured memories of him. It was a live
thing, true, but arrested at the intensity and the formlessness of his
hopes for her when she was six. She encouraged the child only to want to
be in pictures, and to be sure she would be; it never occurred to her
that there might be things for the child to learn. Her career was
coming; it was coming like Christmas.

But no one knew when.

And when she cleaned house, they all thought it was sweet, so pretty to
watch, but they’d rather take the broom away from her; and when she
baked, it was pretty too but not what she was really _for;_ and when she
read the diet sections in the grocery magazines, that was all right, but
the other features—how to make tangerine gravy for duck, how to remove
spots from synthetic fibers— “Why, Mary! you’ll have a little army
worrying about those things for you!”

Movie magazines then, and movies, and waiting, until the day she left.

_Did they throw you out, gal?_

_Screen Society_ had a feature on Hollywood High School, and it
mentioned how many stars and starlets had come from there, and the ages
some of them had been when they signed contracts. And suddenly she
wasn’t the Shirley Temple girl at all, she was older, years older than
two girls in the article, the same age as five of them. Yet here she was
still, while the whole town waited … suppose she never made it? Suppose
nothing happened here? And she began to interpret this remark, that
look, the other silence, in ways that troubled her, until she wanted to
hide, or to drop dead, or leave.

Just like that, leaving was the answer. She told no one, she took what
clothes she had that were good, she bought a ticket for just anywhere
and wrote thrilling, imaginative, untrue letters at wider and wider
intervals. Naively she got a job which might mean her Big Break and
which actually never would. And at last she reached a point where she
would not look back, for wanting home so much; she would not look
forward, for knowing there was nothing there; she held herself in a
present of futility and purposive refusal to further the ambition she
insisted she had; and she had no pleasure and no outlet but anger. She
took refuge in her furies; she scorned people and what they did and what
they wanted, and told them all so. And she took the picture of Mom
standing in front of the house in the spring, with the jonquils all
about and the tulips coming, and she wrapped it up in the cotton print
Mom had made for her fourteenth birthday and never given her because
_Screen Society_ had said princess-style for teeners was corny.

_Did they throw you out, gal?_

Old Sam had asked her that; he knew, even when she didn’t. But now, in
this strange silver moment, she knew; she knew it all. Yes, they had
thrown her out. They had let her be a dead man’s dream until she was
nearly dead herself. They never let her be Mary Haunt who wanted to fix
the new curtains or bake a berry pie, and have a square hedge along the
Elm Street side and go to meeting on Sundays. They had marked her
destiny on her face and body and on the clothes she wore, and stamped it
into her speech and fixed her hair the way they wanted it, and to the
bottom of her heart she was angry.

And now, all of a sudden, and for the very first time, it occurred to
her that she could, if she wanted, be Mary Haunt her own self, and be it
right there at home; that home was the best place to be that very good
thing, and she could replace their disappointment with a very real
pride. She could be home before the Strawberry Festival at the church;
she would wear an apron and get suds on her forehead when she pushed her
hair back, the way Bitty did sometimes.

So Mary Haunt sat on a fire engine, next to the high-school librarian
who was enveloped in a tremendous raincoat, saying that everything was
burned up, lost; and about to say, “I’ve got to go home now.” But she
said, “I can go home now.” She looked into Miss Schmidt’s eyes and
smiled a smile the older woman had never seen before. “I can, I can! I
can go home now!” Mary Haunt sang. Impulsively she took Miss Schmidt’s
hand and squeezed it. She looked into her face and laughed, “I’m not mad
any more, not at you or anybody … and I’ve been a little stinker and I’m
sorry; I’m going _home!”_ And Miss Schmidt looked at the smudged face,
the scorched hair drawn back into a childish ponytail and held by a
rubber band, the spotless princess dress. “Why,” said Miss Schmidt,
“you’re beautiful, just beautiful!” “I’m not. I’m seventeen, only
seventeen,” Mary Haunt said out of a wild happiness, “and I’m going home
and bake a cake.” And she hugged her mother’s picture and smiled; even
the ruined house did not glow quite this way.

EXCERPT FROM FIELD EXPEDITION [NOTEBOOK]: [! ! !] Did it ever work!
[You]’d think these specimens had used Synapse Beta sub Sixteen all
their lives! If [we] had a [tenth] as much stamina [we] could [lie down]
in a [bed] of paradoxes and go to [sleep].

[We] will observe for a [short period] longer, and then pack up and
leave. This is a [fascinating] place to visit, but [I] wouldn’t want to
[live] here.


XVI

It was October, and possibly the last chance they’d have for a picnic,
and the day agreed and was beautiful for them. They found a fine spot
where a stand of birch grew on both sides of an old split-rail fence,
and a brook went by just out of sight. After they were finished O’Banion
lay on his stomach in the sun, and thoughtfully scratched his upper lip
with a bit of straw.

His wife laughed softly.

“Hm?”

“You’re thinking about the Bittelmans again.”

“How’d you know?”

“Just used to it. When you go off into yourself and look astonished and
mystified and annoyed all at once, it’s the Bittelmans again.”

“Harmless hobby,” said Halvorsen, and smiled.

“Is it, Phil? Tonio, how would you like me to go all pouty and coy and
complain that you’ve spent more time thinking about them than about me?”

“Do by all means go all pouty and coy. I’ll divorce you.”

“Tony!”

“Well,” he said lazily, “I had so much fun marrying you in the first
place that it might be worth doing again. Where’s Robin?”

“Right h— Oh, dear, _Robin!_”

Down in the cleft, where the brook gurgled, Robin’s voice answered
instantly. “Frogs here, Mommy. Deelicious!”

“Does he eat ’em raw?” asked Halvorsen mildly.

Sue laughed. “That just means ‘pretty’ or ‘desirable’ or even ‘bright
green.’ Robin, don’t you dare get wet, you promise me?”

“I promise me,” said the voice.

“And don’t go away!”

“I don’t.”

“Why don’t they show up?” demanded O’Banion. “Just once, that’s all I’d
ever want. Just show their faces and answer two questions.”

“Why don’t who—oh, Sam and Bitty. What two questions?”

“What they did to us, how and why.”

“That’s one question, counselor?” asked Halvorsen.

“Yes. Two: What they are.”

“Now, why’d you say ‘what’ instead of ‘who?”

“It comes to that.” He rolled over and sat up. “Honey, would you mind if
I ran down everything we’ve found out so far, just once more?”

“Summarize and rest your case?”

“I don’t know about resting it … reviewing the brief.”

“I often wonder why you call it a brief,” Halvorsen chuckled.

O’Banion rose and went to the fence. Putting one hand on a slender birch
trunk, he hopped upward, turning, to come to rest sitting on the top
rail. “Well, one thing I’m sure of: Sam and Bitty could _do_ things to
people, and they did it to all of us. And I refuse to believe that they
did it with logic and persuasion.”

“They could be pretty persuasive.”

“It was more than that,” O’Banion said impatiently. “What they did to me
changed everything about me.”

“How very intriguing.”

“Everything about the way I _think_, hussy. I can look back on that now
and realize that I was roped, thrown, and notched. When he wanted me to
answer questions I had to answer them, no matter what I was thinking.
When he was through with me he turned me loose and made me go back to my
business as if nothing had happened. Miss Schmidt told me the same
thing.” He shifted his weight on the rail and said excitedly, “Now
there’s our prize exhibit. All of us were—changed—by this thing, but
Reta—she’s a _really_ different person.”

“She wasn’t more changed than the others,” said Sue soberly. “She’s
thirty-eight years old. It’s an interesting age because when you’re
there and look five years older, and then spruce up the way she did and
look five years younger, it looked like twenty years’ difference, not
ten. That’s all cosmetics and clothes, though. The real difference is as
quiet and deep as—well, Phil here.”

Again Halvorsen found a smile. “Perhaps you’re right. She shifted from
library to teaching. It was a shift from surrounding herself with other
people’s knowledge to surrounding other people with hers. She’s alive.”

“I’ll say. Boyfriend too.”

“Quiet and deep,” said O’Banion thoughtfully, swinging his feet. “That’s
right. All you get out of Halvorsen when you ask him about it is a smile
like a light going on and, ‘Now it’s right for me to be me.’ ”

“That’s it—all of it,” chuckled Halvorsen happily.

“And Mary Haunt, bless her. Second happiest child I ever saw. _Robin!
Are you all right?_”

“Yis!” came the voice.

“I’m still not satisfied,” said O’Banion. “I have the feeling we’re
staring at very petty and incidental results of some very important
cause. In a moment of acute stress I made a decision which affected my
whole life.”

_“Our.”_

He blew her a kiss. “Reta Schmidt says the same thing, though she
wouldn’t go into detail. And maybe that’s what Halvorsen means when he
says, _‘Now_, it’s right for me …’ _You_ annoy me.”

“Sir!” she cried with mock horror.

He laughed. “You know what I mean. Only you got exposed to the
Bittelmans and didn’t change. Everybody else got wonderful,” he smiled,
“You just stayed wonderful. Now what’s so special about you?”

“Must we sit here and be—”

“Shush. Think back. Was there any _different_ kind of thing that
happened to you that night, some kind of emergency thinking you did that
was above and beyond anything you thought you could do?”

“Not that I remember.”

Suddenly he brought his fist down on his thigh. “There _was!_ Remember
right after we got out of the house, the wall fell on us? You dragged me
back and held me still and that attic vent dropped right around us?”

“That. Yes, I remember. But it wasn’t special. It just made sense.”

“_Sense?_ I’d like to put a computer on that job—after scorching it half
through and kicking it around a while. Somehow you calculated how fast
that thing was falling and how much ground it would cover when it hit.
You computed that against our speed outward. You located the attic vent
opening and figured where it would land, and whether or not it could
contain us both. Then you estimated our speed _if_ we went toward the
safe spot and concluded that we could make it. _Then_ you went into
action, more or less over my dead body to boot. All that in—” He closed
his eyes to relive the moment. “—all of one and a half seconds absolute
tops. It wasn’t _special?_”

“No, it wasn’t,” she said positively. “It was an emergency, don’t you
see? A real emergency, not only because we might get hurt, but in terms
of all we were to each other and all we could be if only you—”

“Well, I did,” he smiled. “But I still don’t understand you. You mean
you think more, not less—widen your scope instead of narrowing your
focus when it’s that kind of emergency? You can think of all those
things at once, better and faster and more accurately?”

Halvorsen suddenly lunged and caught O’Banion’s foot, pulling it sharply
upward. He shouted _“Yoop!”_ His right hand whipped up and back and
scrabbled at the tree-trunk; his torso twisted and his left hand shot
straight down. His legs flailed and straightened; for a moment he
see-sawed on the rail on his kidneys. At last he got his left hand on
the rail and pulled himself upward to sit again. “Hey! What do you think
you’re—”

“Proving a point,” said Halvorsen. “Look, Tony: without warning you were
thrown off balance. What did you do? You reached out for that tree-trunk
without looking—got it, too; you knew just how fast and how far to go.
But at the same time you put your left hand straight down, ready to
catch your weight if you went down to the ground. Meantime you banged
around with your legs and shifted your weight this way just enough to
make a new balance on top. Now tell me: did you sit there after I pushed
you and figure all those things out, one by one?”

“By golly no. Snop—snap—synapses.”

“What?”

“Synapses. Sort of pathways in the brain that get paved better and
better as you do something over and over. After a while they happen
without conscious thought. Keeping your balance is that kind of thing,
on the motor level. But don’t tell me you have a sort
of … personal-cultural inner ear-something that makes you reach
reflexively in terms of your past and your future and … but that’s what
happened to me that night!” He stared at Halvorsen. “You figured that
out long ago, you and your IBM head!”

“It always happens if the emergency’s a bad one,” Sue said composedly.
“Sometimes when you don’t even know it is an emergency. But what’s
remarkable? Aren’t drowning men supposed to see their whole lives pass
before them?”

“Did you say that always happens with your emergencies?”

“Well, doesn’t it?”

Suddenly he began to chuckle softly, and at her questioning look he
said, “You remind me of something a psychologist told me once. A man was
asked to describe his exact sensations on getting drunk. ‘Just like
anybody else,’ he says. ‘Well, describe it,’ says the doctor. The man
says, ‘Well, first your face gets a little flushed and your tongue gets
thick, and after a while your ears begin to wiggle—’ Sue, honey, I’ve
got news for you. Maybe you react like that in important moments, a
great big shiny flash of truth and proportional relationships, but
believe me, other people don’t. I never did until that night. _That’s
it!_” he yelled at the top of his voice.

From down the slope came a clear little voice, “Wash ’at noice?”

Sue and Halvorsen smiled at one another and then O’Banion said
earnestly, “That’s what Bitty and Sam gave us—a synaptic reflex like the
equilibrium mechanisms, but bigger—much bigger. A human being is an
element in a whole culture, and the culture itself is alive.… I suppose
the species could be called, as a whole, a living thing. And when we
found ourselves in a stress situation which was going to affect us
signally—dangerously, or just importantly—we reacted to it in the way I
did just now when you pushed me—only on a cultural level. It’s as if Sam
and Bitty had found a way to install or develop that ‘balancing’
mechanism in us. It resolved some deep personal conflict of Halvorsen’s;
it snapped Mary out of a dangerous delusion and Miss Schmidt out of a
dangerous retreat. And, well, you know about me.”

“I can’t believe people don’t think that way in emergencies!” she said,
dazed.

“Maybe some do,” said Halvorsen. “Come to think of it, people do some
remarkable things under sudden stress; they make not-obvious but very
right choices under pressure, like the man who cracks a joke and averts
a panic or the boy who throws himself on a grenade to save his squad.
They’ve surveyed themselves in terms of all they are and measured that
against their surroundings and all it is—all in a split fraction of a
second. I guess everyone has it. Some of it.”

“Whatever this synapse is, the Bittelmans gave it to us … yes, and maybe
set the house on fire too.… Why? Testing? Testing what—just us, or human
beings? _What are they?_” demanded the lawyer.

“Gone, that’s what,” said Halvorsen.

For a very brief time, he was wrong to say that.

EXCERPT FROM FIELD EXPEDITION [NOTEBOOK]: [Our] last [hour] here, so
[we] [induced] three of the test specimens to [locus B] for final
informal observation. [Smith] pretends to a certain [chagrin]. After
all, [he] [says] all [we] did was to come [sizable abstract number] of
[terrestrially immeasurable distance unit]s, forgoing absolutely the
company of [our] [] and the pleasures of the []; strain [our] ingenuity
and our [technical equipment] to the [break]ing point, even getting
trapped into using that [miserable impractical] power supply and
[charge]ing it up every [month]—all to detect and analyze the incidence
of Synapse Beta sub Sixteen. And here these specimens sit, locating and
defining the Synapse during a brief and idle conversation! Actually, [I]
[think] [Smith] is [pleased] with them for it. We shall now [dismantle]
the [widget] and the [wadget] and [take off].

Robin was watching a trout.

“Tsst! Tsst!”

He was watching more than the trout, really; he was watching its shadow.
It had occurred to him that perhaps the shadow wasn’t a shadow, but
another and fuzzier kind of fish which wouldn’t let the more clear-cut
one get away from over it, so maybe that was why the trout kept hanging
into the current, hanging and _zoom!_ darting forward. But he never was
fast enough for the fuzzy one, which stayed directly under him no matter
what.

“Tsst! Robin!”

He looked up, and the trout was forgotten. He filled his powerful young
lungs with air and his face with joy, and then made a heroic effort and
stifled his noisy delight in obedience to that familiar finger-on-lips
and its explosive _“Shh!”_

Barely able to contain himself, he splashed straight across the brook,
shoes and all, and threw himself into Bitty’s arms. “Ah Robin!” said the
woman, “wicked little boy. Are you a wicked little boy!”

“Yis. Bitty-bitty-BITTY!”

“Shh. Look who’s with me.” She put him down, and there stood old Sam.
“Hey-y-y-y, boy?”

“Ah Sam!” Robin clasped his hands together and got them between his
knees, bending almost double in delight. “Ware you _been_, Sam?”

“Around,” said Sam. “Listen, Robin, we came to say goodbye. We’re going
away now.”

“Don’t go ‘way.”

“We have to,” said Bitty. She knelt and hugged him. “Goodbye, darling.”

“Shake,” said Sam gravely.

“Shake, rattle an’ roll,” said Robin with equal sobriety.

“Ready, Sam?”

“All set.”

Swiftly they took off their bodies, folded them neatly and put them in
two small green plastic cases. On one was lettered [WIDGET] and on the
other [WADGET], but of course Robin was too young to read. Besides, he
had something else to astonish him. “Boff!” he cried. “Googie!”

Boff and Googie [waved] at him and he waved back. They picked up the
plastic cases and threw them into a sort of bubble that was somehow
there, and [walked] in after them. Then they [went].

Robin turned away and without once looking back, climbed the slope and
ran to Sue. He flung himself into her lap and uttered the long,
whistle-like wail that preceded his rare bouts with bitter tears.

“Why _darling_, whatever happened? What is it? Did you bump your—”

He raised a flushed and contorted face to her. “Boff gone,” he said
wetly. “Oh, oh-h-h, Boff an’ Googie gone.”

He cried most of the way home, and never mentioned Boff again.

INCIDENTAL [NOTES] ON FIELD REPORT: The discovery of total incidence and
random use of Synapse Beta sub Sixteen in a species is unique in the
known [cosmos]; yet introduction of the mass of data taken on the Field
Expedition into the [master] [computer] alters its original [dictum] not
at all: the presence of this Synapse in a species ensures its survival.

In the particular case at hand, the species undoubtedly bears, and will
always bear, the [curse] of interpersonal and inter-cultural frictions,
due to the amount of paradox possible. Where so many actions, decisions,
and organizational activities can occur uncontrolled by the Synapse and
its [universal-interrelational] modifying effect, paradox must result.
On the other [hand], any species with such a concentration of the
Synapse, even in partial use, will not destroy itself and very probably
cannot be destroyed by anything.

Prognosis positive.

Their young are delightful. [I] [feel good]. [Smith], [I] [forgive]
[you].

1. TRANSLATOR’S NOTE: Despite the acknowledged fact that the translator
is an expert on extraterrestrial language, culture, philosophy, and the
theory and design of xenological devices, the reader’s indulgence is
requested in this instance. To go into detail about these machines and
the nature and modes of communication of the beings that operate them
would be like writing the story of a young lover on the way to his
reward, springing up his beloved’s front steps, ringing the bell—and
then stopping to present explicit detail about circuitous wiring and
dry, dry cells. It is deemed more direct and more economical to use
loose and convenient translations and to indicate them by brackets, in
order to confine the narrative to the subject at hand. Besides, it
pleases the translator’s modesty to be so sparing with his
[omniscience].



THE BEHOLDERS


What I _meant_ was that no more than one person in one or two hundred is
worth a second thought, and that says it all. But why say it all in one
sentence with the whole evening to kill and good drinks and comfortable
surroundings? So I was saying to Bruno, “There is no such thing as a
population explosion. We don’t even have a population explosion. You
know how many real people there are in the world? Maybe one in two
hundred.” You can kick this kind of tin-can along for an hour or more.
And it really isn’t my fault if I have a voice like a boat-horn and if
at that moment Bruno had to go away and retread a couple of manhattans
at the other end.

I mean, it isn’t my _fault_.

Next thing I know this guy without glasses wants to touch my face.
Ranges up alongside and excuses himself and says can he _touch_ me! I
looked him up and back and he was rumpled and he was worried and he was
a little smaller than me, and his eyes were red and he would squinch
them up and suck in his chin and move his head back on his neck every
now and then which was why I thought he’d come out without his glasses.
But one thing I didn’t think he was, was queer. Then he called Bruno and
bought one, and when Bruno went away he said, “Well, can I?” And I took
up the full glass and said, “In this case, why not?” And he touched me.
Quickly, forehead and cheeks, with both hands. “Thank God,” he said.
“Oh, thank God.” And he drank his drink right down. “All right,” I told
him because I had nothing else to do and because this has been known to
keep an anxious guy buying for hours and hardly noticing it, “What’s
your problem?”

His name was Millbourne and he was a physical biochemist and he used up
two whole rounds of drinks telling me a lot of stuff that I don’t
remember and I wouldn’t understand if I did. He said he’d been making
some measurements with old-fashioned steel calipers and also with a
newfangled radar thing, only I think he said it worked with light
instead of radio waves. And the results didn’t match. I mean, here he
was measuring the human body with tried-and-true methods and also with a
new machine that had to be more accurate, and he was getting different
results. But every now and then he would measure somebody, or a stiff,
where the results matched up nice as you please. It was as if only one
body in every two, three hundred was really what it seemed to be. Then
he tried to explain about LSD and mescaline and that kind of hop, drugs
that make you see more than you thought you could. What it all shook
down to was, he had these three things on his mind, a pill, a set of
like eyeglasses, and this girl.

Let me see if I can get it sorted out for you. He said if the world and
everything in it was all the time getting larger and smaller, including
all the scales and rulers and everything you used to measure with, why,
you’d never know it. But maybe one day you find a ruler that stayed the
same. Maybe you’d find something to measure with this ruler that also
stayed the same. He said he got the idea that he himself was like a
ruler that changed when everything else changed, so he couldn’t measure
right, and what he did, he took small doses of one of these drugs
because, he said, it “expands the consciousness” —that is, it makes you
see more than you thought you could see. Well, he saw more than he had,
but not enough, so he made a contraption like eyeglasses to help them,
using the kind of light the new measuring instrument was using, and
that’s when he found out that there isn’t but one or two people in every
three hundred that’s real. I can’t help how kooky that sounds, that’s
what the man said. If he took the pill and then looked at people through
these like glasses, he could see which ones were real. And that isn’t
all. Without the glasses he could touch somebody and feel the
difference, no matter what he saw. Go ahead, laugh. Just notice I’m not
laughing.

All right, about the girl. This Millbourne worked at a big research
laboratory connected to a hospital, and in the clinic one day he saw
this girl bringing her mother in. The mother died right after and
Millbourne kind of helped the girl through the bad time afterward, and,
well, he got hung up on her. What I mean, if I tell you the Pacific is
quite a little puddle, if I say Hood and Washington are fair-sized
hills, it’s the same kind of talk. Millbourne was _really_ hung up. This
girl—well, wait a bit.

So here’s a guy who thinks he’s discovered that only a fraction of the
population is real, and the others—I asked him about the others, and he
began to shake so much I all but ordered a drink for him, but he quieted
down some and asked me if I’d help him. I said help him do what?

He wanted me to look at his girl. Just to be sure, he wanted me to touch
her. Imagine, touch her: he wanted me to put my hands on his girl.

Well I said sure. But then he told me I had to take this pill and also
learn how to run the eyeglasses thing. I didn’t much like that,
especially the pill bit, but he was very persuasive, and about three
more drinks along I was convinced. After all, all he wanted was for me
to do something he couldn’t bring himself to do, because he was so hung
up on this girl: look at her through the gimmick to find out if she was
real like him and me. I said throw away the pills and forget it, you
couldn’t tell otherwise, right? But no; he had to know for sure, but he
just couldn’t bring himself to do it. So okay, and we went to his place
and he gave me the pills, three or four of them, and a paper telling me
how to get in touch with him, and he checked me out on the eyeglasses
gizmo. You had to have a battery pack and there were some controls to
match up, and things look sort of hazy through them, but he said it
worked all right. Then he said where to find the girl.

The next day I went there, a greeting-card shop it was, without my
equipment, you understand, just to have a look and sort of figure the
approach. And you know …

You know, she, she— I am going to embarrass myself with you. I am no,
well, poet is what I mean, but let me spit this out quick because it’s
in the way. You know there are girls that seem like they are sunlit, no
matter what time or day or night you see them; like the sun is shining
on them. I’ve seen a few like that in my life, two or three. But only
once did I see a moonlit girl, and here she was, coming out of the card
shop at quitting time. I didn’t say anything, I let her go by, I would
see her again when I had a chance to think, and I wasn’t going to think
about much else. The whole crazy story Millbourne told me turned into
something different when I saw that girl come out of the shop. A guy is
hot for some particular chick, well and good, it’s maybe a matter of
taste, maybe his and mine, maybe his and not mine, but … this—

I did what I had to do. I mean, things like this are nobody’s _fault_,
is what I mean. I practiced around with the eyeglasses and made some
experiments, and finally one night I called Millbourne and made him meet
me at the bar. He came in and I handed him a color photograph. He looked
at it and quick at me; oh I hope to God I never see a man look at me
like that again. I said to him why didn’t he think of this? You hang one
lens of the eyeglass gizmo over a Polaroid camera like a portrait
attachment. The camera sees what it sees and takes no pills. He looked
again at the picture and I thought I was going to have to hold him up.
He closed his eyes for a long time and then he put the picture face up
on the bar and we both looked at. What it showed was more or less human
shaped, but nothing was … nothing was finished. It was a base to put
things on—here’s where the hair will go, an eye goes here, here the
mouth, and so on, but nobody had put anything on it.

Millbourne said, “Beauty is in the eye of the beholder.” I didn’t dig
that. He said, “You and I, and a few others, we invent what we see, we
put it there. We have eyes and hands and minds to do this work, I don’t
know why, and they all lie to us. Thank you,” he says, standing up very
straight, and he walks out the door and dives under the double duals of
a semi-trailer; I saw him do it, I saw those big wide wheels spread him.
I never had the chance to tell him that the picture was of Bruno the
bartender. I never had the chance, really, to make up my mind whether
I’d tell him or not.

So anyway, I was the one told her Millbourne was dead, and I pulled her
through that just the way he helped her after her mother died—funny,
isn’t it? And now we’re pretty close, and there’s only one thing on my
mind.… I have these pills, see, and the gizmo. And my camera, and I
should throw them away, shouldn’t I?

But I—but I—

Look, will you do something for me? I mean, seeing that you’re for
real.…



IT’S YOU!


“It’s you!”

It wasn’t the hair that made him cry out like that, though God knows
California’s enough to turn anyone into a hair freak these days; well
she was enough by herself with that silken waterfall of coppery-canary
to freak you, and it wasn’t that or the crinkle-cornered arch on arch of
the eye and brow or the perfect teeth, not by themselves. It wasn’t even
the absolute confidence with which she wore the see-through shirt
through which he saw the absolute confidence of her breasts, or even
that she was exactly tall enough and round enough. More than anything
else, it was that she was real.

Everybody does this thing, although some cats know it more than others:
you see chicks, you see pix, you add and subtract and over the years
things settle in—just so big, just so dark, just so—just exactly so
until it’s all finished. Then that finished thing, that her, settles
down inside you and every time you see someone, or in a magazine, or at
the show, you set it up against her. It could be great, you could get
excited, you could dream a lot about any of the others, but somehow they
never, never check out with the her you’ve made.

So when he saw her he yelled it out. It came out of him and he hadn’t
known he was going to say it, it hit him that hard. Maybe that’s how you
know—it bursts out of you without a thought.

He’d just parked the Monster and was half in, half out when he saw her.
She was hitchhiking with a girl friend—they do that a lot in California.
He was never able to remember much about that girlfriend, Susie or
Dottie or something. Maybe he never saw her, much. There was this truck
parked off the road with berries and corn-on-the-cob and tomatoes and
stuff, and he liked corn and that was why he stopped. He walked over to
the two girls and pointed at the Monster and said, “I’ll be right with
you.” They smiled at him and looked him over, and at each other,
checking him out, and then said Thanks and went over to the car.
Something developed fists inside his chest and began hitting him from
inside so hard he blinked with each beat. He went over to the truck and
bought corn, a couple of ears. He lived by himself.

But before he picked it up he went back to the Monster.

They’d got themselves somehow into the one bucket seat. He asked her,
“Do you like corn?” She said she did. He went back and got a couple more
and some tomatoes and a canteloupe, and then he saw the stocks, long
clusters of white and purple flowers with a heavy scent that nobody’s
ever put in a bottle yet. He bought one white bunch and one purple and
mixed them together right there into one big bunch, and he had never
done anything like that in his life before.

They went first to the girlfriend’s house. Without remembering the
girlfriend much, he long remembered the thick waves of disapproval she
set up when she got out and the other one, her, didn’t. It made him
laugh when he pulled away from the curb and they were alone together,
and he met her eyes and she was laughing too.

She lived in Altadena, which was a hell of a haul away from where he
lived, but he didn’t mind. Oh, he didn’t mind. She lived in a little
two-room guest house the other side of a swimming pool; the people in
the big house hardly ever used it. It had its own little driveway. It
was nice. She said she would cook the corn for him. She did, with some
lamb chops she had in the freezer, and they ate the canteloupe with
vanilla ice cream on it and a pinch of dry instant coffee sprinkled on
it. She could cook. You could tell. There were more than forty herbs and
spices in the kitchen. She made up a name for him, Knightly. She said he
looked like a knight in shining armor. He never did call her by her
name, except sometimes Hon.

It was one of those hot smoggy California evenings and the pool looked
good, but he didn’t have a suit. She laughed at him and said who needs
it? When she peeled off the see-through top he saw it wasn’t a
see-through at all, no more than a stained-glass window is a see-through
when you want to look at the sun. There can’t be a more perfect body
than that one, not anywhere, not only for the perfection of each part,
but for the absolute rightness of a breast like that with a shoulder
like that, and a waist that turned just so together with such slender
ankles. Also, all her hair was that same yellowy-coppery color and there
wasn’t a flaw on her skin anywhere.

They fell into the pool and laughed a lot, and you are not going to
believe this easily but it’s true: there was something about the way she
did it all, something about the way she was, that made him not touch her
then. They dried off on some of a mountain of thick clean towels she had
and got dressed again and he never made the first pass. Maybe it was
because passes often get made because a guy just has to find out where
it’s at, and in this case he knew where it was at. They both knew. It
happened later, much later, about two in the morning, after which (it
was pretty wonderful) she said softly “Knightly-night” and fell asleep
in his arms. He didn’t go home until Saturday.

On the way back to his place he stopped at a Rents and hired a 6-by-10
trailer. They had a hell of a job rigging a hitch for it on the Monster
without bashing those beautiful chrome pipes, and it took a half hour to
figure a way to get the big right-hand rearview mounted, and when he
took off he was one hell of a sight. It was like a racehorse hitched to
a manure spreader and people all over stopped in their tracks to watch
him go by, and he was sure that one sideswipe on the freeway was caused
by some yokel rubbernecking him. At his place he loaded on everything he
owned, which wasn’t really too much. He was paid till the end of the
month but screw it. He took it all out to the guest house in Altadena.

She was supposed to clear out the second room for him but when he got
there she had rearranged the whole house so that there was a real living
room and a real bedroom instead of the overlap she’d had before. There
was plenty of room in the closet for his clothes—more than he needed—but
she’d fixed up everything else so perfectly that there was really no
place to put anything of his, and anyway, who needed it? It was an Our
House.

He was on Emergency then, which had always suited him fine. He was one
of those lucky people who went to sleep bang whenever he felt tired, and
could wake up—all the way up—in twenty minutes or two hours or ten,
whatever was handy, and any part of the twenty-four was all right with
him. She was a day people, however, and midnight was late to her always,
and 8 A.M. was late too. She liked to be up before seven. He adjusted to
that pretty well, and also learned not to talk when she was going
through the complicated secret ritual of getting to sleep. Some people
are like that. They have to do whatever it is they do to get to sleep,
everything in the right order and skipping none of it, and if you
interrupt, they have to go back to the beginning and start over. She
wouldn’t sleep late, not ever, so when he’d kept her up late she looked
drawn and kind of sad all the next day and evening. He also found out
she would go to sleep almost instantly after sex, when it was good, and
it was almost always good. But the whole sleep thing was hard to handle
while he was on Emergency and would get calls at two and three in the
morning and get out and not know when he’d be back. She was sweet about
it—she was sweet about everything—but after awhile he put in for the day
shift. It meant a little less money, but what the hell.

He quit going to Mother’s, which believe it or not is a chain of pool
halls in the L.A. area. Nobody said he couldn’t, but pool or snooker
just wasn’t her thing, and when he played with her sitting patiently
smiling in the front of the place and waiting for him to get done, it
wasn’t the same. She was nice as could be to Scruffy and Ralph and Rod
and the rest, and even the Blinker, even though she didn’t dig him.
Well, you had to know the Blinker. And the way she did it was great,
warm and lively with all of them but there was never any doubt as to
whose girl she was and meant to be. But … it wasn’t the same, and pretty
soon he went less and less and didn’t see the herd at Mother’s any more.
Likewise the hangarounds at Butch’s Aircooled, except when something on
the Monster needed fixing, which wasn’t often. Once when he went down
for new connectors on his tach he found himself taking an hour instead
of ten minutes to put them in, and driving away he felt a single wild
strong tug inside him that he just couldn’t understand. Well they were
just a bunch of greasy cats who couldn’t talk or think anything but
chops and cams and pots and mags and slicks, but.…

In the first couple of days she gave him a medallion on a chain around
his neck, a funny little twist of silver with a flat piece of fire opal
on it, and he wore it night and day. For a long time he wore it swinging
outside and was glad to say “My chick,” when someone asked about it.

His subscriptions to _Car and Driver_ and _Road and Track_ got screwed
up somehow and six weeks went by and he didn’t even miss them. You have
to know him to know what that really meant. He was very content. He’d
tell her that every once in a while just to see her light up. He told
himself that too. He bought the magazines at the newsstand and when the
next issues came out she threw away the old ones. He was a little shook,
and although he didn’t say anything, he kept the magazines at work after
that.

One morning the alarm went off and he rolled out and fumbled for his
clothes and they felt different. Instead of the black tight cords and
the Western shirt with the rawhide on the pockets, there were a pair of
black jeans, real tailored, with slightly bell bottoms and a dark dull
kind of paisley print shirt with a scarf and ring attached to it. They
were really cool and he liked them but he said hell, he couldn’t go to
work in them, he’d look like a peacock. She lay in the bed watching him
with a say-you-like-them, pent-up joy on her face. She’d made them
herself secretly whenever she could snatch the time when he wasn’t
around, and kept hiding the pieces before he came back until they were
all done. So he said what she wanted to hear and he did wear them to
work that once, although he wore the medallion inside his shirt instead
of outside. Sure enough the crew gave him a rough time about it and when
he came home he said he’d save the bells and the paisley for parties,
they were too good to risk at work. And he got to the trash before they
collected it and found his black cords and Western shirt and put them
away in the garage in a box with the rest of his stuff still out there.
He never knew why and nobody asked him but he wore the medallion inside
his shirt after that.

She made him three more pairs of pants and two more shirts, and they
were really great, but for parties. They’d go to parties, people she’d
known a long time. They were okay parties. He never liked drinking much
but he’d drink a little sometimes and like it a little, and he could
take pot or leave it alone. Only sometimes after a party where he had
laughed a lot, he would leave with a strange feeling that he had just
crossed a desert. It could be full of people but there just wasn’t
anybody to talk to. One time he parked outside one of the parties and
there in the dark under a tree was a silver Excalibur. He always said an
Excalibur was a piece of candy, but secretly he thought it was a whole
big heap of wheels, and if anybody ever offered to swap him for the
Monster he’d keep the Monster, but he sure would think it over a lot. So
when they got inside he made it his business to find out who was driving
it, and he had his mouth all set to sit down and really talk, but it
turned out to belong to some rich chick whose daddy had given it to her
for her eighteenth birthday and she didn’t know an axle from an ax
handle. That one time he really felt cheated and mad, and it was the
first time he felt dead sure he couldn’t explain it and drove home too
fast without talking and scared her a bit, and wouldn’t talk after they
got home either.

Also she cut his hair. She could do that. She could do anything she
tried, and she did it well. It looked great. It was a lot different but
it really did look fine.

One night after some sex, and it really was the most, and she slipped
off to sleep in the way she had, he lay thinking about things and
remembered something about rollbars and anti-sways he had read
somewhere, but couldn’t pin it down. He got up carefully and went out to
the Monster and got the flashlight and went into the garage and got out
the boxes with the back issues in them, and squatted there looking them
over for so long his feet went numb and the batteries quit. He sat there
in the dark banging his heels against the concrete to wake them up and
you know something? he felt wonderful. He put away the magazines in the
boxes and then put away the boxes and limped back into the house and to
bed. He didn’t think she knew.

He bought heavy-duty batteries first thing next day, and about a week
later it happened again just the same way. He didn’t figure out what was
happening—he was not the figuring-out kind, maybe. But the third or
fourth time it happened he was kneeling in the middle of the concrete
floor with a drag pictorial on steam turbines down at the bottom of his
tunnel of light when he heard something. He switched off his flash and
the color print of a bright red three-wheel squirt, with the driver in
prone position, faded from his eyes to be replaced by her shadowy naked
figure in the doorway.

He said, “Well, I didn’t want you to wake up.”

She said the only bitter thing she had ever said to him. She pointed at
his crotch and said, “You use that as a kind of sleeping pill for me,
don’t you?” Then she went back inside.

He stayed to pack away the magazines and then followed.

She seemed to be asleep so he got in quietly and did not touch her. They
did not talk about it in the morning.

That night they went to another party, and no less than three cats told
him at different times how great his threads were. Well, she had good
taste, she knew what looked good. The party was beautiful people and two
guitars and a side table full of things made of rice and a lot of
different kinds of cheese and wine—a desert. When they got home she went
to bed and he went into the bathroom to get rid of the desert inside and
out, and a terrible thing happened to him. He looked into the mirror and
did not know who that was in there.

I mean it was a great haircut and the guru-style collar on the
cotton-satin shirt-jacket was so well-cut it did not look freaky, and
then there were the deep-buffed reversed-calf boots, like suede so nappy
it was almost fur. But none of it was him, nothing he remembered,
nothing he ever thought about when he thought Me. A terrible thing.

He took off all the clothes and hung them up and put them and the shoes
away. Then he took off the medallion and put it on the TV and went to
bed and right to sleep.

She was up ahead of him as usual and breakfast was ready.

He went out into the garage naked and found his black cords and the
Western shirt with the rawhide on the pockets, and his old lineman’s
boots, and put them all on. He came in and ate. While he was eating she
told him she had done everything in the world to make him happy. He
agreed that she had and said it had all been great.

It was Saturday and he hopped in the Monster and went down to the Rents.
He felt very strange, holding something inside of himself locked down
tight, knowing it was no good to let it all out because he couldn’t
explain it to anybody if he did. They remembered him all right and got
the 6-by-10 hitched on and the mirror mounted in half the time. He drove
back to the house and up the driveway to the garage and loaded all his
stuff into the trailer. It didn’t take too long.

She came out and watched him finish. “Come inside.”

He just shook his head and vaulted into the bucket. She came over and
stood beside the Monster, holding her hands together real tight.
“Knightly, Knightly, what is it? Tell me what’s the matter.”

He could only stare blindly at the tachometer. The only thing that came
to him seemed so crazy he could not bring himself to say it: I want my
real name back. He said, “I’m no good at explaining things, Hon.”

But she was. She knelt by the Monster so he could look down into those
double-arched eyes in that frame of coppery-yellow, and she said how she
had been thinking and thinking, and she realized how wrong she had been.
She began a whole list of promises. She said, “I’ll try to learn about
cars and go with you to the dragstrips and the shops. I’ll pick it up
quickly, and then I’ll pay more attention to the way you want to look
and not the way I want you to look. And I never realized it but I
shouldn’t’ve made you quit the Emergency and live the way I live.” And
more, like about she never had found out what he used to eat before he
met her, she just cooked what she thought he ought to like without
asking. She would change, she would change. Any way he wanted her to,
she would change.

He almost had a thought worth saying, something about what happened to
people when they had to change, but he couldn’t get it into shape. Maybe
later she could figure it out for herself. He started the motor and
shifted into low and checked the mirrors on both sides, and then
throttled way back so she could hear him. He said, as he began slipping
the clutch, “It ain’t any of those things, Hon.

“It’s you.”



SLOW SCULPTURE


She didn’t know who he was when she met him; well, not many people did.
He was in the high orchard doing something under a pear tree. The land
smelled of late summer and wind: bronze, it smelled bronze. He looked up
at a compact girl in her mid-twenties, with a fearless face and eyes the
same color as her hair, which was extraordinary because her hair was
red-gold. She looked down at a leather-skinned man in his forties with a
gold-leaf electroscope in his hand, and felt she was an intruder. She
said, “Oh,” in what was apparently the right way, because he nodded once
and said, “Hold this,” and there could then be no thought of intrusion.
She knelt down by him and took the instrument, holding it just where he
positioned her hand, and then he moved a little away and struck a
tuning-fork against his kneecap. “What’s it doing?” He had a good voice,
the kind of voice strangers notice and listen to.

She looked at the delicate leaves of gold in the glass shield of the
electroscope. “They’re moving apart.”

He struck the tuning fork again and the leaves pressed away from one
another. “Much?”

“About forty-five degrees when you hit the fork.”

“Good—that’s about the most we’ll get.” From a pocket of his bush jacket
he drew a sack of chalk-dust and dropped a small handful on the ground.
“I’ll move now. You stay right there and tell me how much the leaves
separate.”

He traveled around the pear tree in a zigzag course, striking his tuning
fork while she called out numbers—ten degrees, thirty, five, twenty,
nothing. Whenever the gold foil pressed apart to maximum, forty degrees
or more, he dropped more chalk. When he was finished the tree was
surrounded, in a rough oval, by the white dots of chalk. He took out a
notebook and diagrammed them and the tree, and put away the book, and
took the electroscope out of her hands. “Were you looking for
something?” he asked her.

“No,” she said. “Yes.”

He could smile. Though it did not last long, she found it very
surprising in a face like that. “That’s not what is called, in a court
of law, a responsive answer.”

She glanced across the hillside, metallic in that late light. There
wasn’t much on it—rocks, weeds the summer was done with, a tree or so,
and then the orchard. Anyone present had come a long way to get here.
“It wasn’t a simple question,” she said, tried to smile, and burst into
tears.

She was sorry and said so.

“Why?” he asked. This was the first time she was to experience this
ask-the-next-question thing of his. It was unsettling. It always would
be—never less, sometimes a great deal more. “Well—one doesn’t have
emotional explosions in public.”

“You do. I don’t know this ‘one’ you’re talking about.”

“I—guess I don’t either, now that you mention it.”

“Tell the truth then. No sense in going round and round about it, ‘he’ll
think that I—’ and the like. I’ll think what I think, whatever you say.
Or—go on down the mountain and just don’t say any more.” She did not
turn to go, so he added, “Try the truth, then. If it’s important, it’s
simple, and if it’s simple it’s easy to say.”

“I’m going to die!” she cried.

“So am I.”

“I have a lump in my breast.”

“Come up to the house and I’ll fix it.”

Without another word he turned away and started through the orchard.
Startled half out of her wits, indignant and full of insane hope,
experiencing, even, a quick curl of astonished laughter, she stood for a
moment watching him go, and then found herself (at what point did I
decide?) running after him.

She caught up with him on the uphill margin of the orchard. “Are you a
doctor?”

He appeared not to notice that she had waited, had run. “No,” he said,
and, walking on, appeared not to see her stand again pulling at her
lower lip, then run again to catch up.

“I must be out of my mind,” she said, joining him on a garden path. She
said it to herself, which he must have known because he did not answer.
The garden was alive with defiant chrysanthemums and a pond in which she
saw the flicker of a pair of redcap imperials—silver, not gold
fish—which were the largest she had ever seen. Then—the house.

First it was part of the garden, with its colonnaded terrace, and then,
with its rock walls (too big to be called fieldstone) part of the
mountain. It was on and in the hillside, and its roofs paralleled the
skylines, front and sides, and part of it was backed against an
out-jutting cliff face. The door, beamed and studded and with two
archers’ slits, was opened for them (but there was no one there) and
when it closed it was silent, a far more solid exclusion of things
outside than any click or clang of latch or bolt. She stood with her
back against it watching him cross what seemed to be the central well of
the house, or at least this part of it. It was a kind of small court in
the center of which was an atrium, glazed on all of its five sides and
open to the sky at the top. In it was a tree, a cypress or juniper,
gnarled and twisted and with the turned-back, paralleled, sculptured
appearance of what the Japanese call bonsai.

“Aren’t you coming?” he called, holding open a door behind the atrium.

“Bonsai just aren’t fifteen feet tall,” she said.

“This one is.”

She came by it slowly, looking. “How long have you had it?”

His tone of voice said he was immensely pleased. It is a clumsiness to
ask the owner of a bonsai how old it is; you are then demanding to know
if it is his work or if he has acquired and continued the concept of
another; you are tempting him to claim for his own the concept and the
meticulous labor of someone else, and it becomes rude to tell a man he
is being tested. Hence “How long have you had it?” is polite,
forebearing, profoundly courteous. He answered, “Half my life.” She
looked at the tree. Trees can be found, sometimes, not quite discarded,
not quite forgotten, potted in rusty gallon cans in not quite successful
nurseries, unsold because they are shaped oddly or have dead branches
here and there, or because they have grown too slowly in whole or part.
These are the ones which develop interesting trunks and a resistance to
misfortune that makes them flourish if given the least excuse for
living. This one was far older than half this man’s life, or all of it.
Looking at it, she was terrified by the unbidden thought that a fire, a
family of squirrels, some subterranean worm or termite could end this
beauty—something working outside any concept of rightness or justice
or … or respect. She looked at the tree. She looked at the man.

“Coming?”

“Yes,” she said and went with him into his laboratory. “Sit down over
there and relax,” he told her. “This might take a little while.”

“Over there” was a big leather chair by the bookcase. The books were
right across the spectrum—reference works in medicine and engineering,
nuclear physics, chemistry, biology, psychiatry. Also tennis,
gymnastics, chess, the oriental war game Go, and golf. And then drama,
the techniques of fiction, _Modern English Usage, The American Language_
and supplement, Wood’s and Walker’s rhyming dictionaries and an array of
other dictionaries and encyclopedias. A whole long shelf of biographies.
“You have quite a library.”

He answered her rather shortly: clearly he did not want to talk just
now, for he was very busy. He said only, “Yes I have—perhaps you’ll see
it some time,” which left her to pick away at his words to find out what
on earth he meant by them. He could only have meant, she decided, that
the books beside her chair were what he kept handy for his work—that his
real library was elsewhere. She looked at him with a certain awe.

And she watched him. She liked the way he moved—swiftly, decisively.
Clearly he knew what he was doing. He used some equipment that she
recognized—a glass still, titration equipment, a centrifuge. There were
two refrigerators, one of which was not a refrigerator at all, for she
could see the large indicator on the door: it stood at 70°F. It came to
her that a modern refrigerator is perfectly adaptable to the demand for
controlled environment, even a warm one.

But all that, and the equipment she did not recognize, was only
furniture. It was the man who was worth watching, the man who kept her
occupied so that not once in all the long time she sat there was she
tempted toward the bookshelves.

At last he finished a long sequence at the bench, threw some switches,
picked up a tall stool and came over to her. He perched on the stool,
hung his heels on the cross-spoke, and lay a pair of long brown hands
over his knees. “Scared?”

“I s’pose I am.”

“You don’t have to stay.”

“Considering the alternative,” she began bravely, but the courage-sound
somehow oozed out, “it can’t matter much.”

“Very sound,” he said, almost cheerfully. “I remember when I was a kid
there was a fire scare in the apartment house where we lived. It was a
wild scramble to get out, and my ten-year-old brother found himself
outside in the street with an alarm clock in his hand. It was an old one
and it didn’t work—but of all the things in the place he might have
snatched up at a time like that, it turned out to be the clock. He’s
never been able to figure out why.”

“Have you?”

“Not why he picked that particular thing, no. But I think I know why he
did something obviously irrational. You see, panic is a very special
state. Like fear and flight, or fury and attack, it’s a pretty primitive
reaction to extreme danger. It’s one of the expressions of the will to
survive. What makes it so special is that it’s irrational. Now, why
would the abandonment of reason be a survival mechanism?”

She thought about this seriously. There was that about this man which
made serious thought imperative. “I can’t imagine,” she said finally.
“Unless it’s because, in some situations, reason just doesn’t work.”

“You can imagine,” he said, again radiating that huge approval, making
her glow. “And you just did. If you are in danger and you try reason,
and reason doesn’t work, you abandon it. You can’t say it’s
unintelligent to abandon what doesn’t work, right? So then you are in
panic; then you start to perform random acts. Most of them—far and away
most will be useless; some might even be dangerous, but that doesn’t
matter—you’re in danger already. Where the survival factor comes in is
that away down deep you know that one chance in a million is better than
no chance at all. So—here you sit—you’re scared and you could run;
something says you should run; but you won’t.”

She nodded.

He went on: “You found a lump. You went to a doctor and he made some
tests and gave you the bad news. Maybe you went to another doctor and he
confirmed it. You then did some research and found out what was to
happen next—the exploratory, the radical, the questionable recovery, the
whole long agonizing procedure of being what they call a terminal case.
You then flipped out. Did some things you hope I won’t ask you about.
Took a trip somewhere, anywhere, wound up in my orchard for no reason.”
He spread the good hands and let them go back to their kind of sleep.
“Panic. The reason for little boys in their pajamas standing at midnight
with a broken alarm clock in their arms, and for the existence of
quacks.” Something chimed over on the bench and he gave her a quick
smile and went back to work, saying over his shoulder: “I’m not a quack,
by the way. To qualify as a quack you have to claim to be a doctor. I
don’t.”

She watched him switch off, switch on, stir, measure and calculate. A
little orchestra of equipment chorused and soloed around him as he
conducted, whirring, hissing, clicking, flickering. She wanted to laugh,
to cry, and to scream. She did no one of these things for fear of not
stopping, ever.

When he came over again, the conflict was not raging within her, but
exerting steady and opposed tensions; the result was a terrible stasis,
and all she could do when she saw the instrument in his hand was to
widen her eyes. She quite forgot to breathe.

“Yes, it’s a needle,” he said, his tone almost bantering. “A long shiny
sharp needle. Don’t tell me you are one of those needle-shy people.” He
flipped the long power-cord which trailed from the black housing around
the hypodermic, to get some slack, and straddled the stool. “Want
something to steady your nerves?”

She was afraid to speak; the membrane containing her sane self was very
thin, stretched very tight.

He said, “I’d rather you didn’t, because this pharmaceutical stew is
complex enough as it is. But if you need it.…”

She managed to shake her head a little, and again she felt the wave of
approval from him. There were a thousand questions she wanted to ask—had
meant to ask—needed to ask: What was in the needle? How many treatments
must she have? What would they be like? How long must she stay, and
where? And most of all— Oh, could she live, could she live?

He seemed concerned with the answer to only one of these.

“It’s mostly built around an isotope of potassium. If I told you all I
know about it and how I came on it in the first place, it would
take—well, more time than we’ve got. But here’s the general idea:
Theoretically, every atom is electrically balanced (never mind ordinary
exceptions). Likewise all electrical charges in the molecule are
supposed to be balanced—so much plus, so much minus, total zero. I
happened on the fact that the balance of charges in a wild cell is not
zero—not quite. It’s as if there was a submicroscopic thunderstorm going
on at the molecular level, with little lightning bolts flashing back and
forth and changing the signs. Interfering with communications—static—and
that,” he said, gesturing with the shielded hypo in his hand, “is what
this is all about. When something interferes with
communications—especially the RNA mechanism, which says, Read this
blueprint and build accordingly, and stop when it’s done—when that
message gets garbled, lopsided things get built, off-balance things,
things which do almost what they should, do it almost right: they’re
wild cells, and the messages they pass on are even worse.

“Okay: Whether these thunderstorms are caused by viruses or chemicals or
radiation or physical trauma or even anxiety—and don’t think anxiety
can’t do it—that’s secondary. The important thing is to fix it so the
thunderstorm can’t happen. If you can do that, the cells have plenty of
ability all by themselves to repair and replace what’s gone wrong. And
biological systems aren’t like ping-pong balls with static charges
waiting for the charge to leak away or to discharge into a grounded
wire. They have a kind of resilience—I call it forgiveness—which enables
them to take on a little more charge, or a little less, and do all
right. Well then: Say a certain clump of cells is wild and say it
carries an aggregate of a hundred units extra on the positive side.
Cells immediately around it are affected, but not the next layer or the
next.

“If they could be opened to the extra charge, if they could help to
drain it off, they would, well, cure the wild cells of the surplus, you
see what I mean? And they would be able to handle that little overage
themselves, or pass it on to other cells and still others who could deal
with it. In other words, if I can flood your body with some medium which
can drain off and distribute a concentration of this unbalanced charge,
the ordinary bodily processes will be free to move in and clear up the
wild-cell damage. And that’s what I have here.”

He held the shielded needle between his knees and from a side pocket of
his lab coat he took a plastic box, opened it and drew out an alcohol
swab. Still cheerfully talking, he took her terror-numbed arm and
scrubbed at the inside of her elbow. “I am not for one second implying
that nuclear charges in the atom are the same thing as static
electricity. They’re in a different league altogether. But the analogy
holds. I could use another analogy. I could liken the charge on the wild
cells to accumulations of fat, and this gunk of mine to a detergent,
which would break it up and spread it so far it couldn’t be detected any
more. But I’m led to the static analogy by an odd side effect—organisms
injected with this stuff do build up one hell of a static charge. It’s a
by-product, and for reasons I can only theorize about at the moment, it
seems to be keyed to the audio spectrum. Tuning forks and the like.
That’s what I was playing with when I met you. That tree is drenched
with this stuff. It used to have a whorl of wild-cell growth. It hasn’t
any more.” He gave her the quick surprising smile and let it click away
as he held the needle point upward and squirted it. With his other hand
wrapped around her left biceps, he squeezed gently and firmly. The
needle was lowered and placed and slid into the big vein so deftly that
she gasped—not because it hurt, but because it did not. Attentively he
watched the bit of glass barrel protruding from a black housing as he
withdrew the plunger a fraction and saw the puff of red into the
colorless fluid inside, and then he bore steadily on the plunger again.

“Please don’t move.… I’m sorry; this will take a little time. I have to
get quite a lot of this into you. Which is fine, you know,” he said,
resuming the tone of his previous remarks about audio spectra, “because
side effect or no, it’s consistent. Healthy biosystems develop a strong
electrostatic field, unhealthy ones a weak one or none at all. With an
instrument as primitive and simple as that little electroscope you can
tell if any part of the organism has a community of wild cells, and if
so, where it is and how big and how wild.” Deftly he shifted his grip on
the encased hypodermic without moving the point or varying the amount of
plunger pressure.

It was beginning to be uncomfortable, an ache turning into a bruise.
“And if you’re wondering why this mosquito has a housing on it with a
wire attached (although I’ll bet you’re not and that you know as well as
I do that I’m doing all this talking just to keep your mind occupied!)
I’ll tell you. It’s nothing but a coil carrying a high-frequency
alternating current. The alternating field sees to it that the fluid is
magnetically and electrostatically neutral right from the start.” He
withdrew the needle suddenly and smoothly, bent her arm, and trapped in
the inside of her elbow a cotton swab.

“Nobody ever told me that before or after a treatment,” she said.

“What?”

“No charge,” she said.

Again that wave of approval, this time with words: “I like your style.
How do you feel?”

She cast about for accurate phrases. “Like the owner of a large sleeping
hysteria begging someone not to wake it up.”

He laughed. “In a little while you are going to feel so weird you won’t
have time for hysteria.” He got up and returned the needle to the bench,
looping up the cable as he went. He turned off the AC field and returned
with a large glass bowl and a square of plywood. He inverted the bowl on
the floor near her and placed the wood on its broad base.

“I remember something like that,” she said. “When I was in—in junior
high school. They were generating artificial lightning with a … let me
see … well, it had a long endless belt running over pulleys and some
little wires scraping on it and a big copper ball on top.”

“Van de Graaf generator.”

“Right! And they did all sorts of things with it, but what I specially
remember is standing on a piece of wood on a bowl like that and they
charged me up with the generator, and I didn’t feel much of anything
except all my hair stood out from my head. Everyone laughed. I looked
like a golliwog. They said I was carrying forty thousand volts.”

“Good! I’m glad you remember that. This’ll be a little different,
though. By roughly another forty thousand.”

“Oh!”

“Don’t worry. Long as you’re insulated, and as long as grounded, or
comparatively grounded objects—me, for example—stay well away from you,
there won’t be any fireworks.”

“Are you going to use a generator like that?”

“Not like that, and I already did. You’re the generator.”

“I’m—oh!” She had raised her hand from the upholstered chair arm and
there was a crackle of sparks and the faint smell of ozone.

“Oh you sure are, and more than I thought, and quicker. Get up!”

She started up slowly; she finished the maneuver with speed. As her body
separated from the chair she was, for a fractional second, seated in a
tangle of spitting blue-white threads. They, or she, propelled her a
yard and a half away, standing. Literally shocked half out of her wits,
she almost fell.

“Stay on your feet!” he snapped, and she recovered, gasping. He stepped
back a pace. “Get up on the board. Quick, now!”

She did as she was told, leaving, for the two paces she traveled, two
brief footprints of fire. She teetered on the board. Visibly, her hair
began to stir. “What’s happening to me?” she cried.

“You’re getting charged after all,” he said jovially, but at this point
she failed to appreciate the extension of even her own witticism. She
cried again, “What’s happening to me?”

“It’s all right,” he said consolingly. He went to the bench and turned
on a tone generator. It moaned deep in the one to three hundred cycle
range. He increased the volume and turned the pitch control. It howled
upward and as it did so her red-gold hair shivered and swept up and out,
each hair attempting frantically to get away from all the others. He ran
the tone up above ten thousand cycles and all the way back to a
belly-bumping inaudible eleven; at the extremes her hair slumped, but at
around eleven hundred it stood out in (as she had described it) golliwog
style.

He turned down the gain to a more or less bearable level and picked up
the electroscope. He came toward her, smiling. “You are an electroscope,
you know that? And a living Van de Graaf generator as well. And a
golliwog.”

“Let me down,” was all she could say.

“Not yet. Please hang tight. The differential between you and everything
else here is so high that if you got near any of it you’d discharge into
it. It wouldn’t harm you—it isn’t current electricity—but you might get
a burn and a nervous shock out of it.” He held out the electroscope;
even at that distance, and in her distress, she could see the gold
leaves writhe apart. He circled her, watching the leaves attentively,
moving the instrument forward and back and from side to side. Once he
went to the tone generator and turned it down some more. “You’re sending
such a strong field I can’t pick up the variations,” he explained, and
returned to her, closer now.

“I can’t, much more … I can’t,” she murmured; he did not hear, or he did
not care. He moved the electroscope near her abdomen, up and from side
to side.

“Yup. There you are!” he said cheerfully, moving the instrument close to
her right breast.

“What?” she whimpered.

“Your cancer. Right breast, low, around toward the armpit.” He whistled.
“A mean one, too. Malignant as hell.”

She swayed and then collapsed forward and down. A sick blackness swept
down on her, receded explosively in a glare of agonizing blue-white, and
then crashed down on her like a mountain falling.

Place where wall meets ceiling. Another wall, another ceiling. Hadn’t
seen it before. Didn’t matter. Don’t care.

Sleep.

Place where wall meets ceiling. Something in the way. His face, close,
drawn, tired; eyes awake though and penetrating. Doesn’t matter. Don’t
care.

Sleep.

Place where wall meets ceiling. Down a bit, late sunlight.

Over a little, rusty-gold chrysanthemums in a goldgreen glass
cornucopia. Something in the way again: his face.

“Can you hear me?”

Yes, but don’t answer. Don’t move. Don’t speak.

Sleep.

It’s a room, a wall, a table, a man pacing; a nighttime window and mums
you’d think were alive, but don’t you know they’re cut right off and
dying?

Do they know that?

“How are you?” Urgent, urgent.

“Thirsty.”

Cold and a bite to it that aches the hinges of the jaws. Grapefruit
juice. Lying back on his arm while he holds the glass in the other hand,
oh no, that’s not … “Thank you. Thanks very—” Try to sit up, the
sheet—my clothes!

“Sorry about that,” he said, the mindreader-almost. “Some things that
have to be done just aren’t consistent with panty-hose and a minidress.
All washed and dried and ready for you, though—any time. Over there.”

The brown wool and the panty-hose and the shoes, on the chair. He’s
respectful, standing back, putting the glass next to an insulated carafe
on the night-table.

“What things?”

“Throwing up. Bedpans,” he said candidly.

Protective with the sheet, which can hide bodies but oh not
embarrassment. “Oh I’m sorry.… Oh I must’ve—” Shake head and he slides
back and forth in the vision.

“You went into shock, and then you just didn’t come out of it.” He
hesitated. It was the first time she had ever seen him hesitate over
anything. She became for a moment an almost-mind-reader: Should I tell
her what’s in my mind? Sure he should, and he did: “You didn’t want to
come out of it.”

“It’s all gone out of my head.”

“The pear tree, the electroscope. The injection, the electrostatic
response.”

“No,” she said, not knowing, then, knowing: “No!”

“Hang on!” he rapped, and next thing she knew he was by the bed, over
her, his two hands hard on her cheeks. “Don’t slip off again. You can
handle it. You can handle it because it’s all right now, do you
understand that? You’re all right!”

“You told me I had cancer.” It sounded pouty, accusing. He laughed at
her, actually laughed.

“You told me you had it.”

“Oh, but I didn’t know.”

“That explains it, then,” he said in a load-off-my-back tone. “There
wasn’t anything in what I did that could cause a three-day withdrawal
like that; it had to be something in you.”

“Three days!”

He simply nodded in response to that and went on with what he was
saying. “I get a little pompous once in a while,” he said engagingly.
“Comes from being right so much of the time. Took a bit more for granted
than I should have, didn’t I? when I assumed you’d been to a doctor,
maybe even had a biopsy. You didn’t, did you?”

“I was afraid,” she admitted. She looked at him. “My mother died of it,
and my aunt, and my sister had a radical mastectomy. I couldn’t bear it.
And when you—”

“When I told you what you already knew, and what you never wanted to
hear, you couldn’t take it. You blacked right out, you know. Fainted
away, and it had nothing to do with the seventy-odd thousand volts of
static you were carrying. I caught you.” He put out his arms and
instinctively she shrank back, but he held the arms where they were, on
display, until she looked at them and saw the angry red scorch marks on
his forearms and the heavy biceps, as much of them as she could see from
under his short-sleeved shirt. “About nine-tenths knocked me out too,”
he said, “but at least you didn’t crack your head or anything.”

“Thank you,” she said reflexively, and then began to cry. “What am I
going to do?”

“Do? Go back home, wherever that is—pick up your life again, whatever
that might mean.”

“But you said—”

“When are you going to get it into your head that what I did was not a
diagnostic?”

“Are you—did you—you mean you cured it?”

“I mean you’re curing it right now. I explained it all to you before—you
remember that now, don’t you?”

“Not altogether, but—yes.” Surreptitiously (but not enough, because he
saw her) she felt under the sheet for the lump. “It’s still there.”

“If I bopped you over the head with a bat,” he said with slightly
exaggerated simplicity, “there would be a lump on it. It would be there
tomorrow and the next day. The day after that it might be smaller, and
in a week you’d still be able to feel it, but it would be gone. Same
thing here.”

At last she let the enormity of it touch her. “A one-shot cure for
cancer.…”

“Oh God,” he said harshly, “I can tell by looking at you that I am going
to have to listen to that speech again. Well, I won’t.”

Startled, she said, “What speech?”

“The one about my duty to humanity. It comes in two phases and many
textures. Phase one has to do with my duty to humanity and really means
we could make a classic buck with it. Phase two deals solely with my
duty to humanity, and I don’t hear that one very often. Phase two
utterly overlooks the reluctance humanity has to accept good things
unless they arrive from accepted and respectable sources. Phase one is
fully aware of this but gets very rat-shrewd in figuring ways around
it.”

She said, “I don’t—” but could get no farther.

“The textures,” he overrode her, “are accompanied by the light of
revelation, with or without religion and/or mysticism; or they are cast
sternly in the ethical-philosophy mold and aim to force me to surrender
through guilt mixed, to some degree all the way up to total, with
compassion.”

“But I only—”

“You,” he said, aiming a long index finger at her, “have robbed yourself
of the choicest example of everything I have just said. If my
assumptions had been right and you had gone to your friendly local
sawbones, and he had diagnosed cancer and referred you to a specialist,
and he had done likewise and sent you to a colleague for consultation,
and in random panic you had fallen into my hands and been cured, and had
gone back to your various doctors to report a miracle, do you know what
you’d have gotten from them? ‘Spontaneous remission,’ that’s what you’d
have gotten. And it wouldn’t be only doctors,” he went on with a sudden
renewal of passion, under which she quailed in her bed. “Everybody has
his own commercial. Your nutritionist would have nodded over his wheat
germ or his macrobiotic rice cakes, your priest would have dropped to
his knees and looked at the sky, your geneticist would have a pet theory
about generation skipping and would assure you that your grandparents
probably had spontaneous remissions too and never knew it.”

“Please!” she cried, but he shouted at her: “Do you know what I am? I am
an engineer twice over, mechanical and electrical, and I have a law
degree. If you were foolish enough to tell anyone about what has
happened here (which I hope you aren’t, but if you are I know how to
protect myself) I could be jailed for practicing medicine without a
license, you could have me up for assault because I stuck a needle into
you and even for kidnapping if you could prove I carried you in here
from the lab. Nobody would give a damn that I had cured your cancer. You
don’t know who I am, do you?”

“No, I don’t even know your name.”

“And I won’t tell you. I don’t know your name, either—”

“Oh! It’s—”

“Don’t tell me! Don’t tell me! I don’t want to hear it! I wanted to be
involved with your lump and I was. I want it and you to be gone as soon
as you’re both up to it. Have I made myself absolutely clear?”

“Just let me get dressed,” she said tightly, “and I’ll leave right now!”

“Without making a speech?”

“Without making a speech.” And in a flash her anger turned to misery and
she added, “I was going to say I was grateful. Would that have been all
right?”

And his anger underwent a change too, for he came close to the bed and
sat down on his heel, bringing their faces to a level, and said quite
gently, “That would be fine. Although … you won’t really be grateful for
another ten days, when you get your ‘spontaneous remission’ reports, or
maybe for six months or a year or two or five, when examinations keep on
testing out negative.”

She detected such a wealth of sadness behind this that she found herself
reaching for the hand with which he steadied himself against the edge of
the bed. He did not recoil, but he didn’t seem to welcome it either.
“Why can’t I be grateful right now?”

“That would be an act of faith,” he said bitterly, “and that just
doesn’t happen any more—if it ever did.” He rose and went toward the
door. “Please don’t go tonight,” he said. “It’s dark and you don’t know
the way. I’ll see you in the morning.”

When he came back in the morning the door was open. The bed was made and
the sheets were folded neatly on the chair, together with the pillow
slips and the towels she had used. She wasn’t there.

He came out into the entrance court and contemplated his bonsai.

Early sun gold-frosted the horizontal upper foliage of the old tree and
brought its gnarled limbs into sharp relief, tough brown-gray and
crevices of velvet. Only the companion of a bonsai (there are owners of
bonsai, but they are a lesser breed) fully understands the relationship.
There is an exclusive and individual treeness to the tree because it is
a living thing, and living things change, and there are definite ways in
which the tree desires to change. A man sees the tree and in his mind
makes certain extensions and extrapolations of what he sees, and sets
about making them happen. The tree in turn will do only what a tree can
do, will resist to the death any attempt to do what it cannot do, or to
do it in less time than it needs. The shaping of a bonsai is therefore
always a compromise and always a cooperation. A man cannot create
bonsai, nor can a tree; it takes both, and they must understand each
other. It takes a long time to do that. One memorizes one’s bonsai,
every twig, the angle of every crevice and needle, and, lying awake at
night or in a pause a thousand miles away, one recalls this or that line
or mass, one makes one’s plans. With wire and water and light, with
tilting and with the planting of water-robbing weeds or heavy
root-shading ground cover, one explains to the tree what one wants, and
if the explanation is well-enough made, and there is great enough
understanding, the tree will respond and obey—almost. Always there will
be its own self-respecting, highly individual variation: Very well, I
shall do what you want, but I will do it my way. And for these
variations, the tree is always willing to present a clear and logical
explanation, and more often than not (almost smiling) it will make clear
to the man that he could have avoided it if his understanding had been
better.

It is the slowest sculpture in the world, and there is, at times, doubt
as to which is being sculpted, man or tree.

So he stood for perhaps ten minutes watching the flow of gold over the
upper branches, and then went to a carved wooden chest, opened it, shook
out a length of disreputable cotton duck, opened the hinged glass at one
side of the atrium, and spread the canvas over the roots and all the
earth to one side of the trunk, leaving the rest open to wind and water.
Perhaps in a while—a month or two—a certain shoot in the topmost branch
would take the hint, and the uneven flow of moisture up through the
cambium layer would nudge it away from that upward reach and persuade it
to continue the horizontal passage. And perhaps not, and it would need
the harsher language of binding and wire. But then it might have
something to say, too, about the rightness of an upward trend, and would
perhaps say it persuasively enough to convince the man; altogether, a
patient, meaningful, and rewarding dialogue.

“Good morning.”

“Oh goddam!” he barked, “you made me bite my tongue. I thought you’d
gone.”

“I did.” She knelt in the shadows with her back against the inner wall,
facing the atrium. “But then I stopped to be with the tree for a while.”

“Then what?”

“I thought a lot.”

“What about?”

“You.”

“Did you now!”

“Look,” she said firmly, “I’m not going to any doctor to get this thing
checked out. I didn’t want to leave until I had told you that, and until
I was sure you believed me.”

“Come on in and we’ll get something to eat.”

Foolishly, she giggled. “I can’t. My feet are asleep.”

Without hesitation he scooped her up in his arms and carried her around
the atrium. She said, her arm around his shoulders and their faces
close, “Do you believe me?”

He continued around until they reached the wooden chest, then stopped
and looked into her eyes. “I believe you. I don’t know why you decided
that, but I’m willing to believe you.” He set her down on the chest and
stood back.

“It’s that act of faith you mentioned,” she said gravely. “I thought you
ought to have it, at least once in your life, so you can never say such
a thing again.” She tapped her heels gingerly against the slate floor.
“Ow.” She made a pained smile. “Pins and needles.”

“You must have been thinking for a long time.”

“Yes. Want more?”

“Sure.”

“You are an angry, frightened man.”

He seemed delighted. “Tell me about all that!”

“No,” she said quietly, “you tell me. I’m very serious about this. Why
are you angry?”

“I’m not!”

“Why are you so angry?”

“I tell you I’m not! Although,” he added good-naturedly, “you’re pushing
me in that direction.”

“Well then, why?”

He gazed at her for what, to her, seemed a very long time indeed. “You
really want to know, don’t you?”

She nodded.

He waved a sudden hand, up and out. “Where do you suppose all this came
from—the house, the land, the equipment?”

She waited.

“An exhaust system,” he said, with a thickening of the voice she was
coming to know. “A way of guiding exhaust gases out of
internal-combustion engines in such a way that they are given a spin.
Unburned solids are embedded in the walls of the muffler in a glass-wool
liner that slips out in one piece and can be replaced by a clean one
every couple of thousand miles. The rest of the exhaust is fired by its
own spark plug and what will burn, burns. The heat is used to preheat
the fuel; the rest is spun again through a five-thousand-mile cartridge.
What finally gets out is, by today’s standards at least, pretty clean;
and because of the preheating, it actually gets better mileage out of
the engine.”

“So you’ve made a lot of money.”

“I made a lot of money,” he echoed. “But not because the thing is being
used to cut down air pollution. I got the money because an automobile
company bought it and buried it in a lock-box. They don’t like it
because it costs something to install in new cars. Some friends of
theirs in the refining business don’t like it because it gets high
performance out of crude fuels. Well all right—I didn’t know any better
and I won’t make the same mistake again. But yes—I’m angry. I was angry
when I was a kid on a tankship and we were set to washing down bulkhead
with chipped brown soap and canvas, and I went ashore and bought a
detergent and tried it and it was better, faster and cheaper so I took
it to the bos’n, who gave me a punch in the mouth for pretending to know
his job better than he did.… Well, he was drunk at the time, but the
rough part was when the old shellbacks in the crew got wind of it and
ganged up on me for being what they called a ‘company man’—that’s a
dirty name in a ship. I just couldn’t understand why people got in the
way of something better.

“I’ve been up against that all my life. I have something in my head that
just won’t quit: it’s a way I have of asking the next question: Why is
so-and-so the way it is? Why can’t it be such-and-such instead? There is
always another question to be asked about any thing or any situation;
especially you shouldn’t quit when you like an answer because there’s
always another one after it. And we live in a world where people just
don’t want to ask the next question!

“I’ve been paid all my stomach will take for things people won’t use,
and if I’m mad all the time it’s really my fault—I admit it; because I
just can’t stop asking that next question and coming up with answers.
There’s a half-dozen real blockbusters in that lab that nobody will ever
see, and half a hundred more in my head; but what can you do in a world
where people would rather kill each other in a desert even when they’re
shown it can turn green and bloom, where they’ll fall all over
themselves to pour billions into developing a new oil strike when it’s
been proved over and over again that the fossil fuels will kill us all?

“Yes, I’m angry. Shouldn’t I be?”

She let the echoes of his voice swirl around the court and out through
the hole in the top of the atrium, and waited a little longer to let him
know he was here with her and not beside himself and his fury. He
grinned at her sheepishly when he came to this, and she said:

“Maybe you’re asking the next question instead of asking the right
question. I think people who live by wise old sayings are trying not to
think, but I know one worth paying some attention to. It’s this: If you
ask a question the right way, you’ve just given the answer.” She paused
to see if he was paying real attention. He was. She went on, “I mean, if
you put your hand on a hot stove you might ask yourself, how can I stop
my hand from burning? And the answer is pretty clear, isn’t it? If the
world keeps rejecting what you have to give, there’s some way of asking
why that contains the answer.”

“It’s a simple answer,” he said shortly. “People are stupid.”

“That isn’t the answer and you know it,” she said.

“What is?”

“Oh, I can’t tell you that! All I know is that the way you do something,
when people are concerned, is more important than what you do, if you
want results. I mean … You already know how to get what you want with
the tree, don’t you?”

“I’ll be damned.”

“People are living growing things too. I don’t know a hundredth part of
what you do about bonsai, but I do know this: when you start one, it
isn’t often the strong straight healthy ones you take. It’s the twisted
sick ones that can be made the most beautiful. When you get to shaping
humanity, you might remember that.”

“Of all the— I don’t know whether to laugh in your face or punch you
right in the mouth!”

She rose. He hadn’t realized she was quite this tall. “I’d better go.”

“Come on now. You know a figure of speech when you hear one.”

“Oh, I didn’t feel threatened. But—I’d better go, all the same.”
Shrewdly, he asked her, “Are you afraid to ask the next question?”

“Terrified.”

“Ask it anyway.”

“No!”

“Then I’ll do it for you. You said I was angry—and afraid. You want to
know what I’m afraid of.”

“Yes.”

“You. I am scared to death of you.”

“Are you really?”

“You have a way of provoking honesty,” he said with some difficulty.
“I’ll say what I know you’re thinking: I’m afraid of any close human
relationship. I’m afraid of something I can’t take apart with a
screwdriver or a mass spectroscope or a table of cosines and tangents.”
His voice was jocular but his hands were shaking.

“You do it by watering one side,” she said softly, “or by turning it
just so in the sun. You handle it as if it were a living thing, like a
species or a woman or a bonsai. It will be what you want it to be if you
let it be itself and take the time and the care.”

“I think,” he said, “that you are making me some kind of offer. Why?”

“Sitting there most of the night,” she said, “I had a crazy kind of
image. Do you think two sick twisted trees ever made bonsai out of one
another?”

“What’s your name?” he asked her.



THE GIRL WHO KNEW WHAT THEY MEANT


I came out of the motel office feeling—well, feeling whatever it is you
feel when you’ve just gotten a phone call from somebody saying “You’ve
got a week, Sam,” and who will call once more: “You’ve got one more day,
Sam,” and then you’re dead. I guess the only thing in the world that
could have shifted my mind away from it even for a second would be a
girl.

This one did, only for a second or maybe three. It was the dog first, I
guess. Afghan. Always did like Afghans. Have a friend back East who
knows this, once sent me a whole book on Afghans—history, care and
feeding, show points, pictures of past champions. This one was a
honey-colored bitch all long bones and silk, and that’s about all I took
in just then because of the girl. She had the dog on a plaited leash.
She was dressed in baggy old Levis and an oversized man’s white shirt
with the tails out, which is a way Miss Universe could dress in a men’s
prison and not be noticed. But the sun was on her face and hair and her
hair was just the color and even more silky than the Afghan’s. Also her
eyes were very wide apart and matched her hair and the dog and the
sunlight, and she wasn’t wearing a brassiere, which isn’t easy to notice
under such circumstances but I can. I have a glandular condition that
makes me notice those things.

The whole thing stopped me in my tracks and I met her eyes, and I said
(now you’ve got to believe me—of all the things in the whole wide world
I might have said, I had to come out with this one) I said: “It’s a
beautiful day.”

And she said, “Why, thank you.” And smiled.

Then my two or three seconds were up and reality came crashing all
around me with one more week, and one more phone call and bang you’re
dead, and I went back to my room to sweat it out.

But you can’t stay feeling any particular way permanently, leastways not
at the peak (like scared at that type of phone call) except maybe mad,
and in a few hours the fear had gone back to the sprained-ankle kind of
dull throb. It’s not filling the world any more, and it’s with you every
step of the way, but at least you can think of other things too.

And what I got to thinking of was this girl, and it wasn’t only the way
she looked. I got to playing back that conversation in my head. “It’s a
beautiful day.”

“Why, thank you.”

Now is that what they call in TV courtroom scenes “a responsive answer”?

Not if you look at the words. If you look at the words they don’t make
any sense at all. But you don’t look at the words. You look at why I
wanted to make contact, and what made me say what I said, of all stupid
things, and how she answered that instead of the words. She knew just
exactly what I meant.

I had a rush of brains to the head and got to rummaging around in the
back of the closet where I’d thrown magazines and old Sunday papers, and
there it was, the book. I got it out and banged the dust off it and went
down to the office of the motel. It was a real cheap motel, twenty-one
rooms and only one telephone which was fine on both counts. You can hide
a lot if you live in a place like that. I found Mrs. Walker who came out
of her apartment looking worried. She was the manager and how she looked
didn’t mean anything, she just had one of those worried faces.

I said, “Where’s the chick with the dog?”

She said, “Now, Sam.”

Is that responsive? I said, “Come on.”

She said, “Number Five, but she’s a nice girl, Sam.” I guess if you look
exactly at the words people use, it can get pretty weird. I mean they
don’t say what they’re saying much at all, do they?

I crossed the court to Number 5 and rapped. After a bit the door opened
a little bit. The white shirt was buttoned with three buttons only and
she went to work on the fourth one as soon as her hand was off the
doorknob.

“Here’s a book you want to borrow from me.”

“Book?” She looked at it as I held it up, and smiled. I didn’t try to
tell you what that smile was like the first time. I won’t try about the
second time either. She knew that book. “Oh, I always wanted a copy, but
it’s too expensive.”

“Well you can take your time with it. Soon as I saw your dog I knew
you’d want to have a look at it so I dug it out.”

“I really appreciate it.” That smile.

“It’s all right.” I backed off a step and made the OK sign with my free
hand. “See you around.” I started to walk off and heard the door close
softly behind me. You don’t push at first. Later you push.

Then I turned around and knocked again. She opened and I said, “You
forgot to take the book.”

She didn’t laugh. “You forgot to give it to me.” Then she opened the
door all the way and made Come In with her hand.

I went in and put the book down on the dresser. It was a room like all
the other rooms in the place—small, a double bed, plastic curtains with
dust on them, walls with smog on them, suitcase-sized refrigerator with
two electric burners bolted into the top and you could wash your dishes
in the bathroom sink. For four bucks a night or ninety a month with
linens and utilities, who cares? She had a piece of green glass, the
kind they break out of a mold, big as my two fists, standing on the
night table and some books, not the kind I ever read, and of course the
dog. I scratched the dog in that hollow place under and behind the ear
and she liked it.

I sat down on the one puffy grimy chair and she sat on the bed with one
ankle under her. We talked about her working at the veterinarian’s two
blocks away and she couldn’t get any place to live cheap enough with a
dog. Animals. California, especially Southern California, LA is not like
any other city in the world with a feeling to it, like a San Francisco
feeling, a Chicago feeling, New York, New Orleans, they all have a
special thing you would know in fifteen seconds with your eyes closed,
but there is no such thing as a Los Angeles feeling. When you get to
know it well you find there is a Pasadena kind of feeling that is not
the same as Beverly Hills, and Encino sort of tastes different from
Pacoima or Glendale, but there is no such thing as a real city-wide city
flavor in LA. And I have a theory that no matter how long people live in
LA they have no roots. They mostly come from other places and they had
no roots there either, they cut them before they came or they just never
had any, so it’s like the whole place is adrift. And she said, “What’s
the matter?”

I said, “Nothing.” I’d been laughing a lot too.

She made coffee and I heard about the guy she was going to get married
to only he got drafted and meningitis in boot camp and died, and how her
folks made it so hard on her because they lived together before he went
away and since then somehow her folks blamed her. “Not that they ever
said that, but whatever they said, that’s what they meant.” Then we had
dinner, she cooked it, she didn’t have anything but eggs so we ate
those, and somehow it was ten o’clock and we were talking about snapping
turtles, how if you stand on them it doesn’t hurt them but they pull in
their necks and you can drill a hole in the edge of their shell to put a
chain on and they never feel it, if you want to keep one for a pet, and
all of a sudden she held out her arms and that was it.

She had the most beautiful body I have ever seen. She did not wear
brassieres for three reasons. One was they made her feel bound up and
she did not want to feel bound up in any way. The other two reasons, one
was on the right and one on the left, big and firm and perfect and
holding themselves up and out without help from anything. She didn’t
like to wear clothes at all, that was where it was at. I have seen that
before, but always chicks who went for see-through clothes and low-cut
this-and-thats, peepshow for everybody. With her it was a private
personal thing. Once she said “When you’re naked you can lie to another
naked person but it’s not easy.” She was a tremendous lay and she did
not know or use any tricks. She just was.

Well for three days she was at work or we were together every waking or
sleeping minute. One night she woke me up and the whole room was like
echoing. She said I was cussing in my sleep, shouting. She was afraid.
She asked me what was the matter and I told her nothing. I tried to go
to sleep again and she held me and I think I cried.

So I told her about Millikein, he had it figured I was responsible for
what happened to his brother, he had his mind made up I had to die too.
Millikein had more money than God, but I don’t think that would have
made any difference; he was a man who made his mind up and that was it.
He made up his mind I was going to die on his kid brother’s birthday and
he told me a whole year ahead. I ran a lot and hid a lot but he always
found me and called me up or wrote me a letter as soon as I stopped, or
I would meet him on the street. He even bought a beer bar, called Bash
West, up the street. He always talked real nice to me, and I could go
see him any time I wanted to; the only thing was, I was going to get
killed four days from now. If it was a blackmail thing or something
about money that I could pay off, well fine, but it wasn’t. And what I
told her was there wasn’t any use going to the cops because who would
listen to a story like that? I just didn’t mention that if I got the
cops smelling into my business with Millikein’s brother, it could get
even worse.

Well the next afternoon I was laying on my bed which I had swung around
so I could see across the court toward Number 5, so I would know when
she got home from work, and I saw this chick, and even with what was
going down between me and the girl with the Afghan, the first look at
what walked in to that motel court brought me bolt upright. I mean the
skirt up to here and a see-through blouse with just a couple little
pockets here and here, and the hair fixed just so, wow, and long legs
and a front end the like of which I swear I had seen only once in my
life, and that was in Number 5.

Well sure it was in Number 5. It wasn’t till the chick took out her key
that I realized it was the same girl. Just because she didn’t like to
wear clothes didn’t mean she didn’t have them or didn’t know how to wear
them.

I was over there so fast I don’t know yet whether I went out my door or
through it. She was in the bathroom in mesh panty-hose washing makeup
off her face. Makeup. Her.

I said “Where have you been?” and she said with Millikein.

She said she had to see him, she had to find out if it was all true.

I said she thought I was a liar and she gave me a look so—I think tired
is the word, such a long tired look I felt something wring inside. She
said it wasn’t that, she said she had to talk to him to see if he meant
it. She said when people talked to her she knew what they meant. By this
time I was willing to buy that, I’d seen it happen with her often
enough. So I asked her what he said.

She dried her face and shook out her hair and came into the room. She
took off the panty-hose and threw them in the corner. I never saw her do
anything like that before. She fell down on the bed and told me he spoke
real nice about me. He said he was just trying to throw a scare into me
in case. He said he didn’t have proof of nothing. He said really he
thought I was a nice young guy, just irresponsible sometimes and not
bad. He said to her not to say anything to me, really because of what
had happened I ought to have a good scare thrown into me, don’t spoil it
because it was doing me a lot of good in the long run.

I kind of blew my top at her because she nosed into it and I called her
some things that hurt, I guess, that whole long body twitched when I
yelled them at her. And I said she’d have to pay off for mixing into it
because now Millikein would have to get rid of her too, what would he
figure if he wanted to wipe me out and here was a chick knew all about
it? And I said even if he was changing his mind, she had made him change
it right back again, running off at the mouth like that.

When I ran out of breath she rolled over and sat up and pushed the hair
back from her face. I think I will always remember her like that no
matter what else happens. So Goddam beautiful, not only a naked chick,
that’s great, but she had a way of being naked like it was clothes, if
you see what I mean, good ones, she wore it well like something made for
her and cut so well she could forget about it, knowing it was perfect.
Oh damn words anyway, that’s what this whole thing is about, damn words
anyway.

So I came down off it and sat next to her and told her it was a hell of
a way to take good news like that, I felt the first hope I had for a
whole year or more, and I know she did it for me. So we went to bed.

The next day she didn’t come home from work at all.

I waited for more than an hour and suddenly got filled up with the worst
wild panic I ever had in my life. I ran up the street toward Bash West
and from more than a block away I could see the blinking red lights and
the people. Three police cars and two hogs and an ambulance. By the time
I got there they were putting her in the wagon, I just got a flash of
who it was, then the doors closed and it went howling off. They said
somebody attacked a girl and she killed him defending herself. There was
another meat wagon came then, and what they put in it had the blanket
over its face.

Who can remember all that happened next the way it happened? Running and
yelling, a whole lot of stuff about money, why should you need money at
a time like that? Yelling at Mrs. Walker the manager to give me twenty
so I could get a cab to the hospital, somehow, not that it makes any
difference, knowing that when she gave in it was for me not for the girl
in five, she wasn’t a nice girl anymore because of me but me, I was
still all right, what sense does that make? And then the cab that never
came and when it came, standing still or running backwards all the way
into Receiving Hospital, oh, forever, and then after all that running
and yelling, waiting and waiting and waiting, looking at magazines I
couldn’t see, drinking coffee I couldn’t taste out of the machine in the
corridor.

Then the doctor, they must have raided a TV show for him, graying
temples, tired eyes, stethoscope around his neck:

Now she wants to see you very badly, only a few minutes, can’t say which
way it will go, really it all depends on her, she can pull through if
she wants to.

And the corner of the IC Unit, that’s Intensive Care in case you didn’t
know, all kinds of machines standing around, three nurses running
between the beds, a burned kid, an old lady with both legs raised in the
air with pulleys and breathing like a power hacksaw, and in the corner,
there she was. The nurses put a screen around the bed and said Call me
if, and Only a few minutes, and like that.

I thought she might be knocked out, but no, she was just waiting with
her eyes closed. Eye. The other one was under the bandages that covered
her whole head and half her face. Otherwise she was covered with a
sheet.

She said to me, “Are you all right?” That’s what she said. I said, “I’m
fine.”

“He’s dead.” She closed her eye.

“That’s what they tell me.”

“Well then, you’re all right now.”

“Why did you do it?”

“He was going to kill you.”

“That’s not what you said.”

“That’s not what he said either.” She could still smile a little. It
wasn’t the same, with the one eye. “But it’s what he meant.” Then she
said for me to lift the sheet.

I didn’t want to, but she said to. I did and said “Oh my God,” and began
to cry. She told me not to.

I said, “Listen, I don’t care what it looks like, I am going to take
care of you.”

She said, “There’s a whole piece cut right out of one of them. And I’m
not going to get that eye back.”

I said, “Oh, my God.”

She looked at me for a long time with that one eye. It had that tired
look. After a while she said, not mad or anything, “All my life I’ve
known what people meant, no matter what they said, and I never met one
yet that said what he meant. I don’t think anyone knows how.”

“That’s crazy,” I said. I told her I loved her. I told her I would
always love her no matter what.

She looked at me for another long time, and then she said, “If I don’t
make it, will you take care of my dog? She’s so beautiful, and she needs
someone who will really take care of her.”

I said of course she was going to make it.

“But in case,” she said.

“I swear it.”

She closed the eye. The nurse shoved the drape aside and looked in and
told me to go.

She didn’t make it, for some reason. Couple of days later I sold the dog
and got out of town. I mean, LA really has no character.



THE PATTERNS OF DORNE


The dart was a miracle of miniaturized precision. A tiny sliver of a
thing, it contained a laser generator, a proximity device, and a
destruct mechanism so efficient that it would, on the instant, separate
all its parts down to the molecular level. It would deliver to its
target that one brief blast of intolerable heat, from close and lethal
range, and would then cease to exist. A dissection of the murdered man
would reveal the almost microscopic puncture burn—but then the exit
wound would be almost identical and everything between them cooked into
a sort of soup. There would be no marks on anything behind or around the
victim; even the bright glare of almost-solar heat would be concealed
within the victim’s body, and as he fell, he must turn one way or the
other; who could reconstruct the trajectory?

The little gun designed to throw the dart was equally a miracle—so small
that it was dwarfed by the telescope mounted at its top. The propellant
was a series of cryptocryogenic solenoid rings, silent and lightless,
wound with tens of thousands of turns of all but invisible,
superconductive wire. In the ’scope was a complete light-amplification
system, with automatic range-coupling with the focus. Anything found at
the intersection of the radiant crosshairs and brought into focus was
going to be killed. And all of it, gun and missiles, was made of
materials well below the allowable error of the finest detection
devices, and demountable into small unnoticeable parts which could be,
which had been, distributed in and around the neatly fitted uniform of a
Senior Lieutenant in the Leader’s Guard. The Leader was Dorne, and in
the bright image in the ’scope was the open balcony door of Dorne’s
suite, and all that was lacking to complete the picture, to complete
this careful plan, was the appearance in it of Dorne’s famous face.

The stone room in which the Lieutenant leaned yearning into his ’scope
was more suited, perhaps, to the fifteenth century than to the
twenty-first, with its ironbound oaken door and its single arrow-slit
window. It was tomb-dark except for the tiny spot of light in the
eyepiece, and empty except for half a lifetime’s worth of hate and
purpose and absolute certainty … and now, and now it was complete; now
there was a shadow-flicker in the door across the inner courtyard, now
it swung back and the face on the coins, the face of stamps and placards
and statues and Government edicts, the great gentle-seeming lion-maned
powerful face of Dorne appeared in the crosshairs as the Leader came out
exactly on schedule (of course!) for his midnight breath of air.

The Lieutenant’s life and career peaked in the two tiny movements of a
finger slipping through the trigger guard and a thumb on the focus
rotor. The image sharpened into pore-clear detail, and, as the thumb
moved to the second rotor, zoomed to fill the frame with that detested
about-to-laugh countenance, its muscular cheeks, the hint of crow’s feet
around the wide-spaced brooding eyes. The joining of the crosshairs
settled on the bridge of the Leader’s nose, the finger tensed on the
trigger, the image steadied—

And went out.

Went out, was blank, was gone.

There was a split second then of endless time, a black universe composed
entirely of total disbelief, and then he moved his eye back, which did
nothing but emphasize the blackness with the dim presence of the
arrow-slit. He slid his hand away from the trigger guard and up along
the ’scope to the lens, to find what was obscuring it.

It was a hand. He had time enough to touch it and know it for what it
was, when something blunt-pointed struck him on the side of the Adam’s
apple. He fell, the gun seemingly fastened into the darkness by
darkness, staying suspended while he fell away from it, fighting for two
impossibilities—breath, and silence. His knees struck the stone floor,
and as he bowed his head over the agony in his throat, something struck
him across the exposed nape, and he went down. Pain was a brief blaze of
even darker darkness, which swallowed him up.

Time skipped a beat then. He was never to remember how he had been moved
from a collapsed heap on the floor under the window to a sitting
position against one of the side walls. Either it was still dark, or he
was blind … No; it was just the dark, for he was aware of the dim
arrow-slit. His eyes felt scalded. He had not cried for years, not since
his father and two brothers had been taken by a patrol one night, never
to be seen again; he had been only a toddler then. What touched him now
was all the anguished grief and loss and frustrated anger he had denied
himself during these careful years; he was, for the moment, denied
anything else. The one thing he did not feel was shame, and that was
supplied shockingly as soft cloth touched a cheekbone, one eye, the
other, wiping away tears. No one should have known he had tears. He
tried to raise two angry hands and could not; tingling agony in a spot
just above each collarbone told him the nerves had been expertly
pinched, and he knew from experience that his arms wouldn’t belong to
him for a while.

Something ringed his head, settled over his brow and eyes.

He gasped. The light, as lights go, was not bright, but any light at all
in this place was a dazzle. Understanding was a dazzle too—that these
were blacklight goggles—a UV converter, and that with them and the
invisible beam from the lamp between the lenses, he had been watched
from the moment he entered the stone room in the battlement. He had been
seen—photographed? —assembling the weapon and taking his aim. He had
been, oh God, seen weeping, and his tears had been wiped away so that he
could see through these goggles.

See what? A bright blur, a blink, a leather-backed escutcheon bearing
the Leader’s ubiquitous face, and on each side of it a letter, a
scintillant S. Secret Service—Dorne’s own legendary, mysterious secret
service, above the law, outside the law; for even Dorne’s law, made by
Dorne, represented restrictions on Dorne, and Dorne was a man who would
not be restricted.

He nodded, and the goggles were immediately snatched away. Three soft
footfalls in the darkness, a breathless moment of waiting, listening,
and then the heavy door was opened just far enough to build a black
silhouette which slipped outside and closed the door again.

The Lieutenant gaped at where the swift vision had been, and tried not
to think—thinking was too terrifying, thinking led to the certain
knowledge that he was a dead man, and the even more destroying knowledge
that he had been played with like a kitten and backhanded aside like an
insect. So much for half a lifetime of care and passion. So instead of
thinking he felt—felt the tingling above his collarbones descend to his
biceps, forearms, hands, fingers, less an agony each second, until an
effort of will was rewarded by a movement in his fingers. He got his
hands up and shakily rubbed them together until they belonged to him
again; then he pressed himself to his feet and followed the example
which had just been set him; he went to the door and held his breath,
listening. Nothing. He opened the door a very small crack, peered,
slipped out, closed it. No one in sight. He turned to the right and
began to walk.

If he had expected the battlement to be in a state of alert or alarm, he
was disappointed. It came to him, as he passed a courier, who saluted,
and then a noncom, that he had seen their faces at pretty much these
places time and again before; that he had slipped back again into his
accustomed slot in the intricate workings of the concentric guard. Since
he had come on watch tonight he had made his routine contact points each
a few seconds early, until he had accumulated a shade under six minutes
ahead of schedule. With these six minutes and a weapon it had taken
years to design and build, he had meant to change the world. He now knew
it had taken no more than that to become useless and dead, leaving the
world, Dorne’s world, unchanged and triumphant; for he was right on his
posted schedule. He could go straight to the common room and turn over
the watch to his relief, and check out, and no one would know that life
and all the reasons for living had been drawn out of him, folded up,
filed away—in something less than six minutes.

In the familiar common room, full of familiar faces, he checked across
the columns of his report (one was headed Unusual Occurrences, one
Unauthorized Personnel; he lied and wrote None, none, none all across
the page; what could they do to him now, for lying?) and could
appreciate the momentum of familiarity. You could be preoccupied, tired,
drunk and do familiar things right. You could be dead. He knew he was
watched, as he had been watched. He knew he was more than helpless—he
was futile. He turned over the shift to Riggs, a career lieutenant with
prominent front teeth and a giggle, and went out into the floodlit night
and checked himself out through the familiar gate; and would this be the
last time? Perhaps, perhaps not—so much depended on how amusing “they”
found the game.

The familiar car was waiting, familiar Zein and Hallowell and Iturbi
were climbing in as he reached it, and as the car slid silently along
the dark streets, the talk was as usual. Nobody noticed his silence; he
was not a talkative man. Iturbi was dropped off. More silent sliding and
the new familiarity of the Zein-Hallowell conversation; they always
talked about Iturbi. Then they were dropped off at the Shrine of the
Leader—they both lived near it, and the car slid away northward on Dorne
Boulevard, with the final familiarity of his silent occupancy of the
wide rear seat, and the familiar silent presence of the driver.

Northward on Dorne Boulevard? “Hey!”

The car immediately slowed and drifted to a stop against the curb. Well,
at last something was different to mark the day of his death. The driver
had forgotten that he lived on the South Side. He peered. It was a
woman. Well, most of them were. She half-turned toward him and said,
“Come up front with me.”

“I’ll stay where I am,” he snapped. “Turn this thing around and—” He
stopped, thunderstruck, for with a single casual motion the driver
hooked something out of her side pocket and tossed it back into his lap.
It was the eyepiece of his telescope.

There was a moment of shattering silence—no repeat request or command,
no display of weapons. She simply waited. The whole dialogue was there,
back and forth, back and forth—argument, resistance, threat, fear. Then
he did as he must—opened his door, got out, re-entered beside her. The
car started to move the instant the door clicked shut. He watched her
face for a while by the wash and fade, the wash and fade of passing
lights. Twenty-something, straight nose, good chin, large eyes—just
another woman in uniform among the millions of the same. A thought
occurred to him, a question. “Who jumped me in the battlement?”

“I did.”

She drove with enormous competence and she seemed normally healthy, but
she was not a large woman. Another few seconds of that silent dialogue:
disbelief, could-it-be, who-else-then, prove it!—which she did in words:
“You cried.” Not what he wanted to hear, but proof enough.

She turned the car into a cross street and at last looked directly at
him. “I don’t blame you,” she said. “I’d have done the same. I like you
for it.”

“Think of that,” he said bitterly.

Ignoring this, she said, “You had no plans, had you, for afterward.
After he was dead.”

If she had asked him what his plans might have been, he would have
refused to answer. He might even have enjoyed dying for his refusal to
answer. But this was a flat statement.

“Who needs plans? Dorne’s a fool.” The heretical words felt good after
all these years of reverence. “Any man’s a fool who builds his structure
to a single kingpin. Snatch that out and the whole thing falls apart. It
looks like strength but it isn’t.”

“And what did you think would happen when it fell apart?”

“I didn’t care. Anything would be better than a controlled population
living controlled lives. Something would come up out of the ruins—maybe
not as neat, efficient, maybe not as comfortable. But it would be
something alive and growing, not something perfect and—well, stopped.”

She said, in a tone of perfect knowledge and certainty, “Dorne doesn’t
think he will live forever. He does think his system will. He’s been
ready for you for a long time.”

“For me?”

“Or someone like you. Newton’s first law operates everywhere, even in
politics. ‘Every action has an equal and opposite reaction.’ If you
create a society like this one, you create your revolutionaries right
along with it. You know perfectly well there’s an Underground.”

“Don’t try to tie me in with that pack of creeps!” he spat.

“Oh,” she said, “I’m not. There are all kinds of revolutionaries, and
the ones who make a lot of noise are the easiest to handle. They’re
noticeable—that’s the thing. They can be found and picked off whenever
the time is ripe. In addition, the people who follow them are usually
misfits, and they don’t stop being misfits just because they follow a
new leader. They couldn’t get along with the Establishment, and they
can’t get along with each other. Your ‘kingpin’ principle operates
there, too. Eliminate the leader and you have only a mess to clean up,
not a movement to put down.”

“You have it all figured out,” he said, his bitterness increasing.

She nodded serenely. He wanted to smash his fist into her face—but not
at seventy miles an hour on a winding road. Where was she taking him?
The city was behind them now. She said, “There’s another kind of
revolutionary who’s much more difficult to handle. He’s the kind with a
personal grudge, with the intelligence to plan his strike and the
ability to carry it out. He has no partners or comrades; he can’t be
betrayed. The hardest thing of all to deal with is that he has a limited
objective. He wants a single thing—let’s say, to kill a man. He isn’t
building anything, he isn’t saving the world, he doesn’t even care if
anyone ever finds out he’s responsible. How can you guard against a
revolutionary like that?”

“How did you?”

She smiled. “Just by knowing that he exists, that he’s as inevitable as
the man-the-barricades type of revolutionary hero. Once you know that,
any Mark II or III computer can XT a portrait of him—who, why, how, when
and where. All you have to do is sit and wait for him. He’ll keep the
appointment.”

The wave of futility nearly drowned him. When it receded, he asked,
“XT … that’s—extrapolate.”

“Right. That’s what it’s designed for—to predict. It takes all the known
factors and casts probabilities, and compares all those and selects the
most probable, and does it over again and selects the most certain of
those, and so on. And we aren’t using a II or III—ours is a VII. It
talks to all the other computers. Lieutenant—it knows.”

She pulled the car off the paved road and into a barely discernible dirt
track through heavy forest. She stopped talking and concentrated on
driving, tooling the car through unlikely gaps between trees and rock
outcrops. It came at last to a cul-de-sac between a house-sized boulder
and two giant Douglas firs. She braked to a halt. She made no move to
open a door, and therefore neither did he. She must have touched a
control somewhere because the ground on which the car stood began
silently to rotate, as on a turntable. When the car was pointed between
the tree trunks, the turntable stopped and she edged the car through.
Looking back, the Lieutenant could see the turntable rotating back to
its previous position.

“Come in.” He looked at her, and then where she pointed.

A hunter’s shack on pilings, frame and tarpaper, built against a rock
wall. He looked back at her. Starlight and a sliver of moon gave only a
little light, but it was enough for him to see the confident way she
moved as she came round the car and stood near him. She was taller than
he had supposed, and she carried her hands a little away from her body,
and her feet were placed so and just so. He realized there was no need
to wonder if she had a weapon. Her hands were weapons—she was a weapon.
And for all he knew she might have had a gun as well. He nodded and led
the way to the shack. At her gesture he pushed the door open and went
in. She followed. She closed the door and a light sprang out from her
hand. He saw a bunk, an old stove, rubble on the floor, some firewood.
She kicked at the firewood and the wall behind it rolled massively
upward, revealing a corridor slanting downward into the hillside.

The Lieutenant paused right there and looked back past her at the flimsy
barrier of the shack wall, and then at her. How he telegraphed what
flicked through his mind, he did not know. Did he tense, narrow his
eyes, flex his hands, set his feet? He almost moved, but she said
quietly, “Don’t.”

And caught, he had to shake a rueful head and relax. He asked a straight
question, gesturing at the corridor. “If I walk down there, will I ever
come out alive?” And she gave him what sounded like a straight answer:
“That is entirely up to you.” She made an ‘after you’ gesture, and he
sighed and went down the corridor; thinking several things on several
levels: That is one hell of a lot of woman, and What’s she got that’s so
special? because he had seen many a prettier girl, some who seemed more
intelligent, a whole lot that were more fun.… And under it all, They’ve
caught me and I am going to die in this place. She passed him after the
turn at the bottom of the ramp, looking up into his face, and opened a
door. They went in.

Torture chamber? Mad scientist’s lair, with rock walls, steaming
retorts, and traveling arcs zit-zitting? Secret martial court, complete
with granite-faced officers and an empty prisoner’s dock waiting just
for him? None of this … a homey living room. Carpet worn but not shabby,
a little rip in a lampshade. Big sofa, two big chairs, three well-chosen
small ones and a matching table, a large desk cater-cornered. Home, not
office or shop. A cheerful little man in his fifties sprang up and came
around the desk with his hand out. “Lieutenant! I’ve been looking
forward to this.”

He took the hand by sheer reflex, and the little man, talking warmly,
made a tiller of it and steered him over to one of the big chairs. He
had his choice of sitting in it or falling into it; he sat, dumbfounded.
“Dr. McHenry …!” Had this been the moment for small witticism, he might
have added “… I presume.” He could presume; this was one of the world’s
most famous faces, along with—oh my Lord, she was here too, Rachel Heinz
McHenry; the Sunday-supplement cliché for this couple was “Twenty-first
Century Curies.” She was a biochemist, if you like understatements, and
her husband was the greatest living computer theorist, which means
mathematics, logic, language, cybernetics, philosophy, electronics, and
a number of sidelines. He never got the chance to get to his feet to
shake Rachel McHenry’s hand; she was there to give it to him before he
could even try, and was begging him to accept coffee. He refused, not
because he didn’t want it but because it was a little like having the
Pope scramble you some eggs. The whole thing was watched in (he thought)
an amused fashion by the uniformed girl, who seemed quite at home here,
though he found himself wishing she would take off the Dorne hat, with
its shiny bill and the foreign-legion curtain around the back. The Dorne
short-winged cape suited her; the hat did not.

Dr. McHenry went back to his desk chair and sat down. He opened the flat
center drawer and took out a yellow sheet and laid it down and said,
“I’m going to come straight to the point, Lieutenant. Tonight you tried
to kill Leader Dorne. I’d like to know how long you planned this.”

Suddenly the little dash of pleased surprise evaporated, and this was a
grim business again. “You know already. I understand you have access to
a Mark VII XT.”

“He designed it,” snapped the girl—perhaps a little defensively. Dr.
McHenry held up pacifying hands to both of them. “Please,” he said.
“You’re not being grilled, Lieutenant. Call it a rhetorical question. I
was leading up to something else. You don’t have to answer.”

“In that case,” said the Lieutenant, “I’ll answer it. I think I began
planning it the day my father and two brothers didn’t come back after
some soldiers dropped by one midnight. I was thirteen at the time; I’m
twenty-seven now. There isn’t anything I’ve done that wasn’t part of
it—getting into the Service, qualifying for the Concentric
Guard—everything. I have never married. I never learned to dance.
Tonight it all came to a peak and you took it away from me. Now you know
what I am and what I’ve done and how I feel.”

Dr. McHenry leaned back in his chair and delivered an unprofessorial
“Wow.” His wife—it was almost ludicrous—said with what sounded like
genuine concern, “You’re sure I can’t get you something?” The girl
looked very sober. Dr. McHenry slid the drawer open and took out another
yellow sheet. He glanced at it and said, “How much do you know about
Leader Dorne? I mean who his folks were, how he grew up, all the things
that made him what he is?”

“I’ve read the school books. Who hasn’t? Visions as a child,
flabbergasting his teachers, arguing down the professors when he was
twelve—all that. I never bothered much with it. All I cared about was
him now—his habits, his routines, where I could get at him.”

“Then let me tell you some things you may not know.

“Dorne was born a Jew. His parents weren’t Jewish; they converted just
before he was born. They were hardshell Fundamentalists who wanted to go
all the way into the Old Testament because they found the new one not
orthodox enough for them. When Dorne got old enough to think for himself
he shucked all that and became a Christian. Somewhere in his teens he
was a Buddhist for a while, but that didn’t last; there’s not much in
real Buddhism for a man who wants personal power. After that he turned
away from religion altogether and got involved with communism. Very
involved. It didn’t take him long to become part of the inner circle.

“That lasted for quite a few years, and then the currents began to flow
in the other direction. Dorne joined the opposition, turned in a lot of
his friends, and before long was masterminding the so-called Swing to
the Right of the 1990s. It wasn’t a big step to turn that into what we
have today.”

“And we’ll have it forever, thanks to you and your Mark VII.”

Again McHenry held up the pacifying hand. “It’s very important—vital—for
you to understand what we’re trying to tell you. Just remember what I’ve
said about the Leader. I want you to notice especially the timing of the
changes he went through. At first it was a matter of weeks, then months,
then years.”

“And now,” said the Lieutenant glumly, “there’ll never be another. He’s
too old to change.”

“Very good. Very good,” said Dr. McHenry with surprising warmth. “The
very point I wanted to get across. Now: Rachel.”

She came closer and perched on the arm of one of the big chairs; she
looked like a plump bird. He was marveling again at the very idea that
this legendary figure should think of making coffee for him when she
dropped her bomb: “Lieutenant, I’ve found out how to make a man
immortal.” She paused. “Truly. Barring accident, a man can live
forever.”

The Lieutenant closed his eyes carefully and opened them again to see
again, really believe this plump friendly little lady who was saying
things about DNA and RNA molecules. “Hard to do, mind you, but easy to
understand. The pattern, the blueprint of the whole human being is in
every single cell of his body. Now in a newborn baby, the patterns are
sharp and clear, but as we grow older the lines of the blueprint get
blurred as the cells are replaced. It’s just the same thing as making
copies of a tape. You can get beautiful copies with good equipment, but
no matter how good it is, when you have to make copies from copies, you
lose a little each time. And that’s all aging is.

“But if you have the original tape, and make each copy from that one,
you can get a great number of almost perfect copies. Likewise if you
have a tissue sample of a newborn baby, and keep it for, say, forty
years, you can use it as a master to clean up the blurred lines in that
same person’s DNA molecules. It’s done through the lymph system—flooding
the tissues … Oh, but never mind that, we don’t have to get technical.
Will you believe me if I say we can do it?”

“I’ll believe you.” He had to say it.

McHenry opened his drawer again and took out a yellow sheet. This was
beginning to irritate the Lieutenant. Dr. McHenry beckoned the girl, who
crossed to him, glanced at the paper, and then came to the Lieutenant.
She sank to her knees before him, took both his hands, looked deep into
his eyes. Holding him so—and her eyes seemed to be doing most of the
holding—she pressed his hands down on the arms of his chair. There was a
faint click and he looked down to find his wrists, his forearms and his
thighs encircled by bands of silvery-gray mesh which flicked up and
around and down into the chair again. “It’s all right,” the girl said
before he could speak, could shout. “Try to relax, now.” She stood up,
moved away.

The Lieutenant gazed disgustedly down at his trapped limbs. “And now it
begins, I suppose.” He hoped his tone of disgust covered all of his
terror.

“Nothing begins,” said Dr. McHenry. “It’s just time to tell you
something, and we don’t want you to get hurt.” He looked at his wife,
who said quietly, “We have a preserved sample of Leader Dorne’s tissue,
taken when he was only eight days old. We’ve been able to reconstitute
the DNA from it, and prepare enough synthetic DNA to flood his whole
body. We are going to make him into a perfectly self-perpetuating
organism. We will make him immortal.”

The Lieutenant yelled then, and leapt upward against the straps. And
again. And again. He began to shout something with such force that the
words could not be understood. Saliva flew; he bit his tongue; blood
flew. The women ran to him, saying soothing nonsense words as to a hurt
child, wiping his wet and bloody mouth. Rachel McHenry bathed his
temples and eyelids with a tissue drenched in something cool and
medicinal. At last he was calm enough to be able to use words, though he
still shouted. “Don’t you see what you’ve done? You’ve killed us all,
and all the people to come. Oh, the armies and factories and farms will
keep on going, and all the people in them, but they’ll be dead, all
mankind will be dead because it can’t grow, it can’t change! Why didn’t
you leave me alone? Why didn’t you let me kill him?” He sobbed; then he
shouted again: “What’s in it for you? Haven’t you got enough medals and
prizes already? What can Dorne do for you?” After that he began to
curse. They let him. Dr. McHenry took another yellow sheet out of the
drawer. When he looked at it, he smiled. He handed it to the girl, and
the expressions which chased themselves over her face were a sight to
see—surprise, laughter, and then an exquisite wave of pink. She returned
to the chair and knelt before the prisoner, waiting. When he began to
run down, she asked him gently, “Will you listen to me?” She had to
repeat it before he could hear her; he slumped back and glared at her
redly. She said patiently, “If I let you go, will you listen to me?”

Still he stared, and she sighed and took from a pocket the
leather-mounted I.D. she had displayed in the stone room the profile of
the Leader flanked by the two S’s. “This isn’t a real one. We made it.
Don’t you see, we’re not on Dorne’s side—we’re on yours. You and I, all
of us here—we want the same thing; we want an end to what Dorne has
built.” She threw the I.D. back over her shoulder, a used-up thing. He
followed it with his eyes, and then looked angrily at her again. “Why
should I believe you?”

“Why did you believe I was in the SS? Just because I showed you that?
What was I to do—explain all this to you, in the state you were in?
Suppose I had—how far could I have gotten marching you out at gunpoint?
They’d have caught us both, for sure. No, you had to leave by yourself,
certain you were watched. The only thing that could make you do that was
to believe the SS was on to you. Don’t you see—I had to do it this way?”
She was pleading with him, and while fury and amazement circled around
his confused mind, she reached up and removed the Dorne hat, and did
something with pins, clips.… Her hair cascaded down around her shoulders
and back and breasts, such masses of red-gold hair as he had seldom
seen, never touched—never in his stark, unswerving, purposeful life.
“May I let you go now? Will you listen? Will you please listen?”

He nodded. Instantly she touched a control in the chair arm, and the
restraints flickered out of sight. Rachel McHenry said, “I could maybe
make you that cup of coffee now?” and somehow they all laughed—not
heartily, just a little, but it cleared the air.

McHenry came round his desk and crossed to the chair where the girl
still knelt, like a nymph under a waterfall, a red-gold light-fall. He
carried one of his yellow papers with him. He said, “Think, now—think
hard. Remember what I told you about Dorne’s patterns. He moved from
religion to religion, then into politics, from one kind to another. He
was looking for answers, he was looking for some law, some system that
would be right for him, and finally, when he couldn’t find one, he made
one.

“But it is the pattern of that man to change. True, the changes came
more and more slowly as he grew older, and true, too, that with a normal
lifetime he would die before the next change could come. If he dies now,
there will be no change. He has computers too, you know—and he has
programmed them. He will no longer be kingpin—his computer will run the
whole structure, and then there will be death for us all. Life itself is
growth and change, and a society which does not grow and change is dead,
and all the people in it, as you yourself said.

“Now we have given Dorne unlimited life, and because he is what he is,
he will change this thing. Ultimately he will because he must—because he
is Dorne and that is his pattern. Also, he has more power to bring about
the changes than anyone else.

“All this will happen if he is immortal. He can’t be immortal as long as
you are alive and free and determined to kill him. Can you understand
me?”

The Lieutenant looked from one to another of them, and his eyes came to
rest on the girl’s hair. Rachel McHenry murmured, “You have to find
something else to live for.”

The young man rose from his big chair and moved slowly toward the girl.
Almost like a sleepwalker he raised his hand and gently touched her
hair. The hand dropped away. He shook himself, then said to Rachel,
“Maybe I could. Maybe I could, if …”

No one finished the sentence for him, but the girl smiled.

The Lieutenant put his hands to his face for a moment, then took them
down, and now he could smile too, a little. “You’ve batted me around
like a ping-pong ball,” he said a little shakily. “I’ve never felt so
helpless in all my life. You people are out of my league.”

“No we’re not.” Dr. McHenry smiled. “But our friend in the corner is.”
He pointed at the battered desk—and why should a Mark VII XT not look
like a battered desk? “Don’t give us more credit than we deserve. Look
at this.”

Words were typed on the yellow sheet: If killing Dorne is a conviction,
keep him. If an obsession—kill him.

“Convictions yield to reason,” McHenry said gently. “Obsessions don’t.
It was a close thing.”

The Lieutenant looked at that mass of red-gold and said, “Not really.”
Nobody ever told him that the VII had instructed her to take it down,
that it had followed every word spoken in that room. Nobody ever told
him, either, because it never occurred to him to ask, why a pair of
Fundamentalist parents would preserve every scrap of flesh cut away from
themselves or their child; such folk believe they will be reassembled on
Judgment day, actually and literally.

So it was by this means that Mankind overpowered Death and conquered
Time, and took the stars.



CRATE


We had to bury the pilot and Mr. Petrilli and the Stein kid, and by the
time we were done with that we had to bury Rodney. It was a hell of a
job for a bunch of kids but Miss Morin made us. The pilot had no face
and not much head and Mr. Petrilli’s chest was all squashed and the
Stein kid didn’t seem to have a mark on him, I guess he died of scare
before the boat hit. Rodney screamed until Miss Morin gave him that
stuff. After that he just lay there until he died. Also Miss Morin was
hurt but nobody knew it at the time. She was up and around before
anybody, after the crash, telling everybody what to do. She was always a
great one for that. You want to be a probation officer, you be like
that. Miss Morin, she was a probation officer before she was born, I bet
when she was born she had that same set of lines around her mouth old
maids get from sucking their own mouth instead of someone else’s.

After we planted the people we wanted to take it easy but she told off
Fatty and Pam to drag out some food and set it up while Tommy and Hal
and Flip had to get into the hold and bring out a crate. There was a lot
of crates in there and most of them was triangles, full of panels for
building dome houses, but it wasn’t just any crate she wanted, it was
one special one. She give Tommy a paper with the special numbers wrote
on it big, and they had to slide half a hundred crates in and out to
look before they found the right one. They got it out and it was hard,
with the ship tipped over that way and Flip getting under foot all the
time. He was nine. Tom was fifteen, big. Hal was fourteen but not much
bigger than Flip. The crate weighed about a hundred pounds.

We sat on the ground outside and ate except Miss Morin.

She sat on the crate. That’s the way she was, she always stood or sat a
little higher than everyone else, one of her tricks. She was full of
tricks. She was the most iron-handed hardmouthed cold-blooded old bitch
ever lived. She was always around. She told us what to do and she was
around to see it got done. There was other probation officers back on
Earth had groups like us, overflow kids that didn’t fit in nowhere and
got into trouble and they shipped them off to frontier planets where
they could fight cold and heat and animals instead of other people and
the “Great As Is” (well that was what they said they was doing, we
always thought they was just finding some edge to dump us off); anyway,
other probation officers made up stuff for their kids to do and then
went off on their own and when they came back, if it wasn’t done they
would put one or another of the kids in Detention or all of them. Miss
Morin never did that, she was always around, she never went off on her
own business, she had no business but us. She didn’t use Detention, she
didn’t need it, she was a walking Detention all by herself. Also the
other Probation Officers rode herd on a group until they was shipped out
and then got theirselves another bunch. Not Miss Morin. When the day
came for us to go, there she was, she’d fixed it to come along too.
Nobody knew for sure what it would be like Outside, the only thing to
look forward to was being away from your PO, and look at this, we had
our PO right along with us.

So while we ate she made this speech. She said what we already knew,
that there wasn’t no place for kids like us on Earth, we’d all had our
chance to shape up and we didn’t, we were lucky to live in a time when
there was frontier worlds where there could be a place for us, because
in earlier times there wasn’t no place and we would of been calmed down
by wiping out part of our brain and be fit to push a mop for life, and
in a earlier time still we would of spent most of our time in like
Detention but much worse, with bars on the windows. But now there was
the Jump Drive and a way of space-bending, like if you put two dots on a
paper a long way apart and then bend the paper so the dots are together,
you could jump from one to the other without hardly moving, and in no
time. So with the Jump Drive there was ships going to thirty or more
brand-new worlds and more found all the time, with plenty of room for
overflow people and plenty of work and room for the likes of us that was
so much trouble. This here was one of the new worlds, it was called
Barrault and it was a dangerous place but it could be a good one if we
got it tamed down. And we did not have to do it ourself, there was
already a town called Cap Sidney.

Miss Morin went on to tell us more we already knew, like our boat
crashed. Jump Drive ships don’t land no place, boats off them do. So
when they turned our boat loose it come into Real Space in the middle of
a magnetic storm and nothing worked right. The pilot done the best he
could but without radio or radar or ground control he couldn’t do much.
So he was dead and Mr. Petrilli and two of the kids, and that left Miss
Morin and the five of us. The ship wouldn’t know we crashed, you don’t
contact Jump Ships from Real Space because they ain’t in it. Also they
wouldn’t know we’d crashed at Cap Sidney neither, they had no way of
knowing when a boat would come unless they got told by the boat, which
we didn’t do without no radio because of that storm.

So now Miss Morin come to the point which was what we had to do next. We
had to eat all we could and sleep a lot and then in the morning start
out for Cap Sidney. There would not be nobody looking for us and there
was no sense hanging around by the wreck, it did not carry no more food
and water than it needed for a few orbits, and more than half of that
was lost in the crash.

She told us how to get to Cap Sidney. Go straight east—that meant walk
into the sun all morning and keep the sun behind us all afternoon. Then
we would come to a river, and we had to follow it downstream till we
come to Cap Sidney. She made it sound real easy and I don’t know if any
of us listened real hard.

But then she come to the part about the crate, and we listened to that
all right, because she got off it and kneeled down on the ground and
made her voice kind of whispery and talked about that crate as if it was
full of the greatest treasure in all the world, any world. She said,
“Back on Earth not one of you had a chance of growing up to be anything
or have anything. Out here you have. Now, you weren’t to know this, but
because of the crash, I’ll tell you. This crate is the greatest treasure
known to man, but it has to be taken to the Preceptor at Cap Sidney
before you can get your share. Don’t open it—you would not understand
what is in it if you did. And I want you to understand what I’m
saying—this treasure is not for me or for the colony, it’s for you. It’s
yours and nobody will cheat you out of it and nobody can take it away
from you. But you have to get it to the Preceptor.”

I guess it was about this time we began to realize that Miss Morin
wasn’t planning to go along with us. Nobody liked the old razor-back but
the idea of getting away from her was a little bit spooky. We just
weren’t used to it. We all got real quiet. Then she started to cough.
She used to cough once in a while like that. She didn’t make almost no
noise at all because she held a big handkerchief up tight against her
nose and mouth, but it was like she was being hit by big fists the way
it shook her. We just sat and waited it out like we always did. It
lasted longer than usual and for a time she kneeled there with her head
on the crate and the cloth up against her mouth. Nobody made a move to
touch her. You did not touch Miss Morin. When she got up she stood up
straight as ever. Pam saw something she did not tell about until later.
Nobody else saw it.

Then Miss Morin gave orders about getting the crate ready to carry,
fixing a handle on each corner and screwing in eyebolts around the edge
so we could lash our food and water on the top. Then she told Pam to
come with her and went and climbed back into the busted tipped-over
ship. The rest of us went on working on the crate. After a time Pam came
back looking real quiet and stiff and said for Flip to go see her. Flip
come back after a while and he looked scared. He said for Fatty to go
in. Well, one at a time we went in to see Miss Morin, all five of us.
She had something special to say to each one of us and said it was
private, so let’s keep it that way for now. We turned in soon as it was
dark, sleeping outdoors near the crate. In the morning Miss Morin was
dead. We could see her in there through the glass port in the door, but
the door was locked from the inside. Her eyes was open and she’d throwed
up a lot of blood. I bet she tried hard not to do that but she did
anyway. Maybe we would have buried her too but like I said, she locked
herself in and there wasn’t nothing to do but get going. Tommy was the
biggest, he was fifteen, and when he said let’s go, we went. Tommy and
Hal and Fatty took the three handles and Pam and Flip walked along
ahead. It wasn’t too long before Fatty begun to whine about how heavy
the crate was, and Pam took over. Fatty kept on whining but not so loud.
Flip was all over the place, ahead, behind, all over; well, Flip was
only nine. He told what Miss Morin had said to him private. It was
“Always ask somebody first.”

It did not get too hot that first day although the air was very dry. We
could look back and see the boat for a long time. It was plains country
covered mostly with a brown weed. We seen like a mouse with six legs and
a whole bunch of bugs that run sideways like crabs and one time a bunch
of big knob-headed birds like ostriches away off, watching us. After a
time we couldn’t see the boat no more, it just went out of sight in that
rolling country, you’d think it sank. We had to yell at Fatty to take
over from Pam. Pam would not complain but she got tired easier than the
others. Pam was fourteen but not very big. We wanted to stop but Tommy
made us keep dragging until the sun was right overhead and then we lay
up until we could be sure which way it was setting, so we’d know which
way to go. We ate some and drank a little of the water, Tommy wouldn’t
let us have but a little, and we lay around in the shade and talked a
little, some about Miss Morin. A funny thing happened about that:

Somebody said something about what a ironbound bitch she was, she
wouldn’t give you a cup of water if you was drowning, if she had a kind
word for anybody it would choke her, and the next thing you know Flip
was screaming at us. Flip! Flip was a fuzzyheaded little nine-year-old,
I guess some people would say he was kind of cute, but mostly he was
underfoot and asking questions and running when it was easier to walk,
make you tired just looking at him. Well you know how little kids are.
Anyway here he was yelling at us that Miss Morin was not either a
ironbound bitch, we was all a bunch of ironbound bitches and we stunk
too. I mean he was mad and crying. After a time he was sad and crying,
which is a lot different, and he told us that one time at the Probation
Center he got up tight and tried to run away, he couldn’t’ve been no
more than seven. It was at night and nobody could get through the
force-fences, but he didn’t know that and he tried for a long time and
then it got cold and he flopped down by one of the fence generators. And
who should come along but Miss Morin, she must’ve been looking for him
half the night, and she did not say nothing but sat down beside him, and
he climbed up into her lap and went to sleep and she held him like that
until morning and took him back and never gave him no Detention. We
listened to him bug-eyed because we could not believe Miss Morin would
do such a thing but we could not disbelieve Flip telling about it
crying.

Soon as the shadows started pointing east we got ourselves together and
started east too. Fatty got to whining worse than ever and we let Flip
help on that corner. After the third time Flip stepped on Fatty’s feet,
Fatty was ready to kill him and chased him away and then couldn’t whine
so much.

It was getting more hilly and we come over the top of a rise and down in
a little valley it looked like somebody had built something. I mean
there was five or six things standing up out of the ground, like if you
have a oval bowl and cut it in two crosswise and stand it up on the cut.
A couple were two or three feet tall and the others as tall as a man and
then there was one really big one, I mean twelve foot or more. Flip, he
went bouncing down the slope to see what they were, he had no more sense
than a puppy dog. As we worked our way down the hill we could see that
in front of each of the half-oval things there was a patch of bare
purplish rock, or it looked like rock, dished down with kind of a wet
mud in it, and back at the bottom of the tall thing, half sunk in the
slime, a thing almost as big as your head, red and green and a shivery
sort of yellow. We thought at first it was some kind of animal trapped
or tied in there, because when we came up closer it began to wobble and
spin and wiggle and swell up and all. Also there was a very sweet sticky
smell that came up. Flip I guess wanted a closer look at that ball-thing
inside, and in he went to look at it close or poke at it. Soon as he
touched it the whole tall half-oval, like on a hinge, slammed down like
a big mouth closing. My God I could feel the ground shake. Fatty started
to scream and scream. We dropped the crate and ran over there. The big
oval thing lay flat down now, it was covered with brown bark and it was
made of hard wood. Flip’s hand and forearm stuck out from one side.
Tommy hit Fatty to stop the screaming and tried to get his fingers in
the crack and lift, and Hal grabbed Flip’s wrist and tried to pull him
out. Tommy couldn’t budge the thing, and the hand and forearm up to the
elbow came off, chomped right in two. Fatty started to scream again and
Hal fell down on his back and dropped the arm and looked at it and
throwed up.

However we all were at first, it turned into a big mad. We jumped and
kicked at that big closed thing, laying there like a great big wooden
clam. We couldn’t barely dent it. Then somebody thought of the bag of
firemakers we had with us, discs about as big as your hand, you pull out
the string and it begins to burn. Hal pulled the string on one and
throwed it into one of the other clam-things, and it came down whomp!
shaking the ground, and after a time smoke come out all around the edge.
So we killed them all with the firemakers. You’d’ve thought we was all
crazy the way we laughed. You would have to be there, be us, before you
could understand how it was we could laugh at all that. We built a fire
on the big closed one that got Flip, but it kept going out. I don’t
think we really hurt that one none.

We buried the arm and said the same words we said over the pilot and Mr.
Petrilli and the Stein kid and Rodney, and picked up the crate and moved
on.

We got into foothills before dark and found a place against a wall of
rock and built a fire and ate and drank some more of our water. We got
out the sleeping bags, they didn’t weigh but a few ounces each but once
they was inflated they were snug. Pam got into hers and Tommy went to
get in with her, and before you know it Hal caught him by the shoulder
and snatched him backwards and bowled him right over.

Tommy was big and broad and had shiny teeth, and Hal couldn’t never have
knocked him down if he expected it but he didn’t. It could be Hal was
even more surprised than Tommy because he did not try to stomp him or
anything. Tommy rolled right on over and come up on his feet and dived
on Hal and they went round and round. Hal got in a couple of real good
ones because he was so mad but it wasn’t no contest. Tommy beat the hell
out of him and stood back and let him get up, and when Hal went for him
again he beat the hell out of him again. So Hal quit. Tommy went back to
Pam.

Pam said no, get away, and called to Hal. She said, “Hal, you’re going
to sleep with me.” Tommy let out a roar at that and wanted to know why,
and Pam told him straight. She said, “Miss Morin said if anybody got to
fighting over me I was to sleep with the loser. Now you both think about
that the next time you want to fight.” And she held open the sleeping
bag until Hal got through the thing of not believing his ears and the
thing of creeping past Tommy trying to be sure he wouldn’t hit him again
anyway and at last got in. Tommy just stood there shaking his head and
after Hal was in with Pam he went and got his own bag and got in it and
turned his face to the rock wall.

Much later in the night when the fire had burned down real low and it
was quiet, Tommy woke up. Pam was slipping into his sleeping bag. She
whispered, “Well, she didn’t say I couldn’t sleep with the winner too.”
But would you believe, Tommy kicked her out.

The next day was the thirsty day, and it was this close to being the
last day alive for Fatty. The way Tommy and Hal looked at each other
from time to time you would think there was going to be a murder. Also
Tommy was plenty mad at Pam and Pam was still stung at getting kicked
out like that, I mean, no woman likes to get turned down like that. In
the middle of all this there’s Fatty, whose feet hurt, who is thirsty,
who wants to know how much longer this trip is going to take, and most
of all, over and over and over again, “Why do we have to carry this
thing?”

It got so that the big reason for carrying the crate was to bug Fatty.
That whine was enough, after a while, to make the rest of us join forces
and forget what we had going against each other.

We climbed. I don’t know what we would of done if it was overcast. We
were going west, but as the mountain grew steeper and rougher we had to
go north for miles, sometimes, and then cut back again to go around.
Once we spent three hours lowering ourselves into a canyon that seemed
to turn west and climb again to a pass high to the south, only to find
it was a dead end after a turn at the bottom, and it took us seven hours
to haul ourselves and the crate back out again, right back to where we
had started. We camped there too, and there wasn’t but a splash of water
left. Aside from being mad, Pam and Fatty were holding out pretty well,
and of course Tommy was a bull, but Hal wasn’t making it. He didn’t say
anything, but the way he slumped down when we stopped to rest, and the
way he kept on panting for breath long after the rest of us were cooled
down and ready to go, it worried us. Really the reason we camped where
we did was that Hal passed out. I mean he just buckled at the knees and
went down. Pam saw his head bump, bounce a little on the rock. She
dropped her corner of the crate and went to him and sat him up, leaning
against her, and wiped his face with her sleeve. He wouldn’t open his
eyes and when she opened one for him you couldn’t see anything but the
white. Without saying anything Tommy came around with the canteen and
measured out a share of water and fed it to him. It brought him around,
and then right away he fell into a normal sleep, and we had to wake him
up to eat.

That was the cold night. We fused three bags and all slept together or
we couldn’t’ve made it. Never be thirsty and cold at the same time. That
is not good.

In the morning, first thing, Tommy gave Hal another drink, and three
hours later, when we were near the peak, he gave him more. It was Fatty
who realized what was going on. Maybe Fatty was looking for something
more to whine about, I don’t know. By now Pam was mostly handling the
point and Fatty was full time on the left corner. Tommy held the
right-side handle of the crate with one hand and kept his other arm
around Hal, who could only stumble along glassy-eyed. Fatty quit
complaining and took to watching Tommy all the time.

We reached the high pass, and down there, way down, we saw the river.
Funny, how the sight of it made the little swallow of water that Tommy
doled out seem like so much less. But we all of us knew that it wasn’t
the time to gulp it down. Fatty and Pam and Hal each got their share,
and we went on, and not once until after the rain did Fatty whine.

And oh it rained, it came up like artillery, with no more warning than
ten minutes of mugginess. Next thing you know we were bracing ourselves
against the rocks and hanging on to the crate with hands, feet and
teeth. The torrents of water roared and sprayed all around us, first out
of the sky lashed by solid slamming fists of wind, and then from uphill
as the water found its way around the crags and down the fissures,
smashing into boulders and throwing spray high in the air. Just as
quickly, the wet shrapnel from the sky quit, but the water on the
mountain went on and on, hissing and roaring and shining in the sun. And
as soon as he dared take his hands off the crate, there was Tommy with
the canteen, catching a little waterspout with it, holding it steady
until it glugged full and spit out and overflowed. Then he very
carefully screwed on the cap, and turned to the spout off the rock,
still running.

Fatty scrambled over to him and put a hand on his shoulder. “Take it
very easy at first, Tommy.” And winked.

Tommy said, “You don’t miss a thing, do you, Fatty?” He got a mouthful
of water from the rock and swished it around and spit it out before he
sipped a little. Pam wanted to know what the talk was about. Hal came
around the rock dripping all over and looking better than he had in two
days. Tommy said to shut up. Fatty grinned and said no. “You know what
he’s been doing? Giving his own water ration to Hal.” Tommy said again
to shut up. Hal said, “Jesus, Tommy.” Pam looked at Tommy like … like
the way guys wish girls would look.

Tommy sounded a little sore when he said, “It wasn’t me, damn yez all.
Miss Morin, she told me to.” He let that soak in. “She must’ve known
what would happen. Or maybe she just knew … me. She said, if you come to
hate somebody, do him a favor. A big one. That’s why I gave Hal the
water.” He looked at Hal, and said, kind of surprised, “I don’t hate you
no more. How about that.”

I think we could of said the thing about Miss Morin, how it really was
with her, right then, except for what happened. Maybe even that’s what
Pam was going to say, because she jumped up and kind of, you know,
capered, like it was more than she could hold, and said, “Listen, Miss
Morin was—” and then she was gone, just—gone, because, what with that
bash of rain and all, the mountain was different, there was an edge that
was closer, and I guess slippery too. All three of us were side by side
on our bellies yelling something I can’t even spell, and looking down at
Pam falling away, getting smaller and smaller, and hitting a cliff face
and bouncing far out and down and smaller still and landing on a
saddleback and sliding, and then there wasn’t any Pam any more. Rocks
and some mud, and then more rocks and a crazy gout of dry dust,
uncovered by the rock-fall, shot out of the cliff and went down after
her, smoky and pretty in the new washed sunlight.

From belly-down, Hal bounced up on all fours, maybe ready to go after
Pam. Not to get her, not to save her, just to be where she was. He was
immediately surrounded by Fatty, arms, legs, hands, feet. Tommy was a
little slower but much more effective. He pulled them both back from the
edge. He was crying. Fatty was crying too, but what else? Tommy crying
the way he did, it was awful.

We got the crate into Cap Sidney. I don’t know how. I do know how. It
was Fatty. Well, it was really Miss Morin. Here’s what I mean. That Miss
Morin, she knew us all, and what she cared the most about was that
whatever was weakest in each of us would have a prop under it when the
load got big. The only one it didn’t work on was Flip, well hell, little
kids, they forget. Hal told us what her private word was to him. She
told him “Hold out for the biggest reward—the one you’ll live with.”
Fatty explained that to him all the way. Fatty told him going after Pam,
now or later, wasn’t anything he could live with. He didn’t know what he
wanted to live with after Pam went, but Miss Morin said to live with
something—to live.

It was Fatty, too, who said to Tommy that Miss Morin wanted that crate
to get to Cap Sidney. He only had to be told that once.

It worked, and seeing it work made it all come crashing through to
Fatty. What Miss Morin had said to Fatty was, “When it all comes apart,
you put it together.” Seeing it work changed Fatty from a kid to a girl.
She was only twelve. Later on it would change her to a woman.

It took eight days to get down the mountain and across the river and to
Cap Sidney, and it took eight hours for the Preceptor to convince us
that what was in the crate was nothing—nothing but triangular insulating
boards for a geodesic dome, and they had plenty of them already and
could get the rest from the boat now they knew it was there. We were
pretty mad at first. It almost came all apart again, we were so mad. And
then Fatty put it together again for us. She said the one thing that
made all the difference to us, because you got to remember who we were,
the overflow, the can’t-fit, the unwanted.

She said, “How many times would we have fell apart without that crate to
carry? How far would we have got without we stuck by it and taken care
of each other? The treasure she promised us if we got it through was
just what she said it was—the greatest treasure known to man—to be
alive. The treasure wasn’t in the box, it was bringin’ the box.” Then
she said it, Fatty did, she said what made the big difference to all of
us forever and ever afterward; she said:

“That Miss Morin, she loved us. She really and truly loved us.”



SUICIDE


Boyle … jumped. He did it. He really and truly did it.

They say that when the end comes, no matter how swiftly, there’s time
enough for your whole life to pass before your eyes. That’s not strictly
true; it would take a real lifetime to do that, but there is time enough
for a hell of a lot. However, Boyle discovered, as others had before
him, that you get a lot of pictures, all out of order—yes, and sounds,
too, voices speaking a word or two, laughing, a shout that reaches you
at last from years away and means what the shouter meant instead of what
you’ve always thought it meant. In such a moment everything makes sense.
Some of the images and noises are apparently trivial: Aunt Edith saying
“Please pass the salt” and how Hank always used to have one sock up and
one down while they were little kids, and things like that.

Then there are the replays of things you know aren’t trivial and never
were, like the time you had to go to Scranton and Kay said suddenly
“Don’t go. Please don’t go,” and you knew damn well she was going to
sleep with somebody that night and wanted you out of the way and yet she
said that, and you—you went to Scranton anyway. And Kreiger saying,
“Boyle, you know you’d be happier in some other line,” which meant Out,
never mind those years and all that sweat and loyalty and the pipedreams
of the big desk with the opaline letters on a chock facing the door.

He jumped.

He jumped, and sure there was terror, there always is when you’re
falling, there often is when it’s dark. And sure there was regret, and
if-only-I-had-it-all-to-do-over-again. He had expected, and he got, a
couple of brand new ideas to cure it all. Just walk up to him and
say … just show her once and for all that he … take a loan on … a lot of
stuff like that; and under and around it all, a deep glee: I made it.
Boyle did not fail. I said I would do it and I did. That ought to prove
something to the whole sonabitchin bunch of them.

That’s about as far as he got before something in the dark took his foot
and turned him. The wind was different as it whirled past his face and
he found himself looking incredulously past his feet at the stars, with
the great bulk of the cliff face blotting out a third of the sky. Then
the lights (ten thousand lights in the valley below over his head, a
million lights in the sky under his feet) were eclipsed by ten million
more inside his head as he got a shower of cruel thumps and a hundred
long numb scrapes that would be agony if he lived long enough for the
shock to wear off, but he wouldn’t.

And the lights went out.

“Don’t go. Please don’t go.” The voice was soft and quite clear and
close. He opened his eyes and could see the silhouette of her head as
she bent close. He could even feel the stirring of the hairs over his
temple stir to her breath. He blinked once and it wasn’t her head or
anyone’s head, it was the bulk of the mountain against the sky. For a
foolish flash he thought he might still be in midair, falling, but a
single twitch of his cheek told him he was not. Falling through the
unresisting air you do not feel pebbles and dirt ground into your flayed
check. He shook his head to clear it and his whole body moved, slid. It
was only a few inches, but it was enough to pack dirt and rubble into
his collar and send a shocking stab of pain from somewhere low on his
right leg right up through his body. Or maybe it was down. Up was still
down for him. Cautiously he looked over his head and saw lights … stars?
No, for they were in rows and patterns. They were the same as the lights
on the valley floor. They were the lights of the valley floor.

He was lying on a spur of the mountain, on his back and head down, and
the ground under him was tilted like a pitched roof. He looked quickly
past his feet and there were the stars—and again he slid an inch or two.
He suddenly and appallingly realized that if he twitched like that once
or twice more, if he slid just far enough, fast enough so he did not
stop, he was going to go right over that ragged edge down there.

Slowly and very carefully he studied out where his hands were. One was
on the ground at his side, the other across his stomach. He raised this
one and put it to the ground too. The left hand could find only loose
pebbles and earth which slipped up (down) past him hopping and hissing
when he moved his fingers, and bounded away into black space somewhere
past his head. Not very far either. The right hand rested on what seemed
like a more solid piece of rock. Carefully, not daring to turn his head
to look, knowing it was too dark to see anyway, he explored it with his
fingertips.

There was an edge there … more—it was a crack an inch wide. He could not
discover how long it was nor how deep. He curled his fingers into it and
it felt wonderful. He stopped moving for a time and indulged himself in
the joy of feeling it. He had known this feeling once before when he had
bought his first new car. This is mine, this belongs to me. He let his
fingertips creep in and slide out again, very much the way he had let
his proud hands stray over the new-smelling upholstery and dashboard.
How wonderful to own a crack in a rock.

He tried to hook his heels into something and edge himself uphill a bit,
but there was nothing but loose dirt and pebbles up there and an
explosion of pain from his right leg. And his whole body told him it was
about to slip again toward that edge, down (up) there past his head.

He got his right fingers as deep as they would go into the crack, and
stopped to think. The fear began then, and it wouldn’t let him think. It
rose and flooded over him and left him weak, with puddles of it here and
there over his whole soul like tidal pools. He knew there would be other
waves of it, too. Fear numbs your brain, fear can weaken, can paralyze
your fingers, can draw them out of that precious crack in the rocks
which is the only possession left to you in the head-down, lumpy,
sliding universe.

He bit his teeth together until they hurt. It was a pain different from
the other pains which vised and racked and skewered him, because it was
a pain he did himself and could shut off himself. That may seem like a
small thing, but it isn’t. When a helpless man finds he can do
anything—anything at all—he isn’t helpless any more, even if the thing
he does is useless. It was a strange thing he began to do. He began
clenching and unclenching his jaw, and he found it was like a pump,
emptying him of fear. He knew he could never get it all down to the last
drop, but he didn’t need that; he just wanted to get rid of enough of it
so he could think again.

Slowly he brought his left hand across his body and as far as he could
toward the right. The one hand found the other and the straining
fingertips explored the ground next to it. The crack was full of dry
dirt, and he dug clumsily to remove it. The effort increased the
pressure of his whole body to slide, and the rock under his right hand
began to press back. He realized suddenly that the right hand would
tire, would simply wear out and quit, if that pressure grew much larger
or lasted too long. He sank his left fingers in the crack as deep as
they would go. He had to rotate his body slightly for this, and all his
plans to move slowly and carefully evaporated in another great wash of
terror as his body started to slide. He half sat up and whipped over to
get his hands side by side into the crack. His body slid around the two
hands as a pivot point and all around him, loose rocks moved in a small
cascade, rustling and whispering and ending in a terrible silence just
downslope from him as they leaped out into black space. When at last all
movement ended he was lying belly-down, with both hands deep in the
crack, and he couldn’t see anything any more. But at least his head was
upslope, and that seemed to do something for him.

He wheezed for breath and spit out dirt. He lay there panting until it
hurt a little less to breathe, and he was immediately sorry for that,
because the relative relaxation made him able to inventory other
sensations. The one which rose over all others like a shout above a
murmur was his right leg. He could feel nothing with it but a great
constant blare of agony. Something very awful had happened to that leg.

His other one seemed all right. He shifted it a little. He could feel
the knee grinding into the mountain, and the shin, but nothing below
that. He waggled his foot. He felt nothing with it, and then realized
with dreadful clarity that his two feet were projecting over the edge of
the precipice.

The realization brought another great towering surf of fear.

He used what he had learned about that: when terror comes you dig in and
hold hard and let it roar past and slither back. Don’t drown, don’t let
go. In a second or a minute or perhaps in an age or so, fear will
subside. Even if it leaves pieces of itself through and through you, you
will, sooner or later, get to where you can think again.

He resettled the grip of his two hands and pulled. His body slid
painfully a fraction of an inch and he heard the beginnings of that
whispering rustle as pebbles and dirt began to slide all around him.
Well slide if you want to, he told them madly, I’m not going to. He went
the other way—he went up. Not much, not quickly, and certainly, not
easily.

When he drew his feet up over the edge, he was penalized bitterly—and
richly rewarded. The pain in his right leg, when the foot touched the
slope and turned, was far past anything he had ever known in all his
life, and he cowered down under it and begged it not to make him faint
and loosen his grip. But the left toe, seeking like some blind animal,
found a little purchase and sent help like a regiment of cavalry in a
cowboy-and-Indian picture ta-taaa! and helped his crackling fingers to
move him uphill.

It was one of the most glorious moments he had ever known when he drew
himself up so his lips were even with his hands. Driven by some impulse
he could never have explained, he laughed a short hoarse laugh and put
his tongue into the crack of the rocks between his hands. Then he lay
there quietly, half-dozing, half-smiling, until it was time to move
again.

Now the pulling was a pushing, as he pressed the crack down his body,
past his chest, past his stomach. When his hands were fully extended
downward he rested again, and then began to draw his left leg. He didn’t
dare raise himself to his knees yet, and had to bring the leg out and
sidewise until his hip-joint all but whimpered for him to stop, but he
would not.

Most grudgingly the left leg began to take the burden, and the more it
straightened out the more able it became. He slid upward. He dared to
reach forward and found a few shreds of grass—no help in themselves but
their roots were a tight hummock. He felt it shift when he pulled, so he
took it very easy. He got both hands on it and let his left foot say a
heartfelt thank-you and good-bye to the crack in the rock, and drew it
upward again.

The slope was a little less here and he found it possible to draw his
knee straight upward instead of to the side as before—a luxury, an
elegance, to be able to do that. His right leg was molten torture. He
gritted his teeth against that; he said to himself, now I’ve just got to
switch that off. You do not, of course, switch off the pain of a broken
leg. You act as if you could, as if you had. Then somehow you can keep
moving.

The slope now was still easier. He stopped to look up. This must have
been about where he struck and slid after he jumped. He could not see
very well—there was only starlight and the dimmest possible glow from
the valley lights—but the cliff above him rose up impossibly sheer, and
the nearby level spur on which he lay was not very wide—perhaps fifteen
or twenty feet.

He crawled up to the base of the cliff and turned gingerly over, lifting
his broken leg with both hands, and let himself down with his back to
the rock.

He was so tired and so winded, and in such pain, that the distant lights
blurred and whirled; and yet the simple act of sitting, of actually
sitting down and leaning back against something, made him feel favored
to the point of luxuriousness.

Then it all disappeared into a black and comfortable slumber before he
could get it sorted out in his mind.

When he awoke it was in the gray suggestions of false dawn and fevered
dream. For a moment he clutched the earth to right and left, and looked
across the valley with vertigo—so far away, those lights, so far down.
Then the memory flooded back of those minutes—hours, was it? —when he
lay on his back with his head downhill and one hand in a crack in the
rock, and he looked around him as he sat with his back against the
cliff, and almost smiled.

He rocked back and forth to get the blood circulating in his buttocks
and legs, and then pressed and clawed himself upright, grunting against
the stabs of pain. He rested a moment, standing, then fumbled his fly
open and urinated. He didn’t push, he just let it happen. There was
something very wonderful about the sound of it and the faint, warm,
familiar acrid smell. It wasn’t that anything was running out of him; it
was more that something alive was happening here, and it was important
just because of that.

When he was finished he zipped up and looked to right and left. Tumbling
rainwater had carved an angled gully down to the shelf on which he
stood. It wasn’t smooth nor wide nor especially safe—some of it looked
like loose and crumbling earth rather than rock—and it was steep.

He began to climb it.

He climbed for nearly five hours. It was only about sixty feet. Once he
had to stop to build a road—a road of pebbles and root-ends and a rock
or two, anything he could reach and pack in, a road all of four feet
long. Once he slept for a time, twice he fainted when earth fell away
from under him and he had to leap to save himself, twisting his injured
leg.

And in the fourth and fifth hours something strange happened to Boyle.
He began to hurry.

It was the hurry that caused the second of these faints, and when he
recovered he had to crouch there for a time and think it out, and wonder
why he had hurried, because if there was no reason, then it wasn’t smart
to go on hurrying, right?

All he could think of was that he wanted to make the top before anyone
could come to help him. He didn’t understand that at all, so he put it
out of his mind, but he stopped pushing quite so hard.

But when he reached the top, he couldn’t make it. There was no way to
make it. The little crooked sometimes-there, sometimes-not,
sometimes-rock, sometimes-earth gully ended in a narrow crack in an
overhang.

Boyle sat down under the overhang and looked out over the valley. It was
daylight now and all but a few of the lights were gone. The sun wasn’t
up yet but the distant skyline was black and sharp, and the sky above it
had turned from gray to pearl and was beginning to show a cast of pink.
He looked up at the underside of that overhang and he suddenly began to
get mad.

Among the rubble lying around was a narrow pointed flat stone about
eighteen inches long. He picked it up and hefted it, and then began to
dig at the overhang. He dug in and up, and earth fell away and went
hissing down, and he dug some more. He got expert very quickly on how
much he could dig before lumps and clumps of it would fall away. He
uncovered some roots and dug around them until, farther in, they weren’t
threads and strings, but rods and bleached boughs—something to hold to
while he reached further, dug deeper. His arms and his back and the left
leg which was bearing all his weight began to ache, and then it was more
than an ache, it was something that strove to match the torture of his
broken right leg. He seemed to be operating some weird sort of contest
to see if he could make the rest of his body hurt as much as that leg.
He delved inward making a sort of cave into the cliffside, knowing
perfectly well that if he undercut enough he had more than an even
chance of bringing the whole thing down on himself and going with it
into the valley; but the odds suited him and he wouldn’t quit.

For the hundredth time he looked up to gauge the soft material over his
head, and when it happened he almost didn’t see it—didn’t see that the
ceiling above him was abruptly lower. It was actually moving when he
dropped his stone tool and grasped roots with both hands, twisting them
around his wrists and hanging on with all his might.

Almost silently the overhang collapsed, and for a black choking moment
he was totally certain he had buried himself. Then the crushing weight
slid off his back and he heard the rumble of earth and rocks receding
downhill, and shook his head free, and opened his eyes.

There was no more overhang. Where the rain-gully had begun in a narrow
slit, there was a wide V, slanting down from the top in a natural 2-to-1
slope, and full of roots. He bellied into it and clawed his way to the
top and (with a kind of joy) thirty level feet further before he
collapsed.

He lay there for a long time without even trying to think.

Then at last he rolled over, handling his hurt leg as if it was a
fragile possession of someone else’s, and sat up to look across the
valley at the tip of the sun as it pressed up out of its slot behind the
hills. All it said to him was that this was a new day, and he didn’t
have to think about that a lot.

What he did think of, as he sat there in his new day waiting for someone
to come along, was the two questions he hadn’t asked himself, not for a
second, during all those terrible hours:

Why had he jumped?

Why had he climbed?

Just sitting here, watching the sun come up—that was all the answer he
needed for the second one.

And the first one just didn’t matter any more. Right? he asked himself.
“Right,” he said.



UNCLE FREMMIS


“My God!” I cried, “it’s … it can’t be.” Then, a little awed by the fact
that my voice didn’t echo in those wide endless corridors—well hell,
they had carpeting an inch and a half thick—I added almost shyly, “Uncle
Fremmis?”

“Shore is, son,” he said.

I must say, I was shocked.

Uncle Fremmis—actually he was my mother’s uncle—was a hard-bitten,
easy-laughing, gray-headed man when I was merely toddling. When I was
grown, and before I left the Lake country (there’s mostly hills there,
but they call it the Lake country) Uncle Fremmis was still a
hard-bitten, easy-laughing gray-headed man. He lived pretty much by
himself at one end of a hogback with a kind of pond—what it was was a
crooked wide place in a creek—on one side and a deep foggy valley on the
other. It was a valley nobody wanted, I guess—even now it’s the same way
it always was, and Uncle Fremmis used to like to watch the light come
before the sun did, and the rabbits and all, and squirrels red and gray
and bobolinks and the deer that would graze on the steep grass until the
sun burned the mist away. He used to hang around town a lot and was a
very popular man although as far as I know he was never really close to
anybody. When he needed staples he’d turn his hand to
everything—splitting wood with a go-devil, or digging wells, or swamping
(which means anything you want it to mean) around the lumber mill. Flour
and salt and needles—that’s the kind of stuff he’d buy. Yellow soap and
Levis and every few years a bucket and an ax, a whetstone, a pitcher.

He made enemies; they were always the same kind of man.

The first one that I remember was a blacksmith. He rightly hated Uncle
Fremmis, and came up to him on the street one day with his hand out, and
Uncle Fremmis grinned his quick grin and took it, and the blacksmith
snatched him off his feet and stomped him, which didn’t do either one of
them any good because folks stopped dealing with him pretty much except
when they had to, and when folks like that want to get along without
having to, they can go a long way. I recall one farmer used a
one-wheeled hay rake for close to three years rather than have that
smith fix a busted axle cap. The right side of the rake rode on a skid
like a travois, that the farmer made out of old spring leaves. Uncle
Fremmis never did anything to get back at the blacksmith except to stand
in the middle of the street laughing the day the smith nailed up the FOR
SALE sign on his shop.

The years rolled by slower in that country, somehow, than other places,
but they brought new things all the same. The workhorses went the way of
the buggy horses and everybody had a tractor, and it was old Pidgeon,
that owned the gas station, who got to bad-mouthing Uncle Fremmis so
much. Uncle Fremmis paid that no mind at all until Pidgeon bought into
the general store and tried to stop Uncle Fremmis’ credit, because
things were up and down with Uncle Fremmis and when they were down the
credit made a lot of difference, and never once in his life did he leave
a bill unpaid (nor run up more than maybe forty dollars worth of them).
When word got around about that, business fell off so bad at the gas
station and the tractor shop that was part of it that old Pidgeon was
hard put to it to pay his bills. Tractors just didn’t hardly break down
any more and when they did, somehow there was always a neighbor to
borrow one from, and some of the horses still left around came out of
pasture and went back to work again. Before you know it old Pidgeon had
to sell out his piece of the general store and then Uncle Fremmis had
his credit back again. That gas station and the repair shop never did do
real well until old Pidgeon sold out, either.

And when I was in the high school there was a wall-eyed young man name
of Skutch who opened up an electric and radio place. He did real good
until the second time he tried to hurt Uncle Fremmis. The first time he
said it was an accident, when he hired him to help out one afternoon and
told him to hold onto a wire and then did something that gave Uncle
Fremmis such a shock it laid him out and he swallowed his tongue, he
really did, and that would have been all for Uncle Fremmis if Dr. Weiss
hadn’t happened by and hooked the tongue back with his finger and
brought him around. The second time Skutch went after Uncle Fremmis with
his Essex Terraplane automobile; he said that was an accident too, but
if it was it was an accident that went a quarter mile along Beasley Road
and out into Roudenbush’s cornfield with Uncle Fremmis jumping and
ducking like a jackrabbit until Skutch saw Roudenbush sitting there on
his tractor watching, so he quit. After that Skutch’s trade fell off
real bad and if you had a business in town and you bought from Skutch,
somehow your business would fall off too, so Skutch didn’t last long.

Whenever Uncle Fremmis needed more than just his staples, he would
dowse. He was a waterfinder; he’d whittle you a piece of apple (some
dowsers use willow, but Uncle Fremmis always cut a little Y off a green
apple tree) and walk around with it in his hands, and where it bent down
sharp he’d say dig, and there was your well. He only did this three
times that I can remember, and it cost five hundred dollars a time, and
he got it because his deal was real straight: if he said dig and there
was no water, you didn’t pay him. (The price of the digging was your
gamble.) All those three times he was right and got his money. He got
kind of famous around there for that and had all the offers he could
have wanted, but he didn’t want them. He didn’t believe in the income
tax and never would earn more than five hundred dollars in a year.

He never did marry that I know of. He visited around a little, and it’s
a measure of where he stood in the Lake country that although they like
to gossip as much as anybody anywhere, they let Uncle Fremmis’ business
be his business, except maybe one or another of the ladies would nudge
the latest one a little and slip her a wink and make her blush. So all
in all he didn’t need much more than he made helping out here and there,
except for something special, or to catch up on the store account after
a bed spell.

One of the something specials was a Model I-NC quarter ton panel truck.
You probably don’t remember the I-NC. It was the last four-cylinder
wheels that Henry ever made. (I don’t count the Jeep because that wasn’t
Henry’s to begin with.) The truck had this funny little corn popper up
front and right behind it the biggest four-speed gearbox you ever saw,
so that in low-low it would walk up the side of a billboard if you could
find some way to make it stick on. The speedometer only went up to sixty
which if you ever drove a I-NC is just childish, like little kids
betting a million; downhill, flat out, and with a following wind a I-NC
could maybe go forty-three. Anyway Uncle Fremmis fell in love with one
and found water for some dude over in Clearwater and took the money and
bought the truck. He got Ed Varney to take out the corn-popper and put
in a rebuilt V-8 from Sears and Roebuck, and a two-speed rear axle off a
Reo. He got Ed to do it because with mechanical things Uncle Fremmis was
the best water dowser and well digger around, if you see what I mean.
Anyway that old I-NC, peeling green paint and rust spots and all, turned
into something like a buzz bomb with the wings chopped. Riding in it
with Uncle Fremmis was a real hairy experience. The speedo needle would
go right away up to the sixty and hit a pin there, and after that you
could see it bend. The suspension was narrow-gauge and the tires were
6-15’s and the shocks were long gone and pure decoration. The body was
very high and narrow and kind of humped and when it got to swaying a bit
it would pick up both left wheels and then both right wheels and you
wouldn’t know what that thumping was until you asked Uncle Fremmis and
he told you. On the other hand, no matter how useless Uncle Fremmis was
with a wrench, he was a fine artist with the wheel and he never did flip
that thing. Nobody ever knew how fast it would go. He let it out on the
State highway one afternoon and a state patrolman on a hog chased him a
ways and then let him go because he was afraid to catch him; he said
later that what was sure to happen he just couldn’t bear to see, but
anyway he clocked him at eighty-seven and caught him on the way back.
Uncle Fremmis, because he was Uncle Fremmis, wound up without a ticket
and, for an hour and a half, with the policeman’s head under the hood
and down under, looking up at that monstrous rear axle. That cop later
won a NASCAR finals, and used to tell about Uncle Fremmis and how he
started him on the hot wheels, but that’s another story. Anyway it was
that truck that led me to understand about Uncle Fremmis.

I had a girl, I mean I meant to have her, who had a mother who had a cow
who had a calf who didn’t like me, I mean the mother; and I knew I’d
never so much as get up to the barricades, let alone cross them, unless
I could make the mother glad at me. Well she sold this calf to a farmer
over to West Fork who wouldn’t come for it and she wouldn’t bring it
without two dollars extra, so there it stood, her wanting the money and
him wanting the calf and her saying to come for it and him saying bring
it and her saying for two dollars and him saying no, so I borrowed the
truck.

I borrowed Uncle Fremmis’ truck, and you know I never did get that calf
over to West Fork. I never got the calf. I didn’t get but halfway to her
mother’s place and then turned that thing around somehow and got it back
to Uncle Fremmis. You see, it had a gas pedal on it that was hinged at
the back, down on the floor, and the pin had long ago worked out of the
hinge. With a working hinge the pedal would push a wire which would feed
the gas. With the pin out the pedal would layover sideways every time
you put your foot down, and if you were in anything higher than low
gear, the motor would stall. You’ve balanced a broom on the end of your
finger—everybody has. Well that’s what you had to do with your foot on
that gas pedal, except you don’t move your foot around with the
precision of a finger. It might seem like a small thing the way I say
it, but you just try it with a big V-8 up front and a 2-speed axle
behind and a banging, swaying zombie (remember a zombie is the walking
dead) of an obsolete panel truck all around you, and your head full of
plans about doing the calf bit and collecting your just reward. I was
like frustrated.

Uncle Fremmis just laughed a lot. But I began to realize what I guess I
had known for a long time—Uncle Fremmis was not like other people. I
mean he didn’t even have a lock on that truck, just a toggle switch. He
just had a—

He had a way of making things work.

Don’t think that means he could fix things. It doesn’t mean that. He
couldn’t fix anything but dinner. Well, here’s what I mean: he had an
old radio in the house, a car radio he ran off a spare battery he would
switch every now and then with the one in the truck. Sometimes the radio
would hang onto a station all right but something had got old in its
guts, and it would drop down to a whisper and then when you turned it up
so you could hear it, it would suddenly cut in so loud it would make you
bite your tongue. Uncle Fremmis would run his hand over it, back and
forth and up and back again, and then the hand would stop, and maybe
move over a quarter inch, and then whammo, he’d fetch it a stinging blow
with the heel of his hand, and it would be all right again for a month.

Which is also why he had so many friends, and a number of real bad
enemies. Uncle Fremmis was just not quite like other people.

It was around this time—the girl with the mother and the cow and the
calf and all that—that I started to get into trouble. Life was so simple
and good then that I didn’t know how simple and good it was. I guess it
began when I borrowed twenty dollars from Sam Pritchard and promised to
pay him in two weeks and couldn’t. I borrowed thirty from old Joe at the
barbershop so I could pay Sam, but I had to have a little for myself.
When it came time to pay Joe, I went to Sam again. He was willing, but
he only had twenty, so I was ten short. I needed a little for myself so
I borrowed twenty from Hank Johanssen, and about then things began to
get complicated. I somehow got Sam and Joe down to thirty apiece after a
while, and carried it back and forth between them for about six weeks.
Then I couldn’t pay Hank and he got real mad at me and told Joe to watch
out for me, so the next time I asked Joe for twenty he just said no. I
thought that over for a while and then had a bright idea, and I still
think it was a good one: I said to Joe he should give Sam thirty
dollars, and in two weeks Sam could give him thirty dollars, and I’d
just be out of it and could concentrate on Hank. And he threw me out of
the barbershop.

So then I thought of Uncle Fremmis, and I thought this: (a) there was no
way of knowing how much Uncle Fremmis had, so maybe he would have fifty
bucks; (b) he didn’t really need anything, so it would probably be all
right if he didn’t get it back; and (c) he’d lent me his truck once,
hadn’t he, so why wouldn’t he lend me money? I went straight up to the
hogback and the pole-and-shake house made of one hundred percent repairs
on a tar-paper lean-to from thirty years ago, and it was there all right
but he wasn’t, and neither was the I-NC. I asked around and found he’d
left in it and nobody knew where, and he never came back at all that I
know of. I remember feeling real mad at Uncle Fremmis, deserting me like
that.

I was around town for a while after that but things got much too
complicated. I never could figure out how it all happened, but it got so
I couldn’t borrow anything anymore, and if I couldn’t borrow, how was I
going to pay anyone? It was a lot simpler to go to the city and let them
all work it out for themselves.

I did much better in the city, by which I mean in three years I owed
about twelve thousand. I kept thinking about the guy who founded one of
the most successful motel chains in the United States. When he was a
teenager he made up his mind to owe a million by the time he was
twenty-five. He made it and became a big wheel. I guess I just didn’t
have his class. It was taking me a lot longer and the world seems to be
kind of intolerant of guys who take long.

So I was at a party, brought there by a chick who thought some other
people might think I was funny (because you can’t get the country out of
the boy) and I zeroed in on a guy in a silk suit who had an office in
this skyscraper. It was in the part of a skyscraper they call Towers,
which is up on top where they have these thick carpets in all the
hallways and you have to change elevators before you get there and the
Tower elevator has a plug-ugly running it and you better have a reason.
I had a reason but I also had Silk Suit’s card which I hoped he was
still drunk enough to remember how drunk he was when he gave it to me,
and I got into his office and hit him for half a G, and when he asked me
what for, I couldn’t think of a good enough reason so he threw me out.
Which was what was happening and why I was there when I ran into Uncle
Fremmis. “What,” I said to him, “the hell are you doing here, Uncle
Fremmis?” He was dressed in blue Lee work pants and shirt with keys on a
belt clip. He wasn’t carrying a broom or wheeling a waxing machine but
he might as well. But it really was Uncle Fremmis, all those miles and
years away from the hogback, the valley full of morning mist, the
crooked pond; most of all away from town where all those people used to
like him so much. Need him.

“Don’t have time to tell you, son,” he said. “Come along and I’ll show
you.”

He hurried me along the corridor. His hand on my arm was rock-hard and
his movements quick and definite; the years hadn’t changed him one bit.
I don’t mean the years since he had left town; I mean the years since I
first toddled up to his kneecap and I looked up at that quick smile.

We passed doors with polite little names on them—most of them I’d seen
in the papers at one time or another, you know, dollar-a-year men called
in to advise the President, men’s names that have become trademarks like
Eveready or Birdseye, and then the ones I hadn’t seen before doubtless
because of my own ignorance or because they were so big and powerful
nobody even knew they existed—they just ran things. One name I did know,
though, and it stopped me cold and I said “Wow.” Semlar E. Warburg,
M.D., A.P.A. “Wow. He’s the one who—”

“That’s the one,” said Uncle Fremmis. We were talking about the most
famous psychiatrist in the whole entire world, a shrink who had written
books and who had a “school” —that means a special way of doing his
thing where whole colleges full of graduates go out and hang up shingles
and do the same—or try to. Years back he would be called once in a while
in law cases; he was far above that now, you might as well call in the
Pope or J. Edgar. Uncle Fremmis unhooked his keys and turned those
bright eyes on me: you could feel it when he did that, they like had
points like a fence staple. “Now you listen to me, son,” he said, in the
way that made you listen to him, “what you’re goin’ to see you keep to
yourself, right? And if you have to talk, keep your voice down.”

I said I would, and he unlocked a narrow door next one down from Dr.
Warburg’s. I thought it was a broom closet until we were inside and he
reached past me and closed the door. It locked with a heavy click. It
was dark as the inside of a coal miner’s lunch box. “Wait a bit until
you can see,” he said quietly, and I did, and sure enough, pretty soon I
could make out that we were in a dark narrow corridor with what felt
like foam rubber underfoot. “Wait now,” he said when I was about to ask
a question; he seemed to know it.

Suddenly there was a blaze of light a few feet ahead. It made me jump.
Uncle Fremmis said, “As the cigar said to the cigarette, son, we got
here just in the nicotine.” He nudged me painfully in the ribs and then
said, “No foolin’, I cut that too fine. He likes me to be here a half
hour ahead.” He waved me toward the light.

It looked like a square window of plate glass set in the wall.

Through it I saw a woman seated in an armless easy chair, half-turned
toward me, and not three feet away. I couldn’t help myself, I ducked
back out of the way before she could see me. Uncle Fremmis chuckled
quietly. “Don’t let that worry you, son. That there’s one of those
one-way mirrors. Long as it’s dark in here it looks like a mirror in
there. She can’t see you.” Reassured, I looked again.

On a low table six feet away from the woman—a well-dressed woman with
that harried look that people with money seem to carry like a club
membership—was a black box with three knobs and a shiny reflector about
the size of a salad plate standing on edge. In the center of the
reflector was what looked like a radio tube. Adjusting the dials, with a
note pad in his hand, was a middle-aged man.

“That’s him,” said Uncle Fremmis.

“That’s who?”

“The great man,” grinned Uncle Fremmis. “Doctor Warburg.”

I stared with disbelief. No goatee, no Austrian pipe, no funny European
clothes. Just a man. “What’s that gadget?”

“A BWS. Brain-wave synchronizer. It flashes. You turn those knobs, it
makes it flash however often you want it to, as bright as you want it
to.”

“What’s it for?”

“The way he explains it to me, everybody’s brain has a certain kind of
pulsebeat. The first time somebody comes here, he spends an hour or so
finding out what it is. He writes that down, and sets the machine for
it. After that, all he has to do is switch it on and it switches the
person off.”

“You mean like hypnotizes them?”

“Not ‘like,’ son—it does hypnotize ’em, in thirty, forty seconds instead
of the thirty, forty minutes of
hocus-pocus-your-eyes-are-gettin’-heavy.”

“Then what?”

“Once they go under, Doc tells ’em they’re goin’ to dis-remember
everything that happens until he says to wake up.”

“And what happens?”

“Me,” said Uncle Fremmis with some enjoyment. Before I could say
anything to this, the man in the other room switched on the little
machine. The tube lit up, not too bright, in a series of flashes of
orange light. Each flash was probably no more than a hundredth of a
second and the flashes came … I don’t know how frequently. Something
slower than a steady light, something faster than a flicker. I became
aware that Uncle Fremmis was watching me intently. “Son?”

“What?”

“It’s all right. Just wondered if it had got to you. Isn’t much chance
that you and her, or any two people, have exactly the same frequency
with the brain wave, but if you did, that thing would put you under
’fore you could say Boo. ’Course, you’re not gettin’ what she’s
gettin’—the reflector’s givin’ it to her head on. Whup! There she goes.”

In the other room, we could see the woman’s eyelids droop.

They didn’t quite close. She sat relaxed with her hands on her lap,
staring straight in front of her. Dr. Warburg passed his hand close to
her eyes and she didn’t blink. He leaned close and appeared to be
telling her something; at length she nodded slowly.

The doctor looked straight at us and beckoned.

“Back off out of the way,” said Uncle Frcmmis, “both when I go in there
and when I come out. I don’t think the doc’d be too happy about somebody
in here with me,” and he gave me a little shove back and turned a knob
under the “window,” which was my first intimation that it was really a
door. It opened and let him into the room with the lady and the doctor,
and he closed it behind him. I got where I could see again.

The doctor waved a hand and Uncle Fremmis answered something; they both
laughed. I could see this was a very familiar thing to them. The doctor
made a “she’s-all-yours” kind of gesture and Uncle Fremmis stepped over
to the lady. She didn’t seem to notice him at all—just kept staring at
the little machine. Or maybe she didn’t even see it any more. It made no
difference when Uncle Fremmis passed between it and her.

He moved around her, looking at her, looking for something. Then he
began to put his hands on her, or so close to her that he was almost
touching; I couldn’t be sure. I thought she might hit him for it or draw
back, or the doctor would stop him, but no. After a while—oh, a minute
and a half—his hands settled around her head and face, and finally over
her left ear. He moved his left fingertips back and forth an inch or so,
and they settled on a certain spot and rested there, and then shifted
just a little, little bit. Uncle Fremmis seemed to be concentrating real
hard. When he found exactly what he seemed to be looking for, he raised
his right hand up and back … the whole thing reminded me of something
I’d seen before, but I didn’t know what … then he fetched her such a
lick alongside of the head I bit my tongue, and with the pain came the
memory of that old car radio he had in his shack that wouldn’t work
right till he hit it a certain way in a certain place.

The lady’s head rocked a bit but otherwise she just sat there, looking
at the blinking light. Uncle Fremmis made the O sign for “OK” with his
thumb and forefinger, grinned at the doctor and came back to me. I got
out of the way as he opened the little door and came back into the
secret corridor and shut it again. The whole thing hadn’t taken more
than two minutes.

We watched together while the doctor shut off the little machine and
bent close to the lady, talking. We couldn’t hear him but I could tell
he was bringing her out of it. At first she just blinked slowly and
began to raise a hand to put it against her head where she’d been hit,
but the doc caught both her hands and went on talking until she was
fully awake and looking at him. Then she smiled. It was a real nice
smile, all that harried, harrassed look gone from her. Really gone. It
was a nice smile.

Head close to mine as we watched, Uncle Fremmis said in my ear, “You
always used to be a bright boy, son. What do you think happened?”

I didn’t know what to think. I said, “You’ll laugh at me.”

“No.” That’s one of the smallest words there is, but he packed a heap
into it. He wouldn’t laugh at me. So I said the crazy thing that had
crept into my head. I said, “You hit her just the way you used to with
that old radio you had.”

He sounded like he really admired me. “Oh, you are a bright one.” And he
patted my shoulder. Then he asked me how things were going back home.

It happens I’d been back for a week or so three months ago so I told
him. The Lake country wasn’t the same any more, like the twentieth
century had got there at last altogether, not just a bit here and a
piece there. I told him the way you do with down-home folks away from
home, you know—who’d sold out and who had to get married and what
happened to the church clock. He soaked it all in; I thought he looked
sad. While I was talking the doctor in the other room got the lady up
and they walked out together and the doc switched out the lights in
there, and it was dark again in the corridor. Uncle Fremmis made no move
to leave, so I went on talking in the dark. I said I didn’t think I’d go
back to the town again any more, ever; it wasn’t really all that
different from any other town now.

Just then the light came on again and we saw the doctor bringing in
another one, and I recognized this one right away. He was a United
States senator, been one for years. The doctor sat him down and reset
the knobs on the little machine and put him under, and then Uncle
Fremmis slipped out there and—and fixed him. Or not ‘fixed him’—as he
told me later, you couldn’t call what he did ‘fixing.’ It’s something
else there’s no real word for; Uncle Fremmis didn’t know how to fix
things, not really. This time there was no feeling around either; he
went straight to the old Senator and lifted up the Senator’s left hand
to about shoulder high and snapped it down so hard I thought it might
come off at the shoulder. If the doctor hadn’t been hanging on tight I
do believe he’d have tumbled the old feller right off the chair. Then he
came back to me and we went on chatting while the doctor turned off the
machine and brought the Senator around and led him out.

“It’s my fault,” Uncle Fremmis said sadly when he got back to me. “I
mean about the town. It was me made it the way it was. Kep’ it the way
it was. I didn’t mean to do it; I didn’t know. It was Doc Warburg there
made me realize it. And then it’s my fault that things have changed so,
too. To this day I don’t know which was best.”

“I don’t know what you’re talking about. I got to say, I liked it the
way it was.”

“The way it was was a backwater,” he said sharply. I could see this
whole thing meant a lot to him. “If a thing’s alive it’s got to change.
If it stops changing it could be a lot of things—fun to be with or funny
to look at or something for college folks to study, but it ain’t alive
no more, and a town’s like a person, it has a right to be alive and grow
and change and nobody should stop it.”

“You mean you stopped it? How could you stop it?”

“Well, I made things work. I mean like that old lawnmower of Artie
Backer’s, with the kerosene motor. I used to go over to Artie’s every
six weeks during the warm weather and kick it. Wasn’t nobody that knew
where to kick it or how hard but me, and for me it worked. Old Mrs.
Roudenbush, she had a meat grinder that would jam up so she couldn’t
turn it ’less I took holt of the crank and shook it just so.”

And it all came back in a flood—Wertenbaker’s tractor and Samuel’s
windmill pump and the church clock and dozens, scores, hundreds of other
things, big and little, and Uncle Fremmis, drifting around town, knowing
everybody and what everybody had that didn’t work right, and making it
go. Alarm clocks and sewing machines and the farm stuff—seeders and
harrows and spreaders and drills.

And I recalled the blacksmith who had tromped him on the village street
and the electrician who’d tried twice to wipe out Uncle Fremmis, and I
began to understand those things, why they were enemies and why the town
rode ’em out. When the light in the other room came on and I could see
him again I looked at him with brand new eyes, like I’d never seen him
before. I watched while he went in to the doctor and that famous
preacher you’ve all seen on the TV, and while the preacher slumped there
staring into the blinking light, Uncle Fremmis fetched him a hell of a
clip between the shoulder blades with the heel of his hand.

When he came back I asked him how he’d happened to come here, and he
told me about it, setting up in his cabin watching the rabbits in the
steep meadow one early morning, and he seen somebody moving around down
by the crooked pond on the other side of the hogback. “A nippy morning,
it was,” he said, “and there was this man in his shirt sleeves wading
into the water so I knew right away something was haywire and I
scrambled down there. There was a monstrous big Cadillac parked on the
west bank and this feller was heading out for deep water with a kind of
I-can’t-see-you look on his face. I brought him back. He didn’t want to
come. Much bigger’n me, so when talkin’ didn’t help and pullin’ and
haulin’ didn’t help I did the only thing I could think of.… Hell, I
didn’t even think. I mean it was like he wasn’t a man at all but a
threshin’ machine with a jammed conveyor or some kid’s old Mickey Mouse
watch. I mean it was a tight thing, son, he could’ve dragged me into the
deep water too, so all I did was the only thing I could do. I hit him a
certain way.” He prodded me on the right side, a little above the waist.
“ ’Long about here, and it straightened him right out. He stopped dead
an’ looked at me like wonderin’ where he was at, so we waded ashore and
come up to my place and drank a lot of coffee and dried out in front of
the fire. Here comes the Maestro.”

We looked through the mirror and saw one of the world’s biggest
orchestra leaders, so corny even country people laugh at him but what
the hell, if you like bubbles and music ex-act-ly on-the-beat, you got a
right. Uncle Fremmis went in there and turned the guy’s right foot half
around and held it between his knees while he reached up and gave him a
kind of karate chop on the neck, not too hard. When he came back he went
on, “We talked all that day an’ into the next night, me and the doc
there. He’s a big man, son, and I don’t mean money and I don’t mean all
the books he’s wrote and all. He’s a big man with a clear head who ain’t
afraid to look at the truth even if the truth looks crazy. He told me
about how it is in his line of work, how hard it is to rub up against so
many people’s nuttiness without it rubs off on them, and how the load of
nuttiness he’d been carryin’ just got so big over the years that one day
somethin’ snapped an’ he took off in his big shiny Cadillac an’ just
drove an’ drove till he wound up in the early mornin’ lookin’ at water,
an’ he just promptly waded in to drown himself. Yeah. He told me
straight. And what I’d done when I hit him like that cleared the whole
thing up for him somehow, made him see it all, made him work again like
a ol’ sewing machine or school bus or whatever. So he asked me a lot
about me, an’ we got into this thing about me not lettin’ the town grow
up natural. It made me feel real bad. Then he said for me to come to the
city an’ help him, an’ he left, an’ I thought it over for a couple days
an’ jumped into my truck an’ took off.”

“And now you fix people instead of things.”

He snorted. “I don’t fix nothing, son. I never did. I can’t. It’s like
Artie Backer’s lawn mower—what I did I had to do again every six weeks.
Sometimes I could make things go for a year or more, sometimes a week.
Each one’s different. Same with these folks here. They all have to come
back sooner or later, when the worn-out part inside, whatever it is,
starts to act up. Dr. Warburg, I got to hit him like that about every
nine months.”

“What about the blinking light thing? Window dressing?”

I think that bugged him. “Window dressing hell. Do you think these
people would hold still for what I do if they knowed it was me doin’ it?
That machine, and the way Warburg uses it, just makes it so they never
see me.”

“What do you need him for, Uncle Fremmis? My God, you could set up shop
for yourself and make a mint.”

“I don’t want a mint, son. Never did. Anyway, who would want to go see a
crazy old man to git slapped in the chops when they started to act crazy
or couldn’t cut the mustard any more?”

“A lot of people. Word gets out.… You’d make a—”

“These people wouldn’t. An’ that’s the big thing, son. These people are
the big ones. These people are the ones who make things go. Only thing
is, they git worn-out after a bit and it kind of poisons the things they
do. Everybody says the world’s goin’ to hell in a hand-basket, but it
won’t if we can keep enough of the top ones straightened out. There
ain’t many really top ones—never was. And we ain’t got ’em all, but
we’re workin’ on it. An’ it strikes me that’s a lot more use than
keepin’ a sewing machine running just because it belonged to somebody’s
granny, or to help a pinchpenny keep a ol’ pump instead of buyin’ a new
one an’ helpin’ keep work an’ jobs comin’.”

I began to see a number of things, but one took my attention like a
bikini in a hotel lobby, and that was, Uncle Fremmis was standing right
next to a classic buck. “Uncle Fremmis,” I said, “I need five thousand
dollars.”

Well I won’t go into all the talk we had then while he asked me what I’d
been doing and how I’d been living, but with him you couldn’t duck
straight questions and you couldn’t make things look good when they
weren’t. When he was done asking and I was done telling I felt like
something you shovel out of a cowbarn.

He looked at me for a long time and then heaved a deep breath. “Tell you
what, son,” he said, “I’ll do what I can for you. It won’t take but a
minute. We won’t use no gadget box because between you and me we don’t
need it. Only I got to tell you up front, you ain’t goin’ to enjoy it, I
ain’t goin’ to enjoy it, and you’ll have to come back for more every
once in a while—you’ll know when.”

“Do I get my five G’s?” was all I could think of.

He clapped me heartily on the shoulder. It was real affection, and I
could have cried. “You sure do, and more. All you want.”

I said, “Then fire away.”

So then and there, in the dark corridor, he ran his hands over me. They
hardly touched, like butterflies. I heard him kind of grunt, and he
moved his hands a bit more and they rested.

“Come on,” he said. He took me out to the hallway outside. He looked up
and down and there was nobody out there. So he did his thing, and you
better believe it, it was one hell of a jolt. Oh my but he is a strong
old man.

I went out that day and got a job. I did fine. I’m doing fine.

And every once in a while, when I know it’s time, I go back and see
Uncle Fremmis. I know it’s time when I begin to think I can’t get along
another day without borrowing money. Then I go back to him and he
fetches me another good swift kick in the ass.



NECESSARY AND SUFFICIENT


I

Merrihew was a troubleshooter. There had never been one like him, so
there was no name for what he did. Dr. Poole was head of the Institute,
mostly because he could sense trouble before it happened. Sensing it and
doing something about it were two different things. Merrihew could do
something about it. His record was most confidential but his batting
average was high. Incredibly high.

And you wouldn’t have thought so to look at him.

Dr. Poole had called Merrihew and they had met for lunch. When the
waiter went away with his order Merrihew wanted to know the name of the
trouble.

“Lasvogel,” said Dr. Poole. “Look Merrihew, we have a chemistry section
here—three, really, if you figure inorganic and bio and organic as
separate, which they practically are. Then there’s electron physics and
computer design and the mechanical section and the socio think-tank and
some other stuff. And if Lasvogel wanted to call himself section head of
every one of them he’d have the right. Only it would look funny on the
organization chart—and anyway he wouldn’t want it.”

Merrihew said, “That’s who he is, not your trouble.”

Dr. Poole wagged his big white head. “Oh, Lasvogel’s the trouble all
right. He’s coming apart.”

“Eggs in one basket,” Merrihew said. “All those departments with the
head lopped off?”

“All those departments could struggle along just fine without him.
Emphasis on struggle, maybe, but—they’d make it. It’s the West Ecuador
thing. Actually I don’t mind if he cracks up after he’s solved that
one—he’s earned a good breakdown. I just want him to hang together until
then.”

“What’s the West—”

“Quiet.” The waiter came, put down drinks, went away. Dr. Poole was
studious with ice cubes for a moment. He made a motion with his head
that brought Merrihew leaning closer.

“Code name. It isn’t Ecuador and it isn’t West—and if you can do your
work without knowing where it is, all the better. If Lasvogel can stay
with it until he finds an answer you may never find out—and that’s all
right.”

“How much longer does he need?”

“I wish I knew. Oh, I wish I knew. It could be tonight, tomorrow. It
could be weeks.”

“Or never?”

“Don’t say that.” Dr. Poole made a terribly controlled warding-off
gesture. “Don’t even think it.”

“And there isn’t anyone else who might—”

“No there isn’t. Or maybe there is, but the only way to find him would
be to describe the problem—and I can’t do that.”

“Better do it now, though.”

Dr. Poole gave him a long, sharp look. The waiter came with the salads,
fussed about, went away again. “All right then,” said the director of
the world’s quietest and most extraordinary consulting company.
“Overpopulation. Everything comes down to that. Too many people. Not
just pollution but geopolitics—nations looking for room to expand.
Businesses—they overbreed too—looking for markets. But the trouble is
also too many kids in the classroom—a solitary man looking for some
place to walk where it’s wild and quiet. There are other problems
besides overpopulation, but if we can whip that one we can whip them
all.”

“Better hurry,” said Merrihew.

“Yes, of course. Of course: I know what you mean. It’s already too late
for some things. A whole ocean could die if we controlled population by
tomorrow night. But you see, that’s what we’ve done. What Lasvogel’s
done.”

“You lost me.”

Dr. Poole looked to right and left and leaned close again. “The place we
call West Ecuador has the highest birth rate in the hemisphere. Or
almost,” he added. Maybe the hedging words were a scientist’s exactitude
and maybe they were a little something to keep curiosity at bay. “We
have ways of keeping day-to-day tabs on it, primitive as it is. Every
doctor, every clinic in West Ecuador is feeding our computers, whether
anyone of them knows it or not. We can even get the midwives, about
five-eighths of them—much more than half anyway. We’ve been setting the
place up for an experiment for a long time. You don’t much approve of a
tactic like that.”

“I didn’t say anything.”

“Most people wouldn’t approve. High-handed, undignified—I’ve heard all
the names for it. I also know all the preachments about means and ends.
We’re doing what we’re doing because we haven’t been able to find
another way—and because something has to be done now and not when we can
do a public-relations job and then put it through the courts. Little
kids with blown-up bellies, toothpicks for arms and legs and sores all
over—yes, we’re doing it for them. But also because West Ecuador is a
preview. The whole world is going to be like that—not might be, is going
to be—if something isn’t done now.”

Merrihew put up both hands in a way that said, _Well, all right,
dammit_.

“We threw it to Lasvogel,” Dr. Poole said, “and he came through.” He
added a little anxiously: “Lasvogel always comes through. Anyway, his
treatment batted a thousand on a hundred and twenty-three cases.
Injections. Not one of the recipients got pregnant. No side effects. I
know what you’re going to say,” Dr. Poole added quickly, “Nothing new,
eh? That Swedish pill, take it tonight, get your period tomorrow whether
you’ve conceived or not? Wait—there’s more.”

Merrihew sat silent.

“Lasvogel’s whole approach was different,” Dr. Poole continued, “and
that’s all I’ll say about it—except his preparation is more potent than
you’d believe. More even than Lasvogel believed. We did a mass
treatment. Well, I’ll tell you: we had a prevailing wind situation and
we did it with a chemical fog. Lasvogel—we—we figured it might affect
some women in a nearby city to some measurable extent. As I said, we’ve
spent a lot of time and a lot of money setting up observation posts. We
were looking for a decimal point and maybe three zeros before we came to
a number—no more than that.”

Dr. Poole sat and wagged his head. It looked for a while as if he had
forgotten what he was saying, forgotten his lunch and his guest,
forgotten even this tumbling urgency. Then he asked, “In five weeks, in
a population pushing two million, know how many pregnancies we recorded
in West Ecuador’?”

It was not Merrihew’s style to respond to rhetorical questions. He
simply waited.

“Seventeen. Seventeen, in five weeks.”

“Wow.” Merrihew cut steak, forked it up, lifted it, looked at it, put it
down. “Wow.” Pollution, belly bloat and toothpick legs, war and
pestilence—and cold greed is emperor: survival is greed. And then—how
had Dr. Poole put it? —a solitary man walking some place where it’s wild
and quiet. Merrihew had time to get a glimpse of a man like that in a
place like that and think that it might after all be that way when Dr.
Poole had to go and say, “They were all white.”

Merrihew hadn’t gotten to be what he was by being uncool—and it could be
that he looked the part. But once in his life a flashbulb had gone off
in his face in a dark room and once someone he had loved had died in his
arms and once he had had to blow the whistle on the best friend he ever
had, who died of it. This thing he had just heard was like all those at
once; it made him bite his tongue the same way. It could be that he
heard nothing at all for a long moment because he didn’t want to hear
anything else; he wanted to tip time backward and not know what he had
just been told. He came back slowly—as if someone had a volume control
to bring up sound gradually from silence—and heard Dr. Poole say
something about cloud formation.

“There’s a central mountain range and, like all such, it has cloud cover
most of the day. Lasvogel thinks the chemical fog went in over the city
and upslope on a thermal current. He really had no idea the stuff would
work in dilutions like that, but it did. When it got to the cloud it
dispersed right through it in a few hours—well, he had anticipated that
part. Then, of course, it rained. It rains every day in that place for a
little while. It was the rain that brought it down on the lee side—so,
you see, the whole place was covered.

Merrihew recognized a flicker of surprise in himself when he tried his
voice and it worked. “Anybody live in those mountains—or are they all in
the city’?”

“I see what you’re thinking,” Dr. Poole said. “Maybe we missed someone.
Well, forget it. Yes, there are villages and small holdings all through
the area. But you’ve got to accept what I said: we’ve had the whole
place bugged for years now—crossroads clinics, private doctors, the
pathological labs and the midwives. Trust the figures.”

“How big is the white population’?”

“Less than five percent. Two couples from the Peace Corps who settled
there, some teachers and doctors, business people. Also some East Indian
settlements and orientals. No pregnancies there either. Just
Caucasians.”

Merrihew’s steak was cold. He put his fork down. “Too big to get hold of
all at once. You’re taking a hell of a chance telling anyone about this.
Even me.”

“Stick that in your cap for a feather. The record says you can be
trusted.”

Merrihew looked him in the eye. “Nobody can be trusted with this one.
All I can do is the best I can. Let’s get back to work.”

“Work? Ah. Your part in this, you mean. All I can tell you is what needs
to be done and let you take it from there. I can’t tell you what to do.”
He smiled briefly. “From what I hear, nobody can. That’s how you work.”

“Lasvogel,” Merrihew said tersely. He meant, _Get to the point_.

“Very well. Lasvogel is the key to everything. He’s on the track of an
answer and he will come through—although maybe I say that because I have
no alternative. But I’m afraid he won’t last the stretch. He’s under
some kind of pressure that’s brought him to the breaking point and I’m
scared.”

“I’m scared just hearing about it.”

“Oh, you don’t understand. It isn’t West Ecuador. I know the man. I’ve
seen him under stress—work stress—before. This is something different.
Something outside. It isn’t physical—I have the right to order an
examination and I did that, though I thought he was going to spit in my
eye. All I got out of that is what I already knew—he’s under stress. Dr.
Genovese—the Institute head medic—laid it to work pressure and told him
to ease up, told me to ease up, too. But I know better.”

“How?”

Dr. Poole almost shrugged, almost gestured, barely shook his head. “Call
it intuition. Call it my special talent the way you’d call Lasvogel’s
problem-solving a special talent. We give things names and think we have
answers. They aren’t answers but sometimes they make us feel better.” He
drew a deep breath. “Anyway, your problem is Lasvogel. Find out what’s
cutting him up and give me an idea of what can be done about it. Your
problem is _not_ West Ecuador. He’ll handle that. Here.” He removed an
envelope from his breast pocket and handed it to Merrihew. “Here’s a
personnel profile plus all the addresses, telephone numbers and
peripheral information you can possibly need. Numbers you can reach me
twenty-four hours a day—and don’t hesitate on that one. A drawing
account. It doesn’t say so on the paper, but believe me, it’s
open-ended. And I’ve bothered to write one thing down in red: _Respect
Lasvogel’s privacy_. He’s obsessive about that. He must never have the
slightest suspicion that you’re on the job or what the job is. I can put
it to you this way: he’s the most totally devoted and conscientious man
I have ever met, but if he thought he was being spied on, he’d quit the
Institute—West Ecuador and all. The only other thing I have to say to
you is something that doesn’t need saying: God help us if West Ecuador
goes on much longer the way it is. Already there will have to be a
wrinkle in the birth statistics that some sharp eyes will pick up.
Imagine nine months from now when the news gets out that there’s a place
where there have been no non-white births in a population of two
million. You feel all right, Merrihew?”

Merrihew stood up. “I feel we’ve been sitting here too long. Talking too
much.”

“But—”

“You said it was all in here,” and Merrihew tapped the envelope. “You
better be right.” And he ran out.


II

Slit-eyed, thin-lipped, Merrihew went straight to a place he knew and
began to work.

The place was a park bench off the mall, in a little hollow overarched
by linden trees. Aside from turning pages from the envelope, which took
him less than twenty minutes, he sat motionless, legs splayed out, eyes
all but closed, for nearly two hours.

There were things about this job which ran 180 degrees out of phase with
the way he worked, the way he thought. Don’t think of exactly where West
Ecuador is, what it is (although “prevailing wind situation” and
“central range with cloud cover … it rains every day there” and the
population and birth-rate figures put a pin right on its map); don’t
think of the nature of that fog and its power in incredible dilutions
like that and just what that stuff had to be; it was Lasvogel’s job to
work with that—and anyway, Merrihew genuinely doubted that any wild
inspiration of his could even approach Lasvogel’s grasp of the variables
involved. Don’t think of ways and means of discovering from Lasvogel
himself what it was that was pulling him apart. Superbrain he might be,
but Merrihew doubted he was so unlike other human beings as to be always
aware of what was wrong with him. He probably didn’t know.

Merrihew liked to work with cross-checkable facts, and with the truth
(whatever, from time to time, the hell that might be). In this case he
had to work with “metafacts” and treat them as if they were axioms,
knowing perfectly well they weren’t. For example, Lasvogel was the only
man who could solve the West Ecuador mess. Merrihew doubted that, but
could not let that doubt dilute his efforts. And this one: the West
Ecuador mess can be solved. Merrihew doubted this too, but must refuse
to let that thought into the gears. And this: the difference between
Lasvogel’s ability and inability to solve the West Ecuador problem lay
in keeping him from falling apart. Merrihew was perfectly aware that
Lasvogel might well solve the problem before he, Merrihew did anything;
or that he, Merrihew, might pass a miracle and restore Lasvogel to
soundness of mind and soul and still Lasvogel might not be able to find
an answer.

So all his reasoning and actions must spring from this sequence of
assumptions and almost-facts as, if they were the word of God, or at
least Moses. On top of which, whatever he did had to be done instantly
and effectively, for literally every second made it more likely that the
news would get out.

_The news would get out.…_

He stirred uneasily on the bench: he squirmed. Just the fact—no details,
no hows or wheres—just the terrible fact that someone had a substance
that would secretly and painlessly sterilize everyone on Earth except
Caucasians. Who wouldn’t jump at that—jump in horror, in greed, even in
joy, in terror? It wouldn’t matter what details were lacking: that which
is stated as possible is done. A microscopic amount of uranium is split
leaving its streaks through a half cupful of smoke, and once the news is
out, the thing is done—years later, perhaps, billions of dollars,
hundreds of thousands of man-hours later, but it gets done and the world
is never the same again. A man drops dead, seated at his desk. There is
a bullet wound. There is a hole in the window glass. The detective draws
a line from a man’s head, as he sits at the desk, through the hole.
Ballistics experts alter it to the correct parabola and learn where the
gun was that fired the shot—and so on—until a murderer is captured. Let
it be known that a thing has been done and it will be known how it was
done—if anyone cares enough.

And who would care enough about what had happened at West Ecuador?
Blacks and bigots. Clever-mouthed haters, masking their diseased
passions under a cant of believable ecology. And if a weapon so potent
and so selective could be analyzed, why couldn’t it be made to select
another target? And if that proved impossible, was there any way to
measure the rage of the target now established?

Merrihew had a thought—permitted the thought—purely to know he had had
it and that he had eliminated it. Take it to the military, to a wealthy
bigot, to the potential victims of the most horrifying exercise of
genocide known to history—even human history. One might say conscience
would dictate something like the last course—as for the others, there
would be fortune incalculable, power immeasurable for a man who held
what he had and used it for his own ends.

Merrihew shuddered and spat.

_Work. Work. Get to work.…_

He sat there for another twenty minutes.

“For God’s sake,” he said then. “What a way to save the world.”

It was all very discreet, of course, and in the delicate mention of it
in Dr. Poole’s envelope, the words had all but blushed. The fact sheet
held a strange mix of old-world disapproval and latter-day acceptance,
combined with an arch appetite for gossip. What it came down to was that
Lasvogel had, in addition to a cerebellum, some gonads, and that these
had been preoccupied for some time by one Katrin Szabo, expatriate
Hungarian, twenty-four years old, a mathematician employed by the
Institute and living in the same apartment house on the same floor as
Lasvogel. “His association with Miss Szabo,” said the fact sheet primly,
“is regarded strictly as Dr. Lasvogel’s concern and not the Institute’s
business”—thereby making it Merrihew’s.

What a way to save the world …

Merrihew, having carefully checked the whereabouts of the parties
involved, went to the apartment house where Lasvogel lived, repeating to
himself like a mantra: _Lasvogel’s privacy must be respected. Lasvogel’s
privacy must …_ Oh, he didn’t give a damn for Lasvogel’s privacy. Not
now. What the mantra meant was that Lasvogel must not be underestimated.
A mind that could do that many things in that many fields was one that
would pick up the slightest trace of spying—and that one trace would
blow the whole bit. Merrihew could hardly contain West Ecuador in his
memory—he most certainly did not want it on his conscience. Anything he
did in this operation would have to be by remote control. Anyone he
moved or diverted must be handled invisibly and without touching.

In an alley—not the one behind the apartment house—Merrihew became a
telephone repairman, locked his car and went into Lasvogel’s building
through the service entrance. The lock on the fire tower was a simple
matter for him. Trudging up eight flights of stairs was not. He used the
simple rhythm of climbing to reinforce his mantra.

The eighth-floor hallway was deserted and had an admirably soft carpet.
He ghosted up to the door of Apartment 8K and tried the knob, recalling
a nightmarish time he had once had picking a lock that wasn’t locked.
This one was and it was a good one. He glanced at the key slot and from
his belt drew out a flat case, opened it. From one side he took out the
correct blank and slid it into the slot. From the other side he selected
an array of flat blades, chose one, and gently thrust it into the
special recess in the blank, applying turning pressures, forward and
back, as he did so. His sensitive fingers told him which serration on
the blade moved which tumbler and how much. He withdrew the blade and
tried another. The third one did it and the door opened. He went in and
closed it quietly behind him.

Soundlessly, he whistled.

Nobody, but nobody, could be this neat.

Carefully, avoiding the rugs where possible, he trod the whole place,
the whole bare minimal totally efficient place.

Here was where a man could keep his changes of clothes, could wash,
could sleep (alone), could eat if he wanted to but usually didn’t. Here
he apparently did not relax, did not entertain, did not read or watch TV
(there was none) and did not even study. Well, a man like Lasvogel
probably did all his studying in his head. He didn’t need books, and if
it was facts he wanted, he had two telephones. The one with no number on
it was certainly an open line to the Institute.

Merrihew found nothing out of place, nothing not strictly Lasvogel’s,
except the note on the dinette table.

It was triangular, blue, dated, and cuter’n hell:

_Welcome, welcome, wherever you_
_are. Problem: to make perfect_
_beef Stroganoff exactly as_
_you like it, without knowing_
_when you’ll come_.
_Need one ingredient:_
_Dearest you_.
_Waiting_,

Leaning over the table to read it without touching it, Merrihew noticed
the funny little crossbar on the 7 of the date, European style, and
could admire the firm, strong, straight, yet completely feminine
handwriting. He backed off a pace to look at the note from a distance.
From the way it was placed on the table, he had a strong feeling that it
had not been read and tossed there. It had been so carefully centered
most likely by the sender, not the receiver.

And the date? Yesterday.

He continued his hands-off inventory: bathroom (where he detected
moisture not only on the toothbrush but on the soft bristles of an
old-fashioned badger shaving brush) and in the tiny kitchenette, where
he made his big find.

It—they, rather, were in the cupboard over the chopping block. The small
spice rack contained salt, pepper, seasoned salt, seasoned pepper—and
that was all. Beside the rack was an array of vitamin capsules—B
complex, glutamic acid and the usual vitamin-mineral once-a-day pill.
What faintly caught his eye, just as he turned away, was a glimpse of
something stashed behind the little spice rack.

Feeling that perhaps he was carrying caution to a ludicrous extreme—yet
silently chanting his mantra again—Merrihew got out his needle-beam
torch and peeked. He had to be mildly acrobatic to be able to read the
labels, but what he found was vitamins—two bottles. One was B complex
and iron, the other Vitamin E. Unlike the B complex out front, which
bore the name of a reputable drugstore chain, these hidden ones were
from Let’s Live! —one of those natural-food emporia of which Merrihew, a
confirmed carnivore, once had said, “They sell fruits and nuts to the
nuts and fruits.” It happened that he knew this one; it wasn’t far from
his office.

What the hell was Lazvogel doing in a place like that? And why should he
have bought more when he already had had (Merrihew bent to check) two
thirds of a bottle of B Complex? And if Lasvogel were simply storing
this new bottle—why wasn’t the Vitamin E out front?

It looked almost as if he had hidden them.

Resisting the temptation to find out if the bottles really were the
genuine article—for the screw-on caps were sealed with shrunk
plastic—Merrihew turned away and scanned the counters, the miniscule
stove. In the wastebasket was a piece of paper—a small bag with the
colophon of the Let’s Live! store on it. Merrihew’s eye photographed
just how it lay before he reached down and took it by the smallest
possible corner and lifted it out.

Handwriting.

_One of these you really need. So much better for you. Please take them.
The other one you don’t need at all (!!!) Please take them away!_

_Love and love_

_Ruthie_

Merrihew replaced the crumpled bag in the wastebasket precisely as he
had found it, took one more careful look at the whole place and let
himself out.

In the envelope Dr. Poole had given him there was no Ruthie. Hm.

He walked softly down the hall, checking his watch. Still plenty of
time. He let himself into Apartment 8D rather more quickly.

Apartment 8D was much more to his taste. In its way as well ordered as
Lasvogel’s, It was warm, colorful and lived-in—lived-in, too, by someone
who could own a green glass pear and the portrait of a smiling collie
because they were beautiful and not because they did anything. The
kitchenette was no longer than Lasvogel’s but marvelously equipped and
organized. The bed could sleep two and the presence of drapes and
spreads, rugs and cushions had eliminated that acoustically-live effect
Lasvogel’s place generated, wherein one’s very thoughts echoed and there
was nothing to absorb a human error. Merrihew, while retaining his
detachment, could not control the thought that if Lasvogel was throwing
this away he ought to have his glands candled.

Against one wall was a drop-leaf table, serving as a desk but ready to
be used for meals. It bore at the moment a block of triangular
notepaper, blue. He ran a fingertip lightly over its edges and nodded.
Practical, too. This was Institute stationery with the letterhead
guillotined off (making a square) and cut again on the diagonal, making
that charming triangular paper.

A piece of it lay on the desk, a felt-tipped pen next to it. In the
strong feminine handwriting he had seen on Lasvogel’s table, he read:

_Actually I have no claim on you in_
_any way, not even in the simple_
_matter of expecting promises_
_to be kept, and there is obviously_
_no reason for me_
_to oh, damn, what’s the_
_USE …_

The last words sprawled across the paper—he could see where the violent
pen had run clear off onto the table top.

Merrihew’s eyebrows twitched. Time was when he might have raised them.
This was obviously the end of a long series. The rest should be—ahh.

The wastebasket was half full of them. The ones on top were unruffled,
the ones lower down crushed, the ones at the very bottom torn into
little bits or twisted into tight little knots.

It must have been a long night.

He sampled the many drafts.

Cheerful: _Hello there! Remember me? I’m the one with the secret
vice—elaborate beef Stroganoff alone in my room. This could lead to—_

Indignant: _It may be that there are things in your life far more
important than—_

Comic: _HELP! I am a prisoner in a Stroganoff factory!_

Comitragic: To _whom it may concern: I am an orphaned beef Stroganoff.
Nobody wants me. My noodles are withered and my gravy cold_.

Tragicomic: _Oh pity the poor mathematician with her shining hair
brushed bright and the bed turned down, the wine untouched and the
Stroganoff cleaving to the cold old chafing-dish—_

Distraught: _Perhaps I needed this. In no other way could I have learned
how much I want you, need you. It’s so much more than mutual pleasure
and the joy of your nearness. I should be angry but instead I’m
grateful, but oh, it hurts—_

Furious: _You rotten bastard, you icy son of a bitch, whatever gave you
the idea that you could treat me like—_

Maternal: _Nothing matters if you’re all right, my dear. There will be
other times—any time you say—or none. If I can help in any way, I’m
here. If I can help most by leaving you alone while you work things out,
I’ll do that. But I am rather desperately worried about you. Please
eat_.

“Bastard,” Merrihew murmured as he carefully replaced the papers in the
wastebasket.

It must have been a long night.


III

He wondered if she had used her key and how often, “her shining hair
brushed bright—” she had run down the hall to that monkish cell, only to
find it dark and silent and her welcoming note unread on his table? Had
she dozed off some time in the early hours and awakened, stiff and
cramped at her writing table, to run down once more and perhaps done as
Merrihew had just done—checked the untenanted cot and the damp
toothbrush, realizing that Lasvogel had come home in the gray light to
wash and change and leave again—smelling probably of another woman’s
perfume? Smelling of organic soy sauce and sesame seed, rather. Who the
hell was Ruthie?

What was a guy like Lasvogel, with the fate of a whole planet in his
hands, doing with two absolutely superfluous time-consuming
body-and-mind-consuming entanglements like this.

Merrihew thought about those organic vitamins.

_One of them you need …_

That would be the B complex. These health nuts were ape for B complex
and the synthetics just would not do.

_ … you don’t need the other one, but take them anyway_.

Oh, boy. There used to be a whole megillah about the language of the
flowers, you’d send irises and a rose and a hunk of Queen Anne’s lace
and it meant I am panting for you, or some such. Nowadays you bring a
bottle of pills.

_You don’t need these (!!!)…._

Oh, this Ruthie, she is a cutie. Everyone knows Vitamin E’s the wildest
thing since the prairie oyster and Spanish fly. Lasvogel, you busy, busy
boy, you. So you have a date with this Hungarian slip-stick and her
Stroganoff and instead you’re out all night with your dish of yogurt and
her triple exclamation points—and you with all that homework to do. And
you bring home your trophies and hide them because you know the other
chick has a key.

And suddenly Merrihew knew what he must do. He knew it as he knew that
he must do it absolutely invisibly.

He had not the compunctions, here in Katrin Szabo’s apartment, that he
had had in Lasvogel’s austere environment; yet when he used the
telephone he was careful not to move it and to hold the receiver with
his handkerchief. He got his number.

_“Let’s live!”_ said the telephone.

“Hey man, amen,” said Merrihew, who hated people who said “man!”

“Is Ruthie there?”

“You mean Ruthie Gordoni.”

“Godbless, man.” _You just told me what I wanted to know_. But Merrihew
didn’t say that last part out loud. “Look around and see is she there
for me, man.”

A pause, then: “Not here. Wish she was,” the telephone added
garrulously. “This is a whole different place when she walks in. Someone
said just last night she’s a regular Earth Mother.”

“Far out,” said Merrihew, who hated people who say “far out.” “She’s the
one turned me on to your B and liver. I wanted to find her and thank
her, man. I’m really somebody different, man.”

“That’s Ruthie,” said the telephone with pride and joy. “Well she lives
right across the street, so she’ll be in. Who shall I say—”

“I’ll fall by myself soon, man. I’m almost out of pork fat molasses
anyway.”

“Blackstrap.”

“That’s what I said, man. So later, man.”

“Right on,” said the telephone fashionably and Merrihew hung up. He
glared sourly at it. “Far goddam out, man,” he murmured and went looking
for the phone book.

He found what he wanted and then, pausing only long enough to check out
the whole place for his spoor and finding none, he let himself out and
returned through the deserted hall way to Lasvogel’s door, which he now
opened in even less time than he had the girl’s. He was there only long
enough to fish the Let’s Live! bag out of the wastepaper basket and, in
an absolutely perfect copy of her handwriting, add the earth mother’s
last name and street address to her arch little note. He did not,
however, put it back. He left it on the floor beside the basket. In that
environment it shouted, it screamed, it stood out like an oil-spill on a
talcum beach.

He went back to his office and called Dr. Poole. “Finished,” he told
that startled gentleman. “I got to tell you this: he’ll get worse before
he gets better—and if you try to do anything about it you’ll screw
everything up. And if you call me to tell me bad things have happened to
him I’ll just say I know, I know.”

Dr. Poole said, “But—”

Merrihew was already saying, “Goodbye.”

He then went where phones couldn’t reach him for a while.

What a way to save the world.

The waiter went away with the order and Merrihew shot a look at Dr.
Poole. He looked older, a little, though it had been barely three weeks
since the last time. He also looked a hell of a lot happier.

“I can’t tell you exactly what he did, of course,” said Dr. Poole.

Merrihew nodded understandingly.

“Secrets, secrets,” he said.

“Nonsense, man! There are two kinds of secrets—the security kind, where
someone mustn’t find out something or you’ll get hurt—and the other
kind, where you’re expected to explain polymer transformations to a
four-year-old. You just can’t. So as one four-year-old to another, I can
merely bumble to you about DNA analogs, a chemical integument forming
temporarily around ripe ova, selectivity rather like the clumping that
forms sickle cells—and an overlooked environmental factor.”

“You mean there’s no smog in West Ecuador.”

“Jesus! How did you know that?”

“You told me. Most of it at lunch that time. I mean, West Ecuador could
only be one place in the whole world, from what you told me. And now you
mentioned ‘an overlooked environmental factor.’ ”

“Ah. Ah.” Dr. Poole nodded vehemently. “Good thing we—he cleared it up
as soon as he did. Anyway, it’s reformulated completely and if anyone
should ever make the same mistake again we can straighten it out in a
matter of hours. To put it as simply as possible, we now have something
which nullifies conception in any warm-blooded vertebrate—but only for
the current cycle. It doesn’t affect the cycle either and it has no side
effects. It can be taken as an individual dose or fogged—the way we did
it at West Ecuador—to affect millions. We can bend the population curve
downward anywhere—to any degree.”

“And now who gets it? Government? U.N.? Or just you?”

“You don’t want to know that.”

“You’re right.”

The drinks came. Rather happily they silently toasted one another.
“Now,” said Dr. Poole, “tell me. How did you do it? Matter of fact, what
did you do?”

“Maybe I should keep my secrets, too.”

“There are two kinds of secrets,” Dr. Poole reminded him.

Most uncharacteristically, Merrihew laughed. He did not do it very well.
Not enough practice. “_Touché_. Uh—I drew a hell of a slice out of that
account you set up. I wouldn’t want you to regret paying out all that
money for the little I did.”

Dr. Poole waved that away. “There’s an old story about a mechanic who
fixed a big rotary printing press by going inside and whacking something
once with a hammer. He billed for $2500.25, and when they asked for an
accounting and itemization, he said the quarter was for whacking it with
the hammer. The $2500 was for knowing where to whack.”

“Goddam,” said Merrihew. “I was going to tell you that very same story.”

“Tell me what you did.”

“I studied your envelope pretty carefully. Your Lasvogel shows an
interesting pattern. He’s a multi talented man—and I don’t think his
talents are completely under his conscious control. Some people blow up
under stress. Some people sharpen up. Lasvogel sharpens. The tougher the
problem—and/or the more urgent—the sharper he gets. The West Ecuador
problem could hardly have been tougher or more urgent. Every second it
got more so. Lasvogel, I think, began to get a little frantic. I think
that maybe for the first time in his life he began to feel that the
problem wasn’t going to produce enough pressure to squeeze out an
answer. It began to show.”

“Oh, it did,” breathed Dr. Poole.

Merrihew said, “I don’t for a minute believe that Lasvogel consciously
realized why he then did what he did. Which was to go out and get
himself another chick.”

The waiter came, puttered, chuntered and ultimately went away, during
which whole time Dr. Poole frowned unseeingly at the puttering and
chuntering.

“I suppose,” he said when they were private again, “that he needed to
get his mind off the—”

“He got a new chick without getting rid of the old one,” said Merrihew.
“There is in all the world no more certain way for a man to get himself
into trouble than that. There’s no more efficient method for a man to
complicate things for himself, to face more unpredictable and
unmanageable hassle.”

“And you were able to stop it.”

“Haven’t you been listening? My God, you know him better than I do or
ever will! Lasvogel has total confidence in his ability and he had total
devotion to the West Ecuador problem. I mean he knew the answer was in
there somewhere and he knew he wasn’t getting enough pressure out of the
work. Even if it was about to squash him flat it still wasn’t enough to
make the answer come. So he just went out and bought more pressure.”

“Without knowing why?”

“I really don’t think so,” said Merrihew. “Consciously knowing it would
make it game-playing, not real—and the pressures then wouldn’t be real
either. Which is why playing tricks on yourself never works.”

“Incredible. So—what did you do?”

“Nothing essential. What happened was inevitable, so in a way you didn’t
need me at all. On the other hand, I did make the inevitable happen a
hell of a lot sooner, which is why you got your problem solved when you
did.”

“Why we got it solved, period,” Dr. Poole asserted warmly. “Lasvogel was
at the bitter end, believe me.”

“You’d know,” conceded Merrihew. “I don’t—I never saw the guy. Or the
chicks. That was the only real trouble I had—making it happen without
touching anybody. So I just did what you scientist types called bringing
in a force or factor which is necessary and sufficient. I saw to it that
the two girls got to know each other. I knew your Miss Szabo was due
home before Lasvogel, and that she would sit down and brood a bit, that
she would get mad and barge into his place—and that she would not only
see the evidence I left for her but would snatch it up and take it away
with her.”

“What evidence?”

“The other woman’s name and address.”

“But how would that guarantee—”

“It was guaranteed, if you know Miss Szabo.”

“You seem to have gotten to know her quite well.”

“Never saw her,” said Merrihew, watching, behind his eyes, a succession
of careful blue triangles, lines of strong, angry, devoted, injured
handwriting. “But in a way you’re right. I knew she’d go straight there
and have it out.”

“What happened?”

“We’ll never know. Whatever it was, Lasvogel walked in on it.”

“That must have been the night he limped into the lab with the scratches
on his face and the big bruise on his cheekbone.”

“Language of love,” said Merrihew. “One of ’em.”

“And by morning he had the new formulation.”

“Pressure enough,” said Merrihew, spreading his hands in a Q.E.D.
gesture. “Necessary and sufficient.”

“Oh, dear,” said Dr. Poole thoughtfully.

“What is it’?”

“I can’t complain, I suppose. I said before—you heard me—that if
Lasvogel solved this one he could retire with honor. In effect he
probably has—and we won’t be getting much from him from now on.”

“Why?”

Dr. Poole leaned forward with his I-don’t-gossip-but-you-should-know
expression. “This wouldn’t be a Miss Ruth Gordoni?”

“No,” said Merrihew. “Ruthie.”

“Ah. Well, Lasvogel has moved, you know. Taken a house. And according to
my sources Miss Szabo has moved in with him. And, ah, Miss Gordoni also.
They seem to have become fast friends, all three.”

And Merrihew really did laugh, this time. “Friend,” he said, putting his
hand on Dr. Poole’s shoulder, “You’re going to get work out of Lasvogel
like you never got before. And he’s still got a lot to do if the
totalitarian principle of physics inherent in this mess is to be kept
permanently at bay. It goes something like this: ‘Anything not forbidden
is compulsory.…’ He’s found a way to keep the pressure on and an
environment that won’t even let him get sick. Beef Stroganoff with
Vitamin E sauce—” and he dissolved into laughter again and wouldn’t
explain.



THE VERITY FILE


CONFIDENTIAL:

AUTHORIZED EYES ONLY

ETHICOLOSSUS INC.

Office of the Director of Research

Interoffice Memo

  ----- ---------------------------
  To:   Albert Verity, M.D.
        Assistant to the Director
  ----- ---------------------------

An examination of requisitions on file indicates the use of equipment
and materials not readily explained by the nature of projects under
development in your laboratory. I am, of course, quite certain that
these requisitions are justified, but a word of explanation would be
appreciated. Should you wish more specific information as to which
requisitions are referred to, I shall supply it.

Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.

Director of Research

  ----- ---------------------
  cc:   Samuel Rebate, M.D.
        President
  ----- ---------------------

P.S. by hand. _Prexy’s boy Uriah Legree (did you know he always calls
our president Prexy?) has been snooping, hence the copy to the Old Man.
Sorry. But what the hell are you doing with a hard-vacuum still? I’ll
try to cover for you but you cover for me—for not keeping an eye on
you_. G. Q.-P.

ETHICOLOSSUS, INC.

Interoffice Memo

SEALED: PERSONAL

  --------------------- ----------------
  To: Geoffrey Quest-   Profitte, M.D.
  --------------------- ----------------

Damn it, Geoff, of all times for you to be away at The Ethical Drug
Convention! All I can do is write this informally and hope that when you
get back you’ll come straight down here and let me show you the biggest
breakthrough in the history of the company. Company, hell—the biggest
thing since the scalpel was invented. Hang tight, boss. Fend off Prexy
and his snooper for a little while longer while I get it written up and
he’ll forgive you—and therefore me—everything.

Just to whet your curiosity, though, let me tell you that my latest
requisition is for more mice, lot A64 and L073. In case it’s slipped
your mind what these are, the first is Malignancies, inherited, and the
second is Carcinoma, induced. The previous three lots of each group are
cured—remitted—normal. I mean 100%, Geoff—and I mean overnight, every
time. And the seven litters I have so far from the first lot—and one
from the second, check out normal.

I know as well as anybody does how careful everyone has to be, and how
much time and cross-checking we have to go through, but I’m telling
you—this stuff is a one-shot, overnight cure not only for lesions but
for systemic metastasization. You don’t believe this as you read it and
I don’t expect you to, so get down here and I’ll show you.

And by the way—before you get to polishing up a medal for me—this isn’t
my discovery. All I’m doing is repeating the procedures of the guy who
did discover it and I’m going to see to it that he gets the credit for
it. My results-of-record extend back three months. His go back four
years. So hurry back and get your thing down here.

Al

P.S. It also cures warts.

P.P.S. The discoverer is Max Orloff. He’s a neighbor and a friend of
mine.

P.P.P.S. On second thought, I’ll include photocopies of my results.

Did I mention what the raw materials cost? Nothing.

P.P.P.P.S. If I sound a little manic—wouldn’t you?

A.V.

Last and ultimate and blockbusting P.S. because _I’ll_ bust wide open if
I don’t tell somebody, even if I put my life in your hands. Aunt Mollie
gave a party last Saturday and cooked one of her legendary feasts—for
thirty people. She spent the whole day before—and most of the
night—cooking. And the day before that shopping.

A.V.

ETHICOLOSSUS, INC.

Interoffice Memo

  ----- ---------------------------
  To:   Albert Verity, M.D.
        Assistant to the Director
  ----- ---------------------------

Just a word to acknowledge your efforts during my visit to your
laboratory. You will of course assign my lack of response to a deeply
ingrained caution—the caution so necessary to all of us in the ethical
drug trade. Above all the stature and reputation of the firm must be
maintained and I am sure you will observe the same kind of caution. As I
predicted, the requisitions in question are quite justified. Hereafter,
however, it would be appreciated if you would report any new directions
in research to this office before the fact. Keep up the good work.

Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.

Director of Research

  ----- ---------------------
  cc:   Samuel Rebate, M.D.
        President
  ----- ---------------------

P.S. by hand. _You recognize this as a slap on the wrist, very light
because of the results. For God’s sake don’t talk about this on the
outside—it could start riots. Matter of fact, don’t talk about it on the
inside either. As for your Aunt Mollie—I almost fainted. That I don’t
want talked about again—even to me. You took a terrible chance there and
I for one am going to forget it. Sometimes you scare me, Al. A good
thing I can be trusted_.

G.

ETHICOLOSSUS, INC.

Office of the President

CONFIDENTIAL

  ----- -------------------------------
  To:   Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.
        Director of Research.
  ----- -------------------------------

I very much appreciate your sending me your interoffice correspondence
with Dr. Verity. It was no more than your duty. I suggest to you—knowing
it is hardly necessary—just what you suggested to Dr. Verity. We’d best
keep this in the family. I am certainly going to keep it to myself. By
the way—I fail to comprehend the reference to “Aunt Mollie.” Can you
elucidate’?

_Endorsement:_ I totally agree with you, Dr. Rebate, that the Verity
file falls into my province as Director of Security.

In response to your request for suggestions, I think that first of all,
Dr. Verity must be isolated—without his knowing it. I would suggest a
security examination of his laboratory and papers each night after
hours—and that the mailroom be alerted so that his correspondence
interoffice and outside (God forbid) can be examined. His telephone can
easily be put on delay—as is done on radio talk-shows—and monitored so
that before an incautious word gets out of the building it can be cut. I
think that to stop his work or to divert it would only alert him.
Meanwhile I think an outside investigation of this Orloff person (that
name has a bad ring to it, Doctor) is indicated, together with the
nature of his relationship with Dr. Verity.

Who is Aunt Mollie?

Howlan Beagle, Col. (Ret.)

Director of Security

_Endorsement:_ The one thing that strikes me is Dr. Verity’s statement
that the raw material “costs nothing.” Can you get me a nontechnical
description of this “nothing”? I don’t believe it, of course, unless
it’s a figure of speech. But it worries me. Makes it too easy for the
competition to undersell us once they analyze the product.

Tip Turner

Director of Sales

_Endorsement:_ I appreciate a look at this file. I wouldn’t say that at
this stage the matter is in my department, but unless we are extremely
cautious it might well be—and a nightmare to boot. I, too, very much
doubt that this Orloff has anything—or Dr. Verity either—but the matter
should be investigated. I will be glad to go with whoever investigates
this person. He may require some handling. Let me know.

Genteel Flack

Director of Public Relations

ETHICOLOSSUS, INC.

Interoffice Memo

  ----- ---------------------
  To:   Albert Verity, M.D.
  ----- ---------------------

Can you give me a brief description of the process you used to produce
the serum you used on those mice? You know the one I mean. Never mind
the technicalities.

Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.

Director of Research.

P.S. by hand. _Seal your response_.

G. Q.-P.

Interoffice Memo.

  ----- -------------------------------
  To:   Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.
        Director of Research
  ----- -------------------------------

Sure. You start with the spore of _Mucor Mucedo_. What you want is the
endospore, but you don’t have to excavate for it. Just let it develop
the germ tube and nip it off before it branches. Stick these in your
bell jar or whatever you’re using for a quick hard vacuum and freeze-dry
it. You’ll get an aqueous vapor that can be bubbled through distilled
water until it saturates. Run it into your still. What comes out of the
top pipe you can throw away. Same with the bottom. The one in the middle
is what you call the serum, though I wouldn’t—it’s an aromatic extract.
Does that answer your question?

A.V.

Interoffice Memo

To: The President

Here is Turner’s question which mightily impressed me; that man knows
his trade—and Dr. Verity’s answer. For our Sales Manager’s information
(not yours, of course) _Mucor Mucedo_ is the common black mold, found in
soil practically everywhere. The endospore is just what the word
says—the inner white substance of the spore. The germ tubes grow out of
the spore, which cracks open its black rind to let it out. Precisely
what happens in that sort of distillation I can’t say without an
analytical series.

It is, as Turner suggested, rather alarmingly simple and inexpensive.
Shall I suggest to Dr. Verity that he try to synthesize it?

Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.

Director of Research

ETHICOLOSSUS, INC.

Office of the President

Interoffice Memo

  ----- -------------------------------
  To:   Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.
        Director of Research
  ----- -------------------------------

Good thinking!

Samuel Rebate, M.D.

President

Interoffice Memo

To: Geoffrey Quest-Profitte

Director of Research

Good thinking!

Tip Turner

Director of Sales

Interoffice Memo

SEALED: PERSONAL

Geoff, what in God’s name is wrong with the people upstairs? Synthesize
it? Sure I can synthesize it. It’ll take twenty-two steps and thousands
of dollars worth of equipment and time and who knows if the final
distillate will do the same thing? Okay, okay—I’ll get to it (though
better not let Prexy’s boy find out about the requisitions it’s going to
take) because after all I only work here. But why on earth synthesize
something that’s so easy to come by already? Are we going to price
life-saving right out of the market? Sometimes I fail to see the humor
in the ethical drug business. Or the ethics either. Don’t mind me,
Geoff. I’m just blowing off steam. You’ll get your goddam synthesis.
Thanks for the private shoulder.

Disgustedly,

Al

_Endorsement:_ Hardly a loyal attitude, that.

Howlan Beagle, Colonel (Ret.)

Director of Security

From the desk of:

Uriah Legree

Assistant to the President

Picked up Mr. Flack at prearranged time, 8:00 A.M. Tuesday, driving
personal car. Arrived vicinity Orloff residence shortly after 9:00.
After considerable excursions up and down unfashionable streets without
success, queried local gas station, asking for Max Orloff. Attendant,
Grand ol’ Opry type, overalls, old straw hat even, cigar stub
interfering with diction, said Balzac, Baldaz, Boldass or Bolaz?
—difficult to tell which and not understandable until later. Mr. Flack
said again, Max Orloff and the native said, Yeah, that’s ol’ Baldaz (or
Balzac or some such) and gave explicit directions.

House on top of hill behind screen of trees—three, four acres
cultivated, garden vegetables, grapes, cow, duck pond, rabbit hutch.
Sign on door WE LIVE WITHOUT CLOTHES. IF THIS MAKES YOU UNCOMFORTABLE
PLEASE RING AND WE WILL DRESS. IF NOT, PLEASE KNOCK. Reached for
doorbell. Mr. Flack stopped me and knocked, said always take the sucker
at his own measure.

Door open, man in his forties wearing hair to shoulders, beard period.
Waved us in asking nothing. Big room, beams, fireplace, loom. Weaving at
loom young woman wearing long yellow hair period. Smiled. Second young
woman comes in door at back, suppose kitchen, wearing full skirt long
black hair period, says, Oh, hello, I’ll get tea. Started to say no. Mr.
Flack said, Thanks yes. Man said, That’s Joyce, woman at loom, that’s
Jocelyn. Jocelyn ties off thread, comes to us, kisses Mr. Flack, kisses
me just after I caught Mr. Flack’s Hold Still signal. Mr. Flack
introduces himself and me and says we’re from Ethicolossus. The man acts
very glad, says he’s Max Orloff. Sit down. Nothing to sit on but great
big half-filled bright-colored velvet bags. Mr. Flack sits on one, his
weight makes it shape itself like a kind of chair without legs. I try
one carefully, lose balance, fall into it, it catches me, sure enough a
chair, much too low but comfortable. Orloff says, Jocelyn made them.
Jocelyn sits on the floor in front of, between us. Smiles a lot.

Mr. Flack tells Orloff how impressed everyone at Ethicolossus is with
him and his work and a lot more about saving the world from misery and
pain. Orloff takes it all in as if he believes every word and after a
while I think he really does. Mr. Flack doing all talking, slow and
easy, Jocelyn says to me Like to see the place? Mr. Flack flashes me a
quick nod and Jocelyn gets up and holds out hand. Don’t want hand, don’t
want to go, but Mr. Flack gives signal again and I get up. Jocelyn keeps
hand. Very unsettling. Go out through kitchen, brick and iron stove,
burning wood I guess. Beams, cast-iron and copper, tile floor. Big. See
larder, root cellar, spring house, bedrooms with mattress covering whole
floor, twenty cats with names, stories, four dogs, doves. Jocelyn tells
how they live off the land, buy only salt, flour, matches and the like,
not even sugar, they keep bees. Orloff’s lab. Like an alchemist’s
workshop—lot of stuff usually glass is ceramic. Jocelyn says Joyce makes
it.

On the way back in she stops and takes both my hands and says, Oh,
please, will Ethicolossus buy Max’s discovery? Said I don’t know, but
maybe. She says, Oh, and tears come into her eyes. Says it’s been very
hard for a long time. Max could lose the place. It would take such a
little bit to let him keep it. Went back in. Joyce has tray with mugs.
All go into big room. Mr. Flack and Orloff heads together over papers,
Max has Mr. Flack’s pen. Joyce says, Tea? I don’t want it but Mr. Flack
takes his and gives me the look. I take the big mug, guess Joyce made
that, too, took a drink. Herbs. Awful. Mr. Flack drank his all up, so me
too. Everybody happy enough to make a man puke. We leave, both girls
kiss us, afraid Max Orloff might, too.

In car, Mr. Flack laughs all the way down the hill, says, You’d never
believe what we got the process for—fifty dollars, a lousy fifty
dollars. Only Orloff does not know that and will not until he shows
those papers to a lawyer. Told him Orloff about to lose the place. Mr.
Flack said, Good, glad we got there before he moved. Said this world is
sharks and minnows and the minnows live to get eaten, that’s what they
are for.

Dropped off Mr. Flack at Ethicolossus, proceeded to county airport for
second part of investigation. Lunched at airport, caught Flight 803 as
planned, landed at Breed City 3:18 P.M. Hired car, proceeded to Mollie
Verity neighborhood, checked out house. Trees on street made it like
tunnel, houses far apart, old-fashioned, gingerbread, porches, porticos,
porte cocheres. Old but neat, paint bright. Shutters on most, wide
lawns, picket fences, flowers. Verity house light gray with green
shutters. Drive to corner, candy store. Call. Say I work with Dr.
Verity, just passing through. Miss Verity sounds very hospitable. Drive
back and park. Little lady bounces off porch glider, meets me halfway up
front walk, takes both hands. Different thing from that Jocelyn
altogether. Eyes bright as headlights, hair graying but not much and
pulled back so tight it hurt into little bun. Apple cheeks really.
Looked like all her own teeth. Gingham dress, blue with white polka dots
and white collar and white tea apron, looked like that what’s-his-name
that used to paint _Post_ covers. Rockwell. Harder to believe than naked
Orloff.

Inside, not a word until lemonade in tall glass with ice and homemade
ginger and lemon cookies. Then all about Albert, how is Albert, is he
working too hard, does he look peak-ed? Never had to say I don’t see Dr.
Verity one month to the next. She carried it all.

Have to say if I didn’t see this woman myself, couldn’t believe both her
and the medical report Col. Beagle gave me to read. Report said total
terminal, metastasis, gone everywhere, weight less than 80 pounds,
delirium to coma. Then spontaneous remission. But all that only months
ago, now healthiest little lady around, full of bounce, laughing, always
on the move. Said it herself—cancer did her good. Never had so much
energy before, nor so much fun.

No trouble at all getting her to talk about it. About Al Verity either.
Sun rises and sets on him. Golden boy. Not just family pride, real
miracle-worker, all that. Couldn’t get her to say what if anything he’d
done. She was too far gone to know.

But she said this, she said she came out of the haze and the pain
laughing. She says she never felt so good in all her life, better even
than now. She said she saw colors she had never seen before, had no
names for them. Shifting, balanced patterns, moving mosaics. Everything
part of the colors—sound—click of a spoon, footsteps,
airplane—translated into the colors, joined them. Then,
dreams—impossible flying and living and feeling dreams, realer than most
real things. And all the while feeling great.

Then hungry. Couldn’t get enough. Her folks and friends laughed, then
got worried. Gained eighteen pounds in three weeks, all of it in the
right places, kept on feeling good, so not to worry.

Gave me a piece of fruitcake, says it’s Albert’s favorite, says that I
should give it to him.

Somebody else better do that. At least till he finds out from someone
else.

Like my job. Lot of different things to do all the time. Never had a
worse morning, though, or a better afternoon. Maybe some day see that
lady again.

Expense account attached.

Uriah Legree

Assistant to the President.

_Endorsement:_ I attest to the accuracy of Legree’s photographic eye and
telegraphic prose. I cannot completely identify with his sketches of me,
but then, why cavil? That is not the issue. What is most seriously the
issue is that the treatment she had, however she got it or from whom,
seems to be psychedelic or at least euphoric. That won’t do.

Genteel Flack

Director, Public Relations

_Endorsement:_ What is overridingly important—and I am astonished at the
reluctance of both these gentlemen to point it out—is that this Orloff
is a nudist with long hair who has an open and irregular arrangement
with not one, but two females. I would advise strongly against any
association with a person of this sort. One can readily assume what his
politics is. There are more kinds of security, apparently, than these
gentlemen realize.

Howlan Beagle, Col. (Ret.)

Director of Security

_Endorsement:_ As the long-haired man would doubtless say, the Colonel
can cool it. With those signed papers in hand there is no danger of any
such association. Dr. Quest-Profitte: when you have read through this,
see what you can do about getting the euphoric effect out of the
distillate.

Samuel Rebate, M.D.

President

Interoffice Memo

  ----- ---------------------
  To:   Albert Verity, M.D.
  ----- ---------------------

Al, I’ve been studying your diagrams of the aromatic rings in the Orloff
distillate, as well as your chromatography charts, and it seems to me
that there may possibly be a parallel or analogical similarity between
some of these fractions and such compounds as psilocybin. If so, there
may be unexpected and certainly unwanted side effects. Will you please
check this out for me?

Geoffrey Quest- Profitte, M.D.

Director of Research

Interoffice Memo

SEALED: PERSONAL

  --------------------- ----------------------
  To: Geoffrey Quest-   Profitte; M.D.
                        Director of Research
  --------------------- ----------------------

I’m impressed. I really wouldn’t have thought you or anyone could have
discovered that analogue by the rough reports I sent up, though it is
there if you know what to look for. The answer is yes—the stuff gives a
tremendous high and I have the happiest mice in the world. If you’re
worried that people might buy it for that, like glue-sniffers, forget
it—it seems to have no effect on anyone but cancer patients. It’ll take
a lot of testing to prove that out, but it seems to be the case—so much
so that I was about to broach the subject of a line of research to
investigate the distillate as a diagnostic.

Would you favor such an approach? I believe it would bear fruit—and,
rather quickly, at that.

Work progresses on the synthesis, which I still think is a vast waste of
time, but indications are that the synthetic product will work as well
as the natural derivative.

By the way, I dropped over to see Orloff the other night and he was in
seventh heaven. He showed me the agreements with Ethicolossus and I find
them extremely generous. It’s going to make a great deal of difference
to a very good man.

Right?

Al

Interoffice Memo

To: Albert Verity M.D.

Al, you’ll have to get the euphoric effect right out of the distillate.
Dr. Rebate, Mr. Flack, Mr. Turner and I have conferred on the matter and
it’s unanimous. The thing to shoot for is an effect no more marked than
that of the common tranquilizers or so-called psychic energizers. That
much would be fine. Can you do it?

The answer to your question re using the Orloff distillate as a
diagnostic is, of course, answered by the above.

Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.

Director of Research

Dear Geoff:

I’m taking advantage of you, I know—and also of a certain symbolism.
This is a letter on plain paper and in a plain envelope—for plain talk,
for once not under the engraved umbrella of the Ethicolossus name and
image. This is me—Al—the guy downstairs who shovels mouse turds and
tries his damnedest to do what he wants in the way you say you want it.

Let me sidle into the subject. Years ago there was a wonderful English
humorist, almost forgotten today, whose name was Jerome K. Jerome. He
was a very funny man. He was also gentle, quizzical, questioning and
bright as hell—one of those rare human beings who was capable of
exploring the everyday world as if it were a foreign country, full of
strange practices and heathen idols—which of course it was and is.

Remember one of his simplest, gentlest little essays. It was about baby
dresses. In his day—around the turn of the century—it was customary to
make dresses about four feet long for infants. He began to wonder about
this, as he wondered about everything his eye lit on, so he went to an
expert to find an answer. The expert was one of those legendary English
nannies pushing a pram in a London park. “Why do babies wear such long
dresses?” he asked her, and she replied, just this side of shock: “My
goodness, sir! You wouldn’t have them in _short_ dresses, would you?”

Now the point of the essay isn’t that she didn’t know and was admitting
it. The point is that she did know and that was her answer. Further, it
was an answer that absolutely satisfied her, the kind of answer you find
at the end of a theorem, or carved on a tablet of stone for Moses.

We’ve run head on into one just like that. You want me to take the
“upper” effect out of what I’ll be so incautious as to call a cancer
cure. I understand what you’re doing. You’re protecting Ethicolossus
against charges which might be brought against it once the news was out:
I’ll concede that they _will_ be made when it gets out. But it seems not
to have occurred to you that the charges can be refuted—and should be.

First of all there’s a safety factor. I think it will be proved beyond
doubt that that euphoric effect will not occur except in the presence of
malignancy. But absolutely aside from that—did it ever occur to you to
ask, “What’s the matter with sick people feeling good?”

Why is it that morphine is the mainstay in terminal analgesis? You know
as well as I do that there are a dozen or a score other drugs which will
kill pain as well or better, which are not used simply and solely
because they are euphorics. It isn’t a medical issue, it’s a moral
one—and it’s the kind of morality that has no place in medicine—not the
kind Hippocrates was talking about, nor my kind either. It’s the kind of
morality that forced the Chinese doctor to examine his female patients
by means of an ivory doll passed through the curtains, marked where it
hurt. It’s the kind that made anatomical dissection virtually impossible
for over a thousand years.

We don’t give euphorics to dying patients because somehow it’s wrong for
them to go out feeling good. We do a little something to keep them from
feeling too bad or from feeling at all—but somehow it’s immoral to let
them go out happy.

In the case of Orloff’s distillate we have to think one step further.
Suddenly I see the whole R&D of this amazing substance aborted because
patients might feel good—not while they’re dying, but while they’re
getting well!

I’d hate to have to explain that to a man from Mars.

Hey, Geoff—I’m really grateful that I have your shoulder to cry on in
private like this. I get frustrated from time to time and this helps.

Al

ETHICOLOSSUS, INC.

Interoffice Memo

SEALED: PERSONAL

  ----- ---------------------------
  To:   Albert Verity, M.D.
        Assistant to the Director
  ----- ---------------------------

There is very little I can say in response to your good letter, except
that I share in your pleasure in this means of making yourself feel
better. It seems to me that the proper place and time for investigations
into the philosophy and morality of the healing arts is at two in the
morning after too much weak beer in one’s second year of medical school.
These things can hardly be the concern of men of our degree of age and
experience, especially not on company time. I will go so far as to point
out to you that our function in pharmaceuticals is to serve medical
practice, not to alter it. Let physicians make these alterations. When
and if they do, we shall accommodate them. We can do no more. We must do
no more, Dr. Verity.

I do not think your letter was what, in law, is called a responsive
answer to my query as to the possibility of recompounding the Orloff
distillate in such wise as to reduce or eliminate the deleterious side
effects. Please advise me.

And, of course, continue to feel free to express yourself to me in any
way you see fit. It pleases me to have this function.

Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.

Director of Research

Interoffice Memo

  ----- -------------------------------
  To:   Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.
        Director of Research.
  ----- -------------------------------

Please refer to the ring diagrams and chromatograph charts on which you
recently commented and from which you so expertly deduced the
parallelism of the distillate with certain psychomimetics. These
diagrams and charts present a far less subtle statement of the
impossibility of making the alteration you suggest. It is analogous to
asking a metallurgist to substitute lead for tungsten as a hardening
alloy. No matter what the derivation—natural or synthetic—Orloff’s
distillate will not work without that structure. It is not I who makes
this statement, Doctor, but biochemistry.

Albert Verity, M.D.

Assistant to the Director

_Endorsement:_ You smacked him too hard, Geoff. Once he begins to doubt
the source of your information about the euphoric effect, he will begin
to doubt a great many other things. Better call him off the project
before he does.

Samuel Rebate, M.D.

President

_Endorsement:_ Some people just don’t know how to handle people.

Q.-P-Doll should have cleared it with me.

Genteel Flack

Director, Public Relations

_Endorsement:_ If anyone bothered to ask my advice, I’d have said a long
time back, kick him out altogether. Not a good teammate at all. The
price of liberty is eternal vigilance.

Howlan Beagle, Col. (Ret.)

Director of Security

_Endorsement:_ The man gives me the creeps. I have this nightmare about
our marketing the Orloff thing and it doesn’t work. I have this other
nightmare about our marketing it and it does work. And I don’t know
which is worse. I don’t want to say any more than that and don’t need
to.

Tip Turner

Director of Sales

_Endorsement:_ Don’t care what happens. All I know is I got to eat his
Aunt Mollie’s fruitcake. Great.

Uriah Legree

Assistant to the President

_Endorsement:_ Just leave him to me and don’t tell me I can’t handle my
people.

Geoffrey Quest-Profitte

Director of Research

ETHICOLOSSUS, INC.

Interoffice Memo

  ----- ----------------------------
  To:   Albert Verity, M.D.
        Assistant to the Director.
  ----- ----------------------------

I concur in your conclusion that nothing can be done about the
unfortunate side effects inherent in the Orloff distillate. We have
therefore concluded that the project had best be shelved. Please collect
all files and notes and have them delivered to me, complete and indexed,
not later than noon tomorrow. I am making arrangements to have all
unnecessary materials, specimens, test animals and equipment removed
from your laboratory immediately. You may proceed with the previously
authorized projects assigned to you.

Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.

Director of Research

Interoffice Memo

  ----- -------------------------------
  To:   Geoffrey Quest-Profitte, M.D.
        Director of Research
  ----- -------------------------------

Why don’t you square with yourself if not with me’? The Orloff
distillate will disappear into the archives (and now I understand why
your terms with Max were so generous: they were all contingent on
production; now for fifty lousy dollars you’ve gained all right and
title to his discovery) and it is being buried

—because Max Orloff has no medical degree

—because he is a known eccentric

—because the distillate can be easily produced from readily available
materials, duplication is likely and profit is small, or

—because a big markup couldn’t be concealed.

But mostly because the existence of such a treatment would send shudders
through the Big Machine and all its many parts—Ethicolossus, the
pharmacists, the doctors, the hospitals, the hospital-supply firms, the
“chronic” rest-homes and all their heirs and assigns, cohorts and
confederates.

And I quit.

I resign with great joy—not because I am defeated in this project, but
because Orloff and his work and his way of life are bigger than anyone’s
business or career or prestige and I want no part of any of that. You
will call me a dropout, but I will go ahead with the healing I was
trained for—and with no more dirt on my hands than I get from weeding
the eggplant patch. You’ll never pin a malpractice on me because I am on
to you. The papers Orloff signed are no good to you because Orloff
exists and the distillate exists and I exist—and because of that people
are just going to get better and they’ll pay for it by harvesting
tomatoes and chopping wood. And here’s one more thing to think about.
With Orloff—especially with me and Orloff—there’s more where that came
from; more products, processes, ideas.

But you don’t want to hear any of this. You can’t, can you? Albert
Verity, M.D.



OCCAM’S SCALPEL


I

Joe Trilling had a funny way of making a living. It was a good living,
but of course he didn’t make anything like the bundle he could have in
the city. On the other hand he lived in the mountains a half mile away
from a picturesque village in clean air and piney-birchy woods along
with lots of mountain laurel and he was his own boss. There wasn’t much
competition for what he did; he had his wife and kids around all the
time and more orders than he could fill. He was one of the night people
and after the family had gone to bed he could work quietly and
uninterruptedly. He was happy as a clam.

One night—very early morning, really—he was interrupted. Buppup, bup,
bup. Knock at the window, two shorts, two longs. He froze, he whirled,
for he knew that knock. He hadn’t heard it for years but it had been a
part of his life since he was born. He saw the face outside and filled
his lungs for a whoop that would have roused them at the fire station on
the village green, but then he saw the finger on the lips and let the
air out. The finger beckoned and Joe Trilling whirled again, turned down
a flame, read a gauge, made a note, threw a switch and joyfully but
silently dove for the outside door. He slid out, closed it carefully,
peered into the dark.

“Karl?”

“Shh.”

There he was, edge of the woods. Joe Trilling went there and, whispering
because Karl had asked for it, they hit each other, cursed, called each
other the filthiest possible names. It would not be easy to explain this
to an extra-terrestrial; it isn’t necessarily a human thing to do. It’s
a cultural thing. It means, I want to touch you, it means I love you;
but they were men and brothers, so they hit each other’s arms and
shoulders and swore despicable oaths and insults, until at last even
those words wouldn’t do and they stood in the shadows, holding each
other’s biceps and grinning and drilling into each other with their
eyes. Then Karl Trilling moved his head side-wards toward the road and
they walked away from the house.

“I don’t want Hazel to hear us talking,” Karl said “I don’t want her or
anyone to know I was here. How is she?”

“Beautiful. Aren’t you going to see her at all—or the kids?”

“Yes but not this trip. There’s the car. We can talk there. I really am
afraid of that bastard.”

“Ah,” said Joe. “How is the great man?”

“Po’ly,” said Karl. “But we’re talking about two different bastards. The
great man is only the richest man in the world, but I’m not afraid of
him, especially now. I’m talking about Cleveland Wheeler.”

“Who’s Cleveland Wheeler?”

They got into the car. “It’s a rental,” said Karl. “Matter of fact, it’s
the second rental. I got out of the executive jet and took a company car
and rented another—and then this. Reasonably sure it’s not bugged.
That’s one kind of answer to your question, who’s Cleve Wheeler. Other
answers would be the man behind the throne. Next in line. Multifaceted
genius. Killer shark.”

“Next in line,” said Joe, responding to the only clause that made any
sense. “The old man is sinking?”

“Officially—and an official secret—his hemoglobin reading is four. That
mean anything to you, Doctor?”

“Sure does, Doctor. Malnutritive anemia, if other rumors I hear are
true. Richest man in the world—dying of starvation.”

“And old age—and stubbornness—and obsession. You want to hear about
Wheeler?”

“Tell me.”

“Mister lucky. Born with everything. Greek coin profile. Michaelangelo
muscles. Discovered early by a bright-eyed elementary school, principal,
sent to a private school, used to go straight to the teachers’ lounge in
the morning and say what he’d been reading or thinking about. Then
they’d tell off a teacher to work with him or go out with him, or
whatever. High school at twelve, varsity track, basketball, football and
high-diving—three letters for each—yes, he graduated in three years,
summa cum. Read all the textbooks at the beginning of each term, never
cracked them again. More than anything else he had the habit of success.

“College, the same thing: turned sixteen in his first semester, just ate
everything up. Very popular. Graduated at the top again, of course.”

Joe Trilling, who had slogged through college and medical school like a
hodcarrier, grunted enviously. “I’ve seen one or two like, that.
Everybody marvels, nobody sees how easy it was for them.”

Karl shook his head. “Wasn’t quite like that with Cleve Wheeler. If
anything was easy for him it was because of the nature of his equipment.
He was like a four-hundred horsepower car moving in sixty-horsepower
traffic. When his muscles were called on he used them, I mean really put
it down to the floor. A very willing guy. Well—he had his choice of
jobs—hell, choice of careers. He went into an architectural firm that
could use his math, administrative ability, public presence, knowledge
of materials, art. Gravitated right to the top, got a partnership.
Picked up a doctorate on the side while he was doing it. Married
extremely well.

“Mister Lucky,” Joe said.

“Mister Lucky, yeah. Listen. Wheeler became a partner and he did his
work and he knew his stuff—everything he could learn or understand.
Learning and understanding are not enough to cope with some things like
greed or unexpected stupidity or accident or sheer bad breaks. Two of
the other partners got into a deal I won’t bother you with—a high-rise
apartment complex in the wrong place for the wrong residents and land
acquired the wrong way. Wheeler saw it coming, called them in and talked
it over. They said yes-yes and went right ahead and did what they wanted
anyway—something that Wheeler never in the world expected. The one thing
high capability and straight morals and a good education doesn’t give
you is the end of innocence. Cleve Wheeler was an innocent.

“Well, it happened, the disaster that Cleve had predicted, but it
happened far worse. Things like that, when they surface, have a way of
exposing a lot of other concealed rot. The firm collapsed. Cleve Wheeler
had never failed at anything in his whole life. It was the one thing he
had no practice in dealing with. Anyone with the most rudimentary
intelligence would have seen that this was the time to walk away—lie
down, even. Cut his losses. But I don’t think these things even occurred
to him.”

Karl Trilling laughed suddenly. “In one of Philip Wylie’s novels is a
tremendous description of a forest fire and how the animals run away
from it, the foxes and the rabbits running shoulder to shoulder, the
owls flying in the daytime to get ahead of the flames. Then there’s this
beetle, lumbering along on the ground. The beetle comes to a burned
patch, the edge of twenty acres of hell. It stops, it wiggles its
feelers, it turns to the side and begins to walk around the fire—” He
laughed again. “That’s the special thing Cleveland Wheeler has, you see,
under all that muscle and brain and brilliance. If he had to—and were a
beetle—he wouldn’t turn back and he wouldn’t quit. If all he could do
was walk around it, he’d start walking.”

“What happened?” asked Joe.

“He hung on. He used everything he had. He used his brains and his
personality and his reputation and all his worldly goods. He also
borrowed and promised—and he worked. Oh, he worked. Well, he kept the
firm. He cleaned out the rot and built it all up again from the inside,
strong and straight this time. But it cost.

“It cost him time—all the hours of every day but the four or so he used
for sleeping. And just about when he had it leveled off and starting up,
it cost him his wife.”

“You said he’d married well.”

“He’d married what you marry when you’re a young block-buster on top of
everything and going higher. She was a nice enough girl, I suppose, and
maybe you can’t blame her, but she was no more used to failure than he
was. Only he could walk around it. He could rent a room and ride the
bus. She just didn’t know how—and of course with women like that there’s
always the discarded swain somewhere in the wings.”

“How did he take that?”

“Hard. He’d married the way he played ball or took examinations—with
everything he had. It did something to him. All this did things to him,
I suppose, but that was the biggest chunk of it.

“He didn’t let it stop him. He didn’t let anything stop him. He went on
until all the bills were paid—every cent. All the interest. He kept at
it until the net worth was exactly what it had been before his
ex-partners had begun to eat out the core. Then he gave it away. Gave it
away! Sold all right and title to his interest for a dollar.”

“Finally cracked, hm?”

Karl Trilling looked at his brother scornfully. “Cracked. Matter of
definition, isn’t it? Cleve Wheeler’s goal was zero—can you understand
that? What is success anyhow? Isn’t it making up your mind what you’re
going to do and then doing it, all the way?”

“In that case,” said his brother quietly, “suicide is success.”

Karl gave him a long penetrating look. “Right,” he said, and thought
about it a moment.

“Anyhow,” Joe asked, “why zero?”

“I did a lot of research on Cleve Wheeler, but I couldn’t get inside his
head. I don’t know. But I can guess. He meant to owe no man anything. I
don’t know how he felt about the company he saved, but I can imagine.
The man he became—was becoming—wouldn’t want to owe it one damned thing.
I’d say he just wanted out—but on his own terms, which included leaving
nothing behind to work on him.”

“Okay,” said Joe.

Karl Trilling thought, _The nice thing about old Joe is that he’ll wait.
All these years apart with hardly any communication beyond birthday
cards—and not always that—and here he is, just as if we were still
together every day. I wouldn’t be here if it weren’t important; I
wouldn’t be telling him all this unless he needed to know; he wouldn’t
need any of it unless he was going to help. All that unsaid—I don’t have
to ask him a damn thing. What am I interrupting in his life? What am I
going to interrupt? I won’t have to worry about that. He’ll take care of
it_.

He said, “I’m glad I came here, Joe.”

Joe said, “That’s all right,” which meant all the things Karl had been
thinking. Karl grinned and hit him on the shoulder and went on talking.

“Wheeler dropped out. It’s not easy to map his trail for that period. It
pops up all over. He lived in at least three communes—maybe more, but
those three were a mess when he came and a model when he left. He
started businesses—all things that had never happened before, like a
supermarket with no shelves, no canned music, no games or stamps, just
neat stacks of open cases, where the customer took what he wanted and
marked it according to the card posted by the case, with a marker
hanging on a string. Eggs and frozen meat and fish and the like, and
local produce were priced a flat two percent over wholesale. People were
honest because they could never be sure the checkout counter didn’t know
the prices of everything—besides, to cheat on the prices listed would
have been just too embarrassing. With nothing but a big empty warehouse
for overhead and no employees spending thousands of man hours marking
individual items, the prices beat any discount house that ever lived. He
sold that one, too, and moved on. He started a line of organic baby
foods without preservatives, franchised it and moved on again. He
developed a plastic container that would burn without polluting and
patented it and sold the patent.”

“I’ve heard of that one. Haven’t seen it around, though.”

“Maybe you will,” Karl said in a guarded tone. “Maybe you will. Anyway,
he had a CPA in Pasadena handling details, and just did his thing all
over. I never heard of a failure in anything he tried.”

“Sounds like a junior edition of the great man himself, your honored
boss.”

“You’re not the only one who realized that. The boss may be a
ding-a-ling in many ways, but nobody ever faulted his business sense. He
has always had his tentacles out for wandering pieces of very special
manpower. For all I know he had drawn a bead on Cleveland Wheeler years
back. I wouldn’t doubt that he’d made offers from time to time, only
during that period Cleve Wheeler wasn’t about to go to work for anyone
that big. His whole pattern is to run things his way, and you don’t do
that in an established empire.”

“Heir apparent,” said Joe, reminding him of something he had said
earlier.

“Right,” nodded Karl. “I knew you’d begin to get the idea before I was
finished.”

“But finish,” said Joe.

“Right. Now what I’m going to tell you, I just want you to know, I don’t
expect you to understand it or what it means or what it has all done to
Cleve Wheeler. I need your help, and you can’t really help me unless you
know the whole story.”

“Shoot.”

Karl Trilling shot: “Wheeler found a girl. Her name was Clara Prieta and
her folks came from Sonora. She was bright as hell—in her way, I
suppose, as bright as Cleve though with a tenth of his schooling—and
pretty as well, and it was Cleve she wanted, not what he might get for
her. She fell for him when he had nothing—when he really wanted nothing.
They were a daily, hourly joy to each other. I guess that was about the
time he started building this business and that, making something again.
He bought a little house and a car. He bought two cars, one for her. I
don’t think she wanted it, but he couldn’t do enough—he was always
looking for more things to do for her. They went out for an evening to
some friend’s house, she from shopping, he from whatever it was he was
working on then, so they had both cars. He followed her on the way home
and had to watch her lose control and spin out. She died in his arms.”

“Oh, Jesus.”

“Mister Lucky. Listen: a week later he turned a corner downtown and
found himself looking at a bank robbery. He caught a stray bullet—grazed
the back of his neck. He had seven months to lie still and think about
things. When he got out he was told his business manager had embezzled
everything and headed south with his secretary. Everything.”

“What did he do?”

“Went to work and paid his hospital bill!”

They sat in the car in the dark for a long time, until Joe said, “Was he
paralyzed, there in the hospital?”

“For nearly five months.”

“Wonder what he thought about.”

Karl Trilling said, “I can imagine what he thought about. What I can’t
imagine is what he decided. What he concluded. What he determined to be.
Damn it, there are no accurate words for it. We all do the best we can
with what we’ve got, or try to. Or should. He did—and with the best
possible material to start out with. He played it straight; he worked
hard; he was honest and lawful and fair; he was fit; he was bright. He
came out of the hospital with those last two qualities intact. God alone
knows what’s happen to the rest of it.”

“So he went to work for the old man.”

“He did—and somehow that frightens me. It was as if all his
qualifications were not enough to suit both of them until these things
happened to him—until they made him become what he is.”

“And what is that?”

“There isn’t a short answer to that, Joe. The old man has become a
modern myth. Nobody ever sees him. Nobody can predict what he’s going to
do or why. Cleveland Wheeler stepped into his shadow and disappeared
almost as completely as the boss. There are very few things you can say
for certain. The boss has always been a recluse and in the ten years
Cleve Wheeler has been with him he has become more so. It’s been
business as usual with him, of course—which means the constantly
unusual—long periods of quiet, and then these spectacular unexpected
wheelings and dealings. You assume that the old man dreams these things
up and some high-powered genius on his staff gets them done. But it
could be the genius that instigates the moves—who can know? Only the
people closest to him—Wheeler, Epstein, me. And I don’t know.”

“But Epstein died.”

Karl Trilling nodded in the dark. “Epstein died. Which leaves only
Wheeler to watch the store. I’m the old man’s personal physician, not
Wheeler’s, and there’s no guarantee that I ever will be Wheeler’s.”

Joe Trilling recrossed his legs and leaned back, looking out into the
whispering dark. “It begins to take shape,” he murmured. “The old man’s
on the way out, you very well might be, and there’s nobody to take over
but this Wheeler.”

“Yes, and I don’t know what he is or what he’ll do. I do know he will
command more power than any single human being on Earth. He’ll have so
much that he’ll be above any kind of cupidity that you or I could
imagine—you or I can’t think in that order of magnitude. But you see,
he’s a man who, you might say, has had it proved to him that being good
and smart and strong and honest doesn’t particularly pay off. Where will
he go with all this? And hypothesizing that he’s been making more and
more of the decisions lately, and extrapolating from that—where is he
going? All you can be sure of is that he will succeed in anything he
tries. That is his habit.”

“What does he want? Isn’t that what you’re trying to figure out? What
would a man like that want, if he knew he could get it?”

“I knew I’d come to the right place,” said Karl almost happily. “That’s
it exactly. As for me, I have all I need now and there are plenty of
other places I could go. I wish Epstein were still around, but he’s dead
and cremated.”

“Cremated?”

“That’s right—you wouldn’t know about that. Old man’s instructions, I
handled it myself. You’ve heard of the hot and cold private swimming
pools—but I bet you never heard of a man with his own private
crematorium in the second sub-basement.”

Joe threw up his hands. “I guess if you reach into your pocket and pull
out two billion real dollars, you can have anything you want. By the
way—was that legal?”

“Like you said—if you have two billion. Actually, the county medical
examiner was present and signed the papers. And he’ll be there when the
old man pushes off too—it’s all in the final instructions. Hey—wait, I
don’t want to cast any aspersions on the M.E. He wasn’t bought. He did a
very competent examination on Epstein.”

“Okay—we know what to expect when the time comes. It’s afterward you’re
worried about.”

“Right. What has the old man—I’m speaking of the corporate old man
now—what has he been doing all along? What has he been doing in the last
ten years, since he got Wheeler—and is it any different from what he was
doing before? How much of this difference, if any, is more Wheeler than
boss? That’s all we have to go on, Joe, and from it we have to
extrapolate what Wheeler’s going to do with the biggest private economic
force this world has ever known.”

“Let’s talk about that,” said Joe, beginning to smile. Karl Trilling
knew the signs, so he began to smile a little, too. They talked about
it.


II

The crematorium in the second sub-basement was purely functional, as if
all concessions to sentiment and ritual had been made elsewhere, or
canceled. The latter most accurately described what had happened when at
last, at long long last, the old man died. Everything was done precisely
according to his instructions, immediately after he was certifiably dead
and before any public announcements were made—right up to and including
the moment when the square mouth of the furnace opened with a startling
clang, a blare of heat, a flare of light—the hue the old-time
blacksmiths called straw color. The simple coffin slid rapidly in, small
flames exploding into being on its corners, and the door banged shut. It
took a moment for the eyes to adjust to the bare room, the empty greased
track, the closed door. It took the same moment for the conditioners to
whisk away the sudden smell of scorched soft pine.

The medical examiner leaned over the small table and signed his name
twice. Karl Trilling and Cleveland Wheeler did the same. The M.E. tore
off copies and folded them and put them away in his breast pocket. He
looked at the closed square iron door, opened his mouth, closed it again
and shrugged. He held out his hand.

“Good night, Doctor.”

“Good night, Doctor. Rugosi’s outside—he’ll show you out.”

The M.E. shook hands wordlessly with Cleveland Wheeler and left.

“I know just what he’s feeling,” Karl said. “Something ought to be said.
Something memorable—end of an era. Like ‘One small step for man—’ ”

Cleveland Wheeler smiled the bright smile of the college hero, fifteen
years after—a little less wide, a little less even, a great deal less in
the eyes. He said in the voice that commanded, whatever he said, “If you
think you’re quoting the first words from an astronaut on the moon,
you’re not. What he said was from the ladder, when he poked his boot
down. He said, ‘It’s some kind of soft stuff. I can kick it around with
my foot.’ I’ve always liked that much better. It was real, it wasn’t
rehearsed or memorized or thought out and it had to do with that moment
and the next. The M.E. said good night and you told him the chauffeur
was waiting outside. I like that better than anything anyone could say.
I think he would, too.” Wheeler added, barely gesturing, with a very
strong slightly cleft chin, toward the hot black door.

“But he wasn’t exactly human.”

“So they say.” Wheeler half smiled and, even as he turned away, Karl
could sense himself tuned out, the room itself become of secondary
importance—the next thing Wheeler was to do, and the next and the one
after, becoming more real than the here and now.

Karl put a fast end to that.

He said levelly, “I meant what I just said, Wheeler.”

It couldn’t have been the words, which by themselves might have elicited
another half-smile and a forgetting. It was the tone, and perhaps the
“Wheeler.” There is a ritual about these things. To those few on his own
level, and those on the level below, he was Cleve. Below that he was
mister to his face and Wheeler behind his back. No one of his peers
would call him mister unless it was meant as the herald of an insult; no
one of his peers or immediate underlings would call him Wheeler at all,
ever. Whatever the component, it removed Cleveland Wheeler’s hand from
the knob and turned him. His face was completely alert and interested.
“You’d best tell me what you mean, Doctor.”

Karl said, “I’ll do better than that. Come.” Without gestures,
suggestions or explanations he walked to the left rear of the room,
leaving it up to Wheeler to decide whether or not to follow. Wheeler
followed.

In the corner Karl rounded on him. “If you ever say anything about this
to anyone—even me—when we leave here, I’ll just deny it. If you ever get
in here again, you won’t find anything to back up your story.” He took a
complex four-inch blade of machined stainless steel from his belt and
slid it between the big masonry blocks. Silently, massively, the course
of blocks in the corner began to move upward. Looking up at them in the
dim light from the narrow corridor they revealed, anyone could see that
they were real blocks and that to get through them without that key and
the precise knowledge of where to put it would be a long-term project.

Again Karl proceeded without looking around, leaving go, no-go as a
matter for Wheeler to decide. Wheeler followed. Karl heard his footsteps
behind him and noticed with pleasure and something like admiration that
when the heavy blocks whooshed down and seated themselves solidly behind
them, Wheeler may have looked over his shoulder but did not pause.

“You’ve noticed we’re alongside the furnace,” Karl said, like a
guided-tour bus driver. “And now, behind it.”

He stood aside to let Wheeler pass him and see the small room.

It was just large enough for the tracks which protruded from the back of
the furnace and a little standing space on each side. On the far side
was a small table with a black suitcase standing on it. On the track
stood the coffin, its corners carboned, its top and sides wet and
slightly steaming.

“Sorry to have to close that stone gate that way,” Karl said
matter-of-factly. “I don’t expect anyone down here at all, but I
wouldn’t want to explain any of this to persons other than yourself.”

Wheeler was staring at the coffin. He seemed perfectly composed, but it
was a seeming. Karl was quite aware of what it was costing him.

Wheeler said, “I wish you’d explain it to me.” And he laughed. It was
the first time Karl had ever seen this man do anything badly.

“I will. I am.” He clicked open the suitcase and laid it open and flat
on the little table. There was a glisten of chrome and steel and small
vials in little pockets. The first tool he removed was a screwdriver.
“No need to use screws when you’re cremating ’em,” he said cheerfully
and placed the tip under one corner of the lid. He struck the handle
smartly with the heel of one hand and the lid popped loose. “Stand this
up against the wall behind you, will you?”

Silently Cleveland Wheeler did as he was told. It gave him something to
do with his muscles; it gave him the chance to turn his head away for a
moment; it gave him a chance to think—and it gave Karl the opportunity
for a quick glance at his steady countenance.

_He’s a mensch_, Karl thought. _He really is.…_

Wheeler set up the lid neatly and carefully and they stood, one on each
side, looking down into the coffin.

“He—got a lot older,” Wheeler said at last.

“You haven’t seen him recently.”

“Here and in there,” said the executive. “I’ve spent more time in the
same room with him during the past month than I have in the last eight,
nine years. Still, it was a matter of minutes, each time.”

Karl nodded understandingly. “I’d heard that. Phone calls, any time of
the day or night, and then those long silences two days, three, not
calling out, not having anyone in—”

“Are you going to tell me about the phony oven?”

“Oven? Furnace? It’s not a phony at all. When we’ve finished here it’ll
do the job, all right.”

“Then why the theatricals?”

“That was for the M.E. Those papers he signed are in sort of a
never-never country just now. When we slide this back in and turn on the
heat they’ll become as legal as he thinks they are.”

“Then why—”

“Because there are some things you have to know.” Karl reached into the
coffin and unfolded the gnarled hands. They came apart reluctantly and
he pressed them down at the sides of the body. He unbuttoned the jacket,
laid it back, unbuttoned the shirt, unzipped the trousers. When he had
finished with this, he looked up and found Wheeler’s sharp gaze, not on
the old man’s corpse, but on him.

“I have the feeling,” said Cleveland Wheeler, “that I have never seen
you before.”

Silently Karl Trilling responded: _But you do now_. And, _Thanks, Joey.
You were dead right_. Joe had known the answer to that one plaguing
question, _How should I act?_

_Talk just the way he talks_, Joe had said. _Be what he is, the whole
time.…_

Be what he is. A man without illusions (they don’t work) and without
hope (who needs it?) who has the unbreakable habit of succeeding. And
who can say it’s a nice day in such a way that everyone around snaps to
attention and says: _Yes, SIR!_

“You’ve been busy,” Karl responded shortly. He took off his jacket,
folded it and put it on the table beside the kit. He put on surgeon’s
gloves and slipped the sterile sleeve off a new scalpel. “Some people
scream and faint the first time they watch a dissection.”

Wheeler smiled thinly. “I don’t scream and faint.” But it was not lost
on Karl Trilling that only then, at the last possible moment, did
Wheeler actually view the old man’s body. When he did he neither
screamed nor fainted; he uttered an astonished grunt.

“Thought that would surprise you,” Karl said easily. “In case you were
wondering, though, he really was a male. The species seems to be
oviparous. Mammals too, but it has to be oviparous. I’d sure like a look
at a female. That isn’t a vagina. It’s a cloaca.”

“Until this moment,” said Wheeler in a hypnotized voice, “I thought that
‘not human’ remark of yours was a figure of speech.”

“No, you didn’t,” Karl responded shortly.

Leaving the words to hang in the air, as words will if a speaker has the
wit to isolate them with wedges of silence, he deftly slit the corpse
from the sternum to the pubic symphysis. For the first-time viewer this
was always the difficult moment. It’s hard not to realize viscerally
that the cadaver does not feel anything and will not protest.
Nerve-alive to Wheeler, Karl looked for a gasp or a shudder; Wheeler
merely held his breath.

“We could spend hours—weeks I imagine, going into the details,” Karl
said, deftly making a transverse incision in the ensiform area, almost
around to the trapezoid on each side, “but this is the thing I wanted
you to see.” Grasping the flesh at the juncture of the cross he had cut,
on the left side, he pulled upward and to the left. The cutaneous layers
came away easily, with the fat under them. They were not pinkish, but an
off-white lavender shade. Now the muscular striations over the ribs were
in view. “If you’d palpated the old man’s chest,” he said, demonstrating
on the right side, “you’d have felt what seemed to be normal human ribs.
But look at this.”

With a few deft strokes he separated the muscle fibers from the bone on
a mid-costal area about four inches square, and scraped. A rib emerged
and, as he widened the area and scraped between it and the next one, it
became clear that the ribs were joined by a thin flexible layer of bone
or chitin.

“It’s like baleen—whalebone,” said Karl. “See this?” He sectioned out a
piece, flexed it.

“My God.”


III

“Now look at this.” Karl took surgical shears from the kit, snapped
through the sternum right up to the clavicle and then across the lower
margin of the ribs. Slipping his fingers under them, he pulled upward.
With a dull snap the entire ribcage opened like a door, exposing the
lung.

The lung was not pink, nor the liverish-brownish-black of a smoker, but
yellow—the clear bright yellow of pure sulfur.

“His metabolism,” Karl said, straightening up at last and flexing the
tension out of his shoulders, “is fantastic. Or was. He lived on oxygen,
same as us, but he broke it out of carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide and
trioxide, and carbon dioxide mostly. I’m not saying he could—I mean he
had to. When he was forced to breathe what we call clean air, he could
take just so much of it and then had to duck out and find a few breaths
of his own atmosphere. When he was younger he could take it for hours at
a time, but as the years went by he had to spend more and more time in
the kind of smog he could breathe. Those long disappearances of his, and
that reclusiveness—they weren’t as kinky as people supposed.”

Wheeler made a gesture toward the corpse. “But—what is he? Where—”

“I can’t tell you. Except for a good deal of medical and biochemical
details, you now know as much as I do. Somehow, somewhere, he arrived.
He came, he saw, he began to make his moves. Look at this.”

He opened the other side of the chest and then broke the sternum up and
away. He pointed. The lung tissue was not in two discreet parts, but
extended across the median line. “One lung, all the way across, though
it has these two lobes. The kidneys and gonads show the same right-left
fusion.”

“I’ll take your word for it,” said Wheeler a little hoarsely. “Damn it,
what is it?”

“A featherless biped, as Plato once described homo sap. I don’t know
what it is. I just know that it is—and I thought you ought to know.
That’s all.”

“But you’ve seen one before. That’s obvious.”

“Sure. Epstein.”

“Epstein?”

“Sure. The old man had to have a go-between—someone who could, without
suspicion, spend long hours with him and hours away. The old man could
do a lot over the phone, but not everything. Epstein was, you might say,
a right arm that could hold its breath a little longer than he could. It
got to him in the end, though, and he died of it.”

“Why didn’t you say something long before this?”

“First of all, I value my own skin. I could say reputation, but skin is
the word. I signed a contract as his personal physician because he
needed a personal physician—another bit of window-dressing. But I did
precious little doctoring—except over the phone—and nine-tenths of that
was, I realized quite recently, purely diversionary. Even a doctor, I
suppose, can be a trusting soul. One or the other would call and give a
set of symptoms and I’d cautiously suggest and prescribe. Then I’d get
another call that the patient was improving and that was that. Why, I
even got specimens—blood, urine, stools—and did the pathology on them
and never realized that they were from the same source as what the
medical examiner checked out and signed for.”

“What do you mean, same source?”

Karl shrugged. “He could get anything he wanted—anything.”

“Then—what the M.E. examined wasn’t—” he waved a hand at the casket.

“Of course not. That’s why the crematorium has a back door. There’s a
little pocket sleight-of-hand trick you can buy for fifty cents that
operates the same way. This body here was inside the furnace. The
ringer—a look-alike that came from God knows where; I swear to you I
don’t—was lying out there waiting for the M.E. When the button was
pushed the fires started up and that coffin slid in—pushing this one out
and at the same time drenching it with water as it came through. While
we’ve been in here, the human body is turning to ashes. My personal
private secret instructions, both for Epstein and for the boss, were to
wait until I was certain I was alone and then come in here after an hour
and push the second button, which would slide this one back into the
fire. I was to do no investigations, ask no questions, make no reports.
It came through as logical but not reasonable, like so many of his
orders.” He laughed suddenly. “Do you know why the old man—and Epstein
too, for that matter, in case you never noticed—wouldn’t shake hands
with anyone?”

“I presumed it was because he had an obsession with germs.”

“It was because his normal body temperature was a hundred and seven.”

Wheeler touched one of his own hands with the other and said nothing.

When Karl felt that the wedge of silence was thick enough he asked
lightly, “Well, boss, where do we go from here?”

Cleveland Wheeler turned away from the corpse and to Karl slowly, as if
diverting his mind with an effort.

“What did you call me?”

“Figure of speech,” said Karl and smiled. “Actually, I’m working for the
company—and that’s you. I’m under orders, which have been finally and
completely discharged when I push that button—I have no others. So it
really is up to you.”

Wheeler’s eyes fell again to the corpse. “You mean about him? This? What
we should do?”

“That, yes. Whether to burn it up and forget it—or call in top
management and an echelon of scientists. Or scare the living hell out of
everyone on Earth by phoning the papers. Sure, that has to be decided,
but I was thinking on a much wider spectrum than that.”

“Such as—”

Karl gestured toward the box with his head. “What was he doing here,
anyway? What has he done? What was he trying to do?”

“You’d better go on,” said Wheeler; and for the very first time said
something in a way that suggested diffidence. “You’ve had a while to
think about all this. I—” and almost helplessly, he spread his hands.

“I can understand that,” Karl said gently. “Up to now I’ve been coming
on like a hired lecturer and I know it. I’m not going to embarrass you
with personalities except to say that you’ve absorbed all this with less
buckling of the knees than anyone in the world I could think of.”

“I’ll buckle when I have time for it. Just now I’m looking for a way to
think this out.”

“Right. Well, there’s a simple technique you learn in elementary
algebra. It has to do with the construction of graphs. You place a dot
on the graph where known data put it. You get more data, you put down
another dot and then a third. With just three dots—of course, the more
the better, but it can be done with three—you can connect them and
establish a curve. This curve has certain characteristics and it’s fair
to extend the curve a little farther with the assumption that later data
will bear you out.”

“Extrapolation.”

“Extrapolation. X-axis, the fortunes of our late boss. Y-axis, time. The
curve is his fortunes—that is to say, his influence.”

“Pretty tall graph.”

“Over thirty years.”

“Still pretty tall.”

“All right,” said Karl. “Now, over the same thirty years, another curve:
change in the environment.” He held up a hand. “I’m not going to read
you a treatise on ecology. Let’s be more objective than that. Let’s just
say changes. Okay: a measurable rise in the mean temperature because of
CO₂ and the greenhouse effect. Draw the curve. Incidence of heavy
metals, mercury and lithium, in organic tissue. Draw a curve. Likewise
chlorinated hydrocarbons, hypertrophy of algae due to phosphates,
incidence of coronaries … All right, let’s superimpose all these curves
on the same graph.”

“I see what you’re getting at. But you have to be careful with that kind
of statistics game. Like, the increase of traffic fatalities coincides
with the increased use of aluminum cans and plastic-tipped baby pins.”

“Right. I don’t think I’m falling into that trap. I just want to find
reasonable answers to a couple of otherwise unreasonable situations. One
is this: if the changes occurring in our planet are the result of mere
carelessness—a more or less random thing, carelessness—then how come
nobody is being careless in a way that benefits the environment? Strike
that. I promised, no ecology lessons. Rephrase: how come all these
carelessnesses promote a change and not a preservation?

“Next question: What is the direction of the change? You’ve seen
speculative writing about ‘terraforming’—altering other planets to make
them habitable by humans. Suppose an effort were being made to change
this planet to suit someone else? Suppose they wanted more water and
were willing to melt the polar caps by the greenhouse effect? Increase
the oxides of sulfur, eliminate certain marine forms from plankton to
whales? Reduce the population by increases in lung cancer, emphysema,
heart attacks and even war?”

Both men found themselves looking down at the sleeping face in the
coffin. Karl said softly. “Look what he was into—petrochemicals, fossil
fuels, food processing, advertising, all the things that made the
changes or helped the changers—”

“You’re not blaming him for all of it.”

“Certainly not. He found willing helpers by the million.”

“You don’t think he was trying to change a whole planet just so he could
be comfortable in it.”

“No, I don’t think so—and that’s the central point I have to make. I
don’t know if there are any more around like him and Epstein, but I can
suppose this: if the changes now going on keep on—and accelerate—then we
can expect them.”

Wheeler said, “So what would you like to do? Mobilize the world against
the invader?”

“Nothing like that. I think I’d slowly and quietly reverse the changes.
If this planet is normally unsuitable to them, then I’d keep it so. I
don’t think they’d have to be driven back. I think they just wouldn’t
come.”

“Or they’d try some other way.”

“I don’t think so,” said Karl. “Because they tried this one. If they
thought they could do it with fleets of spaceships and super-zap guns,
they’d be doing it. No—this is their way and if it doesn’t work, they
can try somewhere else.”

Wheeler began pulling thoughtfully at his lip. Karl said softly, “All it
would take is someone who knew what he was doing, who could command
enough clout and who had the wit to make it pay. They might even arrange
a man’s life—to get the kind of man they need.”

And before Wheeler could answer, Karl took up his scalpel.

“I want you to do something for me,” he said sharply in a new,
commanding tone—actually Wheeler’s own. “I want you to do it because
I’ve done it and I’ll be damned if I want to be the only man in the
world who has.”

Leaning over the head of the casket, he made an incision along the
hairline from temple to temple. Then, bracing his elbows against the
edge of the box and steadying one hand with the other, he drew the
scalpel straight down the center of the forehead and down on to the
nose, splitting it exactly in two. Down he went through the upper lip
and then the lower, around the point of the chin and under it to the
throat. Then be stood up.

“Put your hands on his cheeks,” he ordered. Wheeler frowned briefly (how
long had it been since anyone had spoken to him that way?), hesitated,
then did as he was told.

“Now press your hands together and down.”

The incision widened slightly under the pressure, then abruptly the
flesh gave and the entire skin of the face slipped off. The unexpected
lack of resistance brought Wheeler’s hands to the bottom of the coffin
and he found himself face to face, inches away, with the corpse.

Like the lungs and kidneys, the eyes—eye? —passed the median, very
slightly reduced at the center. The pupil was oval, its long axis
transverse. The skin was pale lavender with yellow vessels and in place
of a nose was a thread-fringed hole. The mouth was circular, the teeth
not quite radially placed; there was little chin.

Without moving, Wheeler closed his eyes, held them shut for one second,
two, and then courageously opened them again. Karl whipped around the
end of the coffin and got an arm around Wheeler’s chest. Wheeler leaned
on it heavily for a moment, then stood up quickly and brushed the arm
away.

“You didn’t have to do that.”

“Yes, I did,” said Karl. “Would you want to be the only man in the world
who’d gone through that—with nobody to tell it to?”

And after all, Wheeler could laugh. When he had finished he said, “Push
that button.”

“Hand me that cover.”

Most obediently Cleveland Wheeler brought the coffin lid and they placed
it.

Karl pushed the button and they watched the coffin slide into the square
of flame. Then they left.

Joe Trilling had a funny way of making a living. It was a good living,
but of course he didn’t make anything like the bundle he could have made
in the city. On the other hand, he lived in the mountains a half-mile
away from a picturesque village, in clean air and piney-birchy woods
along with lots of mountain laurel and he was his own boss. There wasn’t
much competition for what he did.

What he did was to make simulacra of medical specimens, mostly for the
armed forces, although he had plenty of orders from medical schools,
film producers and an occasional individual, no questions asked. He
could make a model of anything inside, affixed to or penetrating a body
or any part of it. He could make models to be looked at, models to be
felt, smelled and palpated. He could give you gangrene that stunk or
dewy thyroids with real dew on them. He could make one-of-a-kind or he
could set up a production line. Dr. Joe Trilling was, to put it briefly,
the best there was at what he did.

“The clincher,” Karl told him (in much more relaxed circumstances than
their previous ones; daytime now, with beer), “the real clincher was the
face bit. God, Joe, that was a beautiful piece of work.”

“Just nuts and bolts. The beautiful part was your idea—his hands on it.”

“How do you mean?”

“I’ve been thinking back to that,” Joe said. “I don’t think you yourself
realize how brilliant a stroke that was. It’s all very well to set up a
show for the guy, but to make him put his hands as well as his eyes and
brains on it—that was the stroke of genius. It’s like—well, I can
remember when I was a kid coming home from school and putting my hand on
a fence rail and somebody had spat on it.” He displayed his hand, shook
it. “All these years I can remember how that felt. All these years
couldn’t wear it away, all those scrubbings couldn’t wash it away. It’s
more than a cerebral or psychic thing, Karl—more than the memory of an
episode. I think there’s a kind of memory mechanism in the cells
themselves, especially on the hands, that can be invoked. What I’m
getting to is that no matter how long he lives, Cleve Wheeler is going
to feel that skin slip under his palms and that is going to bring him
nose to nose with that face. No, you’re the genius, not me.”

“Na. You knew what you were doing. I didn’t.”

“Hell you didn’t.” Joe leaned far back in his lawn chaise—so far he
could hold up his beer and look at the sun through it from the
underside. Watching the receding bubbles defy perspective (because they
swell as they rise), he murmured, “Karl?”

“Yuh.”

“Ever hear of Occam’s Razor?”

“Um. Long time back. Philosophical principle. Or logic or something.
Let’s see. Given an effect and a choice of possible causes, the simplest
cause is always the one most likely to be true. Is that it?”

“Not too close, but close enough,” said Joe Trilling lazily. “Hm. You’re
the one who used to proclaim that logic is sufficient unto itself and
need have nothing to do with truth.”

“I still proclaim it.”

“Okay. Now, you and I know that human greed and carelessness are quite
enough all by themselves to wreck this planet. We didn’t think that was
enough for the likes of Cleve Wheeler, who can really do something about
it, so we constructed him a smog-breathing extra-terrestrial. I mean, he
hadn’t done anything about saving the world for our reasons, so we gave
him a whizzer of a reason of his own. Right out of our heads.”

“Dictated by all available factors. Yes. What are you getting at, Joe?”

“Oh—just that our complicated hoax is simple, really, in the sense that
it brought everything down to a single cause. Occam’s Razor slices
things down to simplest causes. Single causes have a fair chance of
being right.”

Karl put down his beer with a bump. “I never thought of that. I’ve been
too busy to think of that. _Suppose we were right?_”

They looked at each other, shaken.

At last Karl said, “What do we look for now, Joe—space ships?”



DAZED


I

I work for a stockbroker on the twenty-first floor. Things have not been
good for stockbrokers recently, what with tight money and hysterical
reaction to the news and all that. When business gets really bad for a
brokerage it often doesn’t fail—it merges. This has something to do with
the public image. The company I work for is going through the agony. For
the lower echelons—me—that means detail you wouldn’t believe, with a
reduced staff. In other words, night work. Last night I worked without
looking up until my whole body was the shape of the chair and there was
a blue haze around the edges of everything I could see. I finished a
stack and peered at the row of stacks still to be done and tried to get
up. It took three tries before my hips and knees would straighten enough
to let me totter into the hall and down to the men’s room. It never
occurred to me to close the office door and I guess the confusion, all
the strange faces coming and going for the past few days, extending to
the security man downstairs. However it happened, there was a dazed man
in my office when I came back a moment later.

He was well dressed—I guess that, too, helped him pass the guards—in a
brown sharkskin suit with funny lapels, what you might call
up-to-the-minute camp. He wore an orange knitted tie the like of which
you only see in a new boutique or an old movie. I’d say he was in his
twenties—not yet twenty-five. And dazed.

When I walked in and stopped dead he gave me a lost look and said, “This
is my office.”

I said the only thing I could think of. “Oh?”

He pivoted slowly all the way around, looking at the desk, the shelves,
the files.

When he came around to face me again he said, “This isn’t my office.”

He had to be with the big five-name brokerage house that was gobbling up
my company in its time of need. I asked him.

“No,” he said, “I work for _Fortune_.”

“Look,” I said, “you’re not only in the wrong office, you’re in the
wrong building. Time-Life is on Sixth Avenue—been there since nineteen
fifty-two.”

“Fifty-_two_—” He looked around the room again. “But I—but it’s—”

He sat down on the settle. I had the idea he’d have collapsed on the
floor if the settle hadn’t been there. He asked me what day it was. I
think I misunderstood.

“Thursday,” I said. I looked at my watch. “Well, it’s now Friday.”

“I mean, what’s the date?”

I pointed to the desk calendar right beside him. He looked at it twice,
each one a long careful look. I never saw a man turn the color he
turned. He covered his eyes. Even his lips went white.

“Oh my God.”

“You all right?” I asked—a very stupid question.

“Tell me something,” he said after a while. “Has there been a war?”

“You have to be kidding.”

He took his hand down and looked at me, so lost, so frightened. Not
frightened. There has to be a word. Anguished. He needed answers—needed
them. Not questions, not now.

I said, “It’s been going on a long time.”

“A lot of young guys killed?”

“Upwards of fifty thousand.” Something made me add: “Americans. The
other side, five, six times that.”

“Oh, my God,” he said again. Then: “It’s my fault.”

Now I have to tell you up front that it never occurred to me for one
second that this guy was on any kind of a drug trip. Not that I’m an
expert, but there are times when you just know. Whatever was bothering
him was genuine—at least genuine to him. Besides, there was something
about him I had to like. Not the clothes, not the face, just the guy,
the kind of guy he was.

I said, “Hey, you look like hell and I’m sick and tired of what I’m
doing. Let’s take a break and go to the Automat for coffee.”

He gave me that lost look again. “Is the lid off on sex? I mean, young
kids—”

“Like rabbits,” I said. “Also your friendly neighborhood movie—I don’t
know what they’re going to do for an encore.” I had to ask him,
“Where’ve you been?”

He shook his head and said candidly, “I don’t know where it was. Are
people leaving their jobs—and school—going off to live on the land?”

“Some,” I said. “Come on.”

I switched off the overhead light, leaving my desk lamp lit. He got to
his feet as if he were wired to the switch, but then just stood looking
at the calendar.

“Are there bombings?”

“Three yesterday, in Newark. Come on.”

“Oh, my God,” he said and came. I locked the door and we went down the
corridor to the elevators. Air wheezed in the shaft as the elevator
rose. “It always whistles like that late at night,” he said. I had never
noticed that but knew he was right as soon as he said it. He also said
weakly, “You don’t feel like walking down?”

“Twenty-one flights?”

The doors slid open. The guy didn’t want to get in. But I mean, he
_really_ didn’t. I stood on the crack while he screwed up his courage.
It didn’t take long but I could see it was a mighty battle. He won it
and came in, turned around and leaned against the back wall. I pushed
the button and we started down. He looked pretty bad. I said something
to him but he put up a hand, waved my words away before they were out.
He didn’t move again until the doors opened and then he looked into the
lobby as if he didn’t know what to expect. But it was just the lobby,
with the oval information desk we called the fishbowl and the shiny
floor and the portable wooden desk, like a lectern, where you signed in
and out after hours and where the guard was supposed to be. We breezed
by it and out into Rockefeller Center. He took a deep breath and
immediately coughed.

“What’s that smell?”

I’d been about to say something trivial about the one good thing about
working late—you could breathe the air, but I didn’t say it.

“The smog, I guess.”

“Smog. Oh yes, smoke and fog. I remember.” Then he seemed to remember
something else, something that brought his predicament, whatever it was,
back with a hammer blow. “Well of course,” he said as if to himself.
“Has to be.”

On Sixth Avenue (New Yorkers still won’t call it Avenue of the Americas)
we passed two laughing couples. One of the girls was wearing a
see-through top made of plastic chain mail. The other had on a very maxi
coat swinging open over hot pants. My companion was appreciative but not
astonished. I think what he said was, “That too—” nodding his head. He
watched every automobile that passed and his eyes flicked over the
places where they used to sell books and back-date periodicals, every
single one of them now given over to peepshows and beaver magazines. He
had the same nod of his head for this.

We reached the Automat and it occurred to me that an uncharacteristic
touch of genius had made me suggest it. I had first seen the Automat
when I had ridden in on my mother’s hip more years ago than I’ll
mention—and many times since—and very little has changed—except, of
course, the numbers on the little off-white cards that tell you how many
nickels you have to put in the slot to claim your food. After a few
years’ absence one tends to yelp at the sight of them. I always do and
the strange young man with me did, too. Aside from that, there is a
timeless quality about the place, especially in the small hours of the
morning. The over-age, over-painted woman furtively eating catsup is
there as she, or someone just like her, has been for fifty years; and
the young couple, homely to you but beautiful to each other, full of
sleepiness and discovery; and the working stiff in the case-hardened
slideway of his life, grabbing a bite on the way from bed to work and
not yet awake—no need to be—and his counterpart headed in the other
direction; no need for him to be awake either. And all around: the same
marble change counter with the deep worn pits in it from countless
millions of coins dropped and scooped; behind it the same weary
automaton; and around you the same nickel (not chrome) framing for the
hundreds of little glass-fronted doors through which the food always
looks so much better than it is. All in all, it’s a fine place for the
reorientation of time-travelers.

“Are you a time-traveler?” I asked, following my own whimsy and hoping
to make him smile.

He didn’t smile. “No,” he said. “Yes, I—well—” flickering panic showed
in his eyes “—I don’t really know.”

We bought our coffee straight out of the lion’s mouth and carried it to
a corner table. I think that when we were settled there he really looked
at me for the first time.

He said, “You’ve been very kind.”

“Well,” I said, “I was glad of the break.”

“Look, I’m going to tell you what happened. I guess I don’t expect you
to believe me. I wouldn’t in your place.”

“Try me,” I offered. “And anyway—what difference does it make whether I
believe you?”

“ ‘Belief or nonbelief has no power over objective truth.’ ” I could
tell by his voice he was quoting somebody. The smile I had been looking
for almost came and he said, “You’re right. I’ll tell you what happened
because—well, because I want to. Have to.”

I said fine and told him to shoot. He shot.

I work in Circulation Promotion [he began]. Or maybe I should say I
_worked_—I guess I should. You’ll have to pardon me, I’m a little
confused. There’s so much—

Maybe I should start over. It didn’t begin in Rockefeller Center. It
started, oh, I don’t know how long ago, with me wondering about things.
Not that I’m anything special—I’m not saying I am—but it seems nobody
else wonders about the same things I do. I mean people are so close to
what happens that they don’t seem to know what’s going on.

Wait, I don’t want to confuse you, too. One of us is enough. Let me give
you an example.

World War II was starting up when I was a kid and one day a bunch of us
sat around, trying to figure out who would be fighting who. Us and the
British and French on one side, sure—the Germans and Austrians and
Italians on the other—that was clear enough. And the Japanese. But
beyond that?

It’s all history and hindsight now and there’s no special reason to
think about it, but at the time it was totally impossible for anyone to
predict the lineup that actually came about. Go back in the files of
newspaper editorials—_Harper’s_ or _Reader’s Digest_ or any other—and
you’ll see what I mean. Nobody predicted that up to the very end of the
war our best and strongest friends would be at peace with our worst and
deadliest enemy. I mean, if you put it on personal terms—if you and I
are friends and there’s somebody out to kill me and I find out that you
and he are buddies—could we even so much as speak to each other again?
Yet here was the Soviet Union, fighting shoulder to shoulder with us
against the Nazis, while for nearly five years they were at peace with
Japan!

And about Japan: there were hundreds of thousands of Chinese who had
been fighting a life-and-death war against the Japanese for ten
years—ten years, man! —and along with them, Koreans. So we spent
billions getting ourselves together to mount air strikes against Japan
from thousands of miles away—New Guinea, the Solomons, Saipan, Tinian.
Do you know how far it is from the Chinese mainland to Tokyo, across the
Sea of Japan? Six hundred miles. Do you know how far it is from Pusan,
Korea to Hiroshima? A hundred and thirty!

I’m sorry. I get excited like that to this day when I think of it. But
damn it—why didn’t we negotiate to move in and set up airstrips on the
mainland and Korea? Do you think the natives would have turned us down?
Or is it that we just don’t like chop suey? Oh, sure—there are a lot of
arguments like backing up Chiang against the Communists and I even read
somewhere that it was not our policy to interfere in Southeast Asia.
(Did I say something funny?) But you know Chiang and the Communists had
a truce—and kept it too—to fight the common enemy.

Well—all right. All that seems a long way from what happened to me, I
suppose, but it’s the kind of thing I’ve spent my life wondering about.
It’s not just wars that bring out the thing I’m talking about, though
God knows they make it plainer to see. Italy and Germany sharpening
their newest weapons and strategies in the Spanish civil war, for
example, or Mussolini’s invasion of Ethiopia—hell, the more
sophisticated people got the less they could see what was in front of
them. Any kid in a kindergarten knows a bully when he sees one and has
sense enough at least to be afraid. Any sixth-grader knows how to
organize a pressure group against a bad guy. Wars, you see, are really
life-and-death situations, where what’s possible, practical—logical—has
a right to emerge. When it doesn’t—you have to wonder. French peasants
taxed till they bled to build the Maginot Line all through the thirties,
carefully preparing against the kind of war they fought in 1914.

But let’s look some place else. Gonorrhea could be absolutely stamped
out in six months, syphilis maybe in a year. I picked up a pamphlet last
month—hey, I have to watch that “last month,” “nowadays,” things like
that—anyway, the pamphlet drew a correlation between smoking cigarettes
and a rising curve of lung cancer, said scientific tests prove that
something in cigarettes can cause cancer in mice. Now I bet if the
government came out with an official statement about that, people would
read it and get scared—and go on smoking cigarettes. You’re smiling
again. That’s funny?

“It isn’t funny,” I told the dazed man. “Here—let me bring some more
coffee.”

“On me this time.” He spilled coins on the table. “But you were smiling,
all the same.”

“It wasn’t that kind of a smile, like for a funny,” I told him. “The
Surgeon General came out with a report years ago. Cigarette advertising
is finally banned from TV, but how much difference does it make? Look
around you.”

While he was looking around him I was looking at his coins. Silver
quarters. Silver dimes. Nickels: 1948, 1950, 1945. I began to feel very
strange about this dude. Correction: my feel-strange went up another
notch.

He said, “A lot of the people who aren’t smoking are coughing, too.”

We sat there together, looking around. Again he had shown me something I
had always seen, never known. How many people cough.

I went for more coffee.


II

He went on.

Every four weeks I get—got? —got a makeready. A makeready is a copy of a
magazine with all the proofing done and the type set, your last look
before the presses roll. I have to admit it gives me—used to give me—a
sense of importance to get it free (it’s an expensive magazine) even
before the “men high in government, industry, commerce and the
professions” (as it says in the circulation promotion letters I write)
had a chance to read it and move and shake, for they are the movers and
shakers.

Anyway, there’s this article in the new—not current; _really_ new—issue
called “The Silent Generation.” It’s all about this year’s graduating
class, the young men who in June would go into the world and begin to
fit their hands to the reins. This is 1950 I’m talking about, you
understand, in the spring. And it was frightening. I mean, it spooked me
while I read it and it spooked me more and more as I thought about
it—the stupidity of it, the unbelievable blindness of people—not
necessarily people as a whole, but these people in the article—“The
Class of 1950” —young and bright and informed. They had their formal
education behind them and you assumed it was fresh in their minds—not
only what they had learned, but the other thing college is really for:
learning how to learn.

And yet what do you suppose they were concerned about? What was it they
talked about until three o’clock in the morning? What kind of plans were
they making for themselves—and for all the rest of us (for they were
going to be the ones who run things)? Democracy? Ultimate purpose? The
relationship of man to his planet—or of modern man to history? Hell, no.

According to this, article, they worried about fringe benefits.
Retirement income, for God’s sake! Speed of promotion in specialized
versus diversified industry! Did they spend their last few collegiate
weeks in sharpening their new tools or in beering it up—or even in one
last panty raid? Uh-uh. They spent them moving from office to office of
the campus recruiters for big electronic and chemical and finance
companies, working out the deal that would get them the steadiest,
surest income and the biggest scam on the side and the softest place to
lie down at the end of it.

The Silent Generation, the guy who wrote the article called them. He
himself graduated in the late ‘thirties and he had a lot to say about
_his_ generation. There was a lot wrong about them and they did some
pretty crazy things. They argued a lot with each other and with their
elders and betters and they joined things like the Young Socialist
League—not so much because they were really lefties, but because those
groups seemed the only ones around that gave a damn about the state the
world was in. Most of all, you knew they were there. They were a noisy
generation. They had that mixture of curiosity and rebellion that let
you know they were alive.

The writer looked at the Class of ’50 with a kind of despair—and
something like terror, too. Because if they came to run things,
experience wouldn’t merely modify them and steady them. It would harden
them like an old man’s arteries. It would mean more-of-the-same until
they’d be living in a completely unreal world of their own with no real
way of communicating with the rest of us. Growing and changing and
trying new ways would only frighten them. They’d have the power, and
what they’d use it for would be to suppress growth and change, not
knowing that societies need growth and change—to live, just like trees
or babies or art or science. So all he could see ahead was a solid,
silent, prosperous standstill—and then some sudden and total collapse,
like a tree gone to dry rot.

Well I don’t know what you think of all this—or if you understand how
hard it hit me. But I’ve tried to explain to you how all my life I’ve
been plagued by these—well, I call them wonderments—how, when something
makes no sense, it kind of hurts. When I was a toddler I couldn’t sleep
for wanting someone to tell me why a wet towel is darker than a dry one
when water has no color. In grade school nobody could tell me why the
sound of a falling bomb gets, lower and lower in pitch as it approaches
the ground, when by all the laws of physics it ought to rise. And in
high school I wouldn’t buy the idea about a limitation on the velocity
of light. (And I still don’t.) About things like these I’ve never lost
faith that somebody, some day, would come up with an answer that would
satisfy me—and sure enough, from time to, time somebody does. But when I
was old enough to wonder why smart people do dumb things that kind of
faith could only last so long. And I began to feel that there was some
other factor, or force, at work.

Do you remember _Gulliver’s Travels?_ When he was in Lilliput there was
a war between the Lilliputians and another nation of little people—I
forget what they called themselves—and Gulliver intervened and ended the
war. Anyway, he researched the two countries and found they had once
been one. And he tried to find out what caused so many years of bitter
enmity between them after they split. He found that there had been two
factions in that original kingdom—the Big Endians and the Little
Endians. And do you know where that started? Far back in their history,
at breakfast one morning, one of the king’s courtiers opened his boiled
egg at the big end and another told him that was wrong, it should be
opened at the small end! The point Dean Swift was making is that from
such insignificant causes grow conflicts that can last centuries and
kill thousands. Well, he was near the thing that’s plagued me all my
life, but he was content to say it happened that way. What blowtorches
me is—_why. Why_ are human beings capable of hating each other over such
trifles? Why, when an ancient triviality is proved to be the cause of
trouble, don’t people just stop fighting?

But I’m off on wars again—I guess because when you’re talking about
stupidity, wars give you too many good examples. So tell me—why, when
someone’s sure to die of an incurable disease and needs something for
pain—why don’t they give him heroin instead of morphine? Is it because
heroin’s habit-forming? What difference could that possibly make? And
besides, morphine is, too. I’ll tell you why—it’s because heroin makes
you feel wonderful and morphine makes you feel numb and gray. In other
words, heroin’s fun (mind you, I’m talking about terminal cases, dying
in agony, not normally healthy people) and morphine is not—and if it’s
fun, there must be something evil or wrong about it. A dying man is not
supposed to be made to feel good. And laws that keep venereal disease
from being recognized and treated; and laws against abortion; and all
the obscenity statutes—right down at the root these are all
anti-pleasure laws. Would you like the job of explaining that to a man
from Mars, who hadn’t been brought up with them? He couldn’t follow
reasoning like that any more than he could understand why we have never
designed a heat engine—which is essentially what an internal combustion
engine is—that can run without a cooling system—a system designed to
dissipate heat!

And lots more.

So maybe you see what happened to me when I read the article about the
Class of ’50. The article peaked a tall pyramid inside me, brought
everything to a sharp point.

“Have you a pencil?” said the young man. All this time and he hadn’t yet
lost the dazed look. I guess it was hard to blame him. “Pens are no good
on paper napkins,” he said.

I handed him my felt-tip. “Try this.”

He tried it. “Hey, this is great. This is really keen.” A felt-tip does
fine on paper napkins. He studied it as if he had never seen such a
thing before. “Really keen,” he said again. Then he drew this:

[]

“Yinyang,” I said. “Right?”

He nodded. “One of the oldest symbols on Earth. Then you know what it
means.”

“Well, some anyway. All opposites—life and death, light and dark, male
and female, heavy and light—anything that has an opposite.”

“That’s it,” he said. “Well, let me show you something.” Using another
napkin, folded in two, as a straight edge, he laid it across the symbol.

“You see, if you were to travel in a straight line across a diameter—any
diameter—you’d have to go on both black and white somewhere along the
way. You can’t go all the way on just one color without bending the line
or going a short way, less than the diameter.

“Now let’s say this circle is the board on which the game of human
affairs is played. The straight line can be any human course—a life, a
marriage, a philosophy, a business. The optimum course is a full
diameter, and that’s what most people naturally strive for; a few might
travel short chords or bent ones—sick ones. Most people can and do
travel the diameter. For each person, life, marriage, whatever, there’s
a different starting point and a different arrive point, but if they
travel the one straight line that goes through the center, they will
travel black country exactly as much as white, ying as much as yang.…
The balance is perfect, no matter which way you go. Got it?”

“I see what you mean,” I said. “Your coffee’s cold.”

“So’s yours. Now look: suppose some force came along and shifted one of
these colors away from the center point, like this—” And he drew again.

[]

We studied his drawing. He drew well and quickly.

He said, “You see, if the shift were gradual, then from the very second
it began there would be some people—some lives, philosophies—who would
no longer have that perfect balance between black and white, between
ying and yang. Nothing wrong with the course they traveled—they still
aim for the very center and pass on through.

“And if the shift continued to where I’ve drawn it, you can see that
some people might travel all the way on the white only.

“And _that’s_ what has happened to us. _That’s_ the answer to what seems
to be human stupidity. There’s nothing wrong with people! Far and away
most of them want to travel that one straight line, and they do. It
isn’t their fault that the rules have been changed and that the only way
to the old balance for anyone is to travel a course that is sick or
twisted or short.

“The coffee _is_ cold. Oh, God, I’ve been running off at the mouth.
You’ll want to get back to the office.”

“No, I won’t,” I said. “The hell with it. You go on.” For somewhere
along the line he had filled me with a deep, strange excitement. The
things that he said had plagued him all his life—or things like them—had
plagued me, too. How often had I stood in a voting booth, trying to
decide between Tweedle-Dee and Tweedle-Dum, the Big Endians versus the
Little Endians? Why can’t you tell someone, “Honesty is the best
policy—” or “do as you would be done by—” and straighten his whole life
out, even when it might make the difference between life and death? Why
do people go on smoking cigarettes? Why is a woman’s breast—which for
thousands of artists has been the source of beauty and for millions of
children the source of life—regarded as obscene? Why do we manipulate to
increase the cost of this road or that school so we can “bring in
Federal money” as if the Federal money weren’t coming from our own
pockets? And since most people try to be decent and honest and kind—why
do they do the stupid things they do?

What in the name of God put us into Viet Nam? What are ghettoes all
about? Why can’t the honest sincere liberals just shut up and quietly
move into the ghettoes any time they can guarantee that someone from the
ghetto can take their place in the old neighborhood—and keep right on
doing it until there are no more ghettoes? Why can’t they establish a
country called Suez out of territory on both sides of the canal—and
populate it from Israel and all the Arab countries and all the refugees
and finance it with canal tolls and put in atomic power plants to
de-salt seawater and make the desert bloom, and forbid weapons and
this-or-that “quarters” and hatred? In other words, why are simple
solutions always impossible? Why is any solution that does not involve
killing people unacceptable? What makes us undercopulate and overbreed
when the perfect balance is available to everybody?

And at this weary time of a quiet morning in the Automat, I was pinioned
by the slender bright shard of hope that my dazed friend had answers.

Go back to the office? Really, the hell with it. “You go ahead,” I said,
and he did.


III

Well, okay [he went on], I read that article about the class of ’50—the
Silent Generation—and I began to get mad—scared, and it grew and grew
until I felt I had to do something about it. If the class of ’50 ever
got to run things, they’d have the money, they’d have the power. In a
very real sense they’d have the guns. It would be the beginning of a
long period—maybe forever—of more-of-the-sameness. There didn’t seem any
way to stop it.

Now I’d worked out this yinyang theory when I was a college sophomore,
because it was the only theory that would fit all the facts. Given that
some force had shifted the center, good people, traveling straight the
way they should, had to do bad things because they could never, never
achieve that balance. There was only one thing I didn’t know.

What force had moved the center?

I sat in the office, dithering and ignoring my work, and tried to put
myself together. _Courage, mon camarade, le diable est mort_, is what I
said to myself. That mean anything to you?

No?

Okay—when I was a kid I read a book called _The Cloister and the
Hearth_, by Charles Reade. It was about a kid raised in a monastery who
went into the world—an eighteenth-century kind of world, or earlier, I
forget now. Anyway, one of the people he meets is a crazy Frenchman,
always kicking up his heels and cheering people up and at the worst of
times that’s what he’d say: _Courage, buddy—the devil is dead_. It stuck
with me and I used to say it when everything fell apart and there seemed
nowhere to turn and nothing to grab hold of. I said it now, and you
know, it was like a flash bulb going off between my ears.

Mind you, it was real things I was fretting about, not myths or
fantasies or religious principles. It was overpopulation and laws
against fun and the Dust Bowl (remember that? Well, look it up some
time) and nowhere to put the garbage, and greed and killing and cruelty
and apathy.

I took a pad of paper and drew these same diagrams and sat looking at
them. I was very excited. I felt I was very near an answer.

Ying and Yang. Good and evil—sure—but nobody who understands it would
ever assign good to one color and bad to the other. The whole point is,
they both have to be there and in perfect balance. Light and dark, male
and female, closed and open, life and death, that-which-is-outgoing and
that-which-comes-together—all of it, everything—opposition, balance.

Well now, for a long time the devil had a bad name. Say a bad press. And
why not? Just for the sake of argument, say it is the yang country he
used to rule and that is the one that was forced aside. Anyone living
and thinking in a straight line could spend his whole life and career
and all his thinking in ying country. He’d have to know that yang was
there, but he’d never encounter it, never experience it. More than
likely he’d be afraid of it because that’s what ignorance does to
people, even good people.

And the ones who did have some experience of yang, the devil’s country,
would find much more of the other as they went along, because the
balance would be gone. And the more the shift went on, the more
innocent, well-meaning, thoughtful people ran the course of their lives
and thoughts, the worse they would think of the devil’s country and the
worse they would talk about it and him. It would get so you couldn’t
trust the books; they’d all been written from the one point of view, the
majority side of imbalance. It would begin to look as if the yang part
of the universe were a blot which had to be stamped out to make a nice
clean alloying universe—and you have your John Knox types and your
Cotton Mathers: just good people traveling straight and strong and
acting from evidence that was all wrong by reason that couldn’t be
rational.

And I thought, _That’s it!_

The devil is dead!

I have to do something about it. But what?

Tell somebody, that’s what. Tell everybody, but let’s be practical.
There must be somebody, somewhere, who knows what to do about it—or at
least how to explain about the yinyang and how it’s gone wrong, so that
everybody could rethink what we’ve done, what we’ve been.

Then I remembered the _Saturday Review_. The _Saturday Review_ has a
personal column in it that’s read by all sorts of people—judging by the
messages. But I mean _all_ kinds of people. If I could write the right
ad, word it just the right way.

I felt like a damn fool. Year of Our Lord 1950, turning all my skills as
a professional copywriter to telling the world that the devil was dead,
but it was an obsession, you see, and I had to do something, even
something insane. I had to start somewhere.

So I wrote the ad.

_The trouble is the light-bearer’s torch is out and we’re all on_

_the same end of the seesaw. Help or we’ll die of it. Whoever_

_knows the answer call DU6-1212 Extension 2103_.

I’m not going to tell you how many drafts I wrote or all the reasons
why, copywise, that was best, mixed metaphors and all. I knew that
whoever could help would know what I was asking.

Now comes the hard part. For you, I mean, not me. Me, I did what I had
to. You’re going to have to believe it.

Well, maybe you don’t have to. Just—well, just suspend disbelief until
you hear me out, okay?

All right. I wrote up the copy and addressed an envelope. I put on a
stamp and a special delivery. I put in the copy and a check. I sealed it
and crossed the hall—you know where the mail chute is—right across from
my door. Your door. It was late by then, everyone had gone home and my
footsteps echoed and I could hear that funny whistle under the elevator
doors. I slid the envelope into the slot and let go, and my phone rang.

I’d never heard it ring quite like that before. I can say that, yet I
can’t tell you how it was different.

I sprinted into the office and sat down and picked up the phone. I’m
glad I sat down first.

There was this Voice.…

I have a hell of an ear, you know that? I’ve thought a lot about that
Voice and recalled it to myself and I can tell you what it was made of—a
tone, its octave and the fifth harmonic. I mean if you can imagine a
voice made of three notes, two an octave apart and the third
reinforcing, but not really three notes at all, because they sounded
absolutely together like one. Then, they weren’t pure notes, but
voice-tones, with all the overtones that means. And none of that tells
you anything either, any more than if I described the physical
characteristics of a vibrating string and the sound it produced—when the
string happened to be on a cello played by Pablo Casals. You know how it
is in a room full of people when you suddenly become aware of a single
voice that commands attention because of what it is, not what it says.
When a voice like that has, in addition, something to say—well, you
listen.

I listened. The first thing I heard—I didn’t even have a chance to say
hello—was: “You’re right. You’re absolutely right.”

I said, “Who is this?” and the Voice sighed a little and waited.

Then it said, “Let’s not go into that. It would be best if you figured
it out by yourself.”

As things turned out, that was a hundred percent on target. I think if
the Voice hadn’t taken that tack I’d have hung up, or anyway wasted a
lot of time in being convinced.

The Voice said. “What matters is your ad in the _Saturday Review_.”

“I just mailed it!”

“I just read it,” the Voice said, then explained: “Time isn’t quite the
same here.” At least I think that’s what it said. It said, “How far are
you willing to go to make everything right again?”

I didn’t know what to say. I remember holding the phone away from my
face and looking at it as if it could tell me something. Then I listened
again. The Voice told me everything I was going through, carefully, not
bored exactly but the way you explain to a child that you know what’s
bothering him.

The Voice said, “You know who I am but you won’t think the words. You
don’t want to believe any part of this but you have to and you know you
will. You’re so pleased with yourself for being right that you cannot
think straight—which is only one of the reasons you can’t think
straight. Now pull yourself together and answer my question.”

I couldn’t remember the question, so I had to be asked once more—how far
was I willing to go to make everything right again?

You have to understand that this Voice meant what it said. If you’d
heard it, you’d have believed it—anybody would. I know I was being asked
to make a commitment and that was pretty scary, but over and above that
I knew I was being told that everything could be made right again—that
the crazy tilt that had been plaguing mankind for hundreds, maybe
thousands of years could be fixed. And I might be the guy to do it—me,
for God’s sake.

If I had any doubts, any this-can’t-be kind of feelings—they
disappeared. How far would I go?

I said, “All the way.”

The Voice said, “Good. If this works you can take the credit. If it
doesn’t you take the blame—and you’ll have to live with the idea that
you might have done it and you failed. I won’t be able to help you with
that.”

I said, anyway I’d know I’d tried.

The Voice said, “Even if you succeed you may not like what has to be
done.”

I said, “Suppose I don’t do it—what will happen?”

The Voice said, “You ever read 1984?”

I said I had.

The Voice said, “Like that, only more so and sooner. There isn’t any
other way it can go now.”

That’s what I’d been thinking—that’s what had upset me when I read the
article.

“I’ll do it,” is all I said.

The voice said that was fine.

It said, “I’m going to send you to see somebody. You have to persuade
him. He won’t talk to me and he’s the only one who can do anything.”

I began to have cold feet. “But who is he? Where? What do I say?”

“You know what to say. Or I wouldn’t be talking to you.”

I asked, “What do I have to do?”

And all I was told was to take the elevator. Then the line went dead.

So I turned out the lights and went to the door—and then I remembered
and went back for my drawings of the yinyang, one as it ought to be and
the other showing it out of balance. I held them like you’d hold an
airline ticket on a first flight. I went to the elevators.

How am I going to make you believe this?

Well, you’re right—it doesn’t matter if you do or not. Okay, here’s what
happened.

I pushed the call button and the door opened instantly, the way it does
once in a while. I stepped into the elevator and turned around—and there
I was.

The door hadn’t closed, the car hadn’t moved. It all happened when I was
turning around. The door was open, but not in the hallway on the
twenty-first floor. The scene was gray. Hard gray outdoor ground and
gray mist. I stood a while looking out and my heart was thumping like
someone was pounding me on the back with fists. But nothing happened, so
I stepped out.

I was scared.

Nothing happened. The gray fog was neither still nor blowing. Sometimes
there seemed to be shapes out there somewhere—trees, rocks,
buildings—but then there was nothing and maybe it was all a vast plain.
It had an outdoors feel to it—that’s all I can say for sure.

The elevator door was solidly behind me, which was reassuring. I took
one step away from it—a little one, I’ll have you know—and called out.
It took three tries before my voice would work.

“Lucifer!”

A voice answered me. Somehow it wasn’t as—well, as grand as the one I’d
heard over the phone, but in other ways it was bigger.

It said, “Who is that? What do you want?”

It was cranky. It was the voice of someone interrupted, someone who felt
damn capable of handling the interruption, too. And this time there
really was something looming closer through the fog.

I clapped my hands over my face. I felt my knees hit the gray dirt. I
didn’t kneel down you understand. The knees just buckled as if they
didn’t belong to me any more. But hell, the wings. Bat’s wings, leathery
and a tail with a point on it like a big arrowhead. That face, eyes. And
thirty feet tall, man!

He touched my shoulder and I would have screamed like a schoolgirl if
I’d had the breath for it.

“Come on now.” It was a different voice altogether—he’d changed it—but
it was his all the same. He said, “I don’t look like that. That came out
of your head. Here—look at me.”

I looked. I guess it was funny, me kind of peeping up quickly so in case
it was more than I could take I could hide my face again—as if that
would do any good. But I’d had more than I could handle.

What I saw was a middle-aged guy in a buff corduroy jacket and brown
slacks. He had graying hair and a smooth suntanned forehead and the
brightest blue eyes I have ever seen. He helped me to my feet.

He said, “I don’t look like this either, but—” he shrugged and smiled.

I said, “Well, thanks anyway—” and felt stupid. I looked around at the
fog. “Where is this?”

He kind of waved his hand. “I can’t really say. Where would you want it
to be?”

How do you answer a question like that? I couldn’t.

He could. He put the back of his hand against my cheek and gently turned
my face toward him and bent close. He did something I can only describe
as what you do when you pick up a magazine and run your thumb across the
edge of the pages and flip it open somewhere. Only he did it inside my
head somehow. Anyway there was a blaze of golden light that made me
blink.

When I got my eyes adjusted to it the gray was gone. When I was a kid I
worked one year on a farm in Vermont. I used to go for the cows in the
late afternoon. The day pasture was huge, with a stand of pine at the
upper end and the whole thing was steep as a roof, with granite
outcroppings all over, gray, and white limestone. That’s where we were,
the very smell of it, the little lake with the dirt road around the end
of it far down at the bottom and the wind hissing through the pine trees
up there and a woodchuck ducking out of sight on the skyline. I could
even see three of the Holsteins, standing level on the sidehill in that
miraculous way they have as if they had two short legs and two long
ones. I never did figure out how they do it.

And I got a flash of panic, too, because my elevator door was gone—but
he seemed to know and just waved his hand casually over to my left. And
there it was, a Rockefeller Center elevator door in the middle of a
Vermont pasture. Funny. When I was fourteen that door in the pasture
would have scared the hell out of me. Now I was scared without it. I
looked around me and smelled the late August early evening and marveled.

“It’s so real,” is what I said.

“Seems real.”

“But I was here—right here—when I was a kid.”

“Seemed real then, too, didn’t it?”

I think he was trying to make me rethink all along the line—not so much
to doubt things, but to wipe everything clean and start over.

“Belief or nonbelief has no power over objective truth,” is what he told
me. He said that if two people believe the same thing from the same
evidence, it means that they believe the same thing, nothing more.

While I was chewing on that he took the sketches out of my hand—the same
ones I just did for you. I had quite forgotten I was holding them. He
looked at them and grunted. “It’s like that, is it?”

I took back the sketches and began to make my speech.

I said, “You see, it’s like this. Here the balance is—” and he kind of
laughed a little and said wait, wait, we don’t have to go through all
that.

I think he meant, words. I mean he touched the side of my face again and
made me face him and did that thing with his eyes inside my head. Only
this time it was like taking both your thumbs and pulling open the pages
of a book that are sort of stuck together. I wouldn’t say it hurt but I
wouldn’t want much more of it either. I remember a single flash of shame
that things I’d read, studied, things I’d thought out, I’d been careless
with or had forgotten. And all the while—a very short while—he was
digging in my head he was curing the shame, too. I began to understand
that what he could get from me wasn’t just what I’d learned and
understood—it was everything, _everything_ that had ever passed through
my pipeline. And all in a moment.

Then he stepped back and said, “Bastard!”

I thought, what have I done?

He laughed at me. “Not you. _Him_.”

I thought, oh. The Voice on the phone. The one who sent me.

He looked at me with those sixty-thousand candle power eyes and laughed
again and wagged his head.

“I swore I’d have nothing to do with him any more,” he said, “and now
look—he’s thrown me a hook.”

I guess I looked mixed-up, because I was. He began to talk to me kindly,
trying to make me feel better.

He said, “It’s not easy to explain. You’ve learned so much that just
ain’t so and you’ve learned it from people who also didn’t understand.
Couldn’t. It goes back a long time. I mean, for you it does. For
me—well, time is different here.”

He thought a bit and said, “Calling me Lucifer was real bright of you,
you know that? Lucifer means ‘bringer of light.’ If you’re going to
stick with the yinyang symbol—and it’s a good one—you’ll see that
there’s a center for the dark part and a center for the light—sometimes
they’re drawn in, a little dot on each part right where a pollywog’s eye
would be. I am that dot and the Voice you heard is the other one.
Lucifer I may be, but I’m not the devil. I’m just the other. It takes
two of us to make the whole. What I just might have overlooked is that
it takes two of us to keep the whole. Really, I had no idea—” and he
leaned forward and got another quick look inside my head “—no idea at
all that things would get into such a mess so quickly. Maybe I shouldn’t
have left.”

I had to ask him. “Why did you?”

He said, “I got mad. I had a crazy notion one day and wanted to try
something and he didn’t want me to do it. But I did it anyway and then
when it got me into trouble he wouldn’t pull me out of it. I had to play
it all the way through. It hurt.” He laughed a funny laugh. I understood
that “it hurt” was a gigantic understatement. “So I got mad and cut out
and came here. He’s been yelling and sending messages and all, ever
since, but I paid him no mind until you.”

“Why me?”

“Yes,” he said, “why you?” He thought it over. “Tell me something—have
you got anything to keep you where you are? I mean a wife or a career or
kids or something that would get hurt if you suddenly disappeared?”

“Nothing like that, no. Some friends—but no wife, no folks. And my job’s
just a job.”

“Thought so,” he said. Talking to himself, he said, “Bastard. Built this
one from the ground up, he did. Knew damn well I’d get a jolt when I saw
what a rotten mess this was.” Then he said very warmly, “Don’t take that
personally. You can’t help it.”

I couldn’t help it. I couldn’t help taking it a little personally
either.

Maybe I was a little sharp when I said, “Well—are you going to come back
or not?”

He gave it right back to me.

“I really don’t know,” he said. “Why don’t I leave it to you? You
decide.”

“Me?”

“Why not? You got yourself into this.”

“Did I?”

“No matter how carefully he set you up for it, friend, he had to get
your permission first. Right?”

I remembered that Voice. _How far are you willing to go?_

The one I had called Lucifer fixed me with the blazing eyes. “I am going
to lay it right on you. I will do what you say. If you tell me to stay
here, to stay out of it, it’s going to be like Orwell said: ‘To
visualize the future you must visualize a boot stamping eternally on a
human face.’ But if I come back it’s going to be almost as bad. Things
are really out of hand, so much that it can’t be straightened out
overnight. It would take years. People aren’t made to take the truth on
sight and act on it. They have to be prodded and pushed—usually by being
made so miserable in so many ways that they get mad. When enough of them
get mad enough they’ll find the way,”

“Well, good then.”

He mimicked me. I think he was a little sore and just maybe he didn’t
want to go back to work.

“ ‘Well, good, then,’ ” he mocked me. “We’ll have to shovel stupidity on
them. We’ll have to get them into long meaningless wars. We’ll make them
live under laws that absolutely make no sense and keep passing more of
them. We’ll lay taxes on them until they can’t have luxuries and
comforts without getting into trouble and we’ll lay on more until it
hurts to buy enough just to live.”

I said, “That’s the same thing as the boot!”

He said, “No it isn’t. Let the class of ’50 take over and you’ll have
that. Orwell said _eternally_ and he was right. No conflict, no dissent,
no division, no balance. If I come back, there’ll be plenty of all that.
People will die—lots of them. And hurt—plenty.”

“There’s no other way?”

“Look,” he said, “you can’t give people what they want. They have to
earn it or take it. When they start doing that there’ll be bombings and
riots and people—especially young people—will do what they want to and
what works for them, not what they’re told. They’ll find their own
ways—and it won’t be anything like what grandpa said.”

I thought about all that and then about the class of ’50 and the
stamping boot.

“Come back,” I said.

He sighed and said, “Oh, God.”

I don’t know what he meant. But I think he was glad.

Suddenly—well, it seemed sudden—there was more light outside the Automat
than inside. I felt as dazed as my friend looked.

I said, “And what have you been doing since nineteen fifty?”

He said, “Don’t you understand? All this happened last night! Last night
was 1950! I got back into the elevator and walked into my—your—the
office and there you were!”

“And the dev— Lucif— whoever it was, he’s back, too?”

“Time is different for him. He came back right away. You’ve already told
me enough about what’s been happening since then. He’s back. He’s been
back. Things are moving toward the center again. It’s hard to do, but
it’s happening.”

I stuck my spoon into my cold old coffee and swirled it around and
thought of the purposeless crime and the useless deaths and the really
decent people who didn’t know they were greedy, and a deep joy began to
kindle inside me.

“Then maybe it’s not all useless.”

“Oh, God, it better not be,” he whispered. “Because all of it is my
fault.”

“No it isn’t. Things are going to be all right.” As I said that I was
sure of it. I looked at him, so lost and dazed and I thought, _I am
going to help this guy. I am going to help him help me to understand
better, to work out how we can bring it all into balance again_. I
wondered if he knew he was a messiah, that he had saved the world. I
don’t think he did.

Sudden thought: “Hey,” I said, “did he tell you why he dropped out mad
like that? What was it—he did something the other one didn’t want him to
do?”

“Didn’t I mention that? Sorry,” said the dazed man. “He got tired of
being a—a force. Whatever you call it, Spirit. He wanted to be a man for
a while, to see what it was like. He could do it—but he couldn’t get out
of it again without the other’s help. So he walked around for a while as
a man.”

“And?”

“And got crucified.”



PRUZY’S POT


Dear Fred:

To come right to the point, do you think you could find us a house in
your part of the world?

I know this comes as a surprise to you. Well, hell, this letter is
probably a surprise, knowing me and how I don’t write letters. Really
sorry about that. Ever since I married Niwa two years ago we’ve been so
busy there just hasn’t been time, and besides, I hardly ever wrote
anyway, even before. But I know you’ve heard something about what we’ve
been doing, if you’ve read anything I’ve published recently. In case you
haven’t, I’ll give it to you briefly: we’re trying to work out a
survival life-style in this crazy, crowded, complicated world we live
in. Nothing theoretical; Niwa and I are both deadly sick and tired of
sitting around with bright-eyed malcontents, all knowledge and no
experience, complaining about pollution and corruption in the body,
mind, and soul of man. It hit us all of a sudden, one night after one of
these mouth-marathons, that anyone who has a complaint ought to have to
qualify and be certified first. I mean, here’s somebody who thinks it’s
just awful about the dirty water and the foul air. What is he doing
about the solid waste he creates in his own house? What kind of
poison-factory is he driving, and does he keep it running in such a way
as to minimize the junk it puts into the air? Does he support government
people he knows are corrupt, or by apathy just let them go on
corrupting? The more we heard this kind of crap from these hobby
gripers, the more we felt that a man should qualify to complain, just as
he has to qualify to drive a bus or cut an appendix or run a ferryboat.
Or vote. And if we were going to be honest about it, we had to look at
ourselves. Point a finger at anybody and you’ll find you have three
fingers pointing at you.

Sorry, Fred—I didn’t mean to preach, but you’ve got to have this
background. Once we faced these things we decided to get out of the
plastic cave we were living in, with the chrome kitchen and all the
little bells and buzzers that told us when to take the defrosted food
out of the automatic oven and when the heavy phosphates were flushed out
of the polyester double-knits, and headed for the hills to plant some
honesty and see if we could harvest some survival. And you’ll never
guess where we found what we were looking for: in the “Houses to Rent”
in the Sunday paper, the first one we checked out. And yet it wasn’t all
that simple, because when we got there to look at the place (2 bdr,
frplc, sec, Ch & pets OK) there were cars all over the mountainside and
the agent was running guided tours through the house every seven
minutes. Secluded two-bedroom houses with fireplaces are not all that
common so close to downtown. It was everything it claimed to be and the
rent was most reasonable. It was also funky and creaky, with some
interior wallboard smashed and cracked, a few broken windows, the most
jarring paint-job inside I have ever seen (did you know there are
seventeen DayGlo colors? It had them all), and no more than about eight
pounds water pressure. However, it did have more than a half-acre of
ground, and, being on a knoll with the wild part of a park just across a
narrow road, it was absolutely private.

Niwa, being Niwa, full of enthusiasm and articulateness, spouted and
jetted all our ideas about survival techniques in the late twentieth
century, man versus plastic and the organ versus technology, and the
whole rap, interspersed with enthusiastic “What a great corner for the
rabbit hutch” and “Here we dry sassafras” kind of things. You haven’t
met her yet so I have to tell you that she lights up the landscape even
when she isn’t enthusiastic. When she is—wear your welding hood. The
agent, a faceless type with a clipboard, took notes and said don’t call
us, we’ll call you, and we left to look up more houses.

But that night we got a call from the landlord. He talked to Niwa and he
talked to me. He had a deep voice that sounded something like that
monotone you get from someone who’s had a laryngectomy and uses stomach
wind—a sort of controlled burp—but not exactly that either. He said very
little about himself except that he was in some kind of biochemical
research and he owned a couple dozen properties around. We didn’t care
about that part of it just then; what mattered was he said we could have
the house if we wanted it, and we wanted it. He sent over a lease by
messenger and we paid two months and that was that. The lease was
standard except it said we were to let him put in another half-bath. It
spelled out that we could do anything we wanted with the house and
grounds except mess with the plumbing. I never heard of a landlord like
that and I never saw one either, not even this one, because he died a
few months later.

I wish I could remember that conversation in detail or had taped it or
something. It would have explained everything. Or almost. Maybe I didn’t
listen too carefully because mostly it was Niwa in that electric
explosive way of hers expounding our theories of survival, how to use
tansy (which when growing repels ants) and toads for insecticides
instead of chemical sprays, and how kitchen garbage is turned into rich
black dirt, and how barter (two loaves of sourdough for a brake job on
the VW) is better than money, and how much better it is to live without
clothes but when you do wear clothes, design them yourself and have
something money couldn’t buy. The thing was, this landlord, who said his
name was Jones although we found out later it wasn’t, he liked
everything she said and that’s why we got the house.

So we really put roots down—in several senses—and dug in. It was kind of
great, Fred. Anybody who tells you that working out this kind of
lifestyle is easy, or that there’s an easy way to do it, is out of his
gourd. The same thing is true of anyone who implies it’s cheap. And you
make mistakes. When we imported a thousand lady-bugs to help the toads
fight insects in the garden, what we got was a lot of fat toads. We also
discovered the mysterious communication network that exists in the
netherworlds. Like, nothing is more specialized than a hornworm, a
beautiful animal that grows very large and is so perfectly adapted to
tomato plants that you can stand with your nose seven inches away from
one (and it seven inches long) and not see it, while it is stripping the
plant of leaf, bud, flower, and fruit. Now: who sent for the son of a
bitch? Likewise gophers. Nothing had grown on that little quarter-acre
for years but Dichondra. All of a sudden gophers are all over, tearing
up the beets and carrots and going down the lines of butter lettuce like
a wire contacting phone poles. Who sent for them? Then of course there
was Sonya—she’s a more-or-less dog we have who in a flash could pursue a
gopher clear across the garden … diagonally … eighteen inches deep all
the way. Which meant fencing.

All the same there’s the way Brussels sprouts grow, which has to be seen
to be believed, and baby ears of corn eaten raw, and vine-ripened
tomatoes, like nothing else you ever flang a fang into, and chard, and
carrots tenderer than a tit-man’s dream of the ultimate nipple … and
then the barter that went on, and a kind of understanding of where it’s
all really at that comes to you only if you can get naked and work soil
with the sun on your back and the wind blowing through you rather than
on you, and you plant a seed and lo it comes up, and it forms and buds
and flowers and makes, and what it makes you eat—you eat it into your
same body that did all this, no cellophane, no supermarket, no
middleman, no tax. No, it isn’t easy; no, it isn’t cheap. It is,
however, in these declining years of the twentieth century, one of the
few realities that is not a bummer.

But there I go. What I am writing to you about is can you find me a
place, and especially now after all that I have to tell you why. It’s
the toilet, the new toilet.

I think I already said it was in the lease. That was pretty weird by
itself; there are plenty of things that house needs, and there’s nothing
wrong with the facilities that are already there. But you don’t complain
when a landlord wants to improve your place, even when he insists on it.
So sure enough, after we’d been there ten days or so, here comes a truck
with the agent and two guys, one a deaf-mute five feet across and the
other one the skinniest man, and, I think, the strongest man, I have
ever seen. Nobody said much, and we were busy outside most of the time.
They converted one of the two big walk-in closets in the big bedroom
into a nice little toidey with a sink and a pot and fluorescent lights
and not-bad wallpaper and wall-to-wall carpet on the floor. There was a
door from the bedroom and one from the hall—that was the new one.

And there was the pot. The agent had nothing to say about it—I don’t
think he knew anything—except that Mr. Jones had supplied it, that this
and no other was the one he and his lease had specified, that it was a
brand new design, and that in the remote eventuality we didn’t want to
use it, we didn’t have to—there was always the old one; and we had to
admit that the old one was adequate.

That happened to be the day Pruzy Penntifer arrived from New Zealand.
I’ve told you about her, haven’t I? Used to be Niwa’s roommate in London
before we were married. Niwa made a special friend of Pruzy because she
never could figure her out. She was the English-speaking-world’s number
one straight, a noncussing virgin, “impermeable, impenetrable, and
insurmountable,” as someone once said, so guarded against men that the
armor was up against women, too, in case one of them be used by some man
to infiltrate. To Niwa, who has always been interested in the matter of
being honestly alive, Pruzy was a fascination and a challenge. Anyway,
she was on a world trip and was to stay with us for a week, and Niwa had
been spitting on her hands in anticipation for a long time. Pruzy had
been warned in advance about our lifestyle and that we aren’t about to
change it for anybody, although the last thing we’d ever do is to
persuade anyone else to adopt it. “I’ll live by your rules in your
house,” Niwa would say, “and you can live by your rules in my house. But
when you expect me to live by your rules in my house, you go too damn
far.” So we didn’t get a real look at the toilet until after it was
installed, because we had to go to the airport for Pruzy while the men
were finishing up; they were gone before we got back, everything cleaned
up and the key under the mat.

Pruzy you wouldn’t believe—tall and slender and dressed in blacks and
browns. The one word for her is “contained.” Her chain-mail clothes
contain her, and you get the idea her skin contains her body the same
neat way. She has one of those self-contained mouths that has never
sucked on anything but itself and does a lot of that, and eyes coated
with one-way glass. She talks funny, being Australian, but not funny
like most Australians, who to the American ear put a fine Bow-bells
breadth to the simplest words; her laminated gentility contains even
that.

We gave her the guided tour of the house and garden, winding up in the
big bedroom, which was to be hers while she stayed. The small one was my
studio, and we’d sleep in the living room, which was fine with us—we
mostly did anyhow. This way we could come and go without bothering her,
if that’s what she might want. And of course she had her own sink and
pot, the latter of which made a fine ending and climax to the tour. The
big closet in the northeast corner was gone, and there was a new high-up
half-casement in the outside wall, a built-in medicine chest, a very
nice little washstand with a hemispherical imitation-marble bowl and
gold-colored fittings, and the … the … well, the pot.

It was wider and lower than most, bulbous. It seemed at first to have
scales, tiny close-set ones, but if you closed your eyes and touched it,
it was perfectly smooth. The seat was covered and there seemed to be no
way to lift the cover—and indeed there was not; it took a little
fumbling to discover that the raised pale spot on one side was a
control. It must have (I thought at the time) some sort of electrostatic
system, like those elevator buttons you don’t depress but just touch,
because on contact the cover slid back like an eyelid, exposing the
bowl. I got only the one glimpse of a complicated contour inside,
obviously moist (though I saw no standing water) and deep red. And then,
only half meaning to, I hit the spot again and the cover slid silently
shut, whereupon the whole thing went (with overtones of joy and
controlled power) softly hroom, hroom, hroom … like the revving of a
distant muffled motorcycle or a tiger’s purring.

I heard a tiger purr once.

Just as I wish I could recall that one phone conversation with the late
Mr. Jones, I wish I had been watching Niwa’s face and especially
Pruzy’s, but I was preoccupied with my own reactions. There was
something profoundly unsettling about that piece of plumbing. I had a
crazy artist friend once who painted the inside of his toilet with
high-gloss enamels, bright red and cerise and ivory, so that when you
opened it up it looked like a huge slavering mouth with a wet tongue and
sharp teeth. That was unsettling, too, but it was also funny. This one
wasn’t funny. For one thing, the shock value of my friend’s work of art
lay in the fact that in all respects his was a conventional fixture,
with his efforts applied to it, whereas this thing was all of a
piece—eerie all over. I think Niwa expressed it best when we talked
about it later, after Pruzy had gone to bed. She said, “I think if it
looked as if it might bite, I could laugh it off. But it doesn’t. It
looks as if it was going to smile!”

We lay quietly for a long time, thinking about sitting down on that
smile. Then one or the other of us—it doesn’t matter which, because we
both felt the same way—said, “Well, she can have the damn thing.” And we
left it at that.

During the night I heard it going hroom, hroom twice.

The next day we got up and went to work as usual, me in my studio and
Niwa in the kitchen and garden. Pruzy slept late, getting her time zones
sorted out, and when she emerged and encountered us naked the way we
always are in the house and yard, she took it imperturbably—well, she’d
been told, she knew what to expect, and besides, nothing—nothing—can
crack that chick’s unassailable front. She, of course, stayed not only
dressed, but groomed.

It must have been three days later that we began to notice how much time
Pruzy was spending in her nonbath bathroom. She always shot the bolts on
both doors when she went in and unlocked them when she left—a
purposeless ritual, but then so is nineteen-twentieths of all ritual
privacy. (An airline hostess once told me a little old lady borrowed a
safety pin from her and she found it later in the tiny ten-inch curtains
over the porthole in the john, where Granny had pinned them closed—at
seven hundred miles per hour and thirty thousand feet—to guard against
Peeping Toms.) Niwa and I had no need or desire to go in there, so she
might just as well have kept the outside door permanently locked, but
once she’d established the ritual she kept it up, that being the nature
of ritual. So we always heard the bolts, and though we had no wish to
pry, we couldn’t help but notice she was spending an awful lot of time
in there.

“Maybe she likes to read there. Lots of people—”

“Pruzy is not a reader,” Niwa said positively. “She really thinks she
knows everything she needs to know.” Which figured. People like that
have achieved a kind of balance, and they’ll fight like hell to keep it.
One of the best ways to do that is to put the brains in suspended
animation.

It took about five days for us—Niwa, really—to realize she wasn’t using
any toilet paper. That became an increasing fascination, too, as the
days went by. And they went by, too: Pruzy postponed her departure for a
week and then for another, and started to chip in to the exchequer
before we could suggest it … and she was no trouble, really. But we did
wonder about the toilet paper. It wasn’t anything you could come out and
ask, either. Not with Pruzy. She was company of a sort for Niwa when I’d
go through my marathon writing sessions, or my marathon
leave-me-the-hell-alone sessions, and she helped efficiently with the
house … and got to where she was spending three hours a day in her john.

She went into town one day and got her visa extended. Then there was a
phone call when she was out, about a naturalization form. “I think,”
Niwa whispered to me one night, “she’s going to immigrate, take the
vows, join the melting pot.”

“No pot in the world could melt that one,” I remember saying. I was
wrong.

Sonya had puppies. She would do that from time to time, concealing her
intentions until it happened, then suddenly not being there at chowtime.
Then it was a matter of beating the bush and crawling through dark
crannies until you found out where she’d spawned them. If you couldn’t,
the pups would give themselves away sooner or later, mewling and
yapping. They were usually a sorry lot. This time was no exception.
She’d found a crawl space under the house and had her puppies way
underneath. I bellied under some forty feet before I found them, and it
happened to be right under Pruzy’s bathroom. Though puppies were my
immediate preoccupation, I couldn’t help noticing the plumbing. There
were hot and cold pipes to the washstand and a cold feed to the toilet,
shiny new pipe. And you know what else?

Nothing else. No waste pipe. I mean, no sewer, no outlet. I’m telling
you, Fred, nothing. And don’t tell me I could be wrong. Water pipes are
half-inch, maybe three-quarters, but waste plumbing is big, man—four to
seven inches.

I didn’t say anything to Niwa about it, but the next day I went up on
the roof. There was a vent pipe, sure enough. I hung an ear on it. Air
was passing through it all right—inward. Before I could check it out it
stopped, and then started again.

Outward.

Fred, it was going in and out about twenty-five to the minute. Like
breathing.

I didn’t say anything about that to Niwa either. Not then.

It was the next day—yesterday—when the girls were out that I decided on
a confrontation with the thing. Well, to tell the truth, it was my lower
gut that decided me. I was on my way to the old familiar comfortable
john when I suddenly thought of that purring pot of Pruzy’s. (In our
minds it has become completely hers; neither of us ever use it.) So in I
went.

There it sat, low, wide … waiting. I reached down and touched the pale
hump, and the cover snicked back instantly and almost silently. I looked
down into that moist, convoluted red surface and worried a little. Well,
I thought, okay, but one at a time, all right?

So, man-style, I stood in front of the thing and let fly.

Fred, the best possible way to describe what happened is to say it
gasped in astonishment. I don’t think it objected; I just don’t think it
had ever met a man before. For a split second a black orifice appeared
way down deep, then the sidewalls sort of bulged and rubbed together and
it, well, swallowed. Well, dammit, you don’t have to believe me. But now
that I’m started I’m going to tell it all.

I’m not usually a stubborn guy, but I’d come in there to do something
and I meant to do it. Also to find out something. So I sat down to
finish what I had started.

For a moment that thing and I, both of us, I’ll swear, we held our
breaths. Then I had a rush of brains to the head and grabbed the family
jewels and held ’em up as high as I could. I mean I wanted answers but I
wasn’t about to walk out of there singing soprano, and it dimly occurred
to me that this thing might be designed to remove anything it hadn’t
programmed itself for.

Well there was this tense moment, like the one in the cowboy pictures
when the walkdown is over and the shooting hasn’t started yet, and then
I let fly. I submit to you that I’m not characteristically one of those
strain-and-ponder types who has his forty-minute ritual. I don’t go till
I have to and when I have to I go altogether.

I never fazed this thing. At the first show of anything, something warm
and moist zocked me gently and firmly on the bull’s-eye and—now dammit,
I can see your face as you read this, Fred; it’s true! Also, it’s not
funny—and it applied just as much suction as I supplied pressure. It
made the whole thing so easy and so fast that even before my reflexes
could pucker me up I was done. I came up off that thing as if it was
hot—which it wasn’t—and even in that split second I was aware of why
Pruzy never had to use toilet paper. I suppose I made a deal of noise,
too. Next thing I was aware of I was flat on my face in the hall. You
want to escape as fast as I wanted to escape, you pull up your pants
first. And behind me the damn thing’s going hroom, hroom, hroom, happy
as catnip.

Well, that’s the story, except for Pruzy. I guess I was a little
hysterical when the girls got home because I was yelling that we had to
move; I mean flat out, no argument, we were getting out of here. As soon
as Pruzy got the gist of it she came alive like I have never seen
before. Could she have the place? Could she take over the lease? And
Niwa, flabbergasted, shouting at me what do you mean, move? Are you out
of your thing, man? What about the garden?

The picture that overrides that whole wild scene is the imperturbable
Pruzy, eyes glowing, voice breathy, saying over and over, “Please, you
must, you know. I love this house. I love it, love it, love It.…” The
only way I could cut the chaos was to take Niwa out in the car then and
there and tell her what had happened.

She took it hard—not the idea of moving: you can always get another
house. Not even the garden, though it’s a shame after all that love and
work, because you see, once you clear ground and plant something, that’s
more important than harvest-time, you take so much away with you. Why
Niwa cries a lot is that she feels she’s failed. She’d thought she would
go to any lengths, do anything, live any way that would bring us closer
to the cycle of earth and natural food, recycle, replenish … but she had
to draw the line at Pruzy’s pot, which (like all of us) lived off the
products of other life-forms. If it was bred to deliver special joys,
that was no different from the function of fragrant flowers or bright
sweet fruit, right? But she couldn’t cut it, and that made her whole
conviction about life-style look like a hypocrisy and a failure, and she
cries a lot. For all that, neither of us can take the image of Niwa,
too, coming out of a two-hour session with Pruzy’s pot, saying
breathily, “I love it, love it.…” Ecch.

So find us a house, Fred, as far away from here as you can, and if it’s
one with plastic walls and monofilament rugs and a kitchen full of dials
and bells—fine, man, fine.



AFTERWORD TO “PRUZY’S POT”


Spider Robinson (first published 1986)

Although written in the 1960s, “Pruzy’s Pot” does not refer to cannabis—

Just a moment, please.

In this story, Sturgeon was attempting something genuinely
_fundamental—_

Excuse me, I’ll be right with you.

_—story can be digested in a single sitting—_

I’ve almost got it under control, now, really—

_—obvious intent here was to discommode his r—_

Dammit—

_—whole new meaning to the phrase, let’s go bowling—_

STOP IT! I mean it, now, cut it out! This is serious business, quit
fooling around: I’m trying to introduce my beloved dead teacher and
friend here. How about a little solemnity?

_—solemnity? The man was a pervert, a degenerate, a true sicko—and this
is the story to prove it. I should have guessed when he told me he liked
scat singing—_

Aw, shove it up.… Now you got _me_ doing it. I’m terribly sorry, ladies
and gentleman. These interruptions are all coming from The Lower Half of
My Brain. Unlike most people, I have a brain which is bisected
_horizontally_, into upper and lower hemispheres. The upper half handles
cognitive and verbal skills, motor activities, life-support—everything,
really. That upper half, the ‘higher function’ if you will, is _me_, the
one who addresses you now, and I do all the work around here. The Lower
Half does nothing but make up puns and dirty jokes all day long.

_— “coprophilia?” “Not really; I’ve room for dessert” —_

Cut it out, I said! Excuse me, dear reader. I can usually manage to deny
the Lower Half access to our vocal chords, suppressing nine out of ten
puns that he produces, both from a sense of civic duty, and from an
aversion to being punched. But Lower often seems to seize control of my
typing fingers, and is particularly hard to discipline whenever Ted
Sturgeon comes up—

_—according to Lady Jayne, that was all the time—_

Just ignore him. It doesn’t make him stop, but it builds character. As I
was saying, the subject of Ted Sturgeon makes it very difficult to
control my Lower Half. Ted, you see, had an overdeveloped Lower Half
himself, and his and mine flirted shamelessly together.

_—want to rephrase that, Upper?_

Ted was a paronomasiac. A compulsive punster. I have, thanks to Lower,
acquired some small ill repute in that regard myself. When Ted came to
Halifax to be Toastmaster for Halcon, our annual science fiction
convention, he came with the attitude and aspect of the Old Punslinger
who has heard that there’s a fast new young punk in town, and plans to
settle which is the faster. We met in front of the crosstime saloon with
puns blazing (and fannish eyeballs glazing) and the punfire lasted all
weekend long—

_—talk about selling your birthright for a pot of message—_

Nonetheless he redeemed himself at the eleventh hour. When the chips
were down, Ted’s better self regained control; he met the test of
manhood. The despairing con committee, besieged with complaints, had
taken us to dinner at a curry restaurant, whose menu listed over a
hundred different kinds of curry, by number. Naturally (if that is the
word I want), Ted and I went down the list, punning on each name in
rotation, volleying back and forth; Ted would imitate the unforgettable
voice of Mr. Bacciagalupe from the Abbot and Costello show and say,
“Bud’s cigars stink; open the Vindaloo,” so I’d do my Elvis
impersonation on “Love me Tandoor,” then Ted would read, “Chicken
Phal … but was not seriously injured,” and so on. Cries of protest from
neighboring tables, the pleas of the con-com, all went unheeded. People
began leaving—

_—which did not curry favor with the management—_

—dammit, Lower Half, cut that out!… and things looked grim.

Then we reached number 43.

It was Ted’s turn, he had started this. He wrestled with his conscience,
opened and closed his mouth several times … and resigned. There was only
one way to properly salute such decency. I wavered … and let Ted’s
magnificent example guide me, let his courage show me the way. I too
resigned, and the contest was declared a draw.

Number 43 was “Chick peas curry.”

So in spite of the story you are about to read, I insist that Ted
Sturgeon was a man of _character_, a man of decency and principle, a man
with higher—

_—for Chrissake, Upper, he wrote a whole book about a guy who drinks
menstrual blood; he wrote a story about a guy who saved the world while
sitting on the toilet—_

—he wrote warm, gentle, insightful stories which explored the nature of
human love, which resonated with hope and wisdom, he delineated the
tragicomic—

_—he wrote a book full of hermaphrodites and a novel about motherfuckers
and a story about a man who had a deep emotional and sexual relationship
with a pair of hands dangling from an imbecile, for God’s sake_—_I mean,
we’re talking here about a guy even more bent than Phil Farmer, even
more disgusting than Jonathan Swift, with a finer grasp of the grotesque
than even David Cronenberg—_

—not only the most literate and lyrical writer science fiction ever had,
but one of the nicest, most decent and genuinely lovable human beings
that ever—

_—and the story this reader is about to sample is, let us face it, a
minor story, a story so twisted that even_ National Lampoon _must have
hesitated to print it, a truly gross little gem about The Ultimate
Felch—so why don’t you just shut up and—_

—this story makes many subtle and trenchant satiric points about the
retentive personality and the societal ramifications of the organic
lifestyle and—

_—there’s no other kinds, once you’ve tasted hinds, that’s what the
story has to say, Upper—_

—dammit, Lower, I loved the man as much as I loved my mother, he wrote a
story that kept me from killing myself once, okay?

_—this may be the only story ever written after reading which you do not
want to follow Ted’s lifelong advice and ‘Ask the next question,’
Upper—_

—this is my bloody introduction, not yours, and I’m not going to let you
screw it up, and if you don’t like it, you can kiss my—

_—gotcha—_

—aw, sh—

_—gotcha again! —_

Dear reader, you may or may not “enjoy” (whatever that means) the story
that follows. It certainly is not even in the running for the best story
that Ted ever wrote. But once you have read it, I defy you to forget it.
I can’t.

And believe me, a couple of times I’ve tried.…



STORY NOTES VOLUME XII


Noël Sturgeon

The stories in this volume were written, for the most part, between 1970
and 1972. Before this, Sturgeon, separated from his third wife Marion
and their four children in Woodstock, NY, was living in Los Angeles,
initially with Harlan Ellison® (see Volume XI: _The Nail and the
Oracle_) and then in a run-down motel in Sherman Oaks. He wrote few
stories, but worked in television (for example the three _Star Trek_
teleplays “Amok Time,” (aired 9/15/67) “Shore Leave,” (aired 12/29/66)
and “The Joy Machine”), wrote introductions and book reviews, and tried
without much success to become a screenwriter. He also tried to sell his
own stories to movie producers, and was especially successful with his
novel _More Than Human_. In fact, he spent two weeks working with Orson
Welles in an attempt to produce a treatment for _More Than Human;_ but
this arrangement fell through. (_More Than Human_ was optioned
continually from this period until 2000, but a movie has never been
made.)

In 1969 Sturgeon started a correspondence with a young American fan
living in England, Wina Golden, who was a journalist and photographer.
The correspondence blossomed into a romance, and Wina began living with
Ted in Los Angeles in the spring of 1969, changing her last name to
Sturgeon. They had a son, Andros, in 1970. From a much younger
generation than Sturgeon, Wina’s journalistic experience with rock
musicians; her do-it-yourself philosophy in terms of food, clothes, and
health; as well as her determination to earn her own living, had a deep
influence on Sturgeon. During this time, they began to socialize with
rock musicians, such as Peter Tork of the Monkees; Mama Cass of the
Mamas and Papas; Crosby, Stills and Nash; and Joni Mitchell, many of
whom had read Sturgeon and were influenced by his ideas of gestalt,
love, pacifism, and resistance to social conventions. Sturgeon claimed
that Mama Cass was a special fan of his story “Saucer of Loneliness,”
and when approached to film it, he recommended that she play the part of
the female protagonist. (It was finally made into a _Twilight Zone_
episode in 1986, written by David Gerrold, with Shelley Duvall in the
main role.) David Crosby hired Sturgeon to write a screenplay of his
dystopian song, “Wooden Ships”; however, it never went past the point of
a first few drafts. (See Crosby’s introduction to Volume VI.)

In 1971, a collection of Sturgeon stories entitled _Sturgeon is Alive
and Well_ (G.P. Putnam’s) was published. Given that Sturgeon had written
only about two stories a year since 1960, it represented a significant
comeback for him. This long period of writer’s block, though one of
several in his career, was much more well-known because it occurred
after he was very well established as one of the best writers in the
field, and speculation was constant about why more stories did not
appear—hence the title of the collection. One of the consequences of
having one’s writer’s block be such a matter of public concern was that
Sturgeon acquired a reputation as having written very few stories in his
lifetime, though _The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon_ belies
this, comprising 221 stories. The fact that so many of them are very
good, classics in the field, means that Sturgeon broke his own law in
this regard; Sturgeon’s Law holds that 90% of _everything_ is crap, an
adage he crafted in response to the constant downgrading of science
fiction as a literary genre.

Because of the influence of its muse, _Sturgeon is Alive and Well_ is
often called “the Wina Stories” by Sturgeon aficionados. In _The
Complete Stories_, the stories from this anthology are split up between
Volumes XI and XII, and are slightly out of chronological order. But
Sturgeon meant them to be together, and put a lot of thought into the
arrangement. In a 1979 letter to his agent, Kirby McCauley, he writes:
“This collection is one of the very best balanced of all my titles, half
sf and half mainstream and a fine showcase for what I do.” A 1954 story,
“To Here and the Easel,” was the only story written outside of the
1969–1971 period, presumably included because it was a story about
writer’s block (it appears in Volume VIII). “Jorry’s Gap,” “It Was
Nothing, Really!,” and “Brownshoes,” all published in 1969, and “Take
Care of Joey,” published in 1970, are in Volume XI. All of the other
stories from _Sturgeon is Alive and Well_ are in this volume.

Both Wina and Ted describe these stories as being written in an
outpouring. For example, Wina recalls going down to the office at the La
Fonda Motel (in Sherman Oaks where she first lived with Ted), and
encountering a man who looked at her and said: “It’s a beautiful day,”
and she knew that he was actually saying it about her. She told Ted the
story, and wished out loud that she was a girl who always knew what they
meant. Ted immediately went to the typewriter sat down and wrote “The
Girl Who Knew What They Meant” in about two hours. In another case, she
recounted a former boyfriend breaking up with her by saying: “It’s not
that. It’s you,” in response to which Ted wrote the story “It’s You!”
According to Wina, the writing of “Slow Sculpture,” occurred shortly
after a party at Gene Roddenberry’s home, where the _Star Trek_ producer
was given a bonsai tree. On the drive home, Wina wondered out loud if
the wiring and pruning used to shape a tree could be metaphorically used
to shape a human, calling bonsai a form of “slow sculpture.” (Personal
correspondence, Wina Sturgeon) Many of the stories have a female
character with Wina’s distinctive apricot-colored hair and eyes.

Throughout his career, Sturgeon often wrote stories in a one-off
fashion, as evidenced by the manuscripts in his papers, which very
rarely have any rewritten sections, multiple drafts or crossed-out
words, but appear to have been produced in one sitting. A similar but
longer run of stories occurred from 1951–1959, after Sturgeon moved to
upstate New York with his third wife, Marion. But clearly, “the Wina
Stories” were felt as a special case of this ability to produce story
after story in a sudden outpouring. Sturgeon’s introduction to _Sturgeon
is Alive and Well_ recounts this process.

_Yes, I am alive and well_.

_Once to a perceptive friend I was bemoaning the fact that there was a
gap in my bibliography for 1940 to 1946. (Actually some stories were
published during the period, but only one had been written after 1940.)
What wonders I might have produced had I not been clutched up, I wailed.
And he said no, be of good cheer. He then turned on the whole body of my
work a kind of searchlight I’d not been able to use, and pointed out to
me that the early stuff was all very well, but the stories were
essentially entertainment; with few exceptions they lack that Something
to Say quality which marked the later output. In other words, the
retreat, the period of silence, was in no way a cessation, a stopping.
It was a silent working out of ideas, of conviction, a profound
selection. The fact that the process went on unrecognized and beyond or
beneath my control is quite beside the point. The work never stopped_.

_I’ve held hard to that revelation in recent years, and no longer go
into transports of anguish when the typewriter stops. I do other things
instead, in absolute confidence that when the silent subterranean work
is done, it will surface. When it does so, it does with blinding speed—a
short story, sometimes, in two hours. But to say I wrote it in two hours
is to overlook that complex, steady, silent processing and reprocessing
that has been going on for months and often years. Say then I typed it
in two hours. I do not know how long it took to write. I could only type
it when it was finished_.

_I do not know if the package you hold in your hands will be regarded as
remarkable in the bibliography. Biographically it represents a miracle,
and engenders some tributes_.

_I was living at the bottom of the mountain in Neverneverland, far under
a rock. Looking back on that time, I now know that I was unaware of just
how far I had crawled and just how immobile my crouch. Suddenly one day
there exploded a great mass of red hair attached to a laughing face with
a beauty spot right in the center of her forehead and a totally electric
personality. Her name was Wina and she was a journalist and photographer
and a dress designer and a dancer and she traveled 6,500 miles with her
cat (inside of whom she smuggled four kittens) to marry me. She crawled
way in under that rock and hauled me out. We acquired a squirrel and
some tropical fish and a baby (whose name is Andros Theodore, which
means “Man is the gift of God,” Lindsay Sturgeon) and set up
housekeeping_.

_And suddenly I wrote. As I’ve said, I do not know how long it took to
write the stories, but I typed one a week for eleven consecutive weeks,
and after a short hiatus, a twelfth—all while I was writing a novel. So
the first tribute goes to Wina_.

_My next acknowledgment is to Tom Dardis, not simply for accepting the
book for publication, but for agreeing to use this particular table of
contents. For one thing I am delighted to have in one place exactly
(with one exception) those “Wina” stories—but that’s personal and
sentimental. My most profound appreciation is extended to him for his
willingness to include some of the stories which cannot be categorized
“science fiction.”_

_Science fiction is my best friend and my worst enemy. But for one or
two notable examples, science fiction and science fiction writers are
relegated to the back pages of the book review section, not to be taken
seriously by serious critics. “I don’t read science fiction,” says Mr.
J. Q. Public, with_ On the Beach _and_ Dr. Strangelove _and_ Lord of the
Flies _and_ Messiah _and a half hundred others on the bookshelf behind
him, and he marches out to see_ 2001—_all science fiction but never
called science fiction and virtually never written by anyone who has
ever appeared in_ Analog _or_ Galaxy _or_ New Worlds _except, perhaps,
in reprint, and some of the magazines which run reprints (and I’m glad
they do). The predicament of the professional science-fiction writer who
takes himself and his work seriously could be called comic if it weren’t
for such unfunny things as hospital bills and the IRS, and why more of
them aren’t certifiably paranoid is a greater wonder than any of them
have yet wrought. It seems a literal truth that to have acquired a
reputation in science fiction is to be reflexively relegated to the 25th
Century with Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers, all wrapped up in a colored
funny paper_.

_Yet the best writers in the field (as one of the cognoscenti once
pointed out) write science FICTION, not SCIENCE fiction. Let me tell you
something: you cannot write good fiction about ideas. You can only write
good fiction about people. Good science fiction writers are good fiction
writers. When a blatant dabbler like Kingsley Amis gets three columns
in_ Time _magazine while nobody ever heard of a polished and thoughtful
writer like Edgar Pangborn, it breaks my heart_.

_Very special thanks must go to two bright young editors, Merrill Miller
and Jared Rutter, who bought most of the stories in this book. They
asked me for stories. They didn’t ask for science fiction or fantasy
stories; they did not demand the currently obligatory skin scene—they
just bought my stories as they arrived; and one can approach the
typewriter with a wonderful sense of wingspread with a market like
that_.

_Nothing will ever stop me from writing science fiction, but there sure
is a plot afoot to keep me from writing anything else, and I won’t have
it. Perhaps now you can understand why I’m so pleased with this
collection_.

_My final tribute has to do with the one story in this book which is not
the product of that astonishing summer. I wrote “To Here and the Easel”
for a Ballantine book now long out of print. It was called_ Star Short
Novels, _and when Ballantine issued one of the three novels in a
separate volume I knew it would not be reprinted, and asked, and was
graciously granted permission to use a story in another book. It was
published in 1954 and has been seen nowhere else since. —TS_

“The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff”; first published in _The Magazine
of Fantasy and Science Fiction_, November and December, 1955. Teaser,
most likely written by the editor, Bob Mills: “CRITICS FREQUENTLY
COMPLAIN, WITH NOT A LITTLE JUSTICE, THAT THE GREATEST LACK IN SCIENCE
FICTION IS CHARACTERIZATION, THE FULL-BODIED DEVELOPMENT OF LIVING
PEOPLE. NO WRITER HAS DONE MORE TO ANSWER THAT CHARGE THAN THEODORE
STURGEON; AND THIS NEW AND CURIOUSLY TITLED SHORT NOVEL IS, TO MY TASTE,
ONE OF THE FINEST PIECES OF WORK THAT EVEN STURGEON HAS YET
ACCOMPLISHED, COMPARABLE ONLY TO HIS _MORE THAN HUMAN_ IN THE RICHNESS
AND DEPTH OF ITS CHARACTER-CREATION. YOU’RE ABOUT TO MEET A FASCINATING
AND REAL GROUP OF PEOPLE; AND IN THEIR COMPANY YOU’LL LIVE THROUGH AN
ABSORBING STORY, LEARN A NEW ASPECT OF ALIEN OBSERVATION … AND EVEN COME
TO KNOW THE NATURE OF THOSE DEVICES WHICH OUR LANGUAGE CAN ONLY
APPROXIMATELY RENDER AS [WIDGET] AND [WADGET].”

In terms of chronological order, this story should have appeared in
Volume X of _The Complete Stories of Theodore Sturgeon_, but was too
long for that volume. The character Robin in this story is named after
Sturgeon’s first son, who was in turn named after the character in
Sturgeon’s story, “Maturity,” Robin English. At the date of publication
of this story, Robin Sturgeon, like the character, was three. This story
contains one of the earliest, most complex and least didactic examples
of Sturgeon’s methodological credo, which he later labeled: “Ask the
next question,” symbolized by a Q with an arrow through it. (In his
later years, Sturgeon wore this symbol as a necklace and usually
included a sketch of the symbol with his signature. The symbol is now
used on the annual Sturgeon Memorial Short Story Award trophy.) More
than the standard notion of “critical thinking,” “ask the next question”
was meant to interrogate the very frameworks in which commonplace
inquiry take place, and to explode conventional wisdoms and prejudices
as a result. The ability to do that is presented here as a “synapse”
necessary to the survival of the human species itself. The method is
also depicted as therapeutic, and the flash of revelation that
instantaneously reorders a personality is based on experiences Sturgeon
himself had in various therapies. As in the case of the protagonist
Gerry in _More Than Human_, and many other Sturgeon characters, such a
life-changing therapeutic experience is at the heart of many of
Sturgeon’s narratives. The critical examination of the character
Halvorsen’s guilt over being different sexually is one example among
many of Sturgeon’s interest in critiquing sexual repression and
conventionality. On a minor note, the sandwich that Mary Haunt makes in
this story was one of Sturgeon’s favorites.

“THE BEHOLDERS”; 1964. Previously unpublished. This story was written
while Sturgeon lived in Woodstock, New York, and should have appeared in
Volume XI. Sturgeon was familiar with LSD, as he went through
psychedelic therapy in 1964 and 1965 with the therapist Jim Hayes, which
produced the autobiographical essay, _Argyll_ (published in 1993).

“IT’S YOU!”; First published in _Adam_, January 1970. Reprinted in
_Sturgeon is Alive and Well_. Though, as mentioned above, Wina Sturgeon
recalls this story being prompted by a remark she made about a boyfriend
ending a relationship with her, ironically, the story recounts a process
quite close to that which Sturgeon went through with Wina, as she made
new clothes for him, encouraged him to wear jewelry, and brought him
into a social context very different than others he had encountered.

“SLOW SCULPTURE”; first published in _Galaxy_, February 1970. Reprinted
in _Sturgeon is Alive and Well_. Winner of the Hugo and Nebula Awards
for Best Short Story.

“THE GIRL WHO KNEW WHAT THEY MEANT”; first published in _Knight_,
February 1970. Reprinted in _Sturgeon is Alive and Well_. Again, Wina
Sturgeon recalls the idea for this story coming from a chance encounter
she described to Sturgeon.

“THE PATTERNS OF DORNE”; first published in _Knight_, May 1970,.
Reprinted in _Sturgeon is Alive and Well_.

“CRATE”; first published in _Knight_, October 1970. Reprinted in
_Sturgeon is Alive and Well_.

“SUICIDE”; first published in _Adam_, June 1970. Reprinted in _Sturgeon
is Alive and Well_.

“UNCLE FREMMIS”; first published in _Adam, 1970_. Reprinted in _Sturgeon
is Alive and Well_.

“NECESSARY AND SUFFICIENT”; first published in _Galaxy_, April 1971.
Teaser: “IT WAS MOST EFFECTIVE BIRTH CONTROL … BUT COULD ANYONE BORN
SURVIVE IT?” The series of notes written by the unseen girlfriend in
different modalities (comic, furious, distraught, etc.) recalls one of
Sturgeon’s favorite books, _Exercises in Style_ by Raymond Queneau, in
which the same story is retold in 99 different styles. Sturgeon used the
book in almost all of his writing classes.

“THE VERITY FILE”; first published in _Galaxy_, May 1971. Teaser:
“YESTERDAY’S TRUTHS ARE DYING—AND TODAY’S FEEL NONE TOO GOOD!” Sturgeon
previously used this narrative technique (a story told in interoffice
memos, letters, and reports) in his novel _Some of Your Blood_ (1961).

“OCCAM’S SCALPEL”; first published in _If_, August 1971. Reprinted in
the collection _The Stars are the Styx_ (Dell 1979), which contained
author introductions to each story. Sturgeon’s intro to this one:

_Who was the richest man in the world in 1971, while I was writing this?
And what came creeping into my typewriter to suggest that any particular
rich man would die under inexplicably mysterious circumstances?_

_I am unabashedly proud of some of the things I have done and can do
with a typewriter. I’ve gone through a lot of grinding and polishing and
tumbling to learn how to do it_.

_But there is something else that happens once in a while, something I’m
unaware of at the time, which doesn’t manifest itself to me until after
I’ve written a passage and reread it. I see then some hundreds or
thousands of words written outside any learned idiom, written, as it
were, in a different “voice,” and containing, sometimes, factual
material which I did not and could not have known at the time, and
(rather more often) emotional reactions and attitudes which I know I
have not experienced. This phenomenon is quite beyond my control; that
is, I know of no way to command or evoke it. I just have to wait for it
to happen, which it seldom does. When it does, it keeps me humble; when
I’m complimented on it, I feel guilty_.

Howard Hughes, the reclusive billionaire, died in April 1976 of
malnutrion. Sturgeon seems to be implying by this introduction that at
the time he wrote “Occam’s Scalpel,” it was not known that Hughes would
die of starvation like the rich man in the story.

The “piney-birchy woods with plenty of mountain laurel” and the “fire
station on the Village Green” recall Woodstock, NY, where Sturgeon lived
from 1960–1966; the description of the brother of the protagonist as
being one of the “night people” is a reference to Jean Shepherd, the
1950s-’60s NYC radio show host who was a friend of Sturgeon’s and who
called his fans “the night people.” (As a lark, Shepherd and Sturgeon
decided to promote a non-existent book titled I, _Libertine_ written by
a nonexistent Frederick R. Ewing. “The night people” became so
interested in buying the book that Sturgeon actually wrote it [as what
can be described as a romantic historical legal thriller, unlike
anything else Sturgeon produced] under the Ewing pseudonym. It was
published in 1956 by Ian and Betty Ballantine, who were in on the hoax.)

“DAZED”; first published in _Galaxy_, September, 1971. Reprinted in _The
Stars Are the Styx_ (Dell 1979). Teaser: “TO FIND BLACK, SEARCH WHITE.
TO FIND HEAVEN, SEARCH HELL.…” Sturgeon’s intro to the story in _The
Stars Are the Styx:_

_What a strange little story this is! As people keep asking me: “Where
do you get your crazy ideas?”_

_Harlan Ellison claims he gets his from a little old lady in
Schenectady, who sends them in a plain brown wrapper. I don’t know her.
I think that what I do is to make some sort of sense out of the world
and its population, an activity that repeatedly drives me into fantasy
as the only area in which logic seems to have any consistency_.

_Of one thing I can assure you: virtually no character in my
bibliography stands out as clearly in my mind as this dazed man. I don’t
think he shows up in a particularly sharp focus to the reader, but he
does to me—every gesture, every intonation. And unlike most of my
characters, he isn’t modeled on anyone I know. He’s uniquely himself,
this dazed man_.

_Strange. Very strange_.

Sturgeon worked for _Fortune_ magazine as a copywriter from 1948 to
1952. As a young writer in the forties scraping by on almost no money,
he spent a great deal of time in the Automat. He also spent summers on a
farm in Vermont when he was a young boy, as described in _Argyll_, his
autobiographical essay.

“PRUZY’S POT”; first published in _National Lampoon_, June, 1972. The
house and lifestyle described here reflect the way Ted and Wina lived in
Echo Park, Los Angeles, during the early 1970s, as “Niwa’s” name echoes
Wina’s. In a small house near the park, they had an extensive garden, a
rabbit hutch in which they raised rabbits for food, a pet boa
constrictor and a pet squirrel. Their organic, do-it-yourself lifestyle
was guided by the research done by Wina in her job as the consumer
affairs correspondent for KPFK radio. There was in fact a real dog named
Sonya (who was in actuality a good-for-nothing dog), though she was
owned not by Ted but by his daughter, Tandy. The Echo Park house did
not, however, have an alien toilet. “Pruzy’s Pot” was reprinted in a
limited edition volume (some packaged with an audio tape of Sturgeon
reading the story) by Hypatia Press in 1986, with a foreword by Spider
Robinson and an afterword by Jayne Sturgeon. Spider Robinson’s foreword,
with his kind permission, is reprinted in this volume.



ABOUT THE AUTHOR


Theodore Sturgeon was born on February 26, 1918, and died in Eugene,
Oregon, on May 8, 1985. A resident of New York City, Woodstock, New
York, Los Angeles, and Springfield, Oregon, he was the author of more
than thirty novels and short story collections. He won the International
Fantasy Award for his novel _More Than Human;_ the Hugo Award and Nebula
Award for his short story “Slow Sculpture,” the Outstanding Achievement
Award from the International Society of Science Fiction, Horror, and
Fantasy for the _Star Trek_ screenplay, _Amok Time;_ and the
Gaylactica/Spectrum Award for his ground-breaking story about
homosexuality, “The World Well Lost.” For the influence on comic books
of his short story “It,” he won the Inkpot Award. His idea of “bleshing”
(the interaction of different individuals in a gestalt from _More Than
Human_) was influential for the art of performers from The Grateful Dead
to the Blue Man Group. He was known for the creation of Sturgeon’s Law
(Every genre, without exception, is 90 percent crap) and the credo “Ask
the next question.” For his lifetime of work, he was awarded a World
Fantasy Achievement Award, and, in 2000, was inducted into the Science
Fiction Hall of Fame.

[]
