[]

[]

Theodore Sturgeon circa 1962.

[]

Copyright © 2007 by the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Previously
published materials © 1961, 1964, 1965, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1971 by
Theodore Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust, except
“Runesmith,” which is copyright © 1970 by Harlan Ellison and Theodore
Sturgeon, and “Ride In, Ride Out,” which is copyright © 1973 by Don Ward
and Theodore Sturgeon and the Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust. Foreword
© 2007 by The Kilimanjaro Corporation. Harlan Ellison is a registered
trademark of the Kilimanjaro Corporation. All rights reserved. No
portion of this book, except for brief review, may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise—without the written permission of the publisher. For
information contact North Atlantic Books.

Published by
North Atlantic Books
P.O. Box 12327
Berkeley, California 94712

Cover photo collage design by Paula Morrison

_The Nail and the Oracle_ is sponsored by the Society for the Study of
Native Arts and Sciences, a nonprofit educational corporation whose
goals are to develop an educational and cross-cultural perspective
linking various scientific, social, and artistic fields; to nurture a
holistic view of arts, sciences, humanities, and healing; and to publish
and distribute literature on the relationship of mind, body, and nature.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:
Sturgeon, Theodore.
   The nail and the oracle / by Theodore Sturgeon; edited by Paul
Williams; foreword by Harlan Ellison.
      p. cm.— (The complete stories of Theodore Sturgeon; v. 11)
  Summary: “The eleventh volume of the series by science-fiction author
Theodore Sturgeon contains stories written between 1960 and 1969,
including “How To Forget Baseball,” a hitherto unanthologized short
story”—Provided by publisher. Includes bibliographical references.
  eISBN: 978-1-58394-755-5
  1. Science fiction, American. I. Williams, Paul, 1948– II. Title.
  PS3569.T875 A6 2006 vol. 11
  813’.54—dc22

2007000769

v3.1



EDITOR’S NOTE


THEODORE HAMILTON STURGEON was born February 26, 1918, and died May 8,
1985. This is the eleventh in a series of volumes that will collect all
of his short fiction. The volumes and the stories within the volumes are
organized chronologically by order of composition (insofar as it can be
determined). This eleventh volume contains stories written between 1960
and 1969. “How to Forget Baseball,” a story about a thrilling,
horrifying future sport called Quoit, is anthologized here for the first
time. A story co-authored with Harlan Ellison, “Runesmith,” is also
included.

Preparation of each of these volumes would not be possible without the
hard work and invaluable participation of Noël Sturgeon, Debbie Notkin,
and our publishers, Lindy Hough and Richard Grossinger. I would also
like to thank, for their significant assistance with this volume, Harlan
Ellison, Tina Krauss, Marc Zicree, Hart Sturgeon-Reed, Elizabeth
Kennedy, Shannon Kelly, Eric Weeks, Chris Lotts at Ralph Vicinanza,
Ltd., Cindy Lee Berryhill, T.V. Reed, and all of you who have expressed
your interest and support. The Theodore Sturgeon Literary Trust can be
accessed at http://www.theodoresturgeontrust.com/.



BOOKS BY THEODORE STURGEON


_Without Sorcery_ (_1948_)

_The Dreaming Jewels_ [aka _The Synthetic Man]_ (_1950_)

_More Than Human_ (_1953_)

_E Pluribus Unicorn_ (_1953_)

_Caviar_ (_1955_)

_A Way Home_ (_1955_)

_The King and Four Queens_ (_1956_)

_I, Libertine_ (_1956_)

_A Touch of Strange_ (_1958_)

_The Cosmic Rape_ [aka _To Marry_ Medusa](_1958_)

_Aliens 4_ (_1959_)

_Venus Plus X_ (_1960_)

_Beyond_ (_1960_)

_Some of Your Blood_ (_1961_)

_Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea_ (_1961_)

_The Player on the Other Side_ (_1963_)

_Sturgeon in Orbit_ (_1964_)

_Starshine_ (_1966_)

_The Rare Breed_ (_1966_)

_Sturgeon Is Alive and Well …_ (_1971_)

_The Worlds of Theodore_

_Sturgeon_ (_1972_)

_Sturgeon’s West_ (with Don Ward) (_1973_)

_Case and the Dreamer_ (_1974_)

_Visions and Venturers_ (_1978_)

_Maturity_ (_1979_)

_The Stars Are the Styx_ (_1979_)

_The Golden Helix_ (_1979_)

_Alien Cargo_ (_1984_)

_Godbody_ (_1986_)

_A Touch of Sturgeon_ (_1987_)

_The [Widget], the [Wadget], and Boff_ (_1989_)

_Argyll_ (_1993_)

_Star Trek, The Joy Machine_ (with James Gunn) (_1996_)

THE COMPLETE STORIES SERIES

1. _The Ultimate Egoist_ (_1994_)

2. _Microcosmic God_ (_1995_)

3. _Killdozer!_ (_1996_)

4. _Thunder and Roses_ (_1997_)

5. _The Perfect Host_ (_1998_)

6. _Baby Is Three_ (_1999_)

7. _A Saucer of Loneliness_ (_2000_)

8. _Bright Segment_ (_2002_)

9. _And Now the News …_ (_2003_)

10. _The Man Who Lost the Sea_ (_2005_)

11. _The Nail and the Oracle_ (_2007_)

12. _Slow Sculpture_ (_2009_)

13. _Case and the Dreamer_ (_2010_)



CONTENTS


_Cover_

_About the Author_

_Title Page_

_Copyright_

_Editor’s Note_

_Other Books by This Author_

Foreword:
Abiding with Sturgeon: Mistral in the Bijou
by Harlan Ellison®

Ride In, Ride Out (with Don Ward)

Assault and Little Sister

When You Care, When You Love

Holdup à la Carte

How to Forget Baseball

The Nail and the Oracle

If All Men Were Brothers,
Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?

Runesmith (with Harlan Ellison®)

Jorry’s Gap

Brownshoes

It Was Nothing—Really!

Take Care of Joey

Story Notes by Paul Williams

[]

Theodore Sturgeon and Harlan Ellison, San Francisco Civic Auditorium, 12
February 1977. Photo by Clay Geerdes.



FOREWORD
ABIDING WITH STURGEON: MISTRAL IN THE BIJOU


By Harlan Ellison

It is unlikely that I could have worshipped him more, the day he came to
live with me, had his knock on my door been accompanied by thunder and
roses. Let us get this clear between us, right from the git-go: I
admired Ted Sturgeon more than words can codify. Not just the writing,
but much of the man. Not just the art and craft, but the flawed weird
duck who schlepped them.

We both smoked pipes, but Ted tamped his bowl full of a _grape_-flavored
tobacco so sweetly and sickly redolent, it could stun a police dog. I
was a little over thirty-five years old when Sturgeon came to live with
me. Ted was just fluttering his wings around age fifty.

Herewith, the (by actual count) eleventh time I have started to write
this recondite introduction to Volume XI of the North Atlantic Books
collected _oeuvre_ of the iconic H. Hunter Theodore Waldo Sturgeon,
simply a Great Writer of Our Time. In preparation for this day—one I had
foolishly hoped would never come—I have worried this exercise as would a
pit bull with an intruder. But now it’s here, and now I have dawdled and
postponed and evaded to the point where I got put in the hospital for a
couple of days. Evaded? As would the helot duck the knout! Ten times
before I sat down here, put my two typing fingers on the keyboard of the
stout Olympia manual office machine (that Ted sometimes usurped when he
was here), and ten times I have said awfuckit and torn out the paper.
Ten times. Now eleven. And everyone is screaming at me for my seemingly
dilatory behavior.

And here’s the flat of it, friends.

And Ted would understand.

Most of what I know about Ted Sturgeon, I cannot tell you.

[]

In preparation for this endeavor, I have gone back and done my homework:
I have reread all the guest forewords in the ten previous volumes: all
twelve in ten big fat wonderful congeries of Ted’s phantasmagoria—twelve
in ten? Yeah, there were three in volume one—and let me assure you: this
will not be a learned, long-bearded exegesis such as Chip Delany’s, even
though both Chip’s and Ted’s beards have inspired awe. Ah, but that’s
just splitting hairs. Nor will it be a charming and pop-pastoral
reminiscence overflowing with the chirrups of songbirds reeling through
Disneyesque delusions courtesy of LSD, à la Dave Crosby’s piece that
leads off Volume VI (though both of these friends of mine downed more
acid than your local neighborhood hiatic hernia) …

[]

a pause, if you’ll indulge me. I never did drugs. Probably because I was
on the road at an early age and saw what it could do to the creative
process. But Ted did stuff, and I have neither the inclination nor the
information to comment on what effect it had on him. But what I wanted
to tell you was a sweet little moment tangential to the whole substance
thing, and it was this:

Ted and I were at a party thrown by a brilliant young poet named Paul
Robbins; something like in 1967. Everybody was toke’n and somebody
passed me a doob the size of a stegosaurus coprolith, and I passed it on
to Ted, sitting next to me. And, naturally, some yotz, whose paranoid
orientation conned him into a sense of an ill wind blowing in the room,
snarked at me, “Whassamatter, you don’t want a hit?” And before I could
tell him to mind his own, Ted said (in that lovely tenor), “Harlan won’t
use till he comes down.”

I couda kissed him. And years later, Ted, commenting on how my stories
could seem so hallucinatory when I’d never done drugs, told an
interviewer, “Harlan is the only person I know who produces psilocybin
in his bloodstream.” Couda kissed him again.

Uh, for the record, Ted and I never kissed.

Although two men kissing is fine, just fine. Just saying.

[]

 … and this foreword will not be a well-intentioned and elegant homage
to someone never met by the Introducing Entity, such as Jonathan
Lethem’s nice piece of Volume X; and it sure as hell isn’t going to be a
noblesse oblige accommodation such as the one my old chum Kurt Vonnegut
proffered in Volume VIII.

It will no doubt upset the faithful, dismay the shy, outrage the
punctilious, and get both Publisher and Series Editor to get off the
trolley at downtown nose-outta-jointville. Complaints; oh yes, there
will be complaints. I get a lot of complaints about my manner.

Yeah, well, if Ted or I had ever given much of a foof about the
penalties pursuant to living our lives by our own manner, we sure as
hell wouldn’t have behaved the way we did, and still do.

But it is the eleventh attempt to climb this Nanga Parbat, in for a
penny is in for a pound, either I do it or I don’t. Had I my druthers, I
wouldn’t. But since Ted called me before he died to say he wanted _me_
to do his obit …

[]

 … since we’re in it together at this point, let me pause again to
reprint some words. This is what I wrote for _Locus_ an hour and a half
after Ted died. It was on the first page of that “journal of record” of
the science fiction world, June 1985, issue #293 if you care to check.

THEODORE STURGEON DIES

It began raining in Los Angeles tonight at almost precisely the minute
Ted Sturgeon died in Eugene, Oregon. Edward Hamilton Waldo would have
cackled at the cosmic silliness of it; but I didn’t. It got to me;
tonight, May 8th, 1985.

It had been raining for an hour, and the phone rang. Jayne Sturgeon
said, “Ted left us an hour ago, at 7:59.”

I’d been expecting it, of course, because I’d talked to him—as well as
he could gasp out a conversation with the fibrosis stealing his
breath—early in March, long distance to Haiku, Maui, Hawaii. Ted had
written his last story for me, for the MEDEA project, and we’d sent him
the signature plates for the limited edition. He said to me, “I want you
to write the eulogy.”

I didn’t care to think about that. I said, “Don’t be a pain in the ass,
Ted. You’ll outlive us all.” Yeah, well, he _will_, on the page; but he
knew he was dying, and he said it again, and insisted on my promise. So
I promised him I’d do it, and a couple of weeks ago I came home late one
night to find a message on my answering machine: it was Ted, and he’d
come home, too. Come home to Oregon to die, and he was calling to say
goodbye. It was only a few words, huskingly spoken, each syllable taking
it out of him, and he gave me his love, and he reminded me of my
promise; and then he was gone.

Now I have to say important words, extracted from a rush of colliding
emotions. About a writer and a man who loomed large, whose faintest
touch remains on everyone he ever met, whose talent was greater than the
vessel in which it was carried, whose work influenced at least two
generations of the best young writers, and whose brilliance remains as a
reminder that this poor genre of dreams and delusions can be literature.

Like a very few writers, his life was as great a work of artistic
creation as the stories. He was no myth, he was a legend. Where he
walked, the ether was disturbed by his passage.

For some, he was the unicorn in the garden; for others, he was a
profligate who’d had ten hot years as the best writer in the country,
regardless of categorizations (even the categorization that condemned
him to the ghetto); for young writers he was an icon; for the old hands
who’d lived through the stages of his unruly life he was an unfulfilled
promise. Don’t snap at me for saying this: he liked the truth, and he
wouldn’t care to be remembered sans limps and warts and the hideous
smell of that damned grape-scented pipe tobacco he smoked.

But who the hell needs the truth when the loss is still so painful?
Maybe you’re right; maybe we shouldn’t speak of that.

It’s only been an hour and a half since Jayne called, as I write this,
and my promise to Ted makes me feel like the mommy who has to clean up
her kid’s messy room. I called CBS radio, and I called the
_Herald-Examiner_, and that will go a ways toward getting him the
hail-and-farewell I think he wanted, even though I know some headline
writer will say SCI-FI WRITER STURGEON DEAD AT 67.

And the kid on the night desk at the newspaper took the basics—Ted’s
age, his real name, the seven kids, all that—and then he said, “Well,
can you tell me what he was known for? Did he win any awards?” And I got
crazy. I said, with an anger I’d never expected to feel, “Listen, sonny,
he’s only gone about an hour and a half, and he was as good as you get
at this writing thing, and no one who ever read _The Dreaming Jewels_ or
_More Than Human_ or _Without Sorcery_ got away clean because he could
squeeze your heart till your life ached, and he was one of the best
writers of the last half a century, and the tragedy of his passing is
that _you_ don’t know who the fuck he was!” And then I hung up on him,
because I was angry at his ignorance, but I was _really_ angry at Ted’s
taking off like that, and I’m angry that I’m trying to write this when I
don’t know what to write, and I’m furious as hell that Ted made me
promise to do this unthinkable thing, which is having to write a eulogy
for a man who could have written his own, or any other damned thing,
better than I or any of the rest of us could do it.

—Harlan Ellison®

[]

 … and since Noël won’t spill the beans in _her_ tureen, yet expects
_me_ to do it—“Get in there and suck up them bullets!” she said
sweetly—even though she knows most of what I know—though not even
between us can we seem to make the dates properly coincide—at least I
have a living witness that what I write here is true. Ted’s daughter and
the Trustee of his Literary Estate; she has read this and vetted this.

Other forewords in this series have brilliantly dissected Ted’s style,
analyzed his widening circle effect on other writers …

[]

When I encounter the encomia of other writers about Sturgeon, and they
gush something like, “I learned so much from him,” or “his work taught
me how to write,” I think they are either fools, or they’re lying. No,
wait, that’s unfair: not lying … deluding themselves; so stunned by what
Ted could do seemingly effortlessly, oblivious to what agony accompanied
the doing of it, that they’ve become tropes of what Stephen King noticed
about writers, if you leave sour milk open in the refrigerator, pretty
soon _everything_ in the box takes on the smell.

Yes, he certainly laid down a new architectural elevation every time a
story left his nest (onward, madly onward flew the farraginous
metaphors); and to be sure, any scribbling idiot can perceive his
facility with language, like a pizza chef whirling that expansible crust
aloft; and no question that there are glimmers of Ted’s auctorial
seminar _every_where these days; nonetheless, you _cannot_ learn to
write from Sturgeon any more conveniently than one could learn how to
dance by studying Fred Astaire.

Ted was among the very best there ever were. And the way we’re going, he
may be among the very best there ever _will_ be. He loved the sound of
words the way trees love the wind, the way yin loves yang, the way the
halves of Velcro love their mate (and Ted often contended that he had
“invented” Velcro in one of his stories). Ted played and sang not only
with the guitar, but with words like the best chum you ever had, like
dopey kids drunk on the summertime, careering through an empty lot.
Words were, to Ted, the best chums possible.

Inspirational, but out of reach. What he did, he did like Blackstone or
Houdini, with lock-picks and escape engines from flaw-free fetters under
his tongue, in his butt, up his nose. Ted was, in the purest sense of
the word, a runesmith. (Yeah, that’s the title of the story we wrote
together—at least the one you know about—and it’s in this very book if
you want to pause and go read it and come back here …

[]

Don’t say I’m not considerate of your feelings.)

Anyone who misbelieves that they learned to write by deconstructing a
Sturgeon story—try it with “A Way of Thinking” in Volume VII, I
double-dog-dare you!—is not only building castles in the air, he or she
is trying to move furniture _into_ it. Sturgeon was what he called me
once: _rara avis_. Weird bird, existent in the universe in the number of
one.

[]

Do I interrupt myself? Very well then, I interrupt myself. I am large, I
contain multitudes.

Here’s what Ted wrote in 1967 as an introduction to my book of short
stories, _I Have No Mouth & I Must Scream_. It goes here, correctly,
because it was one of the spurs that moved and shook him to come stay
with me. I was in deep anguish in 1967, some of the toughest times of my
life, and Ted wrote this, in part:

 … _You hold in your hands a truly extraordinary book. Taken
individually, each of these stories will afford you that easy-to-take,
hard-to-find_, very _hard-to-accomplish quality of entertainment. Here
are strange and lovely bits of bitterness like “Eyes of Dust” and the
unforgettable “Pretty Maggie Money-eyes,” phantasmagoric fables like “I
Have No Mouth & I Must Scream” and “Delusion for a Dragon Slayer”_ …

_There are a great many unusual things about Harlan Ellison and his
work—the speed, the scope, the variety. Also the ugliness, the cruelty,
the compassion, the anger, the hate. All seem larger than
life-size—especially the compassion which, his work seems to say, he
hates as something which would consume him if he let it. This is the
explanation of the odd likelihood (I don’t think it’s every happened,
but I think it could) that the beggar who taps you for a dime, and whom
I ignore, will get a punch in the mouth from Harlan_.

_One thing I found fascinating about this particular collection—and it’s
applicable to the others as well, once you find it out—is that the
earlier stories, like “Big Sam,” are at first glance more tightly knit,
more structured, than the later ones. They have beginnings and middles
and endings, and they adhere to their scene and their type, while
stories like “Maggie Money-eyes” and “I Have No Mouth” straddle the
categories, throw you curves, astonish and amaze. It’s an interesting
progression, because most beginners start out formless and slowly learn
structure. In Harlan’s case, I think he quickly learned structure
because within a predictable structure he was safe, he was contained.
When he got big enough_—confident _enough—he began to write it as it
came, let it pour out as his inner needs demanded. It is the confidence
of freedom, and the freedom of confidence. He breaks few rules he has
not learned first_.

_(There are exceptions. He is still doing battle with “lie” and “lay,”
and I am beginning to think that for him “strata” and “phenomena” will
forever be singular.)_

_Anyway … he is a man on the move, and he is moving fast. He is, on
these pages and everywhere else he goes, colorful, intrusive, abrasive,
irritating, hilarious, illogical, inconsistent, unpredictable, and one
hell of a writer. Watch him.”_

_Theodore Sturgeon Woodstock, New York 1967_

And as I wrote for Ted’s attention in a 1983 reprint of the book, for
which I refused any number of Big Name offers to supplant Ted’s 1967
essay: “Ted Sturgeon’s dear words were very important to me in 1967 when
they were shining new and this collection became the instrument that
propelled my work and my career forward. To alter those words, or to
solicit a new introduction by someone else, would be to diminish the
gift that Ted conferred on me. This book has been in print constantly
for sixteen years.… Only this need be said: I have learned the proper
use of ‘lie’ and ‘lay,’ Ted.”

[]

“Watch him,” he said. That was the lynch-pin of our long and
no-bullshit, honest-speaking friendship. We were a lot alike. (Noël’s
son, age 16, has also read these pages and he declares I’m “a fantastic
writer, and arrogant as hell.” You just described your grandfather,
kiddo.) A _lot_ alike, and we watched each other. Avis to avis, two
bright-eyed, cagey, weird birds assaying a long and often anguished
observation of each other—Ted, I think, seeing in me where and who he
had been—me, for certain, seeing in him where I was bound and who I
would be in my later years, which are now. We were foreshadow and _déjà
vu_. We were chained to each other, in more a creepy than an Iron John
way.

I had watched him from afar, before I met him, when I reviewed the just
published _More Than Human_ in the May-July issue #14 (1954) of my
mimeographed fanzine, _Dimensions_. I was an extremely callow nineteen,
Ted was only thirty-six and married to Marion, living back East in
Woodstock, I think; Noël still had two years to go before she could get
borned.

With all the imbecile _sangfroid_ of, oh, I’d say, an O-Cel-O sponge
mop, I pontificated the following comment on Sturgeon at his most
exalted best:

Book reviewers, like Delphic Oracles, are a breed of individuals
self-acknowledged to be authorities on everything—including everything.
Thus it is with some feelings of helplessness that a reviewer finds he
is totally unprepared or capable in describing a book.

It happens only once in every thousand years or so, and is greater
tribute to any book than a word of praise for each of those years. So
enjoy the spectacle, dear reader.

Theodore Sturgeon has expanded his Galaxy novella “_Baby Is Three”_ into
a tender and deeply moving chronicle of _people_, caught in the
maelstrom of forces greater than any of them. The book, in case you
missed it above, is _More Than Human_, and insures the fact that if
Ballantine Books were to cease all publication with this volume, their
immortality would be ensured.

We have dragged out more than we thought we could. Sturgeon is
impeccable in this novel. Unquestionably the finest piece of work in the
last two years, and the closest approach to literature science fiction
has yet produced.

[]

We watched the hell out of each other. After we met, if I remember
accurately, in the autumn of 1954, I remember taking offense at a remark
the late Damon Knight had made about Ted’s story “The Golden Egg” (he
opined, the story “starts out gorgeously and develops into sentimental
slop”), and Ted just snickered and said, “Damon can show a mean streak
sometimes.”

Later in life, one day I remembered that and chuckled to myself and
thought, “No shit.”

Ted called me one time, before he lived here, and sang me the lyrics to
“Thunder and Roses.” I wrote them down, ran them in _Dimensions_, in
issue #15, and when next Ted called me, we sang it together. Ted wrote
quite a few songs. They were awful, just awful. What I’m trying to
vouchsafe here is that in terms of songwriting, both Pinder and Cole
Porter felt no need of stirring in their respective graves at the
eminence of Sturgeon’s lyricism. He was superlative at what he did
superlatively, but occasionally even Ted pulled a booger.

Oh, wait a minute, I have just _got_ to tell you this one …

[]

 … no, hold it, before I tell you _that_ one—Ted and the guy reading
_The Dreaming Jewels_—I’ve got to tell you _this_ one, which Noël just
reminded me of, he said ending a sentence with a preposition.

One early evening, I was rearranging a clothes closet, and I unshipped a
lot of crap that had been gathering dust on a top shelf. And Ted was
just hanging out watching, for no reason (we used to talk books a lot
but I don’t think on that particular evening he was again driving me
crazy in his perseverance, trying to turn me on to Eugene Sue’s _The
Wandering Jew_ or _The Mysteries of Paris_). And I pulled down this neat
tent that I’d used years before, when I was a spelunker; and Ted got
interested in it, and he unzipped and unrolled it, and of a sudden this
nut-case says to me, “We should go camp out.”

Now, two things you should know, one of which Noël remarked when she
reminded me of this anecdote. “The two _least_ Boy Scouts in the world!”
And she laughed so hard her cheek hit the cancel button on her
cell-phone, and that was the end of _that_ conversation. (Which is a
canard, because I was, in fact, an actual Cub and Boy Scout, WEBELOS and
all, with merit badges, when I was a kid, so take _that_, Ms. Smartass
Sturgeon.) And the second thing you should know is that my home, Ellison
Wonderland, aka The Lost Aztec Temple of Mars, sits at the edge of two
hundred acres of watershed land and riparian vegetation, high in the
Santa Monica Mountains, facing what is known as Fossil Ridge—two million
year old aquatic dead stuff in the rocks—now part of what the Santa
Monica Mountains Conservancy has designated Edgar Rice Burroughs Park
because the land that Carl Sagan and Leonard Nimoy and I saved from
developers is _exactly_ where the creator of Tarzan and Barsoom used to
have picnics, back in the early 1900s.

Okay, so now you know that, and now you know why this resident nut-case
Sturgeon is saying to me, “Let’s go and camp out.”

Which—don’t ask me why, it _seemed_ like a good idea at the time—is why
I found myself the next night in a tent, outdoors, in the middle of a
very humid spring night, with semi-nekkid Sturgeon, eating gypsy stew
out of a tin can that fuckin’ exPLOded, festooning the inside of the
tent wherein I slept till the mosquitoes and no-see’ms gorged on my
flesh and I crawled moaning back to the house at three a.m.…

[]

Here’s the one I was going to tell you before I got feetnoted: Ted had a
surfeit of hubris. Every _good_ writer has it, especially those who
scuff toe in the dirt and do an aw-shucks-ma it weren’t nothin’. (John
Clute, the critic, just calls it “shucksma.”) False humility is bullshit
or, as Gustave Flaubert put is much more elegantly, “Modesty is a kind
of groveling.”

But Ted had that scam down pat. He could act as shy as the unicorn in
the garden, but inside he was festooned with bunting and firecrackers
for his talent. One would have to be in a coma to be as good as he was,
as often as he was, not to revel inwardly at the power. He was selfish
and self-involved, even as you and I. He was also generous,
great-hearted, and loyal.

Yet in all the analyses I’ve read in the previous ten volumes, no one
else seems to have perceived that Ted—who was touted, by me as well as
others, as knowing all there was to know about love—was a man in flames.
He had loathings and animosities and an elitism that ran deep. He knew
genuine anguish. But he also knew more cleverly than anyone else I’ve
ever met, that it was an instant turnoff; if he wanted to get what he
wanted, he had to sprinkle dream dust; and so he filtered his
frustration and enmity like Sterno through a loaf of pumpernickel,
distilling it into a charm that could Svengali a Mennonite into a
McCormick Thresher.

From the starting blocks, Ted had been lumbered with the words “science
fiction,” and unlike Bierce or Poe or Dunsany, he never got out of the
ghetto. Dean Koontz and Steve King know what I’m talking about; and so
does Kurt, who created Kilgore Trout, who was Sturgeon. He wanted
passionately to get out of the penny-a-word gulag, and he _knew_ he was
better than most of those who’d miraculously accomplished the trick.

Ted had gotten into writing because he understood all the way to the
gristle the truth of that Japanese aphorism: _The nail that stands too
high will be hammered down_. And while I’m citing clever sources, Ted
also got into the writing in resonance to Heinrich Von Kleist’s “I write
only because I cannot stop.”

But he also knew it was a gig. It was a job. Masonry and pig-iron ingots
and pulling the plough. Not a lifetime job for guys like Ted and me,
weird ducks who’d rather play than labor. A kind of frenetic,
always-working laziness. Tardy, imprecise, careless of the feelings of
others, obsessed and selfish. He was, I am, it’s a fair cop. So he and I
have produced enough work to shame a plethora of others, enough to fill
more than a dozen big fat _Complete Sturgeons_ or _Essential Ellison_s.
What no one ever realizes is that it’s all the product of guilt and
laziness, guilt _because_ of the laziness.

We know what we _can_ be, but we cannot get out of our own way. Ted was
the king of that disclosure. He could not cease being Sturgeon for a
moment, and he was chained to the genre that was too small for him.

(Ted once told me, and everyone I have dealt with since has told me I’m
full of shit and lying, that he _hated_ the title, “A Saucer of
Loneliness” that Horace Gold attached to the story before he’d even
finished writing it—because UFOs were “hot” and “sexy” at that time—and
that he’d originally wanted to call it just “Loneliness” and sell it to
a mainstream, non-sf market. Apparently he wrote it as a straight
character study, couldn’t move it—same with “Hurricane Trio” he said—and
did it as Gold had suggested.)

(Had a helluva fight with the brilliant Alan Brennert over titling
“Saucer” when Alan wrote his teleplay for _The Twilight Zone_ on CBS in
1985 when we worked the series together.)

No matter how congenial, how outgoing, how familial, Ted knew way down
in the gristle what Hunter Thompson identified as “… the dead end
loneliness of a man who makes his own rules.” And it made for anguish
because he was imprisoned in a literary gulag where there was—and
continues to be—such an acceptance of mediocrity that it is as odious as
a cultural cringe. And Ted wanted more. Always _more_.

More life, more craft, more acceptance, more love, more of a shot at
Posterity. Not to be categorized, seldom to be challenged, just famous
enough that even when he wasn’t at top-point efficiency everyone was so
in awe of him that they were incapable of slapping him around and making
him work better. That kind of adulation is death to a writer as
incredibly _Only_ as was Theodore Sturgeon. He hungered for better, and
he deserved better, but he could not get out of his own way, and
so … for years and years …

He burned, and he coveted, and he continued decanting those fiery
ingots, all the while leading a life as disparate and looney as
Munchausen’s. He knew love, no argument, but it was the saving
transmogrification from fevers and railings against the nature of his
received world. And this anecdote I want to relate—as funny as it tells
now—was idiomatic of Ted’s plight.

Here’s what happened.

What we were doing in a Greyhound bus station, damned if I can remember.
But there we were, about five of us—I think Bill Dignin was one of the
group, and I seem to recall Gordy Dickson, as well. But Ted and I and
the rest of these guys were going somewhere chimerical, the sort of
venue my Susan likes to refer to as Little Wiggly-On-Mire. And there we
sat at a table waiting for our bus, chowing down on grilled cheese and
tomato sandwiches, or whatever, and one of the guys nudged Ted and did a
“Psst,” and indicated a guy at the counter, who was (so help me) reading
the Pyramid paperback reissue of Ted’s terrific novel, _The Dreaming
Jewels_ (under the re-title _The Synthetic Man_). And it just tickled
Ted, and he came all a-twinkle, and whispered to us, “Watch this, you’ll
love it.”

And Ted got up, sidled over to the dude, slid onto the stool next to him
and, loud enough for us to hear, cozened the guy with the remark,
“Watchu readin’?” and the dude absently flashed the cover, said it was
something like a fantasy novel, and Ted said archly, “How can you waste
your time reading such crap?”

And we waited for the guy to defend his taste in reading matter to this
impertinent buttinski. We held our breaths waiting for the guy to
correct this stranger with lofty praise for what a great writer this
Theodore Sturgeon was.

The guy looked down at the book for a scant …

Shrugged, and said, “Y’know, you’re right,” and he flipped it casually
across the intervening abyss into the cavernous maw of a huge
mound-shaped gray trash container. Then he paid his coffee tab, slid off
the stool, and moto-vated out of the Greyhound station.

We knew better than to laugh.

Ted came back; and he had the look of ninth inning strike three. None of
us mentioned it again.

It seemed funny at the time. Not so funny when I write about it.

[]

Here’s a funny one. I don’t have this authenticated, that is to say, I
(thankfully) have no photos, but I sort of always knew that Ted had an
inclination toward, well, not wearing clothes. _Your_ doctor would call
it nudity. Now, as I say, I don’t know if Ted was a card-carrying
_nudist_ at any time in his life, but around here he started walking
around _sans raiment_. I could not have that. Not just because we had
studio people and other writers and girl friends and the one or two
people who made up my “staff” _also in situ_, but mostly because bare,
Ted was not any more divine an apparition than are each of you reading
this. He had blue shanks, scrawny old guy legs, muscular but ropey; he
wasn’t inordinately hairy, but what there was … well … it was
_disturbing;_ a little pot belly that pooched out, _also_ mildly
distressing; I will not speak of his naughty bits. But there they were,
wagglin’ in the breeze. I am, I know, a middle-class disappointment to
Ted’s ghost, that I am thus so hidebound, but I simply could not have
it. Particularly, especially, notably after The Incidents:

Primus: he decided to make _Paella_ for me and a select group of dinner
party favorites. So we got him this big _olla_, and amassed for him the
noxious ingestibles (did I mention, I not only _hate_ this olio, would
rather have someone hot-glue my tongue to a passing rhino than to
partake of _Paella_), and off into the kitchen went the naked Sturgeon.
A day he took. A whole day. No one went near the kitchen. I sent _out_
for my coffee. And here’s what is the Incident aspect of it: as he
mish’d that mosh, he used his hands, alternately digging into the
heating morass and then occasionally _scratching his ass_. I am not, I
swear on the graves of my Mom and Dad, not making this up. I have no
idea if others in the house saw it, but I did, and I got to tell you,
had I not loathed _Paella_ out of the starting-gate, that tableau from
The Great Black Plague would have put me off it at least till the return
of the Devonian.

(Another footnote within an anecdote inside a reminiscence: Ted was
impeccable. Clean. This was a clean old man I’m talkin’ here. Not
obsessive about it, not some pathological nut washing his hands every
seven minutes, but _clean_. So don’t get the idea that the horror! the
horror! of The _Paella_ Incident stemmed from Sturgeon uncleanliness, it
was just straightforward
here-is-a-dude-slopping-his-claws-in-our-dinner-and-then-maybe-skinning-a-squirrel-who’s-to-know.)

Secundus: he liked being helpful; little chores; nice short house-guest
strokes that won one’s loyalty and affection. Did I mention, Ted used
charm the way Joan of Arc used Divine Inspiration. He could sell
sandboxes to Arabs. Charm d’boids outta the trees. Devilish weaponry.
So: little aids and assists. Such as answering the doorbell every now
and then. Which was all good, all fine, except most of the time he
forgot he was _bareass nekkid!_ Capped as Incident on the afternoon, as
god—even though I’m an atheist—is my witness, he answered the door and
the Avon cosmetics lady in her Ann Taylor suit and stylish pumps gave a
strangled scream, dropped her attaché sample case, her ordering pad, her
gloves (I think), and flailed away down the street like a howler monkey.

Tertius: after the cops left, I laid down the law. No more Incidents.
Put the fuck some _clothes_ on, Ted! I don’t care if it’s SCUBA gear,
mukluks and a fur parka, a suit of body armor, but you _will_ henceforth
go forth _avec_ apparel!

So he started wearing a tiny fire-engine red Speedo.

I cannot begin to convey how disturbing _that_ was, mostly because the
li’l pot belly overhung that _sexe-cache_ the way the demon Chernabog
overhung the valley in Disney’s _Fantasia_.

Avon has never sent a rep to my house since that day, decades ago. Also,
Pizza Hut will not deliver. Go figure.

[]

And so it went on with us for more than thirty years. Ted growing more
ensnared by a received universe that was both too small to contain him
while simultaneously telling him he was a titan. It is hideously
bifurcating to go among one’s readers, many of whom look upon you as the
mortal avatar of The Inviolable Chalice of Genius, having had to borrow
the bus-fare to get cross-country to the convention. He grew more and
more careless of what his actions and life-choices would do to those he
left behind, yet to those who met him casually he was more charming than
a cobra at a mongoose rally.

And we continued to watch each other; sometimes to watch _over_ each
other. I have a letter I’d like to insert here. It was written during
that very tough time in 1966–67 I mentioned earlier in this jaunt.

Thought it may not seem so, this long in the wind, this exegesis is not
about me. It is about the trails Ted and I cut with each other. The
other guest introductions are variously great, good, okay and slight;
but this one is the only one that minutely tries to codify the odd
parameters of an odd friendship, a human liaison. So I’ll not go into
particulars about the shitstorm under which I went to my knees in
’67–’68, save to tell you true that I was neither feckless nor freshly
kicked off the turnip truck.

Nonetheless, I got hit hard, and Ted wrote this to me, dated April 18,
1966:

_Dear Harlan:_

_For two days I have not been able to get my mind off your predicament.
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that your predicament is on my
mind, a sharp-edged crumb of discomfort which won’t whisk away or
dissolve or fall off, and when I move or think or swallow, it gigs me_.

_I suppose the aspect that gigs me the most is “injustice.” Injustice is
not an isolated homogeneous area any more than justice is. A law is a
law and is either breached or not, but justice is reciprocal. That such
a thing should have happened to you is a greater injustice than if it
happened to most representatives of this exploding population_.

_I know exactly why, too. It is an injustice because you are on the side
of the angels (who, by the way, stand a little silent for you just now).
You are in the small company of Good Guys. You are that, not by any
process of intellectualization and decision, but reflexively, instantly,
from the glands, whether it shows at the checkout in a supermarket where
you confront the Birchers, or in a poolroom facing down a famous bully,
or in pulling out gut by the hank and reeling it up on the platen of
your typewriter_.

_There is no lack of love in the world, but there is a profound shortage
in places to put it. I don’t know why it is, but most people who, like
yourself, have an inherent ability to claw their way up the sheerest
rock faces around, have little of it or have so equipped themselves with
spikes and steel hooks that you can’t see it. When it shows in such a
man—like it does in you—when it lights him up, it should be revered and
cared for. This is the very nub of the injustice done you. It should not
happen at all, but if it must happen, it should not happen to you_.

_You have cause for many feelings, Harlan: anger, indignation, regret,
grief. Theodore Reik, who has done some brilliant anatomizations of
love, declares that its ending is in none of these things: if it is,
there is a good possibility that some or one or all of them were there
all along. It is ended with_ indifference—_really ended with a real
indifference. This is one of the saddest things I know. And in all my
life, I have found one writer, once, who was able to describe the exact
moment when it came, and it is therefore the saddest writing I have ever
read. I give it to you now in your sadness. The principle behind the
gift is called ‘counter-irritation.’ Read it in good health—eventual_.

_ … and in case you think you misheard me over the phone, I would like
you to know that if it helps and sustains you at all, you have my
respect and affection_.

_Yours, T. H. Sturgeon_

Accompanying the letter was number 20 of _Twenty Love Poems Based on the
Spanish by Pablo Neruda_, by Christopher Logue, from _Songs_ (1959). And
then, quickly, _Dangerous Visions_ was published, Ted’s marriage to
Marion underwent heartbreak, Ted and I talked cross-country virtually
every day, and in the wake of the notoriety of DV and his story, “If All
Men Were Brothers, Would You Let One Marry Your Sister?” which I had
chivvied him into writing after a protracted writer’s block dry spell
and financial reverses, Ted came to live with me.

It was 1966, ’67, and at various times I think it was for a full year,
at other times memory insists it was longer, but separate inputs
staunchly declare it was only six, eight, ten months. I can’t recall
precisely, now more than forty years later, but it seemed to go on
forever.

I have all of Ted’s books, of course, but the only two he ever signed
were my copy of _Dangerous Visions_ with _all_ the authors logged on—a
rare artifact existent in the universe, as I’ve said, in the number of
one—and my personal library copy of his first collection, _Without
Sorcery_, Prime Press 1948, for which I paid a buck fifty (marked down
from $3.00) in 1952. Here is what he wrote on the front flyleaf in May
of 1966 during my birthday gathering:

_To Harlan Ellison –_

_Who has, at an equivalent stage in his career, done so much more—so
much better_.

_Theodore Sturgeon_

That’s gracious crap, of course, but what I _did_ do was get Theodore
Sturgeon writing again.

In the wake of my own day and night hammering on one of the half dozen
or so Olympia office machines (never mind how many Olympia portables I
had stashed), Ted grew chagrined at his facility to _talk_ new
story-ideas but not to _write_ them, and I rode him mercilessly. The
phrase “your fifteen minutes of fame has drained out of the hourglass”
became taunt and tautology. I showed him no mercy; and with so many
other younger writers passing through the way station of my home, all of
them on the prod, worshipful but competitive, Ted ground his teeth and
set up shop in the blue bedroom, and began writing.

I’d long-since gotten him inside _Star Trek_, but now—for the fastest
money in town—I opened the market at _Knight_ magazine. Sirkay
Publications. Holloway House. The low-end men’s magazines: _Adam, Cad,
Knight, The Adam Bedside Reader_. Two hundred and fifty, three hundred,
sometimes a little more, each pop … paid within 24 hours. Sometimes we’d
kick the story around at the breakfast table; sometimes he’d come into
my then tiny office at the front of the house, dead of night, as I was
pounding away under the unrelenting pressure of studio or publication
deadlines, and we’d noodle something out. Sometimes it was a snag in one
of my stories, sometimes it was a glitch in his.

And we wrote “Runesmith” together. And he wrote or plotted or set aside
a snippet of the following, here at Ellison Wonderland: “The Patterns of
Dorne,” “It Was Nothing—Really!” and “Brownshoes,” “Slow Sculpture,” and
“Suicide,” “It’s You,” and “Jorry’s Gap,” “Crate,” and “The Girl Who
Knew What They Meant.” Maybe others, I can’t remember. But most of the
stories that he finished when he was living with Wina about a mile away
from me down the hill at 14210 Ventura Boulevard, La Fonda Motel, he
plotted and started here before I threw him out.

Here’s the flat of it, friends.

And Ted would understand this.

Most of what I know about Theodore Sturgeon I cannot tell you.

[]

We watched each other. He looked after me. I tried to help him. And then
came out _Sturgeon Is Alive and Well_ …

Many of the stories from that last, final collection of (almost) new
fictions, got born here. Right downstairs in the blue bedroom. And I
harassed my buddy Digby Diehl, the now-famous editor, who was at that
time the editor of the _Los Angeles Times Book Review_ section, to let
me review _Alive and Well_. And he did, beneath the copy editor’s
headline “Sturgeon’s Law Overtakes Him.”

No good deed …

Here, reprinted for the first time, is that review, from the April 18th,
1971 _Los Angeles Times_.

You will kindly note the cost of this 221 page hardcover in the early
Seventies. This will give you an idea of the kind of money a writer as
excellent as Sturgeon had to subsist on, it will also inform your
understanding of the love-hate attitude even as lauded an artist as
Sturgeon had with his work environment.

STURGEON IS ALIVE AND WELL
A new collection of stories by
Theodore Sturgeon
(G.P. Putnam’s Sons—$4.95)

Alive and well, yes definitely. But up to the level of his past
brilliance, no I’m afraid not.

Theodore Sturgeon, you see, is without argument one of the finest
writers—of any kind—this country has ever produced. His novels _More
Than Human, Some of Your Blood_, and _The Dreaming Jewels_ stand
untarnished by time and endless re-readings as purest silver. His short
stories have so completely examined the parameters of love in a genre of
imagination woefully shy in that particular, that the words _love_ and
_Sturgeon_ have become synonymous. The word _syzygy_ also belongs to
him.

He is also much-quoted as the author of Sturgeon’s Law, a Deep Thought
that suggests 90% of _every_thing is mediocre … puddings, plays,
politicians; cars, carpenters, coffee; people, books,
neurologists … _every_thing. A realistic assessment of the impossibility
of achieving perfection that, till now, has applied to everyone and
everything save Sturgeon. Sadly, and at long last, his own Law has
caught up with him. Ninety per cent of this new collection of stories is
mediocre.

After a long and painful dry spell in which the creative well seemed
emptied, Sturgeon began writing again three years ago, and eleven of the
twelve stories herein contained date from this latest period of
productivity. Only two of them approach the brilliance of stories like
“The Silken-Swift,” “A Saucer of Loneliness,” “Killdozer,” or “Bianca’s
Hands.” It has been said time and again about Sturgeon, that had he not
suffered the ghastly stigmatizing ghettoization of being tagged a
“science fiction” writer, he might easily surpass John Collier, Donald
Barthelme, Ray Bradbury, or even Kurt Vonnegut as a mainstream fantasist
of classic stature. Yet here, freed of that restriction, the fictions
seem thin and too slick and forgettable; stories that could have been
written by men not one thousandth as special as Theodore Sturgeon.

“To Here and the Easel,” a 1954 novelette printed here in hardcover for
the first time (and the only story to have a previous publication), is
the longest, and the dullest. A fantasy of schizophrenia in which a
painter who can’t paint swings back and forth between his life as Giles,
helpless before his empty white canvas, and his life as Rogero, a knight
out of _Orlando Furioso_, this overlong and rococo morality play seems
embarrassingly reminiscent of the kind of pulp writing typified by L.
Ron Hubbard’s _Slaves of Sleep_, a novel bearing almost exactly the same
plot-device Sturgeon employs.

Of the remaining eleven tales, five are straight mainstream, four are
clearly s-f oriented, and two are borderline. However, only two crackle
with the emotional load _aficionados_ have come to revere in Sturgeon’s
work. In “Take Care of Joey,” a man whose world-view is built on the
concept that no one performs a seemingly unselfish act “without there’s
something in it for him,” finds just such a situation operating. A
nasty, troublemaking little bastard named Joey is watched over by a guy
named Dwight, who obviously hates the little rat. He goes way out of his
way to keep Joey from getting the crap kicked out of him, up to and past
the point where Dwight himself gets stomped. The narrator of the story
has to find out why, and he does, and he finds out something else that
makes this eleven-page short a stunning example of Sturgeon’s off-kilter
insight and humanity.

“The Girl Who Knew What They Meant” is the other winner and it is so
carefully-constructed, so meticulously-spun that not until the last
twenty-seven words, the final three sentences, does the reader know he
has had his soul wrung like the neck of a chicken. It is Sturgeon
transcendent. And if Martha Foley’s _Best American Short Stories_
overlooks it this year, surely there is no justice.

On sum, though the book is weak and for the most part a terrible
disappointment, merely having Sturgeon writing again—and being able to
prove it with slugs of type—is a blessing. And even with typographical
errors rampant (a felony heretofore difficult to charge to Putnam’s) it
is a book well worth having done. Not just for those two incredible
little short stories but by the same rationale that insists we preserve
every letter and laundry list written by a Lincoln, a Hemingway or a
Melville.

What I’m trying to say, is that Sturgeon is one of our best. He will be
read and enjoyed a hundred years from now. So we _must_ see it all, even
the least successful of it.

This has been a difficult review to write.

[]

Ted never told me what he thought of that piece. We had no bitterness
over it, but we never sat down to bagels and lox about it, either. We
were friends, and both of us knew that meant unshakeable trust in the
truth that we loved each other, that we respected and admired the best
of each other’s work in such a way that to blow smoke and/or sunshine up
each other’s kilt would have been to poison that trust. Unlike many
writers who expect their friends to write blurbs and dispense encomia on
the basis of camaraderie rather than the absolute quality of the work,
Ted and I understood that we could lie to others that way, but never to
each other.

So. Enough.

I have more, endless more that I could set down about Ted, about abiding
with Ted, about the chill wind blowing through the burlesque houses of
both of our lives, but enough is enough.

Noël has suggested that I take the eulogy I wrote for Ted in 1985, that
appears near the beginning of this essay, and move it back here, because
every time she reads it, she cries.

And she thinks it is a proper end for this love letter to my friend now
dead more than two decades.

No, dear Noël, it has to stay where it is; and I’ll tell you my thinking
here.

Ted wanted me to write his eulogy. He made me promise. And I did it. But
I was so wracked by loss at the time, it was brief, far briefer than
_this_ eulogy. And thus I left out most of what’s set down here in print
for the first—and last—time. It is the for-real eulogy Ted probably
wanted, and which I have perceived is being read over my shoulder as
I’ve written it, by Ted’s ghost. Not for you, Noël, not for any of Ted’s
other kids, not for Marion, not for the publisher who is herewith
getting a major piece unexpectedly, and sure as hell not for admirers,
fans, readers of Ted’s work.

I have written this because Ted needs to read it, and because it is a
picture of The Great Artist that cannot exist via _hoi polloi_. It had
to be done by me, kiddo; and if you think this is all of it …

_Most_ of what I know about Theodore Sturgeon I cannot tell you. I
haven’t told you about the two times we fought, the first being the
imbroglio over that meanspirited piss-ant, the toweringly talented
British novelist Anthony Burgess, who was a nasty little shit; and the
second time subsequent to Ted doing one of the most awful things I’ve
ever known of a human being doing to others, resulting in my telling him
to get the fuck outta my house, now, tonight, this minute!

I haven’t told you about Ted and the Meatgrinder; Ted and the
Tongue-Tied Germans; Ted and the Apollo Trip; Ted and Chuck Barris in
Movieland; Ted and the Wing-Walker; Ted and the Naked Monkey. Oh, trust
me, I could go on for days. But …

Enough.

I would have liked to’ve written more extensively about how Ted and I
wrote together, but Paul Williams has covered some of that in the
story-notes, and the rest is whispers and memories. So, at last, after
more than twenty years, Ted, I’ve kept my promise. In full.

[]

To say, at finish, only this. I miss my friend. I miss Ted’s charm, his
chicanery, his talent, his compassion. I miss them because they will
never, not ever, not embodied in anyone or anything, never ever exist on
any plane we can perceive. Those of you who never met him, who have only
read him, can know what an emptiness there will forever be in your life.
Because I know the emptiness in mine.

Harlan Ellison®
30 January 2007
Sherman Oaks, CA



RIDE IN, RIDE OUT


_Beware the fury of a patient man_.

—John Dryden, _Absalom and Achitoph__EL_

Midafternoon and he came to a fork in the road. Just like the rest of us
in all our afternoons, whether we know it at the time or not.

Younger Macleish liked the left fork. His horse’s sleepy feet preferred
the right, a bit downgrade as it was, and Macleish thought what the
hell, he was ready to like the right fork too. He liked the country
right, left, and whatever, from the white peaks feeding snow water to
high timber and good grama range, across and down through the foothills
where the low curly bunch-grass grew, and on to the black-earthed
bottomland. But then it didn’t need to be all that good to please
Younger Macleish today. He was of a mind to like salt-flat or sage,
crows, cactus or a poison spring, long as the bones lay pretty there.

Around the mountain (right fork, left fork, it’s all the same) and three
hundred miles beyond lay fifteen thousand well-fenced acres and a good
warm welcome. Ninety-nine times Younger Macleish had said no to his
cousin’s offer, for he had some distances to pace off and some growing
up to do on his own. Now he’d said yes and was ambling home to a
bubbling spring and an upland house; not too far away lived a pair of
the prettiest blue-eyed sisters since crinolines were invented, while
down the other way—if a man found he couldn’t choose—lived an Eastern
school-marm with a bright white smile and freckles on her nose. Right
now he had four months pay in his poke, his health, a sound horse, a
good saddle, and no worriments. If a man likes where he’s been and where
he’s headed, he’s fair bound to like where he is.

As the shadows grew longer, this horse, he thought approvingly, has the
right idea, for the trail is good and the passes this side of the
mountain might make a little more sense after all. And if things are as
they should be, there’ll be a settlement down yonder, maybe big enough
for a hotel with a sheet on the bed and a bite of something other than
trail bacon and boiled beans.

With the thought came the settlement, opening up to him as the trail
rounded a bluff. It was just what he had in mind, plus a cut extra—a
well-seasoned cowtown with a sprinkling of mining. It had two hotels, he
saw as he rode in, the near one with a restaurant and a livery right
handy to it. There was a mercantile, more cow than plow, and half the
barber shop was an assay office.

Younger Macleish rode up to the livery and slid off. He hooked an elbow
around the horn and arched his back hard.

“Ridin’ long?”

Macleish turned around and grinned at the tubby little old bald-head who
stood in the carriage door. “My back says so … Treat hosses po’ly here,
do you?”

The old man grinned in return and took the bridle. “Misable,” he
asserted. “Whup ’em every hour.”

“Well, whack this’n with a oat or two an’ give him water if he wants it
or not.”

“He’ll rue the day,” said the oldster, his eyes twinkling.

Macleish followed him far enough inside for a glance to assure him that
water really was there and that the hay was hay. Then he unbuckled his
saddlebags and heaved them over his shoulder. “Which one o’ them hotels
is best?”

“One of ’em ain’t rightly a hotel.”

“I’ll start out at the other.”

“The near one, then. Miz Appleton, now, she _feeds.”_ The old man
colored his information by casting his eyes upward most devoutly.

“Now, you know I ain’t et since my last meal?” Chuckling, Younger
Macleish humped his saddlebags and stepped out into the street. It was
only a step to the hotel porch, barely time enough to say howdy twice to
passers-by. Macleish mounted the steps and thudded inside. It was small
in there, but it had a stairway with a landing up the left and across
the back, and under the landing, just like in the city but littler, a
regular hotel kind of desk. He knew something was cooking right now,
somewhere in the place, with onions and butter both, and he knew that
not long ago something had been baked with vanilla in it. Everything was
so clean he wanted to go out and shine his boots and come in again.
Behind the desk was a doorway covered by nothing at all but red and blue
beads. These moved and fell to again behind a little lady fat as the old
livery man, but half his age and not the least bit bald. Her face was
soft and plump as a sofa pillow and she had a regular homecoming smile.

“You’ll be Miz Appleton.”

“Come in. Put down those bags. You’ve come a ways, the looks of you. You
hungry?”

Macleish looked around him, at the snowy antimacassars and the doilies
under the vases of dried ferns and bright paper flowers, all of it
spotless. “I feel dirtier’n I do hongry, but if I git any hongrier I’ll
be dead of it. My name’s Younger Macleish.”

“You hurry and wash,” she ordered him like kinfolk, “while I set another
something on the stove. You’ll find water and soap on the stand in your
room, first right at the head of the stairs.” She gave him a glad smile
and was gone through the wall of beads before he could grin back.

He shouldered his saddlebags and climbed the stairs, finding the room
just where she had said, and just what the immaculate downstairs had led
him to expect. He stood a moment in it shyly, feeling that a quick move
would coat the walls with his personal grime, then shrugged off the
feeling and turned to the washstand.

He had no plan to get all that fancied up; he just wanted to be clean.
But clean or not, just plain shirtsleeves didn’t feel right to him in
that place, and all he had to put over it was his Santiago vest. It had
on it some gold-braid curlicues and a couple extra pockets and real wild
satin lapels that a puncher might call Divin’ W if it was a brand. He
put it on after he’d shaved till it hurt and reamed out his ears; he had
half an idea Miz Appleton would send him back upstairs if they weren’t
clean. He took off his pants and whacked off what dust he could, and put
them on again and did his best to prettify the boots. When he was done
he cleaned up from his cleaning up, setting the saddlebags in a corner
and folding away his dirty shirt. He hung up his gunbelt, never giving
it a second thought, or much of the first one either, bent to look in
the mirror and paste down a lock of hair which sprang up again like a
willow sapling, and went downstairs.

Miz Appleton clasped her hands together and cried out when she saw him:
“Glo-ry! Don’t he look nice!” and Younger Macleish looked behind him and
all around to see who she was talking about, until he saw there was no
one there but himself and the lady. “It ain’t me, honest, ma’am,” he
said. “It’s only this here gold braid.”

“Nonsense! You’re a fine-looking, clean-cut youngster. Wherever did you
get that curly hair?”

He felt his ears get hot. He never had figured an answer to that. Women
were always asking him that. Next thing you know she’d be saying he’d
ought to be an actor. But she was asking him if he was ready to eat. He
grinned his answer and she led him through a door at the end of the
little lobby into the restaurant.

The restaurant had a door also into the street, which Macleish thought
was pretty clever. It was a rectangular room, just big enough for three
square tables and one long one. On each was a bowl of the dried flowers
he had seen in the lobby. The big table had two of them. The whole place
smelled like Sunday supper in the promised land. At one of the tables,
two punchers and a man in a black coat were shoveling away silently as
if the promise was being kept.

Along the back wall was a doorway covered with the same kind of bead
curtain. Through it he could just barely make out another table, smaller
than the others, covered with blinding white linen. He saw glasses there
and a silver vase and a silver candlestick that matched it.

“Just you set,” said Miz Appleton, waving at one of the bare square
tables, “and I’ll be right with you.”

Macleish said, “Real nice place here.” He pointed at the bead-screened
alcove. “Who’s that for?”

“You want to see it?” Proudly beaming, she went to the alcove, took a
wooden match from a box in her apron pocket, leaned in and lit the
candle in the silver candlestick.

“Well, hey,” breathed Younger Macleish.

The alcove was just big enough for two people and the table. The seats
were built right on to the wall like a window box. They had velour
cushions and backs on them. Two places were set. At each place were
three forks, two knives, four spoons, three glasses, and a starched
napkin folded in a circle like a king’s crown, with the eight points
sticking straight up. The cutlery looked all mismatched, but the handles
were all the same: wide fork, narrow fork, thin knife, wide knife. The
same with the glasses, all different shapes but with identical bases. He
had never seen anything like it.

He asked again, “Who’s this for?”

“Anyone who likes to eat this way.”

“Now who would that be?” asked Macleish, honestly perplexed.

“I might say anyone who knows the difference between eating and dining.”
She laughed at him suddenly. He was walleyed as a new calf seeing his
first bull. “Or anybody that might like to learn.”

He wet his lips. “Me?”

She laughed at him again. “You’re right welcome, Mr. Macleish.” Then, in
tones of real apology, “It’s got to cost a little more, though, and take
a while to fix.”

“Oh that’s all right,” he said quickly, his eyes on the gleaming table.
He picked up a salad fork between his fingertips and carefully set it
down again. “You’re goin’ to have to break trail for me through all
this.”

She laughed again and told him to set right down. She seemed to think he
was no end funny, and he imagined he was; but there’s ways and ways of
getting laughed at, and he didn’t mind her way. He sat down, careful not
to bump anything, and she whisked away the second place setting and left
with it.

She was back in a moment with a dish, a long narrow oval of cut glass in
which were arranged six celery stalks and a mound of what looked like
olives only they were shiny black. She set it down and gently removed
the napkin from under his chin and spread it on his lap, while he sat
rigidly with his big scrubbed hard-work hands hidden under the edge of
the table. “I ‘spect some folks think I’m addled in the head,” she
chattered, “but I always say that good manners are the only real
difference between the men and the beasts. I don’t reckon there’s
another table like this this side of San Diego, not till you reach St.
Louis. Don’t just stare at those olives, boy—eat ’em! … It just does me
good to have someone _dine_ instead of feed. Or learn it,” she added
quickly and kindly. “Here.” And from under her arm she took a great big
card and laid it before him.

_MENU_, it announced itself in block type at the top. All the rest was
in script—flowery curly Spencerian script, so neat and straight and
pretty that he just wagged his head in amazement over it. He could make
out every single letter—but not one of the words.

“It’s in French,” she explained. “All real high-toned menus in real
high-toned places are written in French. This one’s from the Hotel
Metropole in San Francisco. I had my honeymoon there with Mister
Appleton.” She smiled a little more brightly, even, than usual, and
Macleish had the vague feeling that something hurt her. “I put that menu
away and kep’ it for twelve years, and I said to myself that someday I’d
serve up that dinner again in a place of my own, and now I do. These,”
she explained, “are the appetizers, and this is the soup. Down here is
fish and then meat. Here and here are vegetables and potatoes and all
that, and then dessert and so on.”

“Appetizers?”

“They hone up your appetite. Make you hungry.”

He wagged his head again at the idea of folks needing to be made hungry
at dinnertime. He squinted at the card and said, “Chat. Chat.”

“Chateaubriand,” she read out. “You cook beef in wine.”

“Why?”

She laughed. “Ask yourself that when you’ve tasted it.”

He forlornly handed her back the card. “I better leave all this to you,
Miz Appleton. You just bring it on and tell me what to do.”

She left him munching on a stalk of celery. Each stick was packed full
of a gooey, blue-y stuff that tasted like cheese and, as Miz Appleton
explained to him when she came back to pour him a glass of very dry
sherry, _was_ cheese. He inhaled the whole dishful and drank the wine at
a gulp, and sat there with his stomach growling for more.

So Younger Macleish ate a fragrant thin soup with crisp tiny fried cubes
of bread afloat in it, some tender flakes of trout meat, four popovers,
five salted breadsticks and two rolls; another dish of stuffed celery
and olives, three helpings of the Chateaubriand and all the fixings that
went with it; and four pieces of lemon meringue pie you could have
sneezed off the plate it was so light. He drank white wine and red wine,
sharp and thin, and at the end, in a third glass, a heavy red port that
his tongue roots couldn’t believe. Nuts came with this, and a silver
thing to crack them with, and a little bitty doll’s house sort of cup of
coffee. Somewhere along the line he had lost the conviction that genteel
folk didn’t know anything about eating, the helpings seemed so small;
because they kept coming and coming, until at last he had to sneak a
quick pull on his cinches and let his belt out a notch, silently
commanding his liver to move over and make more room. Packed with
well-being until it showed on his face in a sheen of sweat, he pressed
limply at a nut in the nutcracker and wondered if Mr. Appleton was still
alive or had died happy of eating.

“Mr. Appleton was killed on the way back,” said the little lady when she
brought more coffee, smiling that brighter-than-usual smile. “The trace
chain broke. He threw me clear but he went over with the horses. The
only thing I can’t give you,” she went on rapidly, “is a brandy. At the
Metropole you’ll see the gentlemen sitting around after their dinner
smoking their fine Havana see-gars, and there’ll be brandy. Just a
little drop of it in the bottom of a big glass like a flower vase.
That’s so they can smell it better. Or sometimes they’ll call for a
shot-glass too and pour in a little brandy and dip the end of their
see-gar into it. Or put a drop or two right into their coffee. I do wish
I had a bit of fine old brandy for you, so you’d know how it is. They
always used to call for the oldest brandy, because that’s best.”

_Killed on the way back_, Macleish silently repeated to himself. That
would be from the honeymoon. He said, “It’s all right about the brandy,
Miz Appleton. I doubt I’d git a drop of anything all the way down. Not
till tomorrow noon or so anyhow.”

“Well, I wish you had it all the same. How do you feel?”

“Miz Appleton,” he said with all his heart, “I ain’t lived such a life
that I deserved all this.”

“I think you have,” she told him. “I think you will. You’re a nice young
man, Mr. Macleish.”

He felt his ears getting hot again and stood up and batted his way
through the red and blue beads and got clear of the alcove. Either he
had to escape from all this goodness or he had to take a walk and shake
down this dinner so he’d be able to lie down without spilling. He
thanked her again and left her beaming after him, with her quick small
hands folded together under her apron.

He’d already been past the livery and the mercantile, so he naturally
ambled the other way. The town had its quota of bars, and a school right
in town, and a church. Then there was a bank and a long row of dwellings
and what do you know, a second mercantile, this one with a feed and
grain warehouse attached. Then a smithy, and then the other hotel which,
as the livery man had told him, wasn’t rightly a hotel. He passed the
entrance with a glance over the bat-wings, went on three paces and then
stopped.

It wasn’t the off-voice piano that stopped him, nor the size of the
place, which was considerable for such a town, nor the glimpse of pink
satin and soft hair somewhere along the bar, nor even the bar itself,
the longest and most elaborate he had ever seen. It was the array behind
the bar—four tiers all of twenty feet long each, rows and rows of
bottles of all sizes and shapes. He had to wonder if there wasn’t a fine
old brandy there. He didn’t want it or need it, and he didn’t know if
he’d like it or not, but Miz Appleton had said he ought to have it. It
was like a service to her. The dinner seemed to mean more to her even
than it had to him, and it just seemed right to finish it off the way
she said.

So he turned back and went into the place.

The bartender was a squint-eyed oldster wrapped in a long white
butcher’s apron. You had an idea who he was talking to when you were by
yourself at the bar, but it must have been pretty mystifying when the
place was crowded.

“You got any brandy?” Macleish asked.

One of the man’s eyes scanned Younger Macleish’s fancy vest while the
other one raked the northwest corner.

“Reckon we have.”

“Real old brandy?”

“It’s old.”

“You got see-gars?”

“Two kinds. Most men wouldn’t smoke the one, an’ most men wouldn’t pay
for the other.”

“Gimme the best,” said Younger Macleish. He remembered something else
and said “Uh,” as the bartender was about to turn away. He couldn’t see
himself asking for a flower vase to drink his brandy out of, so he asked
for the other instead. “Bring me a extra shot-glass with the brandy.”

The bartender walked to the far end and got an old kitchen chair with
the back off it, and carried it back and set it down. Grunting, he got
up on it and reached for a bottle on the fourth tier. He brought it down
and held it so Macleish could see the label, but didn’t set it down and
didn’t bring glasses. “Suit you?”

The question was asked in a way that seemed to mean more than it said.
Macleish wondered if it had anything to do with money. He noticed
suddenly that the girl, the one with the pink satin dress and all that
hair, was watching him. He went into his poke and got a gold ten dollars
and laid it on the wood. “It’ll do,” he said as if he knew what he was
talking about.

The bartender put the bottle down then and pulled the cork, and reached
underneath for a glass with a small stem and a big bell, and the extra
shot-glass. Macleish figured that if you drink brandy out of a big glass
like that it must be something like beer; but when the bartender poured
in only about a finger and quit, he remembered what Miz Appleton had
said about the men smelling it. He took it and smelled it while the
bartender went for the cigars. It smelled fine.

The bartender brought the cigar box and handed the whole thing to him,
and he took out three. Two he stuck in his vest and got the other one
going. The smoke was full-fleshed and kind to him. He took a little
taste of the brandy and waited a second, and it was as if a good spirit
had sat down in his throat in velvet pants. Turning his back to the bar
and hooking up his elbows, he began a wordless worship of Miz Appleton
and all her works. He was vaguely aware that the bartender was leaning
across the far end, talking to the girl in pink, that the piano player
expressed his disbelief in his own abilities by working with his fingers
crossed, and that two faro games were operating in the corner. But none
of this mattered to him; and as he swung around to dunk his cigar in the
shot-glass and caught the pink girl’s eye as she climbed the stairs to
the gallery, the moment of self-consciousness was lost in pure joy when
he took his first drag of the brandied smoke.

He stood in this golden trance for some minutes and nobody bothered him
until the girl came back downstairs and walked over to him. He smiled at
her because he was ready to smile at anything, but if it was the first
word she waited for, she’d have to give it; he couldn’t think of a one.

“Hello,” she said.

Well, that was a good one. He gave it right back to her.

“Stranger here, aren’t you?” She was older than he had first thought,
but not much. She had a real different kind of nose, thin as the back of
a knife between her close-set eyes, and flaring out at the nostrils,
which pointed more forward than down and were constantly aquiver. She
was pretty enough, though, with all that hair. He admitted that he was a
stranger, and took another smell of the brandy because he then and there
ran out of anything else to say.

“Come to stay?” she asked him.

“Nope,” said Younger Macleish.

“That’s too bad,” said the girl, and then laughed briefly and loudly.
“My,” she said, “you’re quite a one for talk, aren’t you?… You going to
buy me a drink?”

“Oh!” said Macleish, feeling stupid. “Uh—sure.”

She nodded over his shoulder and the bartender brought her a pale
something in a small glass. He also brought back change from Macleish’s
money. He didn’t bring much.

“What are you going to do with yourself all evening?”

“Look around,” said Macleish uncomfortably.

It seemed to him that she waited altogether too long to say anything
else, watching him the whole time. The bartender was watching him too,
or her; he wouldn’t know. At last she burrowed into a pink beaded bag
and withdrew a heavy gold compact. “Look here,” she said, and opened the
lid. Macleish became aware of a faint tinkling. He leaned close and
discovered that in shrill small bell-like notes, the compact was playing
“Peas, peas, goober peas.”

“Well, hey,” said Younger Macleish.

“I got more of them,” said the girl. “I got a powder box that plays a
waltz and another one—that one’s only a straight music box—that plays
the Trish-Trash Polka.”

“You _do?_” said Macleish, sounding quite as impressed as he was.

“You want to see ’em? I got them upstairs.”

He looked at her numbly. In his mind he had a swift flash of two
crinolined sisters and a white-smiled schoolmarm, and—and the whole idea
of going home to settle. Then there was this girl and what she said,
it … it … Well, somehow, something was altogether mismatched.

“I guess I better not,” he mumbled.

“Oh—come _on!”_ she said; and then, going all tight-lipped, “It’s just
to see the music boxes. What do you think I _am?”_

He knew his ears were getting red again; he could feel the heat. He
wished he could get out of this. He wished he hadn’t come in. He wished
he could curl up in his cigar-ash and go up in smoke. He said, “Well,
all right.”

He drank up his brandy and it stung him harder than he wanted it to. He
dipped his cigar once more in the shot-glass and followed her up the
stairs. He was dead certain that both faro games must have stopped dead
while he climbed, everyone watching, but when he flashed a glance from
the top everything down there seemed as usual. It was about then he
remembered to breathe again. He turned to follow the girl along the
gallery.

She had opened a door and was waiting for him. “In here.”

It was black dark in there. If he thought anything at all, it was that
she would follow him and light a lamp.

The instant he was clear of the door, it was kicked shut with the girl
still outside, and he found himself in total blackness. Hands came from
nowhere, took both arms, wrenched them behind him. “Whut—” he yelled,
and got a stinging blow in the mouth before he could make another
syllable. He kicked out and back as hard as he could, and his heel
struck what felt like a shinbone. He heard a curse, and the red
lightning struck him twice more on the cheek and on the ear.

He stood still then, head down, hauling uselessly at the relentless grip
on his arms, and breathed hoarsely.

A blaze of light appeared across the room. It was only a match, but it
was so unexpected it hurt him more than fists and made him grunt. The
flare dwindled as it stroked the wick of a lamp, and then the lamp-flame
came up, yellow and steady.

The room was fixed up like an office. There was a bookcase and a cabinet
and, on the wall, a claims map. A big desk stood parallel with the far
wall with a heavily curtained window behind it. The lamp stood on the
desk, and seated behind it was a thin man with pale gray hair and the
brightest blue eyes he had seen yet. The man wore a black coat and a
tight white collar and an oversized black Ascot, from the top bulge of
which gleamed a single pearl. The man was waving the match slowly back
and forth to put it out.

He was smiling. His teeth were very long, especially the eyeteeth.

“So, Mr. Bronzeau,” he said in a soft, mellow voice. “We meet at last.”

Younger Macleish was far too dazzled to respond. He pulled suddenly at
the arms which held him, glanced right and left. He got a blurred
picture of one man, heavy-set and running to fat, who smelled of beer
and sweat, and another, much younger, with the crazed, craven face of
one who can be frightened into being snake-dangerous. One thing was
certain: the two of them knew how to hold a man so he couldn’t move. To
them he said, “Turn me loose.”

At this there was a movement in the shadows and a fourth man moved out
of the corner. He was a wide man with a wide hat on, and small eyes, and
he put two big white hands in the pool of light under the lamp and began
to fiddle with a big black and gold signet ring with a black-letter B on
it. He was smiling. Younger Macleish said again, “Turn me loose.”

“Oh,” said the gray-headed man pleasantly, “we will—we will, Mr.
Bronzeau. But first Mr. Brannegan here will relieve you of anything
sharp or explosive or which in any way might disturb the peace and quiet
of our little conversation.” He smiled, and then waved his hand in a
small flourish at the man with the signet ring. He said, like one
politician introducing another politician, “Mr. Brannegan.”

The big man came over. Macleish tensed. “Hold real still, sonny,” said
Brannegan, and went over Macleish rapidly and with an expert touch. He
checked everything—even his boot-tops, where men have been known to
stash a knife. In the process he got Younger Macleish’s money, his
cigars, his matches, and even a walnut he had borrowed from Miz
Appleton’s alcove. These things he put neatly on the desk.

“I shall now show you, Mr. Brannegan, that even you can at times be
careless; and you, Mr. Bronzeau, that I know a great deal more about you
than you thought I did. Our young friend,” he informed Brannegan, “has
been seen to reach up as if to scratch his ear, and suddenly hang a
weighted throwing knife he carries in a four-by-four thirty yards away.
If you will be good enough to look, I think you will find the knife in a
sheath between his shoulder blades.”

Brannegan swore and reached over Macleish’s shoulder, to pound him
heavily on the back. The two men holding him tightened their grip as
Brannegan grasped Macleish’s collar and with one painful wrench broke
his string tie and tore out his collar buttons. He slid a hand down the
back of Macleish’s neck and scrabbled around as if he expected to find
the weapon under the skin rather than on it.

“It ain’t here,” said Brannegan.

For a split second the gray-headed man’s eyes got round; then they
slitted again and he took to wagging his head sadly, side to side. “You
have surprised me,” he said to Macleish, “Mr. Bronzeau, you have indeed
surprised me, and I concede that I never thought you would. I knew you
would follow me here, and I knew you could be induced to come into this
room; but I will allow that I never expected you to come unarmed. There
is a difference, Mr. Bronzeau, between courage and foolhardiness. I
think you will agree that you have passed it. Well then,” he barked in a
business-like way, “we can settle our little matter all the better,
then.”

He took a paper out of his breast pocket, unfolded it and put it on the
desk. “Here, my young friend, is a transfer form, properly executed,
lacking only your signature. Here,” he said, moving an inkwell and a
feather pen next to the paper, “is something to—”

“Now you looky here,” said Younger Macleish, who had suddenly had enough
and to spare, and was able to pull his startled wits back into shape. “I
don’t know you or nothing about you or no paper. Now turn me loose!” he
yelled at the two men at his sides, and gave a mighty wrench that ought
to be enough to pull a horse off its feet—and wasn’t enough to break
free of these two.

“Mis-ter Bronzeau!” cried the gray-headed man. He sounded
aggrieved—astonished and hurt. “You interrupted me!” He turned to
Brannegan, complaining: “Mister Brannegan, he interrupted me.”

Brannegan tsk-tsked like a deacon, settled his big ring just the way he
wanted, and hit Macleish on the left cheek-bone with it. Then he stepped
back and smiled. He said, “You hadn’t ought to interrupt, sonny.”

The craze-frightened youth snickered. The beer-smelling man brayed. The
gray-headed man waited until it was quiet again except for Macleish’s
heavy breathing. The blood began running from the place the ring had
hit.

“First I talk,” the gray-headed man explained patiently, “and then you
talk, and that’s the way gentlemen conduct business. Now then—where were
we? Here is a paper, and here is the pen you are going to use to sign it
with, and here is something”—he put out a short-handled, long-bladed
knife, picked up the matchstick he had used to light the lamp, and
delicately split it in two—“we can use to keep this conversation going
if we have to; and here,” he said as he put the knife down exactly
parallel with the pen and opened the desk drawer, “is a little something
for dessert, you might say,” and next to the knife he put down a
nickel-plated, four-barrel gambler’s gun. “Just a toy, really, and
guaranteed not to hit what you aim at unless,” he added, picking up the
gun and pointing it playfully at Macleish’s belt-buckle, “you’ve got
some way of holding the target still.” He laughed genteelly; Brannegan
haw-hawed; and late, the youth tittered and the beery man brayed. “Now
then,” said the gray-headed man, “Mr. Bronzeau had something to say. Go
ahead, Mr. Bronzeau.”

Younger Macleish looked from one to the other of them and concluded that
they were waiting for him to speak. He said, “My name ain’t Bronzeau or
whatever it was you said. I just rode in an’ I’m goin’ to ride out in
the morning and you got yourselves the wrong man.”

“Ah,” said the gray-headed man tiredly, “come off it, Bronzeau. We know
you. Don’t make this take any longer than it has to.”

“It’s the truth all the same,” said Younger Macleish.

“All right, all right; I’ll hear it out. Where is it you pretend to be
coming from, and what lie have you got ready about where you’re going?”

“That,” said Macleish, “is my business.”

“He’s rude, Mr. Brannegan,” complained the gray-headed man.

Brannegan hit Macleish on the same place with his ring. It seemed to
grow dark in there for a time, or perhaps it was only that the lamp and
the room and all the men moved far off for a moment. Then he
straightened up and shook his head, and it all came back again, and
Brannegan was rubbing his ring and saying, “Don’t be rude, sonny.”

“Are you going to sign it?”

“No, I ain’t.”

“Not quite so hard this time, Mr. Brannegan.” But Macleish guessed
Brannegan did not hear the gray-headed man in time.

The next question he was aware of hearing was “Why? Why? Why put
yourself through this, Mr. Bronzeau? Why won’t you sign it? Just tell me
that.”

“Because I told you,” said Macleish hoarsely. “I ain’t who you think,
and this has nothin’ to do with me. Now you whoa!” he roared suddenly at
Brannegan, who was cocking his signet hand for another pass; and,
surprisingly, Brannegan whoaed. Macleish said, “Whatever that is, it
won’t be worth nothing if I sign it. You might’s well sign it yourself.
I tell you it’s got nothin’ to do with me.”

“Reasonable, reasonable,” nodded the gray-headed man. “Only we just
don’t believe you.” But Macleish noticed he didn’t call him “Mr.
Bronzeau” this time.

Brannegan said to the gray-headed man, “He ought to’ve had that there
throwin’ knife.”

“A point, a point,” allowed the gray-headed man, who apparently always
repeated himself when he was thinking. “What impresses me most is that
our Mr. Bronzeau is too intelligent to carry this performance of injured
innocence on so long. Ergo, this man is as stupid as he acts. Which
would indicate that he is after all not our Mr. Bronzeau.” He pulled his
low lip carefully away from his lower teeth. They were too long too. “On
the other hand, such stupidity might be covering up a very clever man
indeed. Indeed.” Abruptly he turned from his contemplation of Younger
Macleish and said briskly, “Mr. Brannegan, we need to know a little more
about our young friend.”

Brannegan said to Macleish, “Where at’s your horse?”

Macleish said, “In my hip pocket.”

“Sonny,” said the big man, stroking his ring, “I owe you one for that.”

“Take care of it when you come back,” said the gray-headed man. “I’m
sure all he meant was that his horse is at the livery, and would hardly
be anywhere else.”

“That’s right,” said Macleish.

Brannegan went to the door. The gray-headed man said, “If by any chance
this is not our Mr. Bronzeau, Brannegan, I should like to know it
quickly. I tire soon in the presence of stupid people,” and he smiled at
Macleish.

“Be right back,” said Brannegan, and went out.

The gray-headed man picked up the little gambler’s gun and checked the
load. “You may as well sit down and be comfortable,” he said, waving at
a corner chair. “Turn him loose, boys,” he said, mimicking Macleish’s
earlier demand, “and stand by the door, and if he makes a play,” he
added, smiling his most pleasant smile, “kill him.”

The men let go, and Macleish gave each of them a memorizing kind of
look, and went and sat in the corner, folding his arms and massaging his
biceps.

It grew very quiet in there. Macleish looked at the three, and the three
looked back at him. After a while, the gray-headed man rose and came
around to the front of the desk, holding the gun loosely. He stood back
against the desk and stared at Macleish.

“Didn’t you win a silver-digging in a crap game and then put it up in a
poker deal with a certain gentleman?”

“Not me,” said Younger Macleish.

“And didn’t you lose the pot, and renege, and then cut out here to see
if the digging was worth-while after all?”

“Not me,” said Macleish.

“It was worthwhile,” said the gray-headed man.

“Well now,” said Macleish.

“Sign this,” said the gray-headed man softly, “and nobody reneged, and
nobody’s mad.”

“I ain’t mad,” said Macleish. He rose suddenly.

The little gun swung to point steadily at him. Late, as usual, the beery
man said a wordless _hup!_ and his gun was out and, noisily, cocked. The
loco-looking youth began to breathe loudly with his mouth open.

“Foot’s asleep,” said Macleish. He jiggled on it a couple of times and
then sat down again.

After that nobody said anything until Brannegan got back.

The gray-headed man went back to his desk chair as Brannegan came in.
Brannegan glanced at no one, but went straight to the desk and put down
a packet of letters, a piece of polished rock crystal hanging from a
fine gold chain, and a pincushion made like a little shepherdess with a
full skirt. “Looky yere,” said Brannegan. “He plays with dolls.”

The gray-headed man was interested only in the letters. He fanned them
and dealt them, one by one, picked up one and glanced through it, opened
another and closed it right up again. He stacked them neatly and put
them away from him next to the doll and the crystal pendant. Then he
folded his long pale hands and seemed to close his eyes.

Macleish looked at the things on the desk and wondered if one or the
other sister would get the pincushion and the pendant, or if it would be
the schoolteacher after all.

The gray-headed man didn’t move, but his sharp bright eyes were suddenly
on Younger Macleish. “You’re really just riding in, riding out.”

“I told you,” said Macleish.

The gray-headed man cursed. Coming from him, and coming as it did with
such violence, the effect was like that match flame a little earlier,
which had made Macleish grunt.

“Mr. Brannegan,” said the gray-headed man mildly, after he had his
breath again, “We’ve got the wrong man.”

Brannegan eyed Macleish with enmity, and said, “All that trouble.”

To Macleish, the gray-headed man said, “Say you had a man to see, and
you knew he was so good-looking he was practically pretty, and he’d
dress so fancy he looked like a clown; and say you knew about him that
he’d smoke the best cigars, call for the oldest brandy, and make for the
nearest pretty face; and say you set up a trail he had to follow and an
ambush he had to walk into. Then suppose just such a clown walked into
it.”

“I’d say you made a mistake,” said Macleish.

“Just so, a mistake.” Then he added, showing he was thinking, “A
mistake.” He sighed. “Mr. Brannegan, we’ve got to make it up to this
young man.”

“Sure,” said Brannegan heavily.

“Return this man’s property to him, Mr. Brannegan.”

Brannegan got the things off the desk and gave Macleish his matches, his
cigars, his poke, his letters, the crystal pendant. “That’s awful
pretty,” he murmured as he gave Macleish the doll.

Macleish stowed the things in the various pockets of his fancy vest
while the gray-headed man went on talking. He said, “I wouldn’t want you
to resent any of this, you know. An honest mistake. And I wouldn’t want
you to complain to the sheriff or anything like that. Not that it would
make any difference. And I would be especially sad if you should talk
about this to anyone you might meet on the trail.” He stopped then, and
waited.

Younger Macleish said, “I don’t never complain.”

“Oh fine,” said the gray-headed man. Then he said it again, and, “I’d
like to be sure of that. I really would.”

Macleish shrugged at him. He couldn’t think of anything to say.

The gray-headed man placed all the tips of all his fingers together and
stared at them mournfully, and said, “A long and eventful life has
taught me that there are after all only three kinds of men. One kind
gives his word and that’s enough. One kind, you pay, and that’s enough.
And one kind needs a boot in the tail to show that you mean what you
say.” He paused and said, without looking up, “I do hope you are
listening, Mr. Brannegan.”

“Oh, every word,” said Brannegan happily.

“Now then,” said the gray-headed man, “I have his word. Sort of. He said
he doesn’t complain. Well, I don’t know what kind of man he is, and I
don’t really care very much. So we’ll pay him, too. Give him twenty
dollars, Mr. Brannegan.”

“Give him _what?”_ gasped the big man.

The gray-headed man thumbed a coin out of his watch pocket and flipped
it ringing across the desk. “Give it to him.”

“Well all right,” said Brannegan, and took up the coin and handed it to
Macleish. Macleish took it and put it away.

“Now,” said the gray-headed man, “take him outside and give him a boot
in the tail.”

“I got just the one,” said Brannegan. He came over to Macleish, who
stood up. Brannegan eyed him for a moment and said over his shoulder,
without looking, “Get your gun out.” Macleish heard the beery man’s gun
cocking and then Brannegan got Macleish’s left arm and twisted it behind
him, putting the fist tight up between Macleish’s shoulder blades. It
hurt. He pulled Macleish off balance and ran him out the door and along
the gallery to the top of the stairs. Here he gave him a shove outward
and followed it with an accurate boot. Macleish spun floundering down
the steps and brought up at the bottom, leaning against the newel post
like a fence prop. Brannegan, incredibly, was right beside him, got the
left fist between his shoulder blades again, and pulled him upright.
Macleish looked up. The gray-headed man was leaning over the gallery
rail, smiling slightly. Beside him, the youth stood, his mouth wide,
tittering. At the head of the stairs stood the beery man, gun in hand.
Brannegan ran Macleish the length of the bar and banged him out through
the batwings. Macleish cleared the two low steps without touching,
clipped the far edge of the duckwalk, and sprawled in the dust outside.

Behind the batwings, somebody yipped a shrill clear drag-rider’s
cattle-drive yip. A number of people helped make a bellow of laughter.

Macleish got to his feet. His face hurt. His hands and elbows hurt, and
his left arm clear back to the shoulder bones hurt a whole lot. His
fancy vest was a mess and he had a hole in the knee of his pants. He
walked back to the hotel.

By the lamplight that streamed from the hotel, Macleish saw a man
standing at the foot of the steps. It was the fat little old man from
the livery. He had a white handkerchief pressed to his face. He said,
“Oh, there you are. Gosh, son, a feller got to your saddle. I tried to
stop him.”

Macleish gently pulled the handkerchief down away from the old man’s
face. He had a puffy sort of hole on his cheekbone.

“Feller had a big ring,” said the man from the livery. “I tried to stop
him,” he called apologetically as Macleish climbed the porch.

Some woman Macleish hadn’t seen before was in the little lobby. She had
a basin of water standing on the hotel desk. Miz Appleton was sitting
behind the desk. The woman was dabbing at Miz Appleton’s face with a wet
clean cloth, and said to Macleish, “Oh, you must be the one. A man got
to your things in your room.”

Macleish stumped up the stairs, and as he reached the landing he heard
Miz Appleton say, “I tried to stop him, Mr. Macleish.”

Macleish went on upstairs. The door to his room was open. His saddlebags
and spare clothes and blanket, and his Arbuckle coffee and trail bacon
and beans were all dumped on the bed. He passed by with a glance and
went to the wall peg where his gun-belt hung, and he took it down and
strapped it on. He drew the gun, broke and spun it, clicked it straight
and holstered it, and went back down the stairs. The women both spoke,
but he didn’t hear what they said.

He clumped down the duckwalks to the other hotel, looking straight ahead
and not exactly hurrying. When he got there he kicked open the batwings
and walked in. This time the piano and the faro games, as well as any
talking and drinking and moving around that happened to be going on,
really did stop, suddenly and altogether. Macleish paid no mind to
anyone, but walked straight back to the stairs and went up them two at a
time.

Somebody shouted then, but the sound was drowned out by the crash of the
door as Macleish shouldered it half off its hinges and stood back.

He could see the desk and the lamp and the gray-headed man, his bright
blue eyes all white-rimmed round. The man scooped open a drawer and
Macleish drew and shot him through the right forearm and sprang inside.

The gray-headed man shrieked like a woman and curled up like a mealworm
bit by a fire ant. Macleish stood in the center of the room, snapped a
look to left, to the right. The beery man and the kid stood flat-footed
by the end of the desk. Macleish made a motion with his gun and their
hands went up as if they had been tied to the same string. Macleish
slipped around behind them and got their guns. He threw the guns out
through the draped window behind the desk.

He said, “Face the wall,” and they were very brisk about doing it. The
gray-headed man had fallen and was writhing on the floor behind the
desk, crying. Macleish backed around there and booted him out in the
open where he could see him. Then he pulled down a drape and put two
straight chairs back to back and threw a couple of half-hitches around
the uprights at one side. He said, “Come here,” and the two gunmen
turned uncertainly and came sheepishly across to him. “Sit,” he said.

Back to back they sat down. Keeping his gun on them, Macleish circled
them twice with the drape, binding them tight to the chairs and to each
other. He didn’t bother to tie the free end, but just tucked it into
itself; it would hold for as long as he wanted it to. He put his gun
down on the desk and placed one hand on the kid’s face and one on the
beery man’s face, and whanged the backs of their heads together as hard
as he could. When you crack one nut with another nut, practically every
time only one of the two will break, and Macleish thought that that gave
odds that neither one of these two deserved.

Macleish heard someone running, and he glanced at the door and found it
full of frightened faces. He waved his gun at them and they disappeared.
He jumped to the door and flattened himself just inside. The running
feet ceased and became a deep growl: “Out o’ my way!” and Brannegan
exploded into the room just the way he himself had. Macleish hit him
alongside the head with his gun and he threw out his arms and went
forward to his hands and knees, his head hanging. Macleish bent, hooked
out his gun, and sent it sailing through the window with one motion.
Then he got hold of Brannegan’s left wrist, pulled the man kneeling
upright, and twisted the arm around and up, meanwhile ramming his gun
barrel into Brannegan’s kidney. “Up!” he said, and Brannegan stood up.
Macleish walked him through the door. There were people out there but
they made way.

Macleish brought Brannegan to the top of the stairs and gave him a push
and such a fine kick that everyone in the place gasped, including
Brannegan, who went out and down like the front end of a rockslide.
Macleish bounded down after him and tried to stand him up with the
bent-arm thing, but Brannegan couldn’t cooperate. Macleish waved his gun
and said to throw water on him.

“Yes, _sir!”_ said the bartender, shuffling fast around the end of the
bar, bringing a big pitcher. Macleish, waiting, moved gun and eyes all
around. Everybody watched. Nobody moved.

The water made Brannegan twitch and groan. Macleish snatched up
Brannegan’s ring hand and caught it between his knees. Looking all
around while he did it, he got the ring off Brannegan’s finger and put
it on his own. The water helped. Then he wrung Brannegan’s left hand
around behind him and told him “Up!”

Macleish walked him the length of the bar to the batwings, and then
swung around to look at the people again. He didn’t think any of them
looked as if they wanted to stop him. Some followed him and Brannegan up
to Miz Appleton’s, but he didn’t mind that.

He shoved Brannegan up the porch steps with his grip on the arm and also
with the end of his gun. He hit the door with Brannegan and heard the
latch break; he hadn’t meant to do that. Miz Appleton and the other
woman screamed.

“Is this the one?” he asked, and they screamed again. He dragged
Brannegan to the door and let go of his left arm and pulled his back
hair until his face tipped up. Then he hit Brannegan with the ring on
the cheekbone, and again on the chin, sending him flying down into the
crowd. Down there he saw the little old man from the livery, clasping
his hands together over his fat stomach and jumping up and down in glee.
He called him.

“Here,” he said when the old man had climbed the porch. He handed him
the ring. “Give this back to him.”

“How?” asked the man, taking the ring and loving it.

“It’s your deal,” said Macleish, and went inside. He never did find out
how the old man dealt it.

He slept well, and departed in the morning before Miz Appleton was up
and about. He left her the gold twenty dollars he had been given the
night before. In the livery, he liked the looks of his horse. Somebody
had bothered to curry him. Macleish saddled up and went to buckling the
bags and fixing the blanket roll, and by the time he was finished there
was a bug-eyed stable boy yawning down from a little cubby in the mow,
who said “Gosh.”

“Gosh what?” asked Macleish.

“You’re the fellow cleaned out the saloon last night, gosh.”

“You tell the old feller,” Macleish said, embarrassed, “my horse is
happy anyhow. Got it?”

“Your horse is happy anyhow,” nodded the boy. Macleish gave him money
and mounted, and rode downstreet.

When he passed the other hotel, a woman called. “Mister.”

He reined in. The girl with all the hair came running out into the
middle of the street. She was all dun-colored in a cape and hood thrown
over what was probably night clothes, and no makeup. She said, “I didn’t
know. I—I had to do what he said.”

Macleish asked her, “Did you?” and rode on. He saw her lift her hand
slowly and bite it.

A little way on, down where he hadn’t been yet, a man called out to him
and he stopped again. The man had a star pinned to his shirt. He said,
“Look, I got two men bedded up back of the doctor’s office, one with a
broken arm and one with a cracked head. I got two more locked up in the
jail.”

Younger Macleish asked him, “Why?”

“Look, I can’t hold them ’less you make a complaint.”

“I don’t complain.” He lifted his hand to snap the lines and go, but the
man said: “Look, were you thinkin’ of maybe settlin’ in hereabouts?”

“No,” said Younger Macleish.

He rode out.



ASSAULT AND LITTLE SISTER


Trembling in the bed, Little Sister cried aloud: “They _want_ him to!”
‘They,’ of course, meant the police … the newspapers … oh, everybody.
‘To’ meant the—the horror she must go through—again! That’s the word,
Little Sister: _Again!_—if he came back. _When_ he came back. “Oh-h-h …”
she moaned. But nobody answered. Nobody was there with her.

Nobody was there _yet_.

_What was that?_

She lay in the dark little room staring at the moon-dappled window, and
held her breath. Surely something moved out in the hall? Something was
_breathing_ out there?

Call out, then. It—could be Peter Poteen, Detective Poteen guarding her
after all. He—he could have thought it over, and—

But then, it could be _him_. It could be—the terribly feared one.

Or even, she thought—and her flesh crept cold, crept needly with
speckles of cold—a new one. The papers were full of them and word got
around, and some men found the victims especially attractive.

Pain banded her chest with the held breath, but still she held it,
listening to nothing-at-all out there. But she knew that someone could
be out there, holding his breath too, also listening. A roaring began in
her ears and listening was useless. She breathed again, gasping
open-throated to be silent. When she could, she sat up. She could pant
more quietly that way.

And now she could see out and down through the single panel of gauze
which covered the lower half of her window. Dim in the moonlight, the
not-quite adjoining roof shone in the summer night like an acre of ice.
Last summer it had shone too, aching, baking around _him_, hotly holding
his flesh, flat as it was, as if it would cup up around him.

She shuddered and rose, and padded on bare feet to the window. The roof
outside, a warehouse, was not completely flat, nor altogether
unobstructed. The edges rose slightly all around, not by bulwarks, but
banked. And not far from Little Sister’s window, to the right, jutted a
small angular housing or kiosk, to shelter the stairs to the roof.

From inside her room it might seem that the roof was a larger, slightly
lower extension of her own floor, but from the window itself she could
look down—she seldom did—a dizzy sixty feet to the alley below. Due to
the overhang of the warehouse roof, its edge was no more than four and a
half feet from her building. Yet the sheer drop between had always been,
for her, a magic barrier, an invisible wall between herself and the city
and all that near part of the sky which combed itself through the city’s
stumpy teeth. There was such a lot of it out there, and none of it could
see her. Behind her alley-chasm, and her panel of gauze, none of it
could see her!

Seen by moonlight, it was as detailed as it had been last summer in the
blaze of afternoon. But only to the eye of memory. In actuality, when
something moved in the shadows of the kiosk, she couldn’t be sure what
it was, or even _if_ it was. She knew every pebble and crease of the
roofing, but pebbles and creases were only what should be there. What
should _not_ be there, movement or memory, was something she could not
be sure of, and memory or movement, it filled her with terror.

Last summer she had stood here speechless, watching the flesh, the
tanned flesh, the hard flesh pulsing with life, the unabashedly bare,
the sweat-sheened. And there came the moment when her eyes and his had
met … when in the locking of their gaze she was no longer invisible and
he, no longer unseen.

The telephone was next, and the voice of Poteen. That was the first time
she heard his voice, the noncommittal, too-understanding Detective Peter
Poteen, who said _yes-mam_ like the polite cop on a television series,
and perhaps was amused at himself for doing it, and, very likely at her,
too, for calling. He was immune to the infection of her outrage; he
patiently had interrupted her, over and over again, until he had written
down her name and her address and had made sure he had them all spelled
right—all that, before she could even tell her story.

And then it was yes mam, yes mam, yes mam, to all of it, and his silly
question. Was the fellow still out there on the roof? Well of _course_
not, she had blurted angrily. He was two hours gone. That was when
Poteen’s voice got a bit quieter, in that special way he had when he was
interested, and also in that special way of his, the amusement showed a
bit more. He asked her if she meant she had waited two whole hours to
report the man to the police?

She supposed she had, though to this day she could not remember what she
had done with the two hours. “I was upset, that’s all!” she had shouted
into the phone; and “Sure,” he had said, “Sure,” and he had promised to
check on it. Check on it! With the papers full of it, every day, two,
three times a day sometimes, the headlines, what happened in parks,
alleys, stairways, even in the rooms of women alone. The whole city was
aroused, and all the people in it except the police, except Detective
Poteen.

Hanging up, she had glared at the bland crooked telephone and _“Oh!”_
she had shrieked at it, unable to find a word for what she felt.

A woman alone could be preyed upon, brutalized, murdered. Or worse.
_Then_ the police would swing into action. Then they would be around
with their radios and their fingerprint kits and bloodstain tests and
microscopes and things—they were very good at that. Afterwards. After
she had been—

_Oh!_ The word was too horrible to say, even to herself.

Check on it. They’d check on it all right. Maybe pass Poteen’s cold
careful notes around at the precinct station and laugh at her.

It had come night then, that hot summer last year, and she had sat
tensely in her wicker chair, glancing in fury at the bland cornerless
hulk of the telephone, and then at the textured face of the gauze that
shut out the night beyond.

And once—she could still remember it—she had found herself wishing,
actually, fervently wishing, that her door would burst open, that one of
the fiends, the beasts of prey, would stand there drooling and baring
his teeth, and would leap on her … leaving only enough afterwards to
enable her to say through broken lips, _I told you it would happen,
Detective Poteen. I told you_. And standing over her bleeding body,
Poteen would take off his hat and say _Yes Mam!_

And it had happened, had happened! even as she sat there thinking that,
the soft footsteps in the hall, the knock on her door. She had gone
rigid, and suddenly the insides of her mouth and throat were dry
blotting-paper, while a great cold knot writhed itself into shape in her
stomach and drew tight. It wasn’t until the knock came again that she
was able to answer at all.

“Who is it?”

“You don’t know me. The guy on the roof.”

She did not answer. She couldn’t. In her mind’s eye, vividly, she saw
through the thin wall. She saw him just as she had seen him by the kiosk
in the hot afternoon, standing so shamelessly; she could only imagine
him the same way by her door, and again—still—with his gaze locked with
hers.

She got up, that hot night a year ago, and, she had never before heard,
had never known, the crackles, shrieks, and shouts a wicker chair gives
out when a body leaves it. She had crept to the telephone, dialed. Oh!
what a noise. What a grinding and clacking a telephone dial makes.
Whether or not she could hear him breathing out there, she thought she
did, and it was horrible.

He knocked again, louder; it was thunder, it was guns. _Fortieth
Precinct; Sergeant Deora_, yelled the phone in her ear.

With her mouth to the telephone’s mouth, close like kissing, wet, she
said, “I told you this would happen, I told that Mister Poteen, the man,
he’s breaking in, he—” _This is the police, Sergeant Deora_, rasped the
telephone scratchily, tinnily, too loud. _I can’t hear you. Who’s
calling, please?_ “Oh, sh! _Shh!!_” Little Sister whispered explosively.
“Not so loud, he’ll hear you. I called this afternoon—” _May I have your
name?_

Angrily, she told him. The knock came again. Out in the hall, a voice,
“I got to see you a minute. Come on, I got to talk to you.” Little
Sister hugged the phone, turned her back to the door. Her eyes were wide
and turned so far over to the side that they hurt. “I called this
afternoon and told that detective, that Mister Poteen—” _Your address,
please_. “Oh!” she cried, but still cried whispering, “Oh! Oh! A man’s
trying to break in right now, I _told_ you he would!” _Yes mam. Now if
you will please give me your address_.

Like cursing, she gave her address. “This afternoon—” _We’ll check on
it_. “But, but, this afternoon—” she said into the phone, the dead
phone, he had gone and left her alone, now of all times.

A knock again, only one, but hard; not a knock, a blow. “Come on, I
ain’t going to hurt you. I got to talk to you a little.”

Holding the phone still, she panted, and panted, and suddenly filled her
lungs and screamed _No!_

“Cut it out!” said the voice quietly, urgently, close to the crack of
the door. “Cut it out, will you? Somebody’ll hear. Just open up, let me
in a minute, will ya?”

Then she had screamed, and screamed again, and screamed and screamed.
Walled in by her own screams, she saw rather than heard the door being
pounded on; it trembled; then the knob turned and it shook; then it
opened, oh God, it opened. He was there, with his shoulders hunched, his
mouth twisted. He hurled himself … something struck her across the
shoulder-blades; her canned-goods shelf—Then she must have risen,
turned, backed away.

“Shut up, wait, be quiet, don’t yell like that, don’t—” He seemed almost
to be pleading. She ducked under the shelf and slid sidewise and turned
to flee to—oh, her bed. The sight of her own bed filled her with a new
and terrible fear, and she screamed a new scream, a new kind of scream
from a new kind of fear.

He touched her.

After that things were misty, swirling. The room was full of people.
Somebody turned on the big overhead light and it hurt her eyes. The man
from the roof looked some smaller, and a whole lot younger, with three
policemen holding him. Younger, well, of course, _these_ days.

Then the parade down the stairs and out on the street, the heads popping
out of doors, the crowd around the three radio cars with their scything
red lights, and a drumming white ambulance, all helter-skelter in the
narrow street, and traffic stopped and car doors open with the people
out and crowding around, crowding around. All the eyes, the eyes,
gloating over her, over _him_.

Coming down the brownstone steps, a woman spat right in his face. In the
car, sobbing, and a big policeman saying she was all right now, all
right now.

Then questions in a bare bright room, with people coming in and out—and
more questions. Once it was _him_, with only two policemen holding him
this time; she did not, could not, look at his face, but she knew him
all right, and said so; he tried to speak but they told him to shut his
mouth. Someone brought her a paper cup of lukewarm tea.

Then the courtroom, and flashbulbs and the smell of dust and old
sweat—nothing clean but the flag. _Stand up!_ somebody shouted and the
judge came in and almost everybody sat down again. It was difficult to
follow the proceedings and she did not try. She did not have to.

Her turn came and she was led to the right place to stand and touch the
Book, and then to the right place to sit; seated, she was still led; she
was asked questions which could only be answered _Yes_ and _Yes_ and
_No_ and _Yes;_ they thanked her.

_He_ took the stand. She averted her eyes. It was soon over. Home then
in a police car, through an avenue of flash-bulbs, on the arm of a
policewoman. All a blur, all nothing, really; the real thing was the
next thing, the day, the next day.

First there were the papers, the two tabloids with her picture weeping
on the front page, and _Story on Page 3_ and _More pictures in
Centerfold_. The headline on one was NAB ATTACKER IN ASSAULT ACT and the
other one said RAPIST NABBED SENT UP 5 1/2 HRS.

The first one had the story she liked best. It had the reporter’s name
on it and began “A living nightmare burst upon a lonely lady late last
night when …” The other one, though it was about her, wasn’t so much
about _her_. It was mostly about the judge. Her judge and another judge
had been having a sort of race.

So many of these terrible attack things coming up had made them revive
the old Night Court, and it seems that her Judge had heard and sentenced
an attacker in less than twelve hours, so this other judge beat him to
it by almost three hours, so this time her judge had packed the convict
off to wherever it was he went, just five and a half hours after _he_
had knocked on her door. And serve him right, too, said the paper, and
all others like him. They had to learn that justice in Our Town was
swift and certain.

She wasn’t on the front page of the other papers, but she was in them
all somewhere. And all that day at the market, people came to see her,
to talk to her. People she had worked with for years spoke to her—really
spoke to her—for the first time. And some of the men just couldn’t get
enough of her. Well, they _cared_.

That was the day everyone began to call her Little Sister. And when she
walked back from the bus stop in the afternoon; they called out to
her—“You okay, Little Sister?” Well, if it took such a terrible thing to
show that way down deep people _cared_.… Still, it was a terrible thing,
terrible. Everyone said so.

And in about three weeks, that same Detective Poteen came to see her. He
had called first, made it convenient, had been very polite and
understanding. He was a man who listened a great deal more than he
talked. He had that skin that always looks tanned, and glossy black hair
and a young face with old pouches under the eyes.

He asked her about the whole thing all over again, right from the
beginning. She told it to him, just the way it had been written in the
papers. Maybe, she had thought, a police detective is too busy to read
the papers. She had asked him why the police were still interested, and
he said they weren’t, but he was. He was off duty at the time. She
thought, at the time, that it was kind of nice.

Then the year went by, and while it was warm, and when it was warm
again, she used to sit sometimes in her wicker chair by the window,
invisible behind the square of gauze, and gaze out across her unseen
barrier—sixty feet, straight down—to the roof. And in her memory’s gaze
she would see him again, the whole thing … unseen by him, remote and
safe. “You all right, Little Sister?” the people said as she passed.
“Watch yourself, now—be careful …”

The year went by, and this afternoon Poteen called again. She’d been a
little slow in responding to him … that was funny … it wasn’t because
she didn’t recognize his voice. She did. It was just that for some
reason she couldn’t believe it. And then with his soft polite voice he
had drawn the curtain of terror over her: “I thought I ought to tell
you—Clewie Richardson got out yesterday.”

“Who’s Louie Richardson?”

“Clewie. Clewton W. Richardson. The boy who was sent up on your
complaint last year.”

She had, of course, seen the name; it just hadn’t stayed with her. “I
forgot his name. I … wanted to forget everything,” she said
pathetically. Then the full impact of the news struck her. “Got _out?_
You mean he’s _back?_”

“He lives here,” said Poteen’s voice gently. Then, very soothing, he
said, “Now don’t you get excited or worried or anything. There’s no
danger for you. I just felt I ought to tell you, in case you should see
him on the street or something. It’s all over, so just don’t worry.”

“Oh,” she said, worried, terribly worried. “Oh dear.” While she was
saying it he said goodbye quietly and hung up.

That was about three this afternoon; now it was nearly ten, and dark;
but for a hazy sliver of moon, peeping and hiding, it was dark, too
dark. Yet she would not turn on her light. As night was born, so her
worry turned to fright; as the night grew around her and all the world,
so her fright turned to terror, until at last it was a haze about her
like the one in the sky.

And like the fragile stick of moon out there, all she could do was peep
and hide in it, peep and hide, and the blur of her fear filtered common
sounds into breathings by her door, and ordinary shifts of moonlight
into movement on the roof.

_Call the police_, she kept telling herself, and _No, what would I say?
I thought I saw, I thought I heard …?_ Then, _Go!_ she would tell
herself, and answer, _go where?_… and then, since no passion, even the
ecstasies of fear, can continue indefinitely, but must ebb and peak, the
haze of terror would fitfully clarify and she could get her breath and
bearings. Detective Poteen had told her there was nothing to fear. And
_he_—Louie or Clewie?—surely he’d have learned his lesson, he wouldn’t
try to …

But then, he would. She knew he would. She knew it so well that she was
waiting for him. This is what she kept coming back to as the night grew
tight around her, strong and dark, and each time she came back to it,
the terror peaked higher. And off again on the climbing spiral: _Call
the police_. (No, what would I—) Then, _Go! Go where?_… Oh! someone’s
breathing out there! Something’s moving out there … Oh!

Something was indeed—someone in the moonlight. Little Sister peered and
peered through the gauze, then, because she could not bear to be
uncertain, no, not for another second, she took the flimsy panel and
held it to one side.

And he, _he_ stood there! and when he saw the curtain move, he smiled.
She could see the gleam of his teeth in the moonlight.

He began again to take off clothes. He took off a jacket and tossed it
behind the kiosk. He took off a shirt. He took off his shoes, balancing
like a great bird on one foot, then the other, never taking his eyes off
her window. And all the while, smiling.

Whether or not he had learned any lesson, she had, and that was, don’t
scream. It was only now, this second, that she knew she had learned it,
knew what her screams had done last time. She whimpered only, dropped
the curtain and fled to the telephone. She lifted it, and, unable to
stay away from the window, carried it as close as she could. She took up
the receiver—and oh! that blessed hum!—and looking out and back, dialed.
And while she was dialing, she saw the dim form outside spring lithely
up the side of the kiosk, stand and balance on tiptoe against the
flickering sky.

He reached up high over his head, took the faint pencil-line of a wire
in his hands, and leapt lightly back to the roof. She heard the twang as
the wire parted, and in her hands, like a captured bird, the telephone
went dead.

Her breath stopped as the life left the instrument. She thought her
heart stopped too. She stood absolutely motionless, gazing at the dead
thing, and then she moaned softly, softly replaced the handset, and
backed away from the window. And even all the way back, near the bed,
she could see him, for he had retired to the middle of the wide roof
opposite.

And now he took two springy strides toward her, and now he skipped once
like a diver or an acrobat getting his stride, and now he was sprinting,
and up the sloping, ramp-like eave he came, and launched himself into
the air!

The square black hole of her open upper sash must have seemed a small
target indeed—almost too narrow to admit his shoulders. But through it
they went, never touching. His whole long body arrowed through the
little opening and came at her like a javelin. And as she tensed herself
for the crash of his landing, his body curved downward toward the floor.
As his hands touched it he snapped his chin down to his collarbones,
curled up in a tight ball, turned all his velocity into a roll. And
there was no crash at all, only a great soft complex thud which shook
her body and the bed, ending with a bump as he came up standing on his
stockinged feet.

For a long moment—forever—they stood silently so, again their gazes
locked, he smiling and balanced on his wide-planted feet, she pressed
back against the edge of the bed. Then she sighed and fell backwards.
She screwed up her eyes and her mouth, and through her twisted lips she
gasped, “All right! All right!”

“Little Sister. Little Sister!”

Calling, calling … “I told you,” she blubbered, “I told you all right.”

“All right,” the voice echoed her, “You’re all right now. You must have
fainted.”

She let her aching eyes open a crack, and cried out; the big overhead
light was on, and it hurt her.

An arm slid cleverly behind her, raised her up. She parted her lips to
speak, and cold touched them, a cup, cold water … she drank a little and
began to tremble. “You’re all right now,” said the voice over the
phone—oh God, not over the phone, right here in the room. She opened her
eyes again, now ready for the blaze of light, and looked into the bland
quiet face of Detective Sergeant Peter Poteen.

Numbly, she let her gaze fall away, and there across the room, hunched
into her wicker chair and much too big for it, was _he, him_, the man on
the roof. Louie, Clewie!

Oh!

“I knew he’d try to see you,” said Poteen, deftly fixing her pillow
behind her. “I was out in the hall. I thought it might save everybody
some trouble if I was with him, at the time. I lost him earlier and
figured to meet him on the way to the door. Never dreamed he’d fly in
like a bird.”

Unbelievably, the man, this Louie or Clewie or whatever, he grinned
briefly, grinned at Poteen, and it was not at all as if he was a
prisoner, or even a criminal. Little Sister began to cry.

Poteen left her alone to cry. He stepped away from her and he and the
man talked—chatted was the word—friendly as could be—their faces
politely averted while she pulled herself together.

When she was able, she whimpered, “What is it? What happened? What are
you doing here?”

Poteen returned to her immediately. He looked at her gravely and then
pulled up the straight chair. From the shelf above, he got some tissues
from her box. He sat down and gave them to her. She crumpled one and
sniffled into it. He said, “Tell me what happened that other time. Last
year.”

“You know what happened.”

“Tell me _all_ of what happened.”

“That,” she remembered, “is what you asked me when you came here that
time, three weeks after.”

He nodded. “And you told me what you told the papers. I just wanted to
know the rest of it.”

“There isn’t any rest of it.”

He breathed deeply once, a patient sound, not exactly a sigh. “That
first time you called me, to complain of a Peeping Tom making obscene
gestures at you from the roof. Was that the first time you had seen this
fellow out on the roof?”

She opened her mouth, drew in air—and then hesitated. There was a
certain something about Poteen’s bland dark face that was not easy to
lie to. “Well,” she said at length, “no, it wasn’t.”

Poteen made no move anyone might describe, but something inside him
seemed to relax. “How many times did you see him before?”

“_I_ don’t know,” she said in the beginnings of anger. “How do you
expect me to remember, exactly how many times?”

“Ten times? Twenty times? Fifty?”

“Oh, not fifty.”

“More than ten?”

“What right have you got to question me like this?” she shouted.

The thing inside him seemed to tighten up again. He reached in his
breast pocket and drew out a thick sheaf of mimeo paper. “Know what this
is? This is the transcript of his trial. Listen,” he said in a tone
which gave her no choice but to do as she was told.

He read, “ ‘Q. Did you or did you not indecently expose your person to
the view of the plaintiff?

“ ‘A. I didn’t even—

“ ‘Q. Answer the question. Did you or did not not—

“ ‘A. But I was only—

“ ‘The Court: The witness will answer the question.

“ ‘Q. Did you—

“ ‘A. Yes! Yes! Yes! If that’s what I got to say.’ ”

Poteen held up the transcript so she could see a handwritten line
penciled in it. “Here was something off the record but the court
stenographer remembered it. His Honor stood up and leaned across the
bench and yelled at the witness, ‘You did, did you! You got a fat nerve
pleading innocent, wasting everybody’s time!’ Then he said to strike
that.”

Poteen paused, then struck the papers softly with his free hand. “Let’s
just say that _this_ is my right to question you this way.” He folded
the transcript and put it away, and went on in exactly the previous
voice, “You’d seen him out on the roof before?”

She whispered, “Yes.”

“More than ten times?”

“… Yes.”

“More than twenty?”

She glared at him. “No.”

“Very well,” he shrugged in a way that took all the strength out of her
glare; it just didn’t matter. “Now, as to what was called in court
‘indecent exposure’ and ‘obscene gestures.’ Exactly what was that? Just
what did he do? Try to remember.”

Little Sister really and truly blushed. “I … c-can’t say it!”

“All right. Perhaps I can find a way to say it for you. He was relieving
himself. Is that about it?”

She put her hands to her cheeks and nodded.

“Very well,” he said clinically, not surprised, angry, shocked,
anything. “Now—was this the only occasion when you had seen this?”

She would not answer.

“Well?” And the way he produced that one syllable, she had to answer.
She shook her head.

“How many times?” He waited, then said, “More than twice? Ten times?”

“Five times,” she said at last.

“Five times,” he repeated. “All right, let’s get back to what he was
doing on the roof in the first place.”

She made a vague gesture.

“Well … tricks.”

He waited, and she said, “You know—like, _tricks_. Standing on his hands
and all. He had some sort of—well, pipes, like.”

“Handstand bars. Like a small parallel bars. Built ’em himself,” said
Poteen. “One more thing—how was he dressed when he did this?”

“Well, not in much, I can tell you!”

“Would you say it was less, say, than a bathing suit?”

“It _was_ a bathing suit.”

That inward, indescribable relaxation came to Poteen again, and he said,
“Well, we don’t need any more of this third degree. Now let me fill in
the details for you.

“Clewie Richardson there is what they used to call a circus buff. Ever
hear that term? Circus struck when he was barely able to walk. All he
ever wanted in his life was to be a flyer—you, know—aerialist. Came to
town to get a job and save up enough to get down to Florida; Sarasota,
where the circus had winter quarters. Figured he could save up enough to
keep him until he could get some sort of a job with them. Got a night
loading job in the warehouse, worked hard.

“They let him have a checker’s office to sleep in—just a rathole, but
they got a kind of watchman out of the deal, and he got to save a few
more dollars. Meantime he kept practicing, keeping himself in shape.
Last summer he was ready to make the break, go south, try for his break
with the circus. Last summer he was seventeen. Three solid years working
on his own for that.”

“I didn’t know!” Little Sister said in defense—in annoyance.

“You didn’t want to know,” said Poteen mildly. “So he lived in the
warehouse, working nights, practicing days. The only washroom is down on
the ground floor, by the way, which is why he—” He shrugged.
“Technically he was guilty of _something_. That could constitute a
nuisance, I suppose. Now then: as to this exposure charge. In all the
time he used the roof, he _never_ knew he could be seen. Out in the
middle, where he had his bars, maybe—there are tall buildings out there,
though none nearby.

“But back in this corner, by your window, that stairway-housing thing,
that blocks off the view from everywhere except this window. When he
stepped behind it, he did it to get out of sight. Yours is the only
living quarters on this floor, right? All the rest is loft space.
Right?”

Mute, she nodded.

“All right, now I’m going to describe to you exactly what happened that
day.” He glanced at the boy, and against her will, her gaze was drawn to
him too. Clewie Richardson was a big youth, wide, tall, well-muscled,
and somehow scrubbed-looking. He sat in her wicker chair dressed in
black slacks and a white T-shirt, his stockinged feet crossed at the
ankles, his whole large lithe frame leaning raptly toward Poteen.

“He worked out for a couple of hours—oh, it had to be the hours you’d be
home, what a break! You and that early-morning job of yours! And then
he—well, he committed his nuisance. And it was then for the very first
time he saw you looking through your curtain. You can imagine how he
felt. Or maybe you can’t.

“All right—he cleared out then, and you waited two whole hours—why, I’ll
never know—and then took it upon yourself to make that phone call. So I
said I’d check on it and I did. I talked to the men loading at the
warehouse; Clewie was out eating. When he got back and they told him the
cops were looking for him, he got all wound up. All he wanted to do was
to talk to you, tell you he didn’t know you were watching, didn’t mean
anything by it. He came up and knocked on your door, and next thing you
know you started to scream. He wanted to calm you down, explain, but it
all blew up in his face.

“Then once the squad-cars got here—” Again, that meaningful shrug. “The
way the papers were playing up assault cases this last year, he didn’t
have a chance. Even the defense attorney told him to save himself
trouble and plead guilty. He didn’t, and—” Audibly, he tapped the
transcript in his breast pocket—“look what that got him.”

“I … didn’t know,” said Little Sister, rather differently.

“I didn’t either, until next day. I went off duty after I spoke to the
guys at the warehouse; then by next morning it was all over and Clewie
was upstate. Five and a half hours, my God! Not that I’d’ve been able to
do anything. Or wanted to, at the time. I had the fever, same as
everyone else. But later … well, it kept bothering me.

“Finally I came to see you and somehow, the way you told the story,
it—oh, it was too much the way a sob-sister writes a crime story. So I
looked it up. You had that scandal-sheet Page Three story about by
heart, didn’t you?”

“You—” and for a moment she thought she was going to swear at him, but
she changed it. “You could have stayed out of it.”

He shook his head and said mildly, “No I couldn’t.” He looked at her
with those understanding dark eyes for too long. She had to turn away,
and he said, just like on TV, “I’m a cop, mam. I have to uphold the law.
But sometimes I stop and think what the law is. The law in this country
is the best we can do to make justice apply to everybody. That’s what
they get made for and that’s how most of ’em work. If they don’t work
that way then somebody ought to fix the trouble.

“Look here,” he said, waving a hand at Clewie Richardson and meaning the
whole thing, the, complaint, assault, arrest, imprisonment—all of it.
“The law was upheld all down the line, but it took a year out of his
life for a misdemeanor. Everything costs, Little Sister. Somebody pays
for everything. Clewie Richardson here paid plenty—for what?

“Partly for newspapers reaching down long handles to stir up some
circulation. Partly for rapists who never got caught. Partly for his own
ignorance, not knowing his rights, and his own bullheadedness, trying to
talk to you. And partly, he paid for something you got out of it. That
last is the only part I really don’t know about. What did you get out of
it, Little Sister?”

“I don’t know what you mean, and I don’t know why you’re … _bullying_ me
like this!”

“I believe you,” said Poteen, and there was real wonderment in his
voice. “All right, Clewie—you win. You can tell her. Little Sister, this
boy lay every night in the reformatory thinking and dreaming of just one
thing—to tell you something you ought to know. I didn’t think he should
because I don’t like people to get hurt and because I knew it would get
him into more trouble. That’s all I wanted to stop him for. But now—go
ahead, Clewie.”

The boy got up and came across the room on silent feet. He was huge. He
was smiling, or perhaps just baring his teeth. She shrank back on the
bed. He said softly, “It’s the same thing I wanted to tell you that
first night, when you screamed so much. You saw me out there that day,
and I saw you, just your face, peekin’ through that curtain.

“I thought you was a _little funny-lookin’ old man_. That’s why I took
my time, finished what I was doin’. And that’s why I had to see you so
bad when the cops came around and told the guys they were lookin’ for me
on a complaint by some _woman_. I had to find you and tell you I never
realized it was a woman watchin’ me!”

“That was the first time,” said Poteen. “Now tell her what you spent
every night for a year dreaming about telling her. Go ahead. I think you
should.”

The boy laughed. “It’s the same thing, really. When I saw you through
that curtain, I thought you were a funny-lookin’ little old man. Well
after that I seen you close up, without no curtain, and all I want is to
tell you—you still look like a funny little old man!”

Little Sister’s face turned grey.

Poteen rose and motioned the boy toward the door. “The circus is in
town,” he said, “I got him a job with it. That takes care of some of the
justice. I think he just took care of the rest.”

He let the boy precede him through the door and, with his hand on the
knob, turned to face her. “You knew he thought that, didn’t you? Is that
why? Is that the reason you waited two hours to make your complaint? Is
that why you wouldn’t let him talk to you? To grab this one chance to
tell the world you were a woman, when the world never really knew it
before? Is that why you told the reporters ‘everybody calls me Little
Sister’ when nobody ever called you that before?”

“Yes they did!” she shrieked. “Yes they did! My daddy used to call me
that!”

Politely, understandingly, Detective Sergeant Peter Poteen closed the
door.



WHEN YOU CARE, WHEN YOU LOVE


He was beautiful in her bed.

When you care, when you love, when you treasure someone, you can watch
the beloved in sleep as you watch everything, anything else—laughter,
lips to a cup, a look even away from you; a stride, sun a-struggle lost
in a hair-lock, a jest or a gesture—even stillness, even sleep.

She leaned close, all but breathless, and watched his lashes. Now,
lashes are thick sometimes, curled, russet; these were all these, and
glossy besides. Look closely—there where they curve lives light in tiny
serried scimitars.

All so good, _so_ very good, she let herself deliciously doubt its
reality. She would let herself believe, in a moment, that this was real,
was true, was here, had at last happened. All the things her life before
had ever given her, all she had ever wanted, each by each had come to
her purely for wanting. Delight there might be, pride, pleasure, even
glory in the new possession of gift, privilege, object, experience: her
ring, hat, toy, trip to Trinidad; yet, with possession there had always
been (until now) the platter called _well, of course_ on which these
things were served her. For had she not wanted it? But this, now—_him_,
now … greatest of all her wants, ever; first thing in all her life to
transcend want itself and knowingly become need: this she had at last,
at long (how long, now) long last, this she had now for good and all,
for always, forever and never a touch of _well, of course_. He was her
personal miracle, he in this bed now, warm and loving her. He was the
reason and the reward of it all—her family and forebears, known by so
few and felt by so many, and indeed, the whole history of mankind
leading up to it, and all she herself had _been_ and done and felt; and
loving him, and losing him, and seeing him dead and bringing him back—it
was all for this moment and because the moment had to be, he and this
peak, this warmth in these sheets, this _now_ of hers. He was all life
and all life’s beauty, beautiful in her bed; and now she could be sure,
could believe it, believe …

“I do,” she breathed. “I do.”

“What do you do?” he asked her. He had not moved, and did not now.

“Devil, I thought you were asleep.”

“Well, I was. But I had the feeling someone was looking.”

“Not looking,” she said softly. “Watching.” She was watching the lashes
still, and did not see them stir, but between them now lay a shining
sliver of the gray, cool aluminum of his surprising eyes. In a moment he
would look at her—just that—in a moment their eyes would meet and it
would be as if nothing new had happened (for it would be the same metal
missile which had first impaled her) and also as if everything,
everything were happening again. Within her, passion boiled up like a
fusion fireball, so beautiful, so huge—

—and like the most dreaded thing on earth, without pause the radiance
changed, shifting from the hues of all the kinds of love to all the
tones of terror and the colors of a cataclysm.

She cried his name …

And the gray eyes opened wide in fear for her fears and in astonishment,
and he bounded up laughing, and the curl of his laughing lips turned
without pause to the pale writhing of agony, and they shrank apart, too
far apart while the white teeth met and while between them he shouted
his hurt. He fell on his side and doubled up, grunting, gasping in
pain … grunting, gasping, wrapped away from her, unreachable even by
her.

She screamed. She screamed. She—

A Wyke biography is hard to come by. This has been true for four
generations, and more true with each, for the more the Wyke holdings
grew, the less visible have been the Wyke family, for so Cap’n Gamaliel
Wyke willed it after his conscience conquered him. This (for he was a
prudent man) did not happen until after his retirement from what was
euphemistically called the molasses trade. His ship—later, his fleet—had
carried fine New England rum, made from the molasses, to Europe, having
brought molasses from the West Indies to New England. Of course a paying
cargo was needed for the westward crossing, to close with a third leg
this profitable triangle, and what better cargo than Africans for the
West Indies, to harvest the cane and work in the mills which made the
molasses?

Ultimately affluent and retired, he seemed content for a time to live
among his peers, carrying his broadcloth coat and snowy linen as to the
manor born, limiting his personal adornment to a massive golden ring and
small square gold buckles at his knee. Soberly shop-talking molasses
often, rum seldom, slaves never, he dwelt with a frightened wife and a
silent son, until she died and something—perhaps loneliness—coupled his
brain again to his sharp old eyes, and made him look about him. He began
to dislike the hypocrisy of man and was honest enough to dislike himself
as well, and this was a new thing for the Cap’n; he could not deny it
and he could not contain it, so he left the boy with the household staff
and, taking only a manservant, went into the wilderness to search his
soul.

The wilderness was Martha’s Vineyard, and right through a bitter winter
the old man crouched by the fire when the weather closed in, and,
muffled in four great gray shawls, paced the beaches when it was bright,
his brass telescope under his arm and his grim canny thoughts doing
mighty battle with his convictions. In the late spring, he returned to
Wiscassett, his blunt certainty regained, his laconic curtness increased
almost to the point of speechlessness. He sold out (as a startled
contemporary described it) “everything that showed,” and took his son,
an awed, obedient eleven, back to the Vineyard where, to the
accompaniment of tolling breakers and creaking gulls, he gave the boy an
education to which all the schooling of all the Wykes for all of four
generations would be mere addenda.

For in his retreat to the storms and loneliness of the inner self and
the Vineyard, Gamaliel Wyke had come to terms with nothing less than the
Decalogue.

He had never questioned the Ten Commandments, nor had he knowingly
disobeyed them. Like many another before him, he attributed the sad
state of the world and the sin of its inhabitants to their refusal to
heed those Rules. But in his ponderings, God Himself, he at last
devoutly concluded, had underestimated the stupidity of mankind. So he
undertook to amend the Decalogue himself, by adding “… or cause …” to
each Commandment, just to make it easier for a man to work with:

“… or cause the Name of the Lord to be taken in vain.”

“… or cause stealing to be done.”

“… or cause dishonor to thy father and thy mother.”

“… or cause the commission of adultery.”

“… or cause a killing to be done.”

But his revelation came to him when he came to the last one. It was
suddenly clear to him that all mankind’s folly—all greed, lust, war, all
dishonor—sprang from humanity’s almost total disregard for this edict
and its amendment: “Thou shall not covet … _nor cause covetousness!_”

It came to him then that to arouse covetousness in another is just as
deadly a sin as to kill him or to cause his murder. Yet all around the
world empires rose, great yachts and castles and hanging gardens came
into being, tombs and trusts and college grants, all for the purpose of
arousing the envy or covetousness of the less endowed—or having that
effect no matter what the motive.

Now, one way for a man as rich as Gamaliel Wyke to have resolved the
matter for himself would be St. Francis’ way; but (though he could not
admit this, or even recognize it) he would have discarded the Decalogue
and his amendments, all surrounding Scripture and his gnarled right arm
rather than run so counter to his inborn, ingrained Yankee
acquisitiveness. And another way might have been to take his riches and
bury them in the sand of Martha’s Vineyard, to keep them from causing
covetousness; the very thought clogged his nostrils with the feel of
dune-sand and he felt suffocation; to him money was a living thing and
should not be interred.

And so he came to his ultimate answer: Make your money, enjoy it, but
_never let anyone know_. Desire, he concluded, for a neighbor’s wife, or
a neighbor’s ass, or for anything, presupposed knowing about these
possessions. No neighbor could desire anything of his if he couldn’t lay
a name to it.

So Gamaliel brought weight like granite and force like gravity to bear
upon the mind and soul of his son Walter, and Walter begat Jedediah, and
Jedediah begat Caiaphas (who died) and Samuel, and Samuel began Zebulon
(who died) and Sylva; so perhaps the true beginning of the story of the
boy who became his own mother lies with Cap’n Gamaliel Wyke and his
sand-scoured, sea-deep, rock-hard revelation.

—fell on his side on the bed and doubled up, grunting, gasping, wrapped
away from her, even her, unreachable even by her.

She screamed. She screamed. She pressed herself up and away from him and
ran naked into the sitting room, pawed up the ivory telephone: “Keogh,”
she cried; “For the love of God, _Keogh!_”

—and back into the bedroom where he lay open-mouthing a grating horrible
_uh uh!_ while she wrung her hands, tried to take one of his, found it
agony-tense and unaware of her. She called him, called him, and once,
screamed again.

The buzzer sounded with inexcusable discretion.

“Keogh!” she shouted, and the polite buzzer _shhh_’d her again—the lock,
oh the damned lock … she picked up her negligee and ran with it in her
hand through the dressing room and the sitting room and the hall and the
living room and the foyer and flung open the door. She pulled Keogh
through it before he could turn away from her; she thrust one arm in a
sleeve of the garment and shouted at him, “Keogh, please, please, Keogh,
what’s wrong with him?” and she fled to the bedroom, Keogh sprinting to
keep up with her.

Then Keogh, chairman of the board of seven great corporations,
board-member of a dozen more, general manager of a quiet family holding
company which had, for most of a century, specialized in the ownership
of corporate owners, went to the bed and fixed his cool blue gaze on the
agonized figure there.

He shook his head slightly.

“You called the wrong man,” he snapped, and ran back to the
sitting-room, knocking the girl aside as if he had a been a machine on
tracks. He picked up the phone and said, “Get Rathburn up here. _Now_.
Where’s Weber? You don’t? Well, find him and get him here  … I don’t
care. Hire an airplane. _Buy_ an airplane.”

He slammed down the phone and ran back into the bedroom. He came up
behind her and gently lifted the negligee onto her other shoulder, and
speaking gently to her all the while, reached round her and tied the
ribbon belt. “What happened?”

“N-nothing, he just—”

“Come on, girl—clear out of here. Rathburn’s practically outside the
door, and I’ve sent for Weber. If there’s a better doctor than Rathburn,
it could only be Weber, so you’ve got to leave it to them. Come!”

“I won’t leave him.”

“Come!” Keogh rapped, then murmured, looking over her shoulder at the
bed, “He wants you to, can’t you see? He doesn’t want you to see him
like this. _Right?_” he demanded, and the face, turned away and
half-buried in the pillow shone sweatly; cramp mounded the muscles on
the side of the mouth they could just see. Stiffly the head nodded; it
was like a shudder. “And … shut … door … tight …” he said in a clanging
half whisper.

“Come,” said Keogh. And again, “Come.” He propelled her away; she
stumbled. Her face turned yearningly until Keogh, both hands on her,
kicked at the door and it swung and the sight of the bed was gone. Keogh
leaned back against the door as if the latch were not enough to hold it
closed.

“What is it? Oh, what is it?”

“I don’t know,” he said.

“You do, you do … you always know everything … why won’t you let me stay
with him?”

“He doesn’t want that.”

Overcome, inarticulate, she cried out.

“Maybe,” he said into her hair, “he wants to scream too.”

She struggled—oh, strong, lithe and strong she was. She tried to press
past him. He would not budge, so at last, at last she wept.

He held her in his arms again, as he had not done since she used to sit
on his lap as a little girl. He held her in his arms and looked blindly
toward the unconcerned bright morning, seen soft-focused through the
cloud of her hair. And he tried to make it stop, the morning, the sun,
and time, but—

—but there is one certain thing only about a human mind, and that is
that it acts, moves, works ceaselessly while it lives. The action,
motion, labor differ from that of a heart, say, or an epithelial cell,
in that the latter have functions, and in any circumstance perform their
functions. Instead of a function, mind has a duty, that of making of a
hairless ape a human being … yet as if to prove how trivial a difference
there is between mind and muscle, mind must move, to some degree, always
change, to some degree, always while it lives, like a stinking sweat
gland … holding her, Keogh thought about Keogh.

The biography of Keogh is somewhat harder to come by than that of a
Wyke. This is not in spite of having spent merely half a lifetime in
this moneyed shadow; it is because of it. Keogh was a Wyke in all but
blood and breeding: Wyke owned him and all he owned, which was a great
deal.

He must have been a child once, a youth; he could remember if he wished
but did not care to. Life began for him with the _summa cum laude_, the
degrees in both business and law and (so young) the year and a half with
Hinnegan and Bache, and then the incredible opening at the International
Bank; the impossible asked of him in the Zurich-Plenum affair, and his
performance of it, and the shadows which grew between him and his
associates over the years, while for him the light grew and grew as to
the architecture of his work, until at last he was admitted to Wyke, and
was permitted to realize that Wyke _was_ Zurich and Plenum, and the
International Bank, and Hinnegan and Bache; was indeed his law school
and his college and much, so very much more. And finally sixteen—good
heavens, it was eighteen years ago, when he became General Manager, and
the shadows dark to totally black between him and any other world, while
the light, his own huge personal illumination, exposed almost to him
alone an industrial-financial complex unprecedented in his country, and
virtually unmatched in the world.

But then, the beginning, the _other_ beginning, was when Old Sam Wyke
called him in so abruptly that morning, when (though General Manager
with many a board chairman, all unbeknownst, under him in rank) he was
still the youngest man in that secluded office.

“Keogh,” said old Sam, “this is my kid. Take ’er out. Give ’er anything
she wants. Be back here at six.” He had then kissed the girl on the
crown of her dark straw hat, gone to the door, turned and barked, “You
see her show off or brag, Keogh, you fetch her a good one, then and
there, hear? I don’t care what else she does, but don’t you let her wave
something she’s got at someone that hasn’t got it. That’s Rule One.” He
had then breezed out, leaving a silent, startled young mover of
mountains locking gazes with an unmoving mouse of an eleven-year-old
girl. She had luminous pale skin, blue-black silky-shining hair, and
thick, level, black brows.

The _summa cum laude_, the acceptance at Hinnegan and Bache—all such
things, they were beginnings that he knew were beginnings. This he would
not know for some time that it was a beginning, any more than he could
realize that he had just heard the contemporary version of Cap’n
Gamaliel’s “Thou shalt not … cause covetousness.” At the moment, he
could only stand nonplussed for a moment, then excuse himself and go to
the treasurer’s office, where he scribbled a receipt and relieved the
petty cashbox of its by no means petty contents. He got his hat and coat
and returned to the President’s office. Without a word the child rose
and moved with him to the door.

They lunched and spent the afternoon together, and were back at six. He
bought her whatever she wanted at one of the most expensive shops in New
York. He took her to just the places of amusement she asked him to.

When it was all over, he returned the stack of bills to the petty cash
box, less the one dollar and twenty cents he had paid out. For at the
shop—the largest toy store in the world—she had carefully selected a
sponge rubber ball, which they packed for her in a cubical box. This she
carried carefully by its string for the rest of the afternoon.

They lunched from a pushcart—he had one hot dog with kraut, she had two
with relish.

They rode uptown on the top of a Fifth Avenue double-decker, open-top
bus.

They went to the zoo in Central Park and bought one bag of peanuts for
the girl and the pigeons, and one bag of buns for the girl and the
bears.

Then they took another double-decker back downtown, and that was it;
that was the afternoon.

He remembered clearly what she looked like then: like a straw-hatted
wren, for all it was a well-brushed wren. He could not remember what
they had talked about, if indeed they had talked much at all. He was
prepared to forget the episode, or at least to put it neatly in the
_Trivia: Misc.: Closed_ file in his compartmented mind, when, a week
later, old Sam tossed him a stack of papers and told him to read them
through and come and ask questions if he thought he had to. The only
question which came to mind when he had read them was, “Are you sure you
want to go through with this?” and that was not the kind of question one
asked old Sam. So he thought it over very carefully and came up with
“Why me?” and old Sam looked him up and down and growled, “She likes
you, that’s why.”

And so it was that Keogh and the girl lived together in a cotton mill
town in the South for a year. Keogh worked in the company store. The
girl worked in the mill; twelve-year-old girls worked in cotton mills in
the South in those days, and had three hours’ school in the afternoons.
Up until ten o’clock on Saturday nights they watched the dancing from
the sidelines. On Sundays they went to the Baptist church. Their name
while they were there was Harris. Keogh used to worry frantically when
she was out of his sight, but one day when she was crossing the catwalk
over the water-circulating sump, a sort of oversized well beside the
mill, the catwalk broke and pitched her into the water. Before she could
so much as draw a breath a Negro stoker appeared out of
nowhere—actually, out of the top of the coal chute—and leapt in and had
her and handed her up to the sudden crowd. Keogh came galloping up from
the company store as they were pulling the stoker out, and after seeing
that girl was all right, knelt beside the man, whose leg was broken.

“I’m Mr. Harris, her father. You’ll get a reward for this. What’s your
name?”

The man beckoned him close, and as he bent down, the stoker, in spite of
his pain, grinned and winked. “You don’ owe me a thang, Mr. Keogh,” he
murmured. In later times, Keogh would be filled with rage at such a
confidence, would fire the man out of hand: this first time he was
filled with wonder and relief. After that, things were easier on him, as
he realized that the child was surrounded by Wyke’s special employees,
working on Wyke land in a Wyke mill and paying rent in a Wyke row-house.

In due time the year was up. Someone else took over, and the girl, now
named Kevin and with a complete new background in case anyone should
ask, went off for two years to a very exclusive Swiss finishing school,
where she dutifully wrote letters to a Mr. and Mrs. Kevin who held large
acreage in the Pennsylvania mountains, and who just as dutifully
answered her.

Keogh returned to his own work, which he found in apple-pie order, with
every one of the year’s transactions beautifully abstracted for him, and
an extra amount, over and above his astronomical salary, tucked away in
one of his accounts—an amount that startled even Keogh. He missed her at
first, which he expected. But he missed her every single day for two
solid years, a disturbance he could not explain, did not examine, and
discussed with no one.

All the Wykes, old Sam once grunted to him, did something of the sort.
He, Sam, had been a logger in Oregon and a year and a half as utility
man, then ordinary seaman on a coastwise tanker.

Perhaps some deep buried part of Keogh’s mind thought that when she
returned from Switzerland, they would go for catfish in an old
flat-bottomed boat again, or that she would sit on his lap while he
suffered on the hard benches of the once-a-month picture show. The
instant he saw her on her return from Switzerland, he knew that would
never be. He knew he was entering some new phase; it troubled and
distressed him and he put it away in the dark inside himself; he could
do that; he was strong enough. And she—well, she flung her arms around
him and kissed him; but when she talked with this new vocabulary, this
deft school finish, she was strange and awesome to him, like an angel.
Even a loving angel is strange and awesome …

They were together again then for a long while, but there were no more
hugs. He became a Mr. Stark in the Cleveland office of a brokerage house
and she boarded with an elderly couple, went to the local high school
and had a part-time job filing in his office. This was when she learned
the ins and outs of the business, the size of it. It would be hers. It
became hers while they were in Cleveland: old Sam died very suddenly.
They slipped away to the funeral but were back at work on Monday. They
stayed there for another eight months; she had a great deal to learn. In
the fall she entered a small private college and Keogh saw nothing of
her for a year.

“Shhh,” he breathed to her, crying, and _sssh!_ said the buzzer.

“Go take a bath,” he said. He pushed her.

She half-turned under his hand, faced him again blazing. “No!”

“You can’t go in there, you know,” he said, going for the door. She
glared at him, but her lower lip trembled.

Keogh opened the door. “In the bedroom.”

“Who—” then the doctor saw the girl, her hands knotted together, her
face twisted, and had his answer. He was a tall man, gray, with quick
hands, a quick step, swift words. He went straight through foyer, hall
and rooms and into the bedroom. He closed the door behind him. There had
been no discussion, no request and refusal; Dr. Rathburn had simply,
quickly, quietly shut them out.

“Go take a bath.”

“No.”

“Come on.” He took her wrist and led her to the bathroom. He reached
into the shower stall and turned on the side jets. There were four at
each corner; the second from the top was scented. Apple blossom. “Go
on.”

He moved toward the door. She stood where he had let go of her wrist,
pulling at her hands. “Go on,” he said again. “Just a quick one. Do you
good.” He waited. “Or do you want me to douse you myself? I bet I still
can.”

She flashed him a look; indignation passed instantly as she understood
what he was trying to do. The rare spark of mischief appeared in her
eyes and, in perfect imitation of a mill-row redneck, she said, “Y’all
try it an Ah’ll tall th’ shurff Ah ain’t rightly yo’ chile.” But the
effort cost her too much, and she cried again. He stepped out and softly
closed the door.

He was waiting by the bedroom when Rathburn slid out and quickly shut
the door on the grunt, the gasp.

“What is it?” asked Keogh.

“Wait a minute.” Rathburn strode to the phone. Keogh said, “I sent for
Weber.”

Rathburn came almost ludicrously to a halt. “Wow,” he said. “Not bad
diagnosing, for a layman. Is there anything you can’t do?”

“I can’t understand what you’re talking about,” said Keogh testily.

“Oh—I thought you knew. Yes, I’m afraid it’s in Weber’s field. What made
you guess?”

Keogh shuddered. “I saw a mill hand take a low blow once. I know _he_
wasn’t hit. What exactly is it?”

Rathburn darted a look around. “Where is she?” Keogh indicated the
bathroom. “I told her to take a shower.”

“Good,” said the doctor. He lowered his voice. “Naturally I can’t tell
without further examination and lab—”

_“What is it?”_ Keogh demanded, not loud, but with such violence that
Rathburn stepped back a pace.

“It could be choriocarcinoma.”

Tiredly, Keogh wagged his head. “Me diagnose that? I can’t even spell
it. What is it?” He caught himself up, as if he had retrieved the word
from thin air and run it past him again. “I know what the last part of
it means.”

“One of the—” Rathburn swallowed, and tried again. “One of the more
vicious forms of cancer. And it …” He lowered his voice again. “It
doesn’t always hit this hard.”

“Just how serious is it?”

Rathburn raised his hands and let them fall.

“Bad, eh? Doc—_how bad?”_

“Maybe some day we can …” Rathburn’s lowered voice at last disappeared.
They hung there, each on the other’s pained gaze. “How much time?”

“Maybe six weeks.”

_“Six weeks!”_

“Shh,” said Rathburn nervously.

“Weber—”

“Weber knows more about internal physiology than anybody. But I don’t
know if that will help. It’s a little like … your, uh, house is struck
by lightning, flattened, burned to the ground. You can examine it and
the weather reports and, uh, know exactly what happened. Maybe some day
we can …” he said again, but he said it so hopelessly that Keogh,
through the rolling mists of his own terror, pitied him and
half-instinctively put out a hand. He touched the doctor’s sleeve and
stood awkwardly.

“What are you going to do?”

Rathburn looked at the closed bedroom door. “What I did.” He made a
gesture with a thumb and two fingers. “Morphine.”

“And that’s all?”

“Look, I’m a G.P. Ask Weber, will you?”

Keogh realized that he had pushed the man as far as he could in his
search for a crumb of hope; if there was none, there was no point in
trying to squeeze it out. He asked, “Is there anyone working on it?
Anything new? Can you find out?”

“Oh, I will, l will. But Weber can tell you off the top of his head more
than I could find out in six mon … in a long time.”

A door opened. She came out, hollow-eyed, but pink and glowing in a long
white terry-cloth robe. “Dr. Rathburn—”

“He’s asleep.”

“Thank God. Does it—”

“There’s no pain.”

“What is it? What happened to him?”

“Well, I wouldn’t like to say for sure … we’re waiting for Dr.

Weber. He’ll know.”

“But—but is he—”

“He’ll sleep the clock around.”

“Can I …” The timidity, the caution, Keogh realized was so unlike her.
“Can I see him?”

“He’s fast asleep!”

“I don’t care. I’ll be quiet. I won’t—touch him or anything.”

“Go ahead,” said Rathburn. She opened the bedroom door and eagerly,
silently slipped inside.

“You’d think she was trying to make sure he was there.”

Keogh, who knew her so very well, said, “She is.”

But a biography of Guy Gibbon is _really_ hard to come by. For he was no
exceptional executive, who for all his guarded anonymity wielded so much
power that he must be traceable by those who knew where to look and what
to look for, and cared enough to process detail like a mass
spectroscope. Neither was Guy Gibbon born heir to countless millions,
the direct successor to a procession of giants.

He came from wherever it is most of us come from, the middle or the
upper-middle, or the upper-lower middle or the lower-upper middle, or
some other indefinable speck in the mid-range of the interflowing
striations of society (the more they are studied, the less they mean).
He belonged to the Wyke entity for only eight and a half weeks, after
all. Oh, the bare details might not be too hard to come by (birth date,
school record), and certain main facts (father’s occupation, mother’s
maiden name), as well, perhaps as a highlight or two (divorce, perhaps,
or a death in the family); but a biography, a real biography, which does
more than describe, which _explains_ the man—and few do—now, _this_ is
an undertaking.

Science, it is fair to assume, can do what all the king’s horses and all
the king’s men could not do, and totally restore a smashed egg. Given
equipment enough, and time enough … but isn’t this a way of saying,
“given money enough?” For money can be not only means, but motive. So if
enough money went into the project, perhaps the last unknown, the last
vestige of anonymity could be removed from a man’s life story, even a
young man from (as the snobs say) nowhere, no matter how briefly—though
intimately—known.

The most important thing, obviously, that ever happened to Guy Gibbon in
his life was his first encounter with the Wyke entity, and like many a
person before and since, he had not the faintest idea he had done so. It
was when he was in his late teens, and he and Sammy Stein went
trespassing.

Sammy was a school sidekick, and this particular day he had a secret; he
had been very insistent on the day’s outing, but refused to say why. He
was a burly-shouldered, good-natured, reasonably chinless boy whose
close friendship with Guy was based almost exclusively on the attraction
of opposite poles. And since, of the many kinds of fun they had had, the
most fun was going trespassing, he wanted it that way on this particular
occasion.

“Going trespassing,” as an amusement, had more or less invented itself
when they were in their early teens. They lived in a large city
surrounded (unlike many today) by old suburbs, not new ones. These
included large—some, more than large—estates and mansions, and it was
their greatest delight to slip through a fence or over a wall and,
profoundly impressed by their own bravery, slip through field and
forest, lawn and drive, like Indian scouts in settler country. Twice
they had been caught, once to have dogs set on them—three boxers and two
mastiffs, which certainly would have torn them to very small pieces if
the boys had not been more lucky than swift—and once by a dear little
old lady who swamped them sickeningly with jelly sandwiches and lonely
affection. But over the saga of their adventures, their two captures
served to spice the adventure; two failures out of a hundred successes
(for many of these places were visited frequently) was a proud record.

So they took a trolley to the end of the line, and walked a mile, and
went straight ahead where the road turned at a discreet NO ADMITTANCE
sign of expensive manufacture and a high degree of weathering. They
proceeded through a small wild wood, and came at last to an apparently
unscalable granite wall.

Sammy had discovered this wall the week before, roaming alone; he had
waited for Guy to accompany him before challenging it, and Guy was
touched. He was also profoundly excited by the wall itself. Anything
this size should have been found, conjectured about, campaigned against,
battled and conquered long since. But as well as being a high wall, a
long wall, and mysterious, it was a distant wall, a discreet wall. No
road touched it but its own driveway, which was primitive, meandering,
and led to ironbound, solid oak gates without a chink or crack to peek
through.

They could not climb it nor breach it—but they crossed it. An ancient
maple on this side held hands with a chestnut over the crown of the
wall, and they went over like a couple of squirrels.

They had, in their ghost-like way, haunted many an elaborate property,
but never had they seen such maintenance, such manicure, such polish of
a piece of land and, as Sammy said, awed out of his usual brashness, as
they stood in a solid marble pergola overlooking green plush acres of
rolling lawn, copses of carven boxwood, park-lake woods and streams with
little Japanese bridges and, in their bends, humorful little
rock-gardens: “—and there’s goddamn _miles_ of it.”

They had wandered a bit, that first time, and had learned that there
were after all some people there. They saw a tractor far away, pulling a
slanted gang of mowers across one of the green-plush fields. (The owners
doubtless called it a lawn; it was a field.) The machines, rare in that
time, cut a swath all of thirty feet wide, “and that,” Sammy said,
convulsing them, “ain’t hay.” And then they had seen the house—

Well, a glimpse. Breaking out of the woods. Guy had felt himself
snatched back. “House up there,” said Sammy. “Someone’ll see us.” There
was a confused impression of a white hill that was itself the house, or
part of it; towers, turrets, castellations, crenellations; a fairy-tale
palace set in this legendary landscape. They had not been able to see it
again; it was so placed that it could be approached nowhere secretly nor
even spied upon. They were struck literally speechless by the sight and
for most of an hour had nothing to say, and that expressible only by
wags of the head. Ultimately they referred to it as “the shack,” and it
was in this vein that they later called their final discovery “the ol’
swimmin’ hole.”

It was across a creek and over a wooded hill. Two more hills rose to
meet the wood, and cupped between the three was a pond, perhaps a lake.
It was roughly L-shaped, and all around it were shadowed inlets,
grottoes, inconspicuous stone steps leading here to a rustic pavilion
set about with flowers, there to a concealed forest glade harboring a
tiny formal garden.

But the lake, the ol’ swimmin’ hole …

They went swimming, splashing as little as possible and sticking to the
shore. They explored two inlets to the right (a miniature waterfall and
a tiny beach of obviously imported golden sand) and three to the left (a
square-cut one, lined with tile the color of patina, with a black glass
diving tower overhanging water that must have been dredged to twenty
feet; a little beach of snow-white sand; and one they dared not enter,
for fear of harming the fleet of perfect sailing ships, none more than a
foot long, which lay at anchor; but they trod water until they were
bone-cold, gawking at the miniature model waterfront with little
pushcarts in the street, and lamp-posts, and old-fashioned houses) and
then, weary, hungry, and awestruck, they had gone home.

And Sammy cracked the secret he had been keeping—the thing which made
this day an occasion: he was to go wild-hairing off the next day in an
effort to join Chennault in China.

Guy Gibbon, overwhelmed, made the only gesture he could think of: he
devotedly swore he would not go trespassing again until Sammy got back.

“Death from choriocarcinoma,” Dr. Weber began, “is the result of—”

“But he won’t die,” she said. “I won’t let him.”

“My dear,” Dr. Weber was a small man with round shoulders and a hawk’s
face. “I don’t mean to be unkind, but I can use all the euphemisms and
kindle all the false hope, or I can do as you have asked me to
do—explain the condition and make a prognosis. I can’t do both.”

Dr. Rathburn said gently, “Why don’t you go and lie down? I’ll come when
we’ve finished here and tell you all about it.”

“I don’t want to lie down,” she said fiercely. “And I wasn’t asking you
to spare me anything. Dr. Weber, I simply said I would not let him die.
There’s nothing in that statement which keeps you from telling me the
truth.”

Keogh smiled. Weber caught him at it and startled; Keogh saw his
surprise. “I know her better than you do,” he said, with a touch of
pride. “You don’t have to pull any punches.”

“Thanks, Keogh,” she said. She leaned forward. “Go ahead, Dr. Weber.”

Weber looked at her. Snatched from his work two thousand miles away,
brought to a place he had never known existed, of a magnificence which
attacked his confidence in his own eyes, meeting a woman of power—every
sort of power—quite beyond his experience … Weber had thought himself
beyond astonishment. Shock, grief, fear, deprivation like hers he had
seen before, of course; what doctor has not? but when Keogh had told her
baldly that this disease killed in six weeks, _always_, she had
flinched, closed her eyes for an interminable moment, and had then said
softly, “Tell us everything you can about this—this disease. Doctor.”
And she had added, for the first time, “He isn’t going to die. I won’t
let him”; and the way she held her head, the way her full voice handled
the words, he almost believed her. Heaven knows, he wished he could. And
so he found he could be astonished yet again.

He made an effort to detach himself, and became not a man, not this
particular patient’s doctor, but a sort of source-book. He began again:

“Death from choriocarcinoma is a little unlike other deaths from
malignancies. Ordinarily a cancer begins locally, and sends its chains
and masses of wild cells growing through the organ on which it began.
Death can result from the failure of that organ; liver, kidney, brain,
what have you. Or the cancer suddenly breaks up and spreads through the
body, starting colonies, throughout the system. This is called
metastasis. Death results then from the loss of efficiency of many
organs instead of just one. Of course, both these things can happen—the
almost complete impairment of the originally cancerous organ, and
metastatic effects at the same time.

“Chorio, on the other hand, doesn’t originally involve a vital organ.
Vital to the species, perhaps, but not to the individual.” He permitted
himself a dry smile. “This is probably a startling concept, to most
people in this day and age, but it’s nonetheless true. However, sex
cells, at their most basic and primitive, have peculiarities not shared
by other body cells.

“Have you ever heard of the condition known as ectopic pregnancy?” He
directed this question at Keogh, who nodded. “A fertilized ovum fails to
descend to the uterus; instead it attaches itself to the side of the
very fine tube between the ovaries and the womb. And at first everything
proceeds well with it—and this is the point I want you to grasp—because
in spite of the fact that only the uterus is truly specialized for this
work, the tube wall not only supports the growing ovum but feeds it. It
actually forms what we call a counterplacenta; it enfolds the early
fetus and nurtures it. The fetus, of course, has a high survival value,
and is able to get along quite well on the plasma which the
counterplacenta supplies it with. And it grows—it grows fantastically.
Since the tube is very fine—you’d have difficulty getting the smallest
sewing needle up through it—it can no longer contain the growing fetus,
and ruptures. Unless it is removed at that time, the tissues outside
will quite as readily take on the work of a real placenta and uterus,
and in six or seven months, if the mother survives that long, will
create havoc in the abdomen.

“All right then: back to chorio. Since the cells involved are sex cells,
and cancerous to boot, they divide and redivide wildly, without pattern
or special form. They develop in an infinite variety of shapes and sizes
and forms. The law of averages dictates that a certain number of
these—and the number of distorted cells is astronomical—resemble
fertilized ova. Some of them resemble them so closely that I personally
would not enjoy the task of distinguishing between them and the real
thing. However, the body as a whole is not that particular; anything
which even roughly resembles a fertilized egg-cell is capable of
commanding that counterplacenta.

“Now consider the source of these cells—physiologically speaking, gland
tissue—a mass of capillary tubes and blood vessels. Each and every one
of these does its best to accept and nurture these fetal limitations,
down to the tiniest of them. The thin walls of the capillaries, however,
break down easily under such an effort, and the imitations—selectively,
the best of them, too, because the tissues yield most readily to
them—they pass into the capillaries and then into the bloodstream.

“There is one place, and only one place, where they can be combed out;
and it’s a place rich in oxygen, lymph, blood and plasma: the lungs. The
lungs enthusiastically take on the job of forming placentae for these
cells, and nurturing them. But for every segment of lung given over to
gestating an imitation fetus, there is one less segment occupied with
the job of oxygenating blood. Ultimately the lungs fail, and death
results from oxygen starvation.”

Rathburn spoke up. “For years chorio was regarded as a lung disease, and
the cancerous gonads as a sort of side effect.”

“But lung cancer—” Keogh began to object.

“It isn’t lung cancer, don’t you see? Given enough time, it might be,
through metastasis. But there is never enough time. Chorio doesn’t have
to wait for that, to kill. That’s why it’s so swift.” He tried not to
look at the girl, and failed; he said it anyway: “And certain.”

“Just exactly how do you treat it?”

Weber raised his hands and let them fall. It was precisely the gesture
Rathburn had made earlier, and Keogh wondered distantly whether they
taught it in medical schools. “Something to kill the pain. Orchidectomy
might make the patient last a little longer, by removing the supply of
wild cells to the bloodstream. But it wouldn’t save him. Metastasis has
already taken place by the time the first symptom appears. The cancer
becomes generalized … perhaps the lung condition is only God’s mercy.”

“What’s ‘orchidectomy’?” asked Keogh.

“Amputation of the—uh—source,” said Rathburn uncomfortably.

“No!” cried the girl.

Keogh sent her a pitying look. There was that about him which was
cynical, sophisticated, and perhaps coldly angry, at anyone who lived as
he could never live, had what he could never have. It was a stirring of
the grave ancient sin which old Cap’n Gamaliel had isolated in his
perspicacious thoughts. Sure, amputate, if it’ll help, he thought. What
do you think you’re preserving—his virility? What good’s it to you
now?… but sending her the look, he encountered something different from
the romantically based horror and shock he expected. Her thick level
brows were drawn together, her whole face intense with taut
concentration. “Let me think,” she said, oddly.

“You really should—” Rathburn began, but she shushed him with an
impatient gesture. The three men exchanged a glance and settled back; it
was as if someone, something had told them clearly and specifically to
wait. What they were waiting for, they could not imagine.

The girl sat with her eyes closed. A minute crawled by. “Daddy used to
say,” she said, so quietly that she must surely be talking to herself,
“that there’s always a way. All you have to do is think of it.”

There was another long silence and she opened her eyes. There was a
burning down in them somewhere; it made Keogh uneasy. She said, “And
once he told me that I could have anything I wanted; all it had to be
was … possible. And … the only way you can find out if a thing is
impossible is to try it.”

“That wasn’t Sam Wyke,” said Keogh. “That was Keogh.”

She wet her lips and looked at them each in turn. She seemed not to see
them at all. “I’m not going to let him die,” she said. “You’ll see.”

Sammy Stein came back two years later, on leave, and full of plans to
join the Army Air Force. He’d had, as he himself said, the hell kicked
out of him in China and a lot of the hellishness as well. But there was
enough of the old Sammy left to make wild wonderful plans about going
trespassing; and they knew just where they were going. The new Sammy,
however, demanded a binge and a broad first.

Guy, two years out of high school, working for a living, and by nature
neither binger nor wencher, went along only too gladly. Sam seemed to
have forgotten about the “ol swimmin’ hole” at first, and halfway
through the evening, in a local bar-and-dance emporium, Guy was about to
despair of his ever remembering it, when Sam himself brought it up,
recalling to Guy that he had once written Sam a letter asking Sam if it
had really happened. Guy had, in his turn, forgotten the letter, and
after that they had a good time with “remember-when”—and they made plans
to go trespassing the very next day, and bring a lunch. And start early.

Then there was a noisy involvement with some girls, and a lot more
drinks, and out of the haze and movement somewhere after midnight, Guy
emerged on a sidewalk looking at Sammy shoveling a girl into a taxicab.
“Hey!” he called out, “what about the you know, ol’ swimmin’ hole?”

“Call me Abacus, you can count on me,” said Sammy, and laughed
immoderately. The girl with him pulled at his arm; he shook her off and
weaved over to Guy. “Listen,” he said, and gave a distorted wink, “if
this makes—and it will—I’m starting no early starts. Tell you what, you
go on out there and meet me by that sign says keep out or we’ll
castigate you. Say eleven o’clock. If I can’t make it by then I’m dead
or something.” He bellowed at the cab, “You gon’ kill me, honey?” and
the girl called back, “I will if you don’t get into this taxi.” “See
what I mean?” said Sammy in a grand drunken non-sequitur, “I got to go
get killed.” He zigged away, needing no zag because even walking
sidewise he reached the cab in a straight line, and Guy saw no more of
him that leave.

That was hard to take, mostly because there was no special moment at
which he knew Sammy wasn’t coming. He arrived ten minutes late, after
making a super-human effort to get there. His stomach was sour from the
unaccustomed drinking, and he was sandy-eyed and ache-jointed from lack
of sleep. He knew that the greater probability was Sammy had not arrived
yet or would not at all; yet the nagging possibility existed that he had
come early and gone straight in. Guy waited around for a full hour, and
some more minutes until the little road was clear of traffic and sounds
of traffic, and then plunged alone into the woods, past the NO
ADMITTANCE sign, and in to the wall. He had trouble finding the two
trees, and once over the wall, he could not get his bearings for a
while; he was pleased, of course, to find the unbelievably perfect lawns
still there by the flawless acre, the rigidly controlled museums of
carven box, the edge-trimmed, rolled-gravel walks meandering prettily
through the woods. The pleasure, however, was no more than confirmation
of his memory, and went no further; the day was spoiled.

Guy reached the lake at nearly one o’clock, hot, tired, ravenously
hungry and unpleasantly nervous. The combination hit him in the stomach
and made it echo; he sat down on the bank and ate. He wolfed down the
food he had brought for himself and Sammy’s as well—odds and ends
carelessly tossed into a paper sack in the bleary early hours. The cake
was moldy but he ate it anyway. The orange juice was warm and had begun
to ferment. And stubbornly, he determined to swim, because that was what
he had come for.

He chose the beach with the golden sand. Under a thick cover of junipers
he found a stone bench and table. He undressed here and scuttled across
the beach and into the water.

He had meant it to be a mere dip, so he could say he’d done it. But
around the little headland to the left was the rectangular cove with the
diving platform; and he remembered the harbor of model ships; and then
movement diagonally across the foot of the lake’s L caught his eye, and
he saw models—not the anchored ships this time, but racing sloops, which
put out from an inlet and crossed its mouth and sailed in again; they
must be mounted on some sort of underwater wheel or endless chain, and
moved as the breeze took them. He all but boiled straight across to
them, then decided to be wise and go round.

He swam to the left and the rocky shore, and worked his way along it.
Clinging close (the water seemed bottomless here) he rounded the point
and came face to face (literally; they touched) with a girl.

She was young—near his age—and his first impression was of eyes of too
complex an architecture, blue-white teeth with pointed canines quite
unlike the piano-key regularity considered beautiful in these times, and
a wide cape of rich brown hair afloat around her shoulders. By then his
gasp was completed, and in view of the fact that in gasping he had
neglected to remove his mouth from the water, he was shut off from
outside impressions for a strangling time, until he felt a firm grasp on
his left biceps and found himself returned to the side of the rock.

“Th-thanks,” he said hoarsely as she swam back a yard and trod water.
“I’m not supposed to be here,” he added inanely.

“I guess I’m not either. But I thought you lived here. I thought you
were a faun.”

“Boy am I glad to hear that. I mean about you. All I am is a trespasser.
Boy.”

“I’m not a boy.”

“It was just a finger of speech,” he said, using one of the silly
expressions which come to a person as he grows, and blessedly pass. She
seemed not to react to it at all, for she said gravely, “You have the
most beautiful eyes I have ever seen. They are made of aluminum. And
your hair is all wiggly.”

He could think of nothing to say to that, but tried; all that emerged
was, “Well, it’s early yet,” and suddenly they were laughing together.
She was so strange, so different. She spoke in a grave, unaccented, and
utterly incautious idiom as if she thought strange thoughts and spoke
them right out. “Also,” she said, “you have lovely lips. They’re pale
blue. You ought to get out of the water.”

“I can’t!”

She considered that for a moment, treading away from him and then back
to the yard’s distance. “Where are your things?”

He pointed across the narrow neck of the lake which he had
circumnavigated.

“Wait for me over there,” she said, and suddenly swam close, so close
she could dip her chin and look straight into his eyes. “You got to,”
she said fiercely.

“Oh I will,” he promised, and struck out for the opposite shore. She
hung to the rock, watching him.

Swimming, reaching hard, stretching for distance warmed him, and the
chill and its accompanying vague ache diminished. Then he had a twinge
of stomach-ache, and he drew up his knees to ease it. When he tried to
extend himself again, he could, but it hurt too much. He drew up his
knees again, and the pain followed inward so that to flex again was out
of the question. He drew his knees up still tighter, and tighter still
followed the pain. He needed air badly by then, threw up his head, tried
to roll over on his back; but with his knees drawn up, everything came
out all wrong. He inhaled at last because he had to, but the air was
gone away somewhere; he floundered upward for it until the pressure in
his ears told him he was swimming downward. Blackness came upon him and
receded, and came again; he let it come for a tired instant, and was
surrounded by light, and drew one lungful of air and one of water, and
got the blackness again; this time it stayed with him …

Still beautiful in her bed, but morphine-clouded, fly-papered, and
unstruggling in viscous sleep, he lay with monsters swarming in his
veins …

Quietly, in a corner of the room, she spoke with Keogh:

“You don’t understand me. You didn’t understand me yesterday when I
cried out at the idea of that—that operation. Keogh, I love him, but I’m
_me_. Loving him doesn’t mean I’ve stopped thinking. Loving him means
I’m more me than ever, not less. It means I can do anything I did
before, only more, only better. That’s why I fell in love with him.
That’s why I am in love with him. Weren’t you ever in love, Keogh?”

He looked at the way her hair fell, and the earnest placement of her
thick soft brows, and he said, “I haven’t thought much about it.”

“There’s always a way. All you have to do is think of it,” she quoted.
“Keogh, I’ve accepted what Dr. Rathburn said. After I left you I went to
the library and tore the heart out of some books … they’re right.
Rathburn and Weber. And I’ve thought and I’ve thought … trying the way
Daddy would, to turn everything upside down and backwards, to look for a
new way of thinking. He won’t die, Keogh; I’m not going to let him die.”

“You said you accepted—”

“Oh, part of him. Most of him, if you like. We all die, bit by bit, all
the time, and it doesn’t bother us because most of the dead parts are
replaced. He’ll … he’ll lose more parts, sooner, but—after it’s over,
he’ll be himself again.” She said it with superb confidence—perhaps it
was childlike. If so, it was definitely not childish.

“You have an idea,” said Keogh positively. As he had pointed out to the
doctors, he knew her.

“All those—those things in his blood,” she said quietly. “The struggle
they go through … they’re trying to survive; did you ever think of it
that way, Keogh? They want to live. They want most terribly to go on
living.”

“I hadn’t thought about it.”

“His body wants them to live too. It welcomes them wherever they lodge.
Dr. Weber said so.”

“You’ve got hold of something,” said Keogh flatly, “and whatever it is I
don’t think I like it.”

“I don’t want you to like it,” she said in the same strange quiet voice.
He looked swiftly at her and saw again the burning deep in her eyes. He
had to look away. She said, “I want you to hate it. I want you to fight
it. You have one of the most wonderful minds I have ever known, Keogh,
and I want you to think up every argument you can think of against it.
For every argument I’ll find an answer, and then we’ll know what to do.”

“You’d better go ahead,” he said reluctantly.

“I had a pretty bad quarrel with Dr. Weber this morning,” she said
suddenly.

“This m—when?” He looked at his watch; it was still early.

“About three, maybe four. In his room. I went there and woke him up.”

“Look, you don’t do things like that to Weber!”

“I do. Anyway, he’s gone.”

He rose to his feet, the rare bright patches of anger showing in his
cheeks. He took a breath, let it out, and sat down again. “You’d better
tell me about it.”

“In the library,” she said, “there’s a book on genetics and it mentions
some experiments on Belgian hares. The does were impregnated without
sperm, with some sort of saline or alkaline solution.”

“I remember something about it.” He was well used to her circuitous way
of approaching something important. She built conversational points, not
like a hired contractor, but like an architect. Sometimes she brought in
portions of her lumber and stacked them beside the structure. If she
ever did that, it was material she needed and would use. He waited.

“The does gave birth to baby rabbits, all female. The interesting thing
was that they were identical to each other and to the mother. Even the
blood-vessel patterns in the eyeball were so similar that an expert
might be fooled by photographs of them. ‘Impossibly similar’ is what one
of the experimenters called it. They had to be identical because
everything they inherited was from the mother. I woke Dr. Weber up to
tell him about that.

“And he told you he’d read the book.”

“He wrote it,” she said gently. “And then I told him that if he could do
that with a Belgian hare, he could do it with—” she nodded toward her
big bed—“him.”

Then she was quiet, while Keogh rejected the idea, found it stuck to his
mind’s hand, not to be shaken off; brought it to his mind’s eye and
shuddered away from it, shook again and failed, slowly brought it close
and turned it over, and turned it again.

“Take one of those—those things like fertilized ova—make it grow …”

“You don’t _make_ it grow. It wants desperately to grow. And not one of
them, Keogh. You have thousands. You have hundreds more every hour.”

“Oh my God.”

“It came to me when Dr. Rathburn suggested the operation. It came to me
all at once, a miracle. If you love someone that much,” she said,
looking at the sleeper, “miracles happen. But you have to be willing to
help them happen.” She looked at him directly, with an intensity that
made him move back in his chair. “I can have anything I want—all it has
to be is possible. We just have to make it possible. That’s why I went
to Dr. Weber this morning. To ask him.”

“He said it wasn’t possible.”

“He said that at first. After a half hour or so he said the odds against
it were in the billions or trillions … but you see, as soon as he said
that, he was saying it was possible.”

“What did you do then?”

“I dared him to try.”

“And that’s why he left?”

“Yes.”

“You’re mad,” he said before he could stop himself. She seemed not to
resent it. She sat calmly, waiting.

“Look,” said Keogh at last, “Weber said those distorted—uh—_things_ were
_like_ fertilized ova. He never said they were. He could have said—well,
I’ll say it for him—they’re _not_ fertilized ova.”

“Bat he did say they were—some of them, anyway, and especially those
that reached the lungs—were very much like ova. How close do you have to
get before there’s no real difference at all?”

“It can’t be. It just can’t.”

“Weber said that. And I asked him if he had ever tried.”

“All right, all right! It can’t happen, but just to keep this silly
argument going, suppose you got something that would grow. You won’t, of
course. But if you did, how would you keep it growing? It has to be fed,
it has to be kept at a certain critical temperature, a certain amount of
acid or alkali will kill it … you don’t just plant something like that
in the yard.”

“Already they’ve taken ova from one cow, planted them in another, and
gotten calves. There’s a man in Australia who plans to raise blooded
cattle from scrub cows that way.”

“You _have_ done your homework.”

“Oh, that isn’t all. There’s a Dr. Carrel in New Jersey who has been
able to keep chicken tissue alive for months—he says indefinitely—in a
nutrient solution, in a temperature-controlled jar in his lab. It grows,
Keogh! It grows so much he has to cut it away every once in a while.”

“This is crazy. This is—it’s insane,” he growled. “And what do you think
you’ll get if you bring one of these monsters to term?”

“We’ll bring thousands of them to term,” she said composedly. “And one
of them will be_—him_.” She leaned forward abruptly, and her even tone
of voice broke; a wildness grew through her face and voice, and though
it was quiet, it shattered him: “It will be his flesh, the pattern of
him, his own substance grown again. His hair, Keogh. His fingerprints.
His—eyes. His—his _self_.”

“I can’t—” Keogh shook himself like a wet spaniel, but it changed
nothing; he was still here, she, the bed, the sleeper, and this
dreadful, this inconceivably horrible, wrong idea.

She smiled then, put out her hand and touched him; incredibly, it was a
mother’s smile, warm and comforting, a mother’s loving, protective
touch; her voice was full of affection. “Keogh, if it won’t work, it
won’t work, no matter what we do. Then you’ll be right. I think it will
work. It’s what I want. Don’t you want me to have what I want?”

He had to smile, and she smiled back. “You’re a young devil,” he said
ardently. “Got me coming and going, haven’t you? Why did you want me to
fight it?”

“I didn’t,” she said, “but if you fight me, you’ll come up with problems
nobody else could possibly think of, and once we’ve thought of them,
we’ll be ready, don’t you see? I’ll fight with you, Keogh,” she said,
shifting her strange bright spectrum from tenderness to a quiet,
convinced, invincible certainty. “I’ll fight with you, I’ll lift and
carry, I’ll buy and sell and kill if I have to, but I am going to bring
him back. You know something, Keogh?”

She waved her hand in a gesture that included him, the room, the castle
and grounds and all the other castle and grounds; the pseudonyms, the
ships and trains, the factories and exchanges, the mountains and acres
and mines and banks and the thousands of people which, taken together,
were Wyke: “I always knew that all this _was_,” she said, “and I’ve come
to understand that this is mine. But I used to wonder sometimes, what it
was all _for_. Now I know. Now I know.”

A mouth on his mouth, a weight on his stomach. He felt boneless and
nauseated, limp as grease drooling. The light around him was green, and
all shapes blurred.

The mouth on his mouth, the weight on his stomach, a breath of air,
welcome but too warm, too moist. He needed it desperately but did not
like it, and found a power-plant full of energy to gather it up in his
lungs and fling it away; but his weakness so filtered all that effort
that it emerged in a faint bubbling sigh.

The mouth on his mouth again, and the weight on his stomach and another
breath. He tried to turn his head but someone held him by the nose. He
blew out the needed, unsatisfactory air and replaced it by a little gust
of his own inhalation. On this he coughed; it was too rich, pure, too
good. He coughed as one does over a pickle-barrel; good air hurt his
lungs.

He felt his head and shoulders lifted, shifted, by which he learned that
he had been flat on his back on stone, or something flat and quite that
hard, and was now on smooth, firm softness. The good sharp air came and
went, his weak coughs fewer, until he fell into a dazed peace. The face
that bent over his was too close to focus, or he had lost the power to
focus; either way, he didn’t care. Drowsily he stared up into the
blurred brightness of that face and listened uncritically to the voice—

—the voice crooning wordlessly and comfortingly, and somehow, in its
wordlessness, creating new expressions for joy and delight for which
words would not do. Then after all there were words, half sung, half
whispered; and he couldn’t catch them, and he couldn’t catch them and
then … and then he was sure he heard: “How could it be, such a magic as
this: all this and the eyes as well …” Then, demanding, “You are the
shape of the not-you; tell me, are _you_ in there?”

He opened his eyes wide and saw her face clearly at last and the dark
hair, and the eyes were green—true deep sea-green. Her tangled hair,
drying, crowned her like vines, and the leafy roof close above seemed
part of her and the green eyes, and threw green light on the
unaccountably blond transparency of her cheeks. He genuinely did not
know, at the moment, what she was. She had said to him (was it years
ago?) “I thought you were a faun …” He had not, at the moment, much
consciousness, not to say whimsy, at his command; she was simply
something unrelated to anything in his experience.

He was aware of gripping, twisting pain rising, filling, about to
explode in his upper abdomen. Some thick wire within him had kinked, and
knowing well that it should be unbent, he made a furious, rebellious
effort and pulled it through. The explosion came, but in nausea, not in
agony. Convulsively he turned his head, surged upward, and let it go.

He saw with too much misery to be horrified the bright vomit surging on
and around her knee, and running into the crevice between thigh and calf
where she had her leg bent and tucked under her, and the clots left
there as the fluid ran away. And she—

She sat where she was, held his head, cradled him in her arms, soothed
him and crooned to him and said that was good, good; he’d feel better
now. The weakness floored him and receded; then shakily he pressed away
from her, sat up, bowed his head and gasped for breath. “Whooo,” he
said.

“Boy,” she said; and she said it in exact concert with him. He clung to
his shins and wiped the nausea-tears from his left eye, then his right,
on his knee-cap. “Boy oh boy,” he said, and she said it with him in
concert.

So at last he looked at her.

He looked at her, and would never forget what he saw, and exactly the
way it was. Late sunlight made into lace by the bower above clothed her;
she leaned toward him, one small hand flat on the ground, one slim
supporting arm straight and straight down; her weight turned up that
shoulder and her head tilted toward it as if drawn down by the heavy
darkness of her hair. It gave a sense of yielding, as if she were
fragile, which he knew she was not. Her other hand lay open across one
knee, the palm up and the fingers not quite relaxed, as if they held
something; and indeed they did, for a spot of light, gold turned coral
by her flesh, lay in her palm. She held it just so, just right,
unconsciously, and her hand held that rare knowledge that closed, a hand
may not give nor receive. For his lifetime he had it all, each tiniest
part, even to the gleaming big toenail at the underside of her other
calf. And she was smiling, and her complex eyes adored.

Guy Gibbon knew his life’s biggest moment during the moment itself, a
rarity in itself, and of all times of life, it was time to say the
unforgettable, for anything he said now would be.

He shuddered, and then smiled back at her. “Oh … _boy_,” he breathed.

And again they were laughing together until, puzzled, he stopped and
asked, “Where am I?”

She would not answer, so he closed his eyes and puzzled it out. Pine
bower … undress somewhere … swimming. Oh, swimming. And then across the
lake, and he had met—He opened his eyes and looked at her and said,
“You.” Then swimming back, cold, his gut full of too much food and warm
juice and moldy cake to boot, and, “… you must have saved my life.”

“Well somebody had to. You were dead.”

“I should’ve been.”

“No!” she cried. “Don’t you ever say that again!” And he could see she
was absolutely serious.

“I only meant, for stupidity. I ate a lot of junk, and some cake I think
was moldy. Too much, when I was hot and tired, and then like a bonehead
I went right into the water, so anybody who does that deserves to—”

“I meant it,” she said levelly, “never again. Didn’t you ever hear of
the old tradition of the field of battle, when one man saved another’s
life, that life became his to do what he wanted with?”

“What do you want to do with mine?”

“That depends,” she said thoughtfully. “You have to give it. I can’t
just take it.” She knelt then and sat back on her heels, her hands
trailing pine-needles across the bower’s paved stone floor. She bowed
her head and her hair swung forward. He thought she was watching him
through it; he could not be sure.

He said, and the thought grew so large that it quelled his voice and
made him whisper. “Do you want it?”

“Oh, yes,” she said, whispering too. When he moved to her and put her
hair back to see if she was watching him, he found her eyes closed, and
tears pressed through. He reached for her gently, but before he could
touch her she sprang up and straight at the leafy wall. Her long golden
body passed through it without a sound, and seemed to hang suspended
outside; then it was gone. He put his head through and saw her flashing
along under green water. He hesitated, then got an acrid whiff of his
own vomit. The water looked clean and the golden sand just what he ached
to scrub himself with. He climbed out of the bower and floundered
clumsily down the bank and into the water.

After his first plunge he came up and spun about, looking for her, but
she was gone.

Numbly he swam to the tiny beach and, kneeling, scoured himself with the
fine sand. He dove and rinsed, and then (hoping) scrubbed himself all
over again. And rinsed. But he did not see her.

He stood in the late rays of the sun to dry, and looked off across the
lake. His heart leapt when he saw white movement, and sank again as he
saw it was just the wheel of boats bobbing and sliding there.

He plodded up to the bower—now at last he saw it was the one behind
which he had undressed—and he sank down on the bench.

This was a place where tropical fish swam in ocean water where there was
no ocean, and where fleets of tiny perfect boats sailed with no one
sailing them and no one watching, and where priceless statues stood
hidden in clipped and barbered glades deep in the woods and—and he
hadn’t seen it all; what other impossibilities were possible in this
impossible place?

And besides, he’d been sick. (He wrinkled his nostrils.) Damn
near … drowned. Out of his head for sure, for a while anyway. She
couldn’t be real. Hadn’t he noticed a greenish cast to her flesh, or was
that just the light?… anybody who could make a place like this, run a
place like this, could jimmy up some kind of machine to hypnotize you
like in the science fiction stories.

He stirred uneasily. Maybe someone was watching him, even now.

Hurriedly, he began to dress.

So she wasn’t real. Or maybe all of it wasn’t real. He’d bumped into
that other trespasser across the lake there, and that was real, but then
when he’d almost drowned, he’d dreamed up the rest.

Only—he touched his mouth. He’d dreamed up someone blowing the breath
back into him. He’d heard about that somewhere, but it sure wasn’t what
they were teaching this year at the Y.

_You are the shape of the not-you. Are you in there?_

What did that mean?

He finished dressing dazedly. He muttered, “What’d I hafta go an’ eat
that goddamn cake for?” He wondered what he would tell Sammy. If she
wasn’t real, Sammy wouldn’t know what he was talking about. If she was
real there’s only one thing he would talk about, yes, and from then on.
You mean you had her in that place and all you did was throw up on her?
No—he wouldn’t tell Sammy. Or anybody.

And he’d be a bachelor all his life.

Boy oh boy. What an introduction. First she has to save your life and
then you don’t know what to say and then oh, look what you had to go and
do. But anyway—she wasn’t real.

He wondered what her name was. Even if she wasn’t real. Lots of people
don’t use their real names.

He climbed out of the bower and crossed the silent pine carpet behind
it, and he shouted. It was not a word at all, and had nothing about it
that tried to make it one.

She was standing there waiting for him. She wore a quiet brown dress and
low heels and carried a brown leather pocketbook, and her hair was
braided and tied neatly and sedately in a coronet. She looked, too, as
if she had turned down some inward tone control so that her skin did not
radiate. She looked ready to disappear, not into thin air, but into a
crowd—any crowd, as soon as she could get close to one. In a crowd he
would have walked right past her, certainly, but for the shape of her
eyes. She stepped up to him quickly and laid her hand on his cheek and
laughed up at him. Again he saw the whiteness of those unusual eyeteeth,
so sharp … “You’re blushing!” she said.

No blusher in history was ever stopped by that observation. He asked,
“Which way do you go?”

She looked at his eyes, one, the other, both, quickly; then folded her
long hands together around the strap of her pocketbook and looked down
at them.

“With you,” she said softly.

This was only one of the many things she said to him, moment by moment,
which gained meaning for him as time went on. He took her back to town
and to dinner and then to the West Side address she gave him and they
stood outside it all night talking. In six weeks they were married.

“How could I argue?” said Weber to Dr. Rathburn.

They stood together watching a small army of workmen swarming over the
gigantic stone barn a quarter-mile from the castle, which, incidentally,
was invisible from this point and unknown to the men. Work had begun at
three the previous afternoon, continued all night. There was nothing,
nothing at all that Dr. Weber had specified which was not only given
him, but on the site or already installed.

“I know,” said Rathburn, who did.

“Not only, how could I argue,” said Weber, “why should I? A man has
plans, ambitions. That Keogh, what an approach! That’s the first thing
he went after—my plans for myself. That’s where he starts. And suddenly
everything you ever wanted to do or be or have is handed to you or
promised to you, and no fooling about the promise either.”

“_Oh_ no. They don’t need to fool anybody … You want to pass a
prognosis?”

“You mean on the youngster there?” He looked at Rathburn. “Oh no—that’s
not what you mean. You’re asking me if I can bring one of those
surrogate fetuses to term. An opinion like that would make a damn fool
out of a man, and this is no job for a damn fool. All I can tell you is,
I tried it—and that is something I wouldn’t’ve dreamed of doing if it
hadn’t been for her and her crazy idea. I left here at four a.m. with
some throat smears and by nine I had a half dozen of them isolated and
in nutrient solution. Beef blood plasma—the quickest thing I could get
ready. And I got mitosis. They divided, and in a few hours I could see
two of ’em dimpling to form the gastrosphore. That was evidence enough
to get going; that’s all I think and that’s all I told them on the
phone. And by the time I got here,” he added, waving toward the big
barn, “there’s a research lab four fifths built, big enough for a city
medical center. Argue?” he demanded, returning to Dr. Rathburn’s
original question. “How could I argue? Why should I?… And that _girl_.
She’s a force, like gravity. She can turn on so much pressure, and I
mean by herself and personally, that she could probably get anything in
the world she wanted even if she didn’t own it, the world I mean. Put
that in the northeast entrance!” he bellowed at a foreman. “I’ll be down
to show you just where it goes.” He turned to Rathburn; he was a man on
fire. “I got to go.”

“Anything I can do,” said Dr. Rathburn, “just say it.”

“That’s the wonderful part of it,” said Weber. “That’s what everybody
around here keeps saying, and they mean it!” He trotted down toward the
barn, and Rathburn turned toward the castle.

About a month after his last venture at trespassing, Guy Gibbon was
coming home from work when a man at the corner put away a newspaper and,
still folding it, said, “Gibbon?”

“That’s right,” said Guy, a little sharply.

The man looked him up and down, quickly, but giving an impression of
such thoroughness, efficiency, and experience that Guy would not have
been surprised to learn that the man had not only catalogued his clothes
and their source, their state of maintenance and a computation therefrom
of his personal habits, but also his state of health and even his blood
type. “My name’s Keogh,” said the man. “Does that mean anything to you?”

“No.”

“Sylva never mentioned the name?”

“Sylva! N-no, she didn’t.”

“Let’s go somewhere and have a drink. I’d like to talk to you.”
Something had pleased this man. Guy wondered what. “Well, okay,” he
said. “Only I don’t drink much, but well, okay.”

They found a bar in the neighborhood with booths, in the back. Keogh had
a Scotch and soda and Guy, after some hesitation, ordered a beer. Guy
said, “You know her?”

“Most of her life. Do you?”

“What? Well, sure. We’re going to get married.” He looked studiously
into his beer and said uncomfortably, “What are you anyway, Mr. Keogh?”

“You might say,” said Keogh, “I’m _in loco parentis_.” He waited for a
response, then added, “Sort of a guardian.”

“She never said anything about a guardian.”

“I can understand that. What has she told you about herself?”

Guy’s discomfort descended to a level of shyness, diffidence, even a
touch of fear—which did not alter the firmness of his words, however
they were spoken. “I don’t know you, Mr. Keogh. I don’t think I ought to
answer any questions about Sylva. Or me. Or anything.” He looked up at
the man. Keogh searched deeply, then smiled. It was an unpracticed and
apparently slightly painful process with him, but was genuine for all
that. “Good!” he barked, and rose. “Come on.” He left the booth and Guy,
more than a little startled, followed. They went to the phone booth in
the corner. Keogh dropped in a nickel, dialed, and waited, his eyes
fixed on Guy. Then Guy had to listen to one side of the conversation:

“I’m here with Guy Gibbon.” (Guy had to notice that Keogh identified
himself only with his voice.)

“… Of course I knew about it. That’s a silly question, girl.”

“… Because it _is_ my business. _You_ are my business.”

“… Stop it? I’m not trying to stop anything. I just have to know, that’s
all.”

“… All right. All right … He’s here. He won’t talk about you or
anything, which is good. Yes, very good. Will you please tell him to
open up?”

And he handed the receiver to a startled Guy, who said tremulously, “Uh,
hello,” to it while watching Keogh’s impassive face.

Her voice suffused and flooded him, changed this whole unsettling
experience to something different and good. “Guy, darling.”

“Sylva—”

“It’s all right. I should have told you sooner, I guess. It had to come
some time. Guy, you can tell Keogh anything you like. Anything he asks.”

“Why, honey? Who is he, anyway?”

There was a pause, then a strange little laugh. “He can explain that
better than I can. You want us to be married, Guy?”

“Oh yes!”

“Well all right then. Nobody can change that, nobody but you. And
listen, Guy. I’ll live anywhere, any way you want to live. That’s the
real truth and all of it, do you believe me?”

“I always believe you.”

“All right then. So that’s what we’ll do. Now you go and talk to Keogh.
Tell him anything he wants to know. He has to do the same. I love you,
Guy.”

“Me too,” said Guy, watching Keogh’s face. “Well, okay then,” he added
when she said nothing further. “Bye.” He hung up and he and Keogh had a
long talk.

“It hurts him,” she whispered to Dr. Rathburn.

“I know.” He shook his head sympathetically. “There’s just so much
morphine you can rain into a man, though.”

“Just a little more?”

“Maybe a little,” he said sadly. He went to his bag and got the needle.
Sylva kissed the sleeping man tenderly and left the room. Keogh was
waiting for her.

He said, “This has got to stop, girl.”

“Why?” she responded ominously.

“Let’s get out of here.”

She had known Keogh so long, and so well, that she was sure he had no
surprises for her. But this voice, this look, these were something new
in Keogh. He held the door for her, so she preceded him through it and
then went where he silently led.

They left the castle and took the path through a heavy copse and over
the brow of the hill which overlooked the barn. The parking lot, which
had once been a barnyard, was full of automobiles. A white ambulance
approached; another was unloading at the northeast platform. A muffled
generator purred somewhere behind the building, and smoke rose from the
stack of the new stone boiler room at the side. They both looked avidly
at the building but did not comment. The path took them along the crest
of the hill and down toward the lake. They went to a small forest
clearing in which stood an eight-foot Diana, the huntress Diana, chaste
and fleet-footed, so beautifully finished she seemed not like marble at
all, not like anything cold or static. “I always had the idea,” said
Keogh, “that nobody can lie anywhere near her.”

She looked up at the Diana.

“Not even to themselves,” said Keogh, and plumped down on a marble
bench.

“Let’s have it,” she said.

“You want to make Guy Gibbon happen all over again. It’s a crazy idea
and it’s a big one too. But lots of things were crazier, and some
bigger, and now they’re commonplace. I won’t argue on how crazy it is,
or how big.”

“What then?”

“I’ve been trying, the last day or so, to back way out, far off, get a
look at this thing with some perspective. Sylva, you’ve forgotten
something.”

“Good,” she said. “Oh, good. I knew you’d think of things like this
before it was too late.”

“So you can find a way out?” Slowly he shook his head. “Not this time.
Tighten up the Wyke guts, girl, and make up your mind to quit.”

“Go ahead.”

“It’s just this. I don’t believe you’re going to get your carbon copy,
mind you, but you just might. I’ve been talking to Weber, and by God you
just about might. But if you do, all you’ve got is a container, and
nothing to fill it with. Look, girl, a man isn’t blood and bone and body
cells, and that’s all.”

He paused, until she said, “Go on, Keogh.”

He demanded, “You love this guy?”

“Keogh!” She was amused.

“Whaddaya love?” he barked. “That skrinkly hair? The muscles, skin? His
nat’ral equipment? The eyes, voice?”

“All that,” she said composedly.

“All that, and that’s all?” he demanded relentlessly. “Because if your
answer is yes, you can have what you want, and more power to you, and
good riddance. I don’t know anything about love, but I will say this:
that if that’s all there is to it, the hell with it.”

“Well of _course_ there’s more.”

“Ah. And where are you going to get that, girl? Listen, a man is the
skin and bone he stands in, plus what’s in his head, plus what’s in his
heart. You mean to reproduce Guy Gibbon, but you’re not going to do it
by duplicating his carcass. You want to duplicate the whole man, you’re
going to have to make him live the same life again. And that you can’t
do.”

She looked up at the Diana for a long time. Then, “Why not?” she
breathed.

“I’ll tell you why not,” he said angrily. “Because first of all you have
to find out _who he is_.”

“I know who he is!”

He spat explosively on the green moss by the bench. It was totally
uncharacteristic and truly shocking. “You don’t know a particle, and I
know even less. I had his back against a wall one time for better than
two hours, trying to find out who he is. He’s just another kid, is all.
Nothing much in school, nothing much at sports, same general tastes and
feelings as six zillion other ones like him. Why him, Sylva? Why him?
What did you ever see in a guy like that to be worth the marrying?”

“I … didn’t know you disliked him.”

“Oh hell, girl, I don’t! I never said that. I can’t—can’t even find
anything to dislike.”

“You don’t know him the way I do.”

“There, I agree. I don’t and I couldn’t. Because you don’t know anything
either—you _feel_, but you don’t _know_. If you want to see Guy Gibbon
again, or a reasonable facsimile, he’s going to have to live by a script
from the day he’s born. He’ll have to duplicate every experience that
this kid here ever had.”

“All right,” she said quietly.

He looked at her, stunned. He said, “And before he can do that, we have
to write the script. And before we can write it, we have to get the
material somehow. What do you expect to do—set up a foundation or
something dedicated to the discovery of each and every moment this—this
unnoticeable young man ever lived through? And do it secretly, because
while he’s growing up he can’t ever know? Do you know how much that
would cost, how many people it would involve?”

“That would be all right,” she said.

“And suppose you had it, a biography written like a script, twenty years
of a lifetime, every day, every hour you could account for; now you’re
going to have to arrange for a child, from birth, to be surrounded by
people who are going to play this script out—and who will never let
anything else happen to him but what’s in the script and who will never
let him know.”

“That’s it! That’s it!” she cried.

He leapt to his feet and swore at her. He said, “I’m not planning this,
you lovestruck lunatic, I’m objecting to it!”

“Is there anymore?” she cried eagerly. “Keogh, Keogh, try—try hard. How
do we start? What do we do first? Quick, Keogh.”

He looked at her, thunderstruck, and at last sank down on the bench and
began to laugh weakly. She sat by him, held his hand, her eyes shining.
After a time he sobered, and turned to her. He drank the shine of those
eyes for awhile; and after, his brain began to function again … on Wyke
business …

“The main source of who he is and what he’s done,” he said at last,
“won’t be with us much longer … We better go tell Rathburn to get him
off the morphine. He has to be able to think.”

“All right,” she said. “All right.”

When the pain got too much to permit him to remember any more, they
tried a little morphine again. For a while they found a balance between
recollection and agony, but the agony gained. Then they severed his
spinal cord so he couldn’t feel it. They brought in people—psychiatrist,
stenographers, even a professional historian.

In the rebuilt barn, Weber tried animal hosts, cows even, and
primates—everything he could think of. He got some results, though no
good ones. He tried humans too. He couldn’t cross the bridge of body
tolerance; the uterus will not support an alien fetus any more than the
hand will accept the graft of another’s finger.

So he tried nutrient solutions. He tried a great many. Ultimately he
found one that worked. It was the blood plasma of pregnant women.

He placed the best of the quasi-ova between sheets of sterilized
chamois. He designed automatic machinery to drip the plasma in at
arterial tempo, drain it at venous rate, keep it at body temperature.

One day fifty of them died, because of the chloroform used in one of the
adhesives. When light seemed to affect them adversely, Weber designed
containers of bakelite. When ordinary photography proved impractical, he
designed a new kind of film sensitive to heat, the first infrared film.

The viable fetuses he had at sixty days showed the eye-spot, the spine,
the buds of arms, a beating heart. Each and every one of them consumed,
or was bathed in, over a gallon of plasma a day, and at one point there
were one hundred and seventy-four thousand of them. Then they began to
die off—some malformed, some chemically unbalanced, many for reasons too
subtle even for Weber and his staff.

When he had done all he could, when he could only wait and see, he had
fetuses seven months along and growing well. There were twenty-three of
them. Guy Gibbon was dead quite a while by then, and his widow came to
see Weber and tiredly put down a stack of papers and reports, urged him
to read, begged him to call her as soon as he had.

He read them, he called her. He refused what she asked.

She got hold of Keogh. He refused to have anything to do with such an
idea. She made him change his mind. Keogh made Weber change his mind.

The stone barn hummed with construction again, and new machinery. The
cold tank was four by six feet inside, surrounded by coils and sensing
devices. They put her in it.

By that time the fetuses were eight and a half months along. There were
four left. One made it.

_Author’s note:_ To the reader, but especially to the reader in his
early twenties, let me ask: did you ever have the feeling that you were
getting pushed around? Did you ever want to do something, and have all
sorts of obstacles thrown in your way until you had to give up, while on
the other hand some other thing you wanted, was made easy for you? Did
you ever feel that certain strangers know who you are? Did you ever meet
a girl who made you explode inside, who seemed to like you—and who was
mysteriously plucked out of your life, as if she shouldn’t be in the
script?

Well, we’ve all had these feelings. Yet if you’ve read the above, you’ll
allow it’s a little more startling than just a story. It reads like an
analogy, doesn’t it? I mean, it doesn’t have to be a castle, or the ol’
swimmin’ hole, and the names have been changed to protect the
innocent … author.

Because it could be about time for her to wake up, aged only two or
three years for her twenty-year cold sleep. And when she meets you, it’s
going to be the biggest thing that ever happened to you since the last
time.



HOLDUP À LA CARTE


Gladys McGonigle, who was known as Happy, was not.

She stood behind the counter of Hart Calway’s restaurant, and cried. In
her hand was the bakelite grip of a glass coffee-maker. At her feet were
the glittering shards of what had been, until a moment ago, a twelve-cup
lower bowl.

“It’s his fault and I _hate_ him,” she said untruthfully. Of course, it
was only remotely Hart’s fault that she had broken the coffee-maker, and
burned sixteen slices of toast that morning, and told the milkman not to
bring buttermilk when she _knew_ buttermilk biscuits were on the menu.
It was Hart’s fault because when he was not there her mind was full of
Hart’s wide shoulders and Hart’s crisp blond hair and Hart’s smile.…
Sometimes the smile made a small, sweet chucking noise, when it was
sudden enough.

She began to smile at the thought, and the cry-puckers over her winged
nostrils smoothed out and let the bright tears run. She set the bakelite
handle down in the center of a bowl of mayonnaise and dabbed at her
cheeks with a paper napkin. “I do try,” she sniffed.

It wasn’t the job. A girl as pretty as Happy could get plenty of jobs. A
girl who was as good a waitress as Happy usually was, could get jobs
easily too. “I’m just no good _here_,” she sobbed.

“I hate him,” she repeated, and then uttered a woeful moan as she saw
the mayonnaise bowl. “He hates me too. He _makes_ me do things like
this.” She picked out the bakelite handle, shook the surplus mayonnaise
from it, and dropped it into the garbage bin. “Leaving me alone with
robbers and murderers,” she muttered.

She was thinking of the reason for Hart’s absence—a meeting of the Clay
Street Merchants’ Association to discuss emergency measures for dealing
with a particularly slick crook who was apparently determined to hold up
every member of the Association, in turn. “It won’t be a long meeting,”
he had said. “Hold the fort, will you, Hap? You don’t have to serve
anything but short orders, and there’ll be enough customers in to make
it safe.”

Well, he was wrong there. There hadn’t been a soul in the place except
herself and one fly since he left. “But Hap—keep your eyes peeled all
the same. The whole week’s receipts are in the cash drawer. I’d take ’em
to the night depository before the meeting only I’m late already. I’ll
do it as soon as I get back—got to run; the boys are waiting.”

The boys, Hap thought bitterly as she mopped the counter. He’ll
entertain, the boys with tales of the big one that got away, and how
hard the tarpon struck his line that day. Fishing and working—that’s all
he ever thinks about! She could take fishing or she could leave it
alone; but to be fair about it, she had to admit that the way he worked
was one of the things she loved about him—that, and his eyes, of course.
And the way he—

She smiled again as she thought of his intense face the day after he had
hired her. “You’re going to think I’m crazy, Miss McGonigle. And tough
too, maybe. But this place is all I have in the world. Every penny I
could save by working for other people is in those fixtures and that
equipment. It’s only a little short-order place, but a lot of big things
have started small. And this is going to be as big as I can make it.
Work and economize, work and economize—that’s all I can have around
here.”

And she had looked up at him and said, “You call me Hap, then. It’s more
economical”—and he had given her the smile, the wide sudden one, and had
touched her shoulder.

“You’ll do.”

She touched the shoulder now. She hadn’t “done.” She had tried so hard
to help, and had fallen all over herself, and everything had gone wrong.

She went to the end of the counter and slid open the old-fashioned cash
drawer. There was no register—just a sturdy wooden drawer with
partitions in front for change and a deep recess in the back for the
heavy canvas sack the bank issued for night deposits. She felt the
strong fabric and the chunky packet of notes inside it, and they gave
her a sudden chill.

He’d been so patient with her. She had done some of the stupidest,
_stupidest_ things, and never once had he bawled her out. Well, not
really. With his eyes, and twice with a sort of resigned sigh that made
her want to run away and hide her head. Suppose she was held up tonight?
Suppose he came back and found the entire week’s receipts gone, and the
rent due, and the meat wholesaler not yet paid? What would he think of
her then? What would he do?

He’d say quietly, “Hap, I’m sorry, but this is the last straw. This is
too much. I’m afraid you’ll have to go.” That’s what he’d say, and she’d
just die, right there in front of him.

Imagine going to work somewhere else, and never seeing him again!
Imagine maybe meeting him on the street and see his politest, coldest
smile flick at her as he walked past, not wanting even to talk to her.

“Oh, _dear!_”

She stood for a moment with her hand on the canvas bag, quite overcome
by her own imagination. And then she began to think—hard.

And then she did an extraordinary thing. She got a hammer and nails from
the tool chest. She got a needle and thread from the dish-towel closet.
And with the claw of the hammer she grimly pried off the hasp of Hart
Calway’s personal, private locker …

A half hour later Happy was standing by the door looking out, hoping
that she might get a glimpse of Hart striding toward her down the dark
street. The man she saw reminded her of him. Tall men reminded her of
him because he was tall, and short men reminded her of him because he
was tall.

She shook her head sadly and looked at the man who was now approaching.

He was short, balding, and pudgy. He wore a jacket almost the color of
the pumpkin pies she had spoiled last week, and not-quite-shabby brown
trousers. He glanced up at her as he shambled past. A few feet farther
on he stopped and peered through the restaurant window, right at the end
where he could see down behind the counter. He seemed to be thinking
something over. Then he turned and came back.

“Got anything to eat?”

“Why, yes!” A customer, this late! Hart would be pleased. “Come in.”

He followed her in and sat down at one of the tables. She put a menu in
front of him—the one Hart had laughed at so, because she had typed “Hart
and Eggs” on it.

“Lamb chops,” said the pudgy man. “Peas and mashed. Apple pie and
coffee.”

“Lamb chops,” she repeated, then “Lamb chops! But I—but the boss—” There
are only two lamb chops left, you silly man, she thought, and Hart
didn’t have his dinner yet, and he’ll want those lamb chops. He _likes_
lamb chops! Aloud she said, “Maybe a nice small steak …”

“It says here—” the man pointed “—it says lamb chops. You got lamb
chops?”

“I—” The customer, Hart kept saying, is always right. “Yes, sir.” She
went dolefully back to the stove, and turned it on. Maybe, she thought
as she greased the grill, maybe she could fix Hart something special. A
potpie, perhaps. Then he would tell her that kind of food was for cash
customers; he, Hart, was hired help the same as she was, even if he did
own the place. But he did _so_ like lamb chops …

She tonged a hot potato out of the steam table and pressed it through
the ricer, mashed it deftly, and pulled it up to a cone with the tines
of a fork. A pat of butter on top, the way Hart had shown her and a
sprinkling of paprika to make it look luscious. Bright green peas around
it in a ring, flanked by the sizzling chops. Pretty. Bread on a plate, a
glass of water, and everything on a tray. Hart would have been proud of
her. If, of course, she didn’t tangle up her feet on the way and drop
the tray in his lap.

She set the plate before the customer, saw to his salt and pepper and
catsup, and then went behind the counter again. The man ate steadily and
hungrily. She kept an eye on him, and when he had only a single forkful
left on his plate, she was there with the pie and coffee. That’s the way
to do it. That’s how to run a restaurant. Let the boss go to his old
cops-and-robbers merchant meetings. She’d run things like a clock.

She cleared off the dishes he had used, washed them immediately, and put
them away. Then she made out the check, adding it three times to be sure
it was right. She laid it properly, face down, at his left, and went
away again.

He ate the pie as slowly and deliberately as he had the rest of the
meal, then reached for the check and patted his right hip pocket.

Then he patted his left hip pocket. Then his coat pockets.

“Miss,” he called.

“Yes, sir?”

He coughed apologetically. “I—ah—seem to have left my wallet in my other
clothes.”

“You—why you—”

The oldest gag in the restaurant business, and it had to happen to her!
Fury mounted in her. Burned toast and broken coffee-makers—and now this!
A free meal—and Hart’s lamb chops!

She searched futilely for a word, found an “Oh!”, tried again, and said,
“Why, I ought to have you arrested!”

“I beg your pardon,” said the pudgy man. “Really, miss. It could happen
to anyone. I don’t know what to say. I could—I could leave you my name
and address.”

“I’m not interested in the address of an empty lot,” she said coldly.
“Haven’t you any money at all?”

He shook his head, patting forlornly at his pockets.

Her eyes filled with tears—angry ones. “I don’t know _what_ my boss will
say. I wish a policeman would walk _in_ here right now, that’s what I
wish!”

And at that moment a policeman did walk in. The pudgy man half rose,
opened his mouth, closed his mouth, and sat down again.

Happy whirled and stared. He was a big policeman, with hard eyes and a
big face, and he had a big gun and a big nightstick. He said, “What’s
going on here?”

The pudgy man seemed to wilt. He sagged down in his chair, but he said
nothing. Happy suddenly felt a twinge of pity. “This man didn’t pay for
his dinner,” she said, in a considerably softer voice. “But it’s all
right. I can handle it, I—I think.”

“A deadbeat, eh?” said the policeman. He looked around the restaurant,
out into the deserted street, and licked his lips. “I got just the
treatment for deadbeats.” He swung his nightstick by its leather thong,
caught the handle deftly and advanced on the pudgy man.

“No!” cried Happy. “Don’t hit him, officer! It’s—it’s all right. I’ll
take care of the bill myself.” The look of fear on the pudgy man’s face
as he started out of his chair had simply torn her apart. Why, he was
little, and hungry, that was all!

“You keep out of this now, kiddo,” said the policeman. He brought his
stick point downward on the checked tablecloth with a crash. “Out of my
way—I’ll fix him!”

Happy pushed between him and the table. “No! No!”

The policeman swept her aside with one easy motion, leaned over, and
tapped the pudgy man behind the ear with the stick. The deadbeat sighed
and slid under the table.

“See how easy?” said the policeman.

“You _pushed_ me!” gasped Happy.

“And you hit that poor little man, why you great big—” and she ran out
of words. Then her temper burst through, and she rushed at him,
forgetting his gun, his stick, his size, his uniform, everything. He was
nothing but a cruel bully, and she felt just as she had when she was a
child and saw a man beating a dog.

Her attack was so sudden that even though her figure was small and her
pert face soft, Happy could pack a surprising wallop. She hit the
policeman’s blue-clad chest as if she had been fired from a cannon, like
the girl in the circus. The policeman staggered back, tripped over the
pudgy man’s leg, which stuck out from under the table, and went down
like tall timber.

For a blind moment the smoke of fury curled around Hap’s brain and she
saw nothing—only a blur. Then her vision cleared.

Two broken chairs. A table and some dishes in a rubble on the floor. The
still figure of the pudgy man. And the policeman, groaning, feebly
feeling the side of his head where it had struck the counter. He rolled
over and began to drag one knee under him.

Happy uttered a mouse-like squeak and fled.

This was the end. This was the complete, utter, final finish of
everything.

She ran, sobbing, down the street, not caring where she was going. She
had attacked a policeman, wrecked the restaurant, maybe cost Hart Calway
everything he had worked so hard to accumulate. And now Hart would never
want to see her again.

She ran right into his arms.

“Oh, oh dear!” she gasped. “Policeman. Oh, Hart! The little man couldn’t
pay lamb chops hit him on the head!”

“What?”

There were two men with Hart. One of them said, “Sounds like someone got
hit on the head with some lamb chops.”

“Shut up, Frank. There’s something wrong here. Bill, blow your whistle.”

A shrill blast ripped out. For some reason it loosed a flood of tears in
Happy.

Hart put an arm around her shoulders. “Come on, Happy darling,” he said
gently. “Let’s go back and straighten it all out.”

Happy looked up into his face. She had caught one word, and fixed on it.
She said it. “Darling.”

“Why—Happy!”

“Come on!” said the man called Bill.

Somehow Happy got her feet under her and found another breath or two.
They ran back down the street. At the corner near the restaurant they
were joined by two policemen.

“Who blew that whistle?”

“Come on!” Hart said urgently. They skidded to a stop in front of the
restaurant. One of the policemen barked, “Down! Get _down!_”

The next thing Happy knew she was sitting on the pavement in front of
the restaurant, dragged down by Hart. “Sorry, darling, but that man
inside’s got a gun.”

Slowly she raised her head. She could just see into the restaurant.

The big policeman who had hit the deadbeat was behind the counter with
his hand in the cash drawer. He was staring at the pudgy man, who was
walking toward him on the balls of his feet. Suddenly the little man ran
two delicate steps and leaped over the counter.

The policeman tried to reach his gun, but before he could grasp it, the
little man was on him like a dervish. There was a flurry of action and
the little man backed off, the gun in his hand.

The two policemen, the three merchants, and Happy crowded into the
restaurant. One of the policemen said, “Why—it’s the Chief!”

The pudgy man straightened up. “Hello, boys,” he panted; “Get the
handcuffs on him. We’ll book him for everything from armed robbery to
impersonating an officer. Know him?”

Hart looked at the limp blue figure behind the counter. “I know him,” he
said.

“Me too,” said the man called Frank. “That’s Eddie Lowell. He was
bootlegging from the back room of a drug store, and the Merchants’
Association ran him out. No wonder he’s been working us over, one by
one.”

Happy’s head was whirling. “Please,” she said faintly. “Will s-somebody
tell me what—I mean—are _you_ the Chief of Police?”

The pudgy man smiled and nodded. “You, young lady, are worth your weight
in gold. I mean it. This fellow has a record as long as my arm, and
rewards to go with it.

“Chief,” said Hart in a bewildered voice, “will you please start from
the beginning and tell me just what’s been going on here?”

“Why, sure, son.” The Chief leaned back against an undamaged table. “The
way I got into it—well, I must confess that you Association men shamed
me into it. If merchants have to get together for protection against a
holdup man, instead of relying on the police, why, it’s a sad business.
I put on these old clothes and mooched around trying to think like a
criminal. I spotted this place as a natural for a holdup. Only a girl to
watch it—but what a girl! Know what she did? She booby-trapped the cash
drawer, and on top of that, she knocked Lowell down and ran for the
police.”

“Knocked—” Hart looked at her with amazement. “And what do you mean,
booby-trapped the cash drawer?”

Happy gulped. “I was scared about the cash. So I b-broke into your
locker, Hart, and got all your fishhooks and sewed them into the cash
bag with their points downward. And I nailed the bag to the bottom of
the drawer, so if anyone tried to get it out, they couldn’t, and they’d
have to reach into it for the money and_—oh!_”

“What’s the matter?” asked the Chief.

Happy said, “You really did leave your wallet in your other clothes,
didn’t you?”

The Chief’s eyes twinkled. “I really did. I never want you for an enemy,
young lady. You had sparks flying out of you! Anyway, this crook Lowell
didn’t recognize me. He was probably going to pretend to guard me while
he sent the girl for the police. Then he’d take the money and run, and
the poor old deadbeat—me!—would be in for it. Of course, I knew he
wasn’t one of my boys the minute I laid eyes on him, so I decided to sit
tight and try to catch him in the act. You beat me to it, young lady,”
he finished, wagging his head admiringly.

After they had all gone, after Hart had laughingly waved off the Chief’s
insistence that he owed him for a meal, Happy turned to right the
overturned table. Hart caught her arm. “Hap—” She waited.

“Hap, I—” She had never heard him stumble over his words before. “Hap,
what do you suppose a fellow works for—works hard and saves and tries to
build something up?”

“To get ahead.”

“Yes, but not only in business. Hap, I’ve worked twice as hard since
I—you came here. Some day maybe I’ll have enough—_be_ enough to—to—” He
stopped, turned her to face him. “Would you wait until then?”

She lowered her voice. “If I had a part interest in this place I don’t
think I’d break things, Hart.”

“You mean you—”

“—and with the reward money I get, you could buy a cash register
and—and—because husbands and wives can jointly own—oh, _Hart!_”



HOW TO FORGET BASEBALL


Once upon a possible (for though there is only one past, there are many
futures), after twelve hours of war and forty-some years of
reconstruction, and at a time when nothing had stopped technology (for
technological progress not only accelerates, so does the _rate_ at which
it accelerates), the country was composed of strip-cities, six blocks
wide and up to eighty miles long, which rimmed the great superhighways,
and wildernesses. And at certain remote spots in the wilderness lived
primitives, called Primitives, a hearty breed that liked to stay close
to nature and the old ways. And it came about that a certain flack,
whose job it was to publicize the national pastime, a game called Quoit,
was assigned to find a person who had never seen the game; to invite him
in for one game, to get his impressions of said game and to use them as
flacks use such things. He closed the deal with a Primitive who agreed
to come in exchange for the privilege of shopping for certain trade
goods. So …

The dust cloud had a chromium nose and a horrible hiss. It labored down
the lane, swinging from side to side, climbed the final rise, slowed
beside the rustic gate with the ancient enameled legend OURSER over it,
slewed around and stopped, whereupon it was enveloped in its own
streaming tail. The hissing subsided, and the dust cloud seemed to slump
at its swirling heart. In the silence the dust settled on and around the
ground-effect vehicle, its impregnable, scratchproof, everlasting finish
ignominiously surrendering its gleam and glitter to the pall of bone-dry
marl. There was a moment of silence, accented by the _râles_ of cooling
metal and the barbarous comments of faraway frightened crickets and a
nearby unabashed frog. Then the vehicle emitted a faint rising whine as
a circular section in a side window began to spin; in a second the sound
was up out of the audible range and the dust vanished from the rotating
part of the window, presenting a dark porthole in which a jovial head
appeared, browless, hairless, and squinting nervously at all the
unconditioned air. It stared through the bars of the gate at what would
have been a footpath except that there were two of them, parallel and
winding up through the meadow to a stand of maples. From these, in due
course, issued an impossibility outside the pages of some historical
treatise—not annealed plastic, but formed metal; not hovering, but
wheeled; streamlined outlandishly only where it showed and, most
surprising of all, producing constant sound from the power plant.

The man in the hovercraft watched with incredulity the stately progress
of this wheeled fossil as it bumped across the meadow and came to a stop
on the other side of the gate. From it stepped a tall man dressed
embarrassingly, bearing a burden of some kind. He closed the door of his
antique and locked it with a key, and walked to the other side to try
the door there. At last he turned to face the hovercar. He did so with
an expression of distaste, which he wore the whole time he approached.

The hairless man touched a stud on the dash and listened intently to the
murmur that came from surrounding speakers. Then he palmed a pale spot
on the dash and the side panel snicked out of sight, gone up, down,
sidewise—who could tell?—and repeated what the recorder had told him:
“Hello. Hello. Bil Ferry speaking. Is Mr. Ourser there?”

The tall man put out a searching hand, found that there was indeed an
opening and got in. The driver brushed the pale spot and the opening
went _snick!_ and was no longer an opening. The newcomer winced, then
said, “I’m Ourser.”

“Did I get it right?” asked Bil Ferry.

“You mean the ‘hello, hello’ bit? That’s for the telephone,” said Mr.
Ourser mercilessly.

“Damn dim research department,” grumbled the flack, and started the
hovercraft. “Anyway, I tried.”

“Nobody but a Primitive _tries_,” said Mr. Ourser starchily. “There’s no
reason to.”

“Passpoint unreason there, classmate,” said Bil Ferry rapidly. “Y’ll
know it, comes Ol’ Florio flippin.”

“I,” said Mr. Ourser, “am a scholar, and among other things I am devoted
to the purity of the tongue. I do not dig you one bit, man.”

“Sorr, so sorr. All I mean, you’ll see Florio put out lots effort,
plenty, today. You find me?”

“I follow the general trend. This Florio, I take it, is your favorite
and champion. _Slow down, you idiot!_” The hovercraft, as always when
not automatically guided, had begun to indulge in its proclivity for
heading at forty-five degrees to the direction it was traveling. Bil
Ferry wrestled the tiny figure-eight–shaped wheel, corrected the heading
and said, unabashed, “Positive, poz-poz-poz,” and slowed to a
comparative crawl. “Every rockhead in the world thinks he’s an expert
driver,” grumbled the Primitive. “Not me, classmate,” said the other
cheerfully. “Who needs it? I am expert flack.”

The hovercar hissed over the undulating marl road with its high wide
white mantle of dust airborne in its wake. In time it turned onto the
remains of a blacktop feeder road, the potholes and weed patches of
which the craft ignored, and came at last to the superway approach. Bil
Ferry placed the vehicle carefully on the center stripe of the approach
ramp and accelerated to match the flowing patches of violet on its buff
background. There was the soft syllable of a gong, and a saucer-sized
purple light appeared at the center of the dash. Bil Ferry sighed,
folded up the steering wheel with a snap and pushed it forward, where it
was swallowed without a trace by a gateway in the dash. The flack sighed
again and swung his seat around on its pivot with his back to the
windshield. Mr. Ourser was sitting rigid, perspiration starting visibly
from his temples and his eyes tight closed, as the hovercraft swept
around the curve of the ramp accelerating (100, 130, 150, 165) to the
straightaway.

“What’s the matter, classmate?”

“I hate these things,” said Mr. Ourser. “Hate this.”

Bil Ferry settled himself comfortably. “Now I got a chance to brief you
about the Q this after.”

“Please don’t,” said the Primitive. “It never made any sense to me
before and I don’t think it or anything else would make any sense to me
just now.” He opened his eyes, took in the blur of continuous village at
the sides, the hurtling hovercraft that preceded them a precise one
hundred yards ahead and the other, which followed one hundred yards
behind, all three vehicles strung on the broad yellow stripe of the
center line. He glanced at, and winced from, the luminous yellow figures
that seemed to hang unsupported three inches away from the dash, with
the information (175) he so little desired at the moment. “Talk if you
want. Just don’t ask me to think.”

“Kay,” said the unpuncturable Bil Ferry agreeably. “You don’t got a Q
stadium your place, poz?”

“We haven’t, we can’t, we wouldn’t and, as you say, we don’t.”

“What you do instead?”

“Instead of what?”

“Sitement. Root. You trace me? The big game.”

“Oh. Well, football. Then in the winter there’s basketball and hockey.
And some of us like tennis. But the main thing is baseball.” The flack
shook his head. “Not baseball. Nobody can und’stan’ baseball.”

“Not understand baseball?” cried Mr. Ourser.

“I researched baseball,” said Bil Ferry. “Chit and chat with you, home
ground, friendly, you find me? I don’t und’stan’ it. RBI. MVP. Earned
runs. Hittin zungos.”

“Fungos. Anyone can understand baseball! Why—”

And so it was that the Primitive began to lecture the flack, the one
still tensely gripping the sides of his seat and averting his eyes from
the outscape, the other relaxed and puzzled, listening with birdlike
cockings of the head and bright, unreceptive eyes. It would have been
clear to Mr. Ourser, had he been observing the evolution of the flack’s
expression from interest through perplexity, that the flack had
eventually tuned him out and was just listening to the noise.

“What I _don’t_ und’stan’,” said Bil Ferry at length, “is, everything
stay still, yes? First base here, third base here, foul line here, home
run here, poz?”

“Home plate. Yes.”

“Thass dead, classmate. You want everything movin. Well, alive is movin,
you find me? Now, what you should do, you should get those bases movin
around a circle. You get your pitcher to turn and turn to follow. He got
a special throw to lead the target, hey?”

“That wouldn’t be baseball!” cried Mr. Ourser.

“And hey,” said the flack eagerly, “why you want one team up, th’other
team up? It take all day. What you want, you got two diamonds, one on
top the other, you find me? You put your pitchers out there back to back
an the whole thing goin round and round. Now it _moves_, classmate, hey?
Alive?”

“You keep your obscenities to yourself!”

“Kay,” said Bil Ferry, uninsulted. “So I don’t und’stan’ baseball, and I
don’t und’stan’ you Primmies either. P’centage points, magic numbers to
win or lose, battin’ averages, and they tell me you live computerless.”

“Our cornerstone,” acknowledged Mr. Ourser. “Then y’r all unsane,” said
Bill Ferry amiably. “Y’r all like this baseball thing. Fella stand on a
place, uses knowledge skill and ergs to get himself where? Right back
where he started only he’s tired. Gimme a Q any day. We’re here.”

What “here” turned out to be was an exit ramp, one like a dozen others
they had passed. The flack turned into it by touching the right-hand one
of two wartlike lumps on the dash. It began to flash lime-green, and the
hovercraft edged off the center line onto the buff roadway and then the
blue margin and began to decelerate. Mr. Ourser fixed his companion with
an apprehensive gaze, opened his mouth to speak, thought better of it,
and started to tremble. The hovercraft, still decelerating, followed the
ramp across a bewildering web of crossroads and cloverleafs and rushed
by a lake and two thousand-foot cylindrical housing units encrusted with
balconies and standing on stilts. Ahead was the chiaroscuro of one of
the nation’s few remaining cities—and it was less a city than the
monstrous clutter caused by the crossing of five major highways and
their strip-villages. The skyline showed a heavy preponderance of
“inverted structure”—the architectural gimmickry of the period which, by
using superstrength materials below and ultralight ones above, created
buildings like upside-down pyramids and impossibly leaning and curving
towers.

Mr. Ourser, past the point of tact and even reason, suddenly screamed,
“The wheel! For the love of God, you forgot your wheel!” At that moment
the lime-green light gonged softly and went out. The flack reached
behind him (he still sat with his back to the windshield) and touched
the wart again; it resumed its flashing and the machine whirled off
again to the right, this time on a much narrower ramp which was now a
ramp, now a tunnel, now an arrow-straight path through swampland and
meadow. “The wheel, who needs it?” laughed the flack, as the car banked
sharply around a turn like that of a bobsled run, braked silently almost
to a halt and settled, with the descending whine of its throttled-out
turbines, to rest on a moving belt.

Above and ahead, great shining letters hung in the sky, surrounded by a
nutating ring of blue light. The letters read QUOIT TODAY and then
FLORIO and then ADAM THE GREAT, and then again QUOIT TODAY. The
hovercraft was borne down perhaps a hundred feet, then turned broadside
and decanted into a niche between two other cars, part of a row, a rank,
a serried myriad of distance-dwindled shining cars. The flack touched
the doorplate, and the side of the car snicked out of existence. “Out,
classmate. We’re here.”

Mr. Ourser, still trembling, dismounted and reached back in for his
burden, at which the flack raised the ridges from which his eyebrows had
been shaved, but made no comment. The flack led the way and assisted his
unwilling guest onto the first and second bands of a slideway on which
they were whisked, standing, to the gateway. Mr. Ourser flicked
self-conscious glances at the people around him and their impossible
clothes. There was a preponderance of a substance that was colored like
skin and clung like skin to areas of skin and showed no margin where the
substance stopped and skin began. This made possible such effects as
braided earlobes and skintight torso coverings, which to all intents and
purposes did not cover. There were also bald girls and men with shoes
that looked like bare feet with no toes. Mr. Ourser and the flack were
grateful, each in his way, for the tradition that made clothing style
the privilege of each individual, and derogatory comments inexpressible.
“Modesty is not so simple a virtue as honesty,” a wise man once said,
and he said it before entire populations lived in an air-conditioned
environment.

Bil Ferry flashed a medallion, swung from a chain around his neck, at
the gate-keeping machine, and they were admitted and swept by another
slideway under the stadium and through to daylight on their aisle. Their
box was perhaps seven rows back from the edge of the playing field but,
once in it, Mr. Ourser had the feeling it was suspended in space over
the action. Before he could determine how this was done he was diverted
by the flack’s demonstration of the box’s conveniences: heat control,
cold control, refreshments, the scoreboard (a blank bulkhead at the
moment) and the Options.

“What are Options?”

Bil Ferry pointed to the two nubs on the scoreboard section of the
bulkhead. “Each quarter, the quoiters run up provisional score, shows
here. Now we decide if it adds zero-sum or nonzero-sum.”

“I do not,” said the Primitive, “know what you are talking about.”

“Oh,” said the flack, and thought for a moment. “Look. You got something
out wildernessville called ‘games theory’?”

“I’ve heard of it. A kind of high-grade math, or logic.”

“Right-eo. Games theory derived from games, hey? Well, Quoit is first
game derived from games theory.” He looked at Mr. Ourser’s expression
and shrugged. “Skip, classmate. Y’ll und’stan’ better at the quarter
when the scores come up.”

“I doubt it,” said the Primitive, and sat down (with all but an
astonished yelp at the seat’s superb softness) and directed his
attention to the field.

The field was oval, about two hundred feet long and a hundred wide, and
covered with what seemed to be perfect greensward. Centered in the oval
was a circle fifty feet in diameter. “Thass the Track,” said Bil Ferry,
pointing to the circle. “There’s three things you got to know: the
Track, the Quoit, the Spot. Track’s fifty feet across. Quoit rolls on
it. Spot is where edge of Quoit touches Track.”

“I don’t see this Spot. Or the Quoit either.”

“You will. This is North,” said the flack, waving left, “and this is
South. Object is for South to get his body, or part of it, into the Spot
while Spot’s traveling in North’s side of the track. You trace me?”

“And to keep the North player out of the Spot when it’s in his own
territory.”

“You listen real good, classmate,” the flack said approvingly.

“How fast does this Spot travel around the track?”

“Four times a minute. Once in fifteen seconds. Bout seven miles ’n
hour.”

“And a player scores by getting into the Spot?”

“Any part of his body, for five seconds. He gets points ’pending on
where Spot is at end of five seconds.”

“You mean he gets more or fewer points depending on where the Spot is.”

“Positiv-eo. From centerfield, into North, goes from zero to ninety and
back to zero.”

“In degrees.”

“In points. Degrees is points, points is degrees.”

“I guess I understand it.”

“Simpler’n a Texas leaguer an’ a fielder’s choice. Here come the girls.”

As if by magic, from unmarked areas in the end zones, girls appeared
briskly, perhaps two per second, springing and dancing off in all
directions. In a matter of moments the field was a kaleidoscope of
leaping, running, bending forms, each wearing—Mr. Ourser would have said
“bearing”—the most exquisite arrays of trailing plumes and ribbons,
cobwebby streamers of all the colors there are, all at once and
ever-changing, some trailing real smoke from slim anklets and bracelets,
green, purple, yellow, orange. Mr. Ourser could smell the smoke
now—pine, heliotrope, sea breeze, vanilla, fresh bread. Music appeared
from nowhere, everywhere, perhaps from the girls, who seemed a part of
it. It heightened its tempo, and the girls began to form into patterns
and lines, intermingle, cluster and whirl, then break into disorganized
riots of color that instantly turned into avenues and orchards of beauty
and motion.

Bil Ferry rose and crossed in front of Mr. Ourser. “Look down there,” he
said. Mr. Ourser moved to the side rail and looked down into a square
pit between their box and the next. He saw three uniformed men there,
each bearing the insignia of the slanted, glowing blue Quoit with a
scarlet thread through it. On the front, or field-side, wall were thirty
or more monitor screens. In the center were four immense trideo tanks
bearing closeup three-dimensional images of the pageantry on the field.
“Broadcast monitors,” explained the flack. “The 2-d screens are for the
ref’ree—him over there on the high chair. The other citizens ‘re techs,
one for stadium management—sound, lights, force screens and all—an’ the
other’s a Quoit tech. See that big red handle? Thass it, classmate.
Thass the big one. Thass the Quoit.”

Mr. Ourser, intrigued by a movement in the trideo tanks, turned his
attention back to the field. At a twinkling run the girls had formed
themselves into two large Xs, one in each end zone, and raced into the
mysterious spot from which they had come, the Xs swallowing themselves
up in their own apexes.

“Where do they go to?”

“Down under. They got like a four-sided pyramid with gateways, on’y you
can’t see it. Force field.”

“What are these force fields? How do they work?”

“How sh’d I know? Look, y’r belly can take y’r lunch an turn it into
that big happy smile an bright eyes, poz? You know how that works? Does
y’r belly know? If it works, who cares? If y’want technol’gy, classmate,
ask one of those techs down there after the game, don’t ask a flack. Now
watch the clown.”

The clown was tall and gangling and many-jointed, bobbing and staggering
and falling over his feet. Bil Ferry pointed into the control tank, and
Mr. Ourser saw the Quoit tech draw down the big red handle.

The stadium, even the most habituated fans in it, gasped; Mr. Ourser was
thunderstruck. A mighty toroid, or doughnut shape, of transparent blue
light, with a threadlike core of aching red, the Quoit was tilted at
thirty degrees, with one edge contacting the ground just on the circular
path of the Track. Where it touched, a circular patch of brilliant light
appeared, the Spot. About twelve feet across and exactly bisected by the
Track, it was green on the infield side and orange on the outfield side,
and it traveled the Track at a steady pace as the huge Quoit moved. The
motion of the Quoit was that of a saucer spinning on its edge and
slowing down, so that it rolls on its perimeter. The Quoit, however, did
not slow down, but nutated at its steady four revolutions per minute,
the bicolored Spot moving with it. “Watch clown.”

The gangling clown, jelly-legged, spaghetti-armed, did a boneless dance
on the Track. The crowd shrieked at him as the Quoit approached. He
stopped dancing and looked at the stands, cupping one ear. With the
Quoit upon him, he turned and leaped in mock panic, and tried to lurch
out of its way. The red thread at the heart of the Quoit sliced down
through his bobbing bustle, severing it neatly. The crowd howled. The
clown, hands clapped to his backside, scampered across the infield,
making the stadium rock with bursts of shrill amplified laughter.

“Ol’ core cut anything—steel, bones, bottoms or rice puddin,” chuckled
the flack. “Para-matter field.”

“How does it work?”

“I tol’ you, ask the techs. All I know is that red core cuts off hand,
foot, anything. Line only a few molecules thick. Seals it, heals it and
makes you laugh.”

“Who laughs?”

“I jingle you not, classmate—it’s some sort of shock. Cut off your
behind, you laugh like hell.”

“Doesn’t it hurt?”

“They say not. Not for a while anyhoo. Then the medicos stick it back on
good as new.”

“Good as new?”

Bil Ferry shrugged. “Most times. Sometimes numb. Sometimes rots off.” He
laughed suddenly and pointed at the clown, who had tripped over his feet
and sprawled across the Track just as the Quoit arrived. To the horror
of the Primitive, the deadly red thread cut through both the clown’s
legs at the knees. The clown howled with merriment, flopped like a fish
into the danger zone again, where the line crossed his neck. The head
rolled away and then exploded with a loud bang, for it had been some
kind of balloon. Out of the headless torso stepped a diminutive and
enchanting female, who rushed to the retreating Spot, caught up with it
and did a roundoff, a handspring and a perfect layout back somersault
over the scarlet core. She bowed charmingly and skipped to the North
centerfield, where she disappeared.

“Now the quoiters,” said the flack, leaning forward expectantly. Mr.
Ourser found himself doing the same; perhaps it was the music, which
thundered and diminished and, with the unresolved chord, waited. “Here
comes Florio.”

The local hero was greeted enthusiastically as he appeared in the South
centerfield. His name floated above him in huge block letters as he
bowed to the right, to the left and ahead. He was dark, compact, and
extraordinarily muscled. “Mother-naked!” gasped the Primitive. Bil Ferry
shook his head and thumbed down into the control pit. Mr. Ourser could
see, in the immense magnification of the trideo tanks, the quoiter
advancing down the field with little mincing steps, his arms out like a
tightrope walker’s. And if one could see no garments, one could also see
no details: he was, if naked, as smoothly streamlined as a teenage-boy
doll. “He got his minibiki,” said Bil Ferry.

“Minibiki,” muttered Mr. Ourser, by some alchemy of inflection making
the word sound like giggling from behind the barn, “Minibiki.”

From centerfield North, out of thin air, pranced a tall golden figure
wearing long yellow hair and a minibiki which, like his opponent’s,
exactly matched the color of his skin. He was all of six feet six and
broad and flat. He sprinted forward, bending as he ran, until he was
hurtling along stooped almost double, his long arms wide and curved
forward a few inches above the ground; he rushed Florio as if to scoop
him up like a mail sack. Florio half knelt, one foot far forward, braced
his rear foot, expanded his enormous chest, bunched his shoulder and arm
muscles and waited there like some artist’s conception of The Immovable
Object. At the last possible moment Adam the Great stopped, poised in an
amazing and perfect arabesque, and then left the ground. His elevation
was phenomenal, and he soared over the stocky Florio’s head like a big
golden bird. The crowds loved it, and said so.

“This is Quoit? It looks more like a dance recital,” scoffed Mr. Ourser.

“Positiv-eo!” cried the flack, not offended. He took his own fingers one
by one and rattled off, “Quoit is dance and prizefight, wrestling,
bullfight, bearbait, gym meet, track, everything.”

“Except baseball.”

Bil Ferry laughed and turned back to the field, just as the Quoit
flickered on and off twice, still moving. There was a long silver note
from the sourceless band, and the whole place fell silent, a breathing
velvet silence in which nothing moved but the great wheeling blue Quoit.
The two quoiters stood, each in his own infield, legs apart, hands
clasped behind them, heads bowed.

“What’s happening?” Mr. Ourser demanded, and was answered by a chorus of
growls and shushes from the people around. “Minute silence memory dead
quoiters,” murmured Bil Ferry.

The silence, commanded by the noiseless hypnotic undulations of the
mighty Quoit, seemed much longer than the sixty seconds it actually was.
Then the music came up with organ tones and a crescendo clear from the
marrow and all the way up to the wailing wall, and broke into a nippy
little trot, and everyone relaxed. “Two cut in th’ last three months,”
explained Bil Ferry. “Fans take it serious.”

“I thought you said the doctors could fix them up.”

“Most times. Not through the head.”

A Gabriel trumped, and instantly the infield, the wonderful smooth
greensward, developed spokes ten degrees apart. From the center line
around to the North, nine segments glowed with spectral colors, red to
indigo. From the North around again to the center line, indigo to red.
And the same at the South side of the circular playing field. At the
same time a hitherto unsuspected (by Mr. Ourser) force field over the
entire stadium went opaque. Daylight was inked out, and the intensity of
everything—the Quoit, the spoked circular centerfield, and the traveling
Spot, green inside the Track, orange outside—it all was stepped up, so
that the eye had to narrow and blink to accommodate it. And the two men,
still standing at ease with their hands behind them, had acquired a glow
of their own: Florio the local champion, silver, Adam the Great, a
glowing gold.

“Are they painted?”

“Taint paint,” said the flack. “They got to spray ’em so the sensors
know who’s in the Spot or over the line so they c’n send to the
computers so they c’n score ’em. Hey, Quoit!” he bellowed, and it seemed
as if half the world was bellowing with him. Mr. Ourser recognized the
equivalent of “Play ball!” and was also aware of the wildly partisan
nature of the crowd. At the South end the boxes seemed almost to rock
with a rhythmic chant of “Florio! Flo-ri-o!” mostly from an idolizing
younger group, while at the North end a large block of upper seats
flared with the letters A-D-A-M spelled out in glowing cards. The two
quoiters trotted to the center line and extended their hands. They
touched fingertips and then turned and went completely across to touch
ground at the ninety degree point in their own territory.

“You want to watch that Adam,” said Bil Ferry tensely. “He got a
trouble. He be champ by now sept for that.”

“What trouble?”

Bil Ferry tapped his own head. “He gets mad.”

Mr. Ourser tsked. Even to the wilderness it had penetrated that there is
something vulgar about anger; it was the new obscenity. Children learned
to control their anger before they could toddle. It was thought that
this might, in the long run, prevent war. The entire civilized world was
studded with methods and devices, rituals and reflexes designed to drain
off anger, or to transmute it into something else. One did not—simply
did not—make public displays of anger. “You mean he’s a sore loser,
something like that?” asked Mr. Ourser.

“Neg-a neg-a no,” the flack said. “He take that all right-eo. But don’t
make him look like a damn fool, you find me? There they go.”

The Spot was just leaving North—Adam’s territory—and as it entered the
South segment Adam began to move. Florio, watching him intently, faded
slowly back. As he crossed the center line, Adam shortened his steps,
every fourth or fifth one being a small feint to right or left, to which
Florio responded as if he were wired to the other’s central nervous
system, going up on his toes to balance there, arms out, tensed, ready
to go anywhere including straight up.

“Now,” said Mr. Ourser, explaining it aloud to himself, “he has to get
past Florio and keep himself in the Spot for five seconds to score
anything.”

“Poz. Or maybe keep Florio in it for five. Florio lose points. In his
own ter’tory.” He laughed excitedly. “But I bet Florio say no.”

The teenagers in the next box were shrieking at Florio to stop Adam, to
rush him, to look out for him. But it was Adam who rushed. His great
size making the speed completely deceptive, he took two long strides and
left the ground in one of his exquisite leaps. It was planned to carry
him over Florio’s head and down just in advance of the Spot as it
entered the eighty degree segment. He could then stay in its green area,
inside the Track, for the necessary five seconds or more, while fighting
Florio off.

But Florio was not deceived and had plans of his own.

As the magnificently arched and balanced figure soared overhead he
reached up almost casually and tipped up the trailing ankle. Florio then
made an immense bound, landing a dozen feet away even before his
flailing, tumbling adversary hit the ground. Catlike the big man might
be, but a cat he was not; he landed on his shoulder and the side of his
face, the speed of his passage then carrying his long body up and over.
His head was twisted almost under his armpit, and his legs just missed
the rising red threat of the Quoit’s core as it passed through the
ninety degree segment. The crowd gasped.

“Now Florio usin’ his think-tank!” crowed the flack. “You see him jump?”

“Yes. What did he do that for?”

“Rule say no direct contusions. No punchin’, kickin’, stompin’, or
bitin’. If you dump a quoiter an he gets contused, that’s all right, you
find me? But you don’t pick him up and whang him on the ground or it
costs you. So if you get away before he hits, he can’t claim. Hey, look
that Florio.”

By now the Spot had swung into North territory. The golden giant still
lay where he had fallen. Mr. Ourser rose anxiously. Half the stadium was
on its feet. Florio was strutting with a cocky little heel-and-toe into
enemy country, blandly ignoring the Spot, though pacing it, until it
should get into a high-scoring area. He waved to someone high up in the
stands. He blew a kiss. And then as if the joy in him simply could not
be contained, he cut across the infield of North’s territory with a
roundoff, two crisp back handsprings and a high back somersault which
took him over the Spot, over the core and out of bounds. He was back in
again with a dive and roll as if he had bounced off something solid,
having used up only the narrowest slice of the second that would have
cost him points. The crowd roared approval.

“But what about him?” cried Mr. Ourser, pointing at the still figure of
Adam the Great. “He could be hurt. He could be dead!”

“Patience, classmate. We find that out end of quarter. Look that Florio
now!”

Florio was staring at the ninety degree segment, play-acting an immense
concentration, holding his chin and wagging his head. Suddenly he turned
his back and walked away. “Score! Score!” shrieked his partisans, but
Florio shook his head, and someone suddenly shouted, “He don’t need it!
He don’t need it!” and everyone took up the cry, laughing and cheering
and pounding one another on the back. And in the midst of the bedlam Mr.
Ourser took Bil Ferry by the shoulders and shook him, trying to be
heard: “Somebody should go out there and see. Somebody—Ferry! Ferry!” he
bellowed, and found himself inarticulate. “The thing, the thing there,
the what-you-call it, red thing, that core, it’ll take off his legs!
Make ’em stop the Quoit, Ferry, damn it, you hear? You’ve got to make
’em stop the Quoit!” he cried, shocked and horrified to his Primitive
bones.

This got through to the flack, and no mistake about it. Ferry’s eyes
went wide, his jaw dropped, he gasped. Then, “Stop the Quoit? They never
stop the Quoit!” he intoned, more shocked, even, than his guest.

Florio disdainfully trotted along in the undefended Spot as it passed
through the low-scoring segment. On the bulkhead before him Mr. Ourser
saw luminous letters and numbers appear: SOUTH 5, but he could not think
about that at the moment. The scarlet thread at the core of the great
ghostly Quoit pursued its stately way, with the brilliant bicolored disc
of light centered on and traveling with the Quoit’s point of contact
with the ground. The stadium was in total uproar. Incredibly to Mr.
Ourser, it seemed like laughter. Inexcusably, it was, for Florio had
flopped down on his stomach and was pretending to pull up blades of
grass and pick his teeth with them. And now, along with the roars and
shrieks of laughter, there was an undercurrent of something else—a
low-pitched buzz of terror and intoxication and something unforgivably
akin to delight—the mob sound which, once heard, can never be forgotten
or mistaken for anything else. And here and there, widely separated,
ineffective, was a scream of horror, a cry of protest as the Quoit’s
core, like the slow-motion picture of a whiplash, red already for its
deadly work, moved down toward the motionless Adam.

Adam lay with his legs across the Track in South’s eighty degree
segment. As the green-and-orange Spot approached the sixty-five degree
mark, something like a silver torpedo hurtled across the arena from the
North infield. How Florio had converted himself from a lolling,
grass-chewing sloth into this projectile—how any human being could move
this fast—was beyond Mr. Ourser’s comprehension. One second he was belly
down on the sward and taking his ease, the next he was flashing across
the playing field, the third he had Adam by the wrists and had jerked
him clear of the Quoit. It seemed as if everybody in the place was on
his feet but one. Mr. Ourser fell back into his seat, covered his face
and trembled.

Bil Ferry plumped down beside him and pounded his shoulder. “Now,
_thass_ Quoit. Thass really Quoit. Now you know. Is great, neg-a neg-a
no, hey?” he crowed. Then before the dazed Primitive could react he gave
a wordless shout and pointed. Florio was standing over the prone giant
bowing to the crowd, when with one of those bewildering transitions from
stasis to full movement, from fear to hilarity, from combat to
playfulness that seemed to characterize this game, Adam the Great rose
fluidly from what had seemed to be total unconsciousness, caught the
smaller man by the thighs, and came up standing with him in a fetal
position in his arms. The closeup in the trideo tanks showed the heavy
strain it took for Adam to hold Florio this way—and that he was capable
of it. It showed, too, what seemed to be unalloyed fury on the big man’s
face, and the effortful but still amused expression of the little one in
his arms.

Adam stalked across the infield with his burden. He could not hope to
overtake the Spot as it left the high-scoring area, so he cut across and
intercepted it. To score, he must be in it for five seconds, and all he
got out of it was a 7 as it approached midfield and his own territory.
But it was enough to top Florio’s score and to send Adam’s adherents
into transports of joy. At the midfield point he unceremoniously dropped
Florio on his rump and stalked off after the Spot.

Florio sat where he was for a moment, shook himself like a wet spaniel,
bounced to his feet and crossed to midfield at the Track, just where the
Spot would enter his territory. Here he braced himself, and when the
Spot crossed over into South, he shoulder-shunted Adam aside and placed
himself between Adam and the Spot. They followed it around this way, the
golden giant trying to step into the pool of light, which would mean a
score, or trying to box his opponent into it, which would mean his loss
of points, but each failing, all around the South traverse. Once it
crossed midfield, they reversed positions like dancers, with Adam now
defending against Florio’s feints and attacks. It was, in its way,
beautiful to watch: the golden and the silver bodies tense and speeding,
waiting and leaping, the brilliant glowing spokes of the playing field,
the majestic loop and fall of the nutating Quoit with its blue body and
the lethal red thread at its heart. The contestants were in constant
motion as they led and followed the traveling Spot, now defending, now
attacking, now bounding away to take up an ambush point somewhere along
the Track. The effect on the crowd seemed to be one of satisfaction, as
if the explosive opening had set the game on a high plane and it was all
right to turn it to this wondrous display of feint and fence. And at
last, with a shocking effect on Mr. Ourser’s eyeballs, the Quoit
disappeared, the luminous spectral cartwheel of the playing field became
the green oval bearing its innocent circle; the light shield over the
stadium flicked out of existence, and it was again a warm outdoor
afternoon, with a pleased and applauding crowd colorful in the sunlight.
The first quarter was over.

“Well, you like? You like?” asked the flack gleefully.

“I don’t really know,” said Mr. Ourser as honestly as he could. “I was
scared there for a minute, I don’t mind telling you. Was Adam really
unconscious?”

The flack shrugged. “Pozzo, neggo, who’s to say-a? Long as it’s good
Quoit. Watch, here’s the scoring.”

The public address system began to thrum: “Zerosum, nonzero-sum.
Zero-sum, nonzero-sum …”

“What’s that mean? Zero what?”

“Zero-sum, you trace? Like-uh-poker. You have poker out there in the
wilderness?”

“Well, sure.”

“Kay. You and I play poker, everything won plus everything lost equals
zero. Hey?”

“Uh—well, yes.”

“Fine. Now, nonzero-sum is like, well, baseball. The scores add up to
more than zero.”

“I see.”

“Good-eo.” The flack pointed to the bulkhead, where the score floated:
NORTH 7 SOUTH 5. “Thass provisional, you und’stan’. Now, if we score it
zero-sum, we give each one 50 points—you got to have something to play
with, same like poker, you find me? Now, Adam got 7, Florio got 5,
provisional. Two points apart. If scoring’s zero-sum, we take two points
f’m Florio and give ’em to Adam. Score North 52, South 48.”

“Uh, I think I’ve got it.”

“Now, nonzero-sum. They get jus’ what they earned, sept for one
thing—underdog gets 50—point bonus.”

“You mean if it’s scored that way Adam would get his seven points, but
Florio would get 55?”

“You oiled up and squeakless, Mr. O.,” said the flack. Mr. Ourser
recognized this as some sort of compliment and all but smiled. “But why
should the underdog get 50 points?”

“Crowd likes his style.”

“So by pushing one of those buttons”—he pointed to the bulkhead—“the
crowd votes on whether to score it zero-sum or nonzero-sum.”

The public-address system gave its muezzinlike cry once more, followed
by a long chime. “Ten seconds. You want to push?”

“You do it.”

The flack pushed the nonzero-sum button and leaned back. In two or three
seconds the final first-quarter score appeared: SOUTH 55 NORTH 7.
Florio’s rescue of Adam had pleased the crowd. “Adam, he not goin to
love that no way nohow negativ-eo,” Bil Ferry said.

The infield abruptly took on its spokes of color, the sky went out, the
Quoit appeared, and the players were magically in place again. The crowd
sighed and settled itself.

This time there was no meeting and salutation. Florio shot across and
into the Spot the second it was in North’s territory. Adam sprang at him
and, grasping him by the shoulders, flung him out before he had been in
the green more than two seconds. Florio, surprisingly, raced away from
him to the other side of the Track, by the center line, and lay down
laughing on the Track.

Bil Ferry, and the whole stadium, shouted. Mr. Ourser was perplexed.
“What’s he doing?”

“He just laying there,” chortled the flack. “Once was a champ name of
Cream used to do that. War o’nerves, trace me? He snatched Adam away f’m
the core, right? Now he give Adam the chance to do same thing. Adam got
to. Look how mad he is, and he got to!”

“But suppose Adam just doesn’t?”

“Oh, he got to. You think the crowd stand f’ that?’ ”

“Florio made a damn fool of him. You said—”

“Oh—Watch the game, classmate.”

The mighty Quoit nutated on. Its brilliant scarlet core knifed along the
Track. The stadium grew hushed, as if at the bidding of a slowly turned
volume control. Florio lay back on the Track, put his hands behind his
head, and laughed up at the darkened sky. Adam the Great stalked over
and stood looking down on him, glowering and (as seen in the trideo)
chewing hard on his own teeth. The green-and-orange Spot arrived. The
blue glow of the Quoit arrived. Adam still looked down, motionless.

And then, unbelievably, the red core cut Florio right in two, from groin
to crown and through both the wrists which were behind his head. In the
trideo tank Mr. Ourser saw the two halves of his body fall open like a
book, the complex of colors which flooded out flashing on its glazed cut
surfaces.

There seemed then to be a silence that went on forever, though it could
not have been long. The Quoit disappeared and the sky came into being
when the core had advanced only another two or three yards. The only
thing that would come to Mr. Ourser’s lips was a whispered, “I thought
they never stopped the Quoit.” And came Bil Ferry’s whispered answer,
“But the game’s over now,” and as whispers they could be clearly heard.

Then there was a wild, inconsolable screaming that seemed to set off an
explosion in every human being in the place. Teenagers began vaulting
over the rail into the control pit; Mr. Ourser saw some confused
fighting going on down there and uniformed men being trampled. The
crowd, in ones, in twos, then by dozens and hundreds, began to jump over
the barriers and pour onto the arena.

Adam the Great stood for perhaps a minute after the bisection of his
opponent, his hands on his hips and his jaws working. He slowly raised
his head and watched the people leaping, falling, vaulting onto the
greensward. Then his eyes widened and he turned and sprinted for the
invisible gateway in the North outfield. He reached it yards ahead of
the nearest spectators and seemed to be scrabbling at thin air. He ran
around in a half circle and tried again, with the same result.

Mr. Ourser now understood why the teenagers had dropped into the control
pit—it was to lock those exits. Adam, fleeing across toward the South
exit, apparently understood this, because he suddenly stopped trying.
Right in the center of the arena he stopped and crouched at bay. More
people came. They closed in, slowly. He whirled, and those behind him
jumped back, but others jumped forward. He got his hands on a man and
whirled with him and threw him. He knocked down two more. He ran then,
and was tripped and went down.

There was a huge hooting sound. Bil Ferry paled. “Less cut out,
classmate. Ther’ll be police helis over here like flies in four seconds
flat,” he said. They stumbled out, the Primitive clinging to his burden
to the last, up the aisle, out to the slideway stage.

Mr. Ourser looked back.

Someone in the wild flailing melee in the control pit had pulled the big
red handle. The Quoit was in motion through the crowd. Nothing of that
was ever to stay with Mr. Ourser but one sharp picture: a young,
slender, bald girl sitting on the sward with the crowd milling around
her, holding a severed and bloodless leg in both hands and laughing and
laughing and laughing …

The slideway, the parking lot, the hovercraft. When at last they were
clear of the stadium and out on a feeder road, Bil Ferry said to the
Primitive, in tones of outrage that echoed back through the years to the
once-familiar syllables: “I say, that’s not cricket.”

“Mr. O.,” he said, “that wasn’t Quoit. That wasn’t Quoit.”

“I know. I know,” said Mr. Ourser, comforting him.

And it was at that moment that Mr. Ourser destroyed the Primitives
forever. He did not do it all at once, but he did it completely. “Do you
suppose,” he said, “that a Quoit installation—just a simple one—might be
put in a wilderness location?”

“I c’n have Survey an’ Estimate out there in the morning, y’ronner,”
said Bil Ferry. (He never called Mr. Ourser “classmate” again, that
being a concession to the ideal of equality and used only on members of
classes lower than one’s own. A prospect, now, a real prospect, was
“y’ronner” no matter what his station.) “I c’n also up your priorities
one notch for the trade goods.”

So Mr. Ourser opened his burden—an attaché case—and got out his shopping
list, and with the improved priorities they were able to fill it, even
to the timer for a 1962 RCA Whirlpool washing machine, even to the set
of points for a 1964 Mercury.



THE NAIL AND THE ORACLE


Despite the improvements, the Pentagon in 1970 was still the Pentagon,
with more places to walk than places to sit. Not that Jones had a
legitimate gripe. The cubical cave they had assigned to him as an office
would have been more than adequate for the two-three days he himself had
estimated. But by the end of the third week it fit him like a size-6 hat
and choked him like a size-12 collar. Annie’s phone calls expressed
eagerness to have him back, but there was an edge to the eagerness now
which made him anxious. His hotel manager had wanted to shift his room
after the first week and he had been stubborn about it; now he was
marooned like a rock in a mushroom patch, surrounded by a back-to-rhythm
convention of the Anti-Anti-Population Explosion League. He’d had to buy
shirts, he’d had to buy shoes, he’d needed a type-four common-cold shot,
and most of all, he couldn’t find what was wrong with ORACLE.

Jones and his crew had stripped ORACLE down to its mounting bolts,
checked a thousand miles of wiring and a million solid-state elements,
everything but its priceless and untouchable memory banks. Then they’d
rebuilt the monster, meticulously cross-checking all the way. For the
past four days they had been running the recompleted computer,
performance-matching with crash-priority time on other machines, while
half the science boys and a third of the military wailed in anguish. He
had reported to three men that the machine had nothing wrong with it,
that it never had had anything wrong with it, and that there was no
reason to believe there ever would be anything wrong with it. One by one
these three had gone (again) into ORACLE’s chamber, and bolted the door,
and energized the privacy field, and then one by one they had emerged
stern and disappointed, to tell Jones that it would not give them an
answer: an old admiral, an ageless colonel, and a piece of walking
legend whom Jones called to himself the civilian.

Having sent his crew home—for thus he burned his bridges—having deprived
himself of Jacquard the design genius and the twenty-three others, the
wiring team, all the mathematicians, everyone, Jones sighed in his
little office, picked up the phone again and called the three for a
conference. When he put the instrument down again he felt a little
pleased. Consistencies pleased Jones, even unpleasant ones, and the
instant response of all three was right in line with everything they had
done from the time they had first complained about ORACLE’s inability to
answer their questions, all through their fiddling and diddling during
every second of the long diagnostic operation. The admiral had had an
open line installed to Jones’ office, the colonel had devised a special
code word for his switchboard, the civilian had hung around personally,
ignoring all firm, polite hints until he had turned his ankle on a
cable, giving Jones a reason to get him out of there. In other words,
these three didn’t just want an answer, they _needed_ it.

They came, the admiral with his old brows and brand-new steel-blue eyes,
the colonel with starch in his spine and skin like a post-maneuver
proving-grounds, the civilian limping a bit, with his head tilted a bit,
turned a bit, a captivating mannerism which always gave his audiences
the feeling that history cared to listen to them. Jones let them get
settled, this admiral whose whole career had consisted of greater and
greater commands until his strong old hand was a twitch away from the
spokes of the helm of the ship of state; this colonel who had retained
his lowly rank as a mark of scorn for the academy men who scurried to
obey him, whose luxurious quarters were equipped with an iron barracks
bed; and this civilian with the scholarly air, with both Houses and a
Cabinet rank behind him, whose political skills were as strong, and as
deft, and as spiked as a logroller’s feet.

“Gentlemen,” said Jones, “this may well be our last meeting. There will,
of course, be a written report, but I understand the—uh—practicalities
of such a situation quite well, and I do not feel it necessary to go
into the kind of detail in the report that is possible to us in an
informal discussion.” He looked at each face in turn and congratulated
himself. That was just right. This is just between us boys. Nobody’s
going to squeal on you.

“You’ve dismissed your crew,” said the civilian, causing a slight start
in the admiral and a narrowing of the colonel’s eyes and, in Jones, a
flash of admiration. This one had snoopers the services hadn’t even
dreamed up yet. “I hope this is good news.”

“Depends,” said Jones. “What it means primarily is that they have done
all they can. In other words, there is nothing wrong with ORACLE in any
of their specialties. Their specialties include everything the computer
is and does. In still other words, there’s nothing wrong with the
machine.”

“So you told us yesterday,” gritted the colonel, “but I got no results.
And—I want results.” The last was added as an old ritual which,
apparently, had always gotten results just by being recited.

“I followed the procedures,” said the admiral, intoning this as a
cardinal virtue, “and also got no results.” He held up a finger and
suspended operations in the room while he performed some sort of
internal countdown. “Had I not done so, ORACLE would have responded with
an ‘insufficient data’ signal. Correct?”

“Quite correct,” said Jones.

“And it didn’t.”

“That was my experience,” said the civilian, and the colonel nodded.

“Gentlemen,” said Jones, “neither I nor my crew—and there just is not a
better one—have been able to devise a question that produced that
result.”

“It was not a result,” snapped the colonel.

Jones ignored him. “Given the truth of my conclusion—that there is
nothing wrong with the machine—and your reports, which I can have no
reason to doubt, there is no area left to investigate but one, and that
is in your hands, not mine. It’s the one thing you have withheld from
me.” He paused. Two of them shifted their feet. The colonel tightened
his jaw.

The admiral said softly, but with utter finality, “I can_not_ divulge my
question.”

The colonel and the civilian spoke together: “Security—” and “This is a
matter—” and then both fell silent.

“Security.” Jones spread his hands. To keep from an enemy, real or
potential, matters vital to the safety of the nation, that was security.
And how easy it was to wrap the same blanket about the use of a
helicopter to a certain haven, the presence of a surprising little
package in a Congressional desk, the exact relations between a certain
officer and his—_argh!_ This, thought Jones, has all the earmarks of,
not _our_ security, but three cases of _my_ security … I’ll try just
once more.

“Thirty years ago, a writer named William Tenn wrote a brilliant story
in which an Air Force moon landing was made, and the expedition found an
inhabited pressure dome nearby. They sent out a scout, who was prepared
to die at the hands of Russians or even Martians. He returned to the
ship in a paroxysm, gentlemen, of laughter. The other dome belonged to
the U.S. Navy.”

The admiral projected two loud syllables of a guffaw and said, “Of
course.” The colonel looked pained. The civilian, bright-eyed, made a
small nod which clearly said, One up for you, boy.

Jones put on his used-car-salesman face. “Honestly, gentlemen, it
embarrasses me to draw a parallel like that. I believe with all my heart
that each of you has the best interests of our nation foremost in his
thoughts. As for myself—security? Why, I wouldn’t be here if I hadn’t
been cleared all the way back to _Pithecanthropus erectus_.

“So much for you, so much for me. Now, as for ORACLE, you know as well
as I do that it is no ordinary computer. It is designed for
computations, not of math, specifically, nor of strictly physical
problems, though it can perform them, but for the distillation of human
thought. For over a decade the contents of the Library of Congress and
other sources have poured into that machine—everything: novels,
philosophy, magazines, poetry, textbooks, religious tracts, comic books,
even millions of personnel records. There’s every shade of opinion,
every quality of writing—anything and everything that an army of over a
thousand microfilming technicians have been able to cram into it. As
long as it’s printed and in English, German, Russian, French, or
Japanese, ORACLE can absorb it. Esperanto is the funnel for a hundred
Oriental and African languages. It’s the greatest repository of human
thought and thought-directed action the world has ever known, and its
one most powerful barrier against error in human affairs is the sheer
mass of its memory and the wide spectrum of opinion that has poured into
it.

“Add to this its ability to extrapolate—to project the results of
hypothetical acts—and the purposely designed privacy structure—for it’s
incapable of recording or reporting who asked it what question—and you
have ORACLE, the one place in the world where you can get a straight
answer based, not in terms of the problem itself, but on every
ideological computation and cross-comparison that can be packed into
it.”

“The one place I couldn’t get a straight answer,” said the civilian
gently.

“To your particular question. Sir, if you want that answer, you have got
to give me that question.” He checked a hopeful stir in the other two by
adding quickly, “and yours. And yours. You see, gentlemen, though I am
concerned for your needs in this matter, my prime concern is ORACLE. To
find a way to get one of the answers isn’t enough. If I had all three, I
might be able to deduce a common denominator. I already have, of course,
though it isn’t enough: you are all high up in national affairs, and
very close to the center of things. You are all of the same generation”
(translation: near the end of the road) “and, I’m sure, equally
determined to do the best you can for your country” (to get to the top
of the heap before you cash in). “Consider _me_,” he said, and smiled
disarmingly. “To let me get this close to the answer _I_ want; namely,
what’s wrong with ORACLE, and then to withhold it—–isn’t that sort of
cruel and unusual punishment?”

“I feel for you,” said the civilian, not without a twinkle. Then, sober
with a coldness that would freeze helium into a block, he said, “But you
ask too much.”

Jones looked at him, and then at the others, sensing their unshakable
agreement. “OK,” he said, with all the explosive harshness he could
muster, “I’m done here, I’m sick of this place and my girl’s sick of
being by herself, and I’m going home. You can’t call in anyone else
cause there isn’t anyone else: my company built ORACLE and my men were
trained for it.”

This kind of thing was obviously in the colonel’s idiom. From far back
in his throat, he issued a grinding sound that came out in words:
“You’ll finish the job you were ordered to do, mister, or you’ll take
the consequences.”

Jones shouted at him, “Consequences? What consequences? You couldn’t
even have me fired, because I can make a damn good case that you
prevented me from finishing the job. I’m not under your orders either.
This seems a good time to remind you of the forgotten tradition that
with this”—he took hold of the narrow lapel of his own sports jacket—“I
outrank any uniform in this whole entire Pentagon.” He caught the swift
smile of the civilian, and therefore trained his next blast on him.
“Consequences? The only consequence you can get now is to deny yourself
and your country the answer to your question. The only conclusion I can
come to is that something else is more important to you than that. What
else?” He stood up. So did the officers.

From his chair, the civilian said sonorously, “Now, now … gentlemen.
Surely we can resolve this problem without raising our voices. Mr.
Jones, would the possession of two of these questions help you in your
diagnosis? Or even one?”

Breathing hard, Jones said, “It might.”

The civilian opened his long white hands. “Then there’s no problem after
all. If one of you gentlemen—”

“Absolutely not,” said the admiral instantly.

“Not me,” growled the colonel. “You want compromise, don’t you? Well, go
ahead—you compromise.”

“In this area,” said the civilian smoothly, “I possess all the facts,
and it is my considered judgment that the disclosure of my question
would not further Mr. Jones’ endeavors.” (Jones thought, the admiral
said the same thing in two words.) “Admiral, would you submit to my
judgment the question of whether or not security would be endangered by
your showing Mr. Jones your question?”

“I would not.”

The civilian turned to the colonel. One look at that rock-bound
countenance was sufficient to make him turn away again, which, thought
Jones, puts the colonel two points ahead of the admiral in the
word-economy business.

Jones said to the civilian, “No use, sir, and by my lights, that’s the
end of it. The simplest possible way to say it is that you gentlemen
have the only tools in existence that would make it possible for me to
repair this gadget, and you won’t let me have them. So fix it yourself,
or leave it the way it is. I’d see you out,” he added, scanning the
walls of the tiny room, “but I have to go to the john.” He stalked out,
his mind having vividly and permanently photographed the astonishment on
the admiral’s usually composed features, the colonel’s face fury-twisted
into something like the knot that binds the lashes of a whip, and the
civilian grinning broadly.

Grinning broadly?

Ah well, he thought, slamming the men’s-room door behind him—and
infuriatingly, it wouldn’t slam—Ah well, we all have our way of showing
frustration. Maybe I could’ve been just as mad more gently.

The door moved, and someone ranged alongside at the next vertical
bathtub. Jones glanced, and then said aloud, “Maybe I could’ve been just
as mad more gently.”

“Perhaps we all could have,” said the civilian, and then with his free
hand he did four surprising things in extremely rapid succession. He put
his finger to his lips, then his hand to the wall and then to his ear.
Finally he whisked a small folded paper out of his breast pocket and
handed it to Jones. He then finished what he was doing and went to wash
up.

Shh. The walls have ears. Take this.

“All through history,” said the civilian from the sink, his big old
voice booming in the tiled room, “we read about the impasse, and
practically every time it’s mentioned, it’s a sort of preface to an
explanation of how it was solved. Yet I’ll bet history’s full of
impasses that just couldn’t be solved. They don’t get mentioned because
when it happens, everything stops. There just isn’t anything to write
down in the book anymore. I think we’ve just seen such an occasion, and
I’m sorry for each of us.”

The old son of a gun! “Thanks for that much, anyway, sir,” Jones said,
tucking the paper carefully away out of sight. The old man, wiping his
hands, winked once and went out.

Back in his office, which seemed three times larger than it had been
before the conference, Jones slumped behind his desk and teased himself
with the small folded paper, not reading it, turning it over and over.
It had to be the old man’s question. Granted that it was, why had he
been so willing to hand it over now, when three minutes earlier his
refusal had been just about as adamant as—adamant? So, Jones, quit
looking at the detail and get on the big picture. What was different in
those three minutes?

Well, they were out of one room and into another. Out of one room that
was damn well not bugged and into one which, the old man’s pantomime had
informed him, may well be. Nope—that didn’t make sense. Then—how about
this? In the one room there had been witnesses. In the second, none—not
after the finger on the lips. So if a man concluded that the civilian
probably never had had an objection to Jones’ seeing and using the
question, but wanted it concealed from anyone else—maybe specifically
from those other two … why, the man had the big picture.

What else? That the civilian had not said this, therefore would not
bring himself to say it in so many words, and would not appreciate any
conversation that might force him to talk it over. Finally, no matter
how reluctant he might be to let Jones see the paper, the slim chance
Jones offered him of getting an answer outweighed every other
consideration—except the chance of the other two finding out. So another
part of the message was: I’m sitting on dynamite, Mr. Jones, and I’m
handing you the detonator. Or: I trust you, Mr. Jones.

So be it, old man. I’ve got the message.

He closed his eyes and squeezed the whole situation to see if anything
else would drip out of it. Nothing … except the faint conjecture that
what worked on one might work on the other two. And as if on cue, the
door opened and a bland-faced major came in a pace, stopped, said “Beg
pardon, sir. I’m in the wrong room,” and before Jones could finish
saying “That’s all right,” he was gone. Jones gazed thoughtfully at the
door. That major was one of the colonel’s boys. That “wrong room” bit
had a most unlikely flavor to it. So if the man hadn’t come in for
nothing, he’d come in for something. He hadn’t taken anything and he
hadn’t left anything, so he’d come in to find something out. The only
thing he could find out was whether Jones was or was not here. Oh: and
whether he was or was not alone.

All Jones had to do to check that out was to sit tight. You can find out
if a man is alone in a room for now, but not for ten minutes from now,
or five.

In two minutes the colonel came in.

He wore his “I don’t like you, mister” expression. He placed his scarred
brown hands flat on Jones’ desk and rocked forward over him like a tidal
wave about to break.

“It’s your word against mine, and I’m prepared to call you a liar,”
grated the colonel. “I want you to report to me and no one else.”

“All right,” said Jones, and put out his hand. The colonel locked gazes
with him for a fair slice of forever, which made Jones believe that the
Medusa legend wasn’t necessarily a legend after all. Then the officer
put a small folded paper into Jones’ outstretched palm. “You get the
idea pretty quick, I’ll say that, mister”; he straightened, about-faced
and marched out.

Jones looked at the two scraps of folded paper on the desk and thought,
I will be damned.

And one to go.

He picked up the papers and dropped them again, feeling like a kid who
forces himself to eat all the cake before he attacks the icing. He
thought, maybe the old boy wants to but just doesn’t know how.

He reached for the phone and dialed for the open line, wondering if the
admiral had had it canceled yet.

He had not, and he wasn’t waiting for the first ring to finish itself.
He knew who was calling and he knew Jones knew, so he said nothing, just
picked up the phone.

Jones said, “It was kind of crowded in here.”

“Precisely the point,” said the admiral, with the same grudging approval
the colonel had shown. There was a short pause, and then the admiral
said, “Have you called anyone else?”

Into four syllables Jones put all the outraged innocence of a male
soprano accused of rape. “Certainly not.”

“Good man.”

The Britishism amused Jones, and he almost said Gung ho, what?; but
instead he concentrated on what to say next. It was easy to converse
with the admiral if you supplied both sides of the conversation.
Suddenly it came to him that the admiral wouldn’t want to come here—he
had somewhat farther to travel than the colonel had—nor would he like
the looks of Jones’ visiting him at this particular moment. He said, “I
wouldn’t mention this, but as you know, I’m leaving soon and may not see
you. And I think you picked up my cigarette lighter.”

“Oh,” said the admiral.

“And me out of matches,” said Jones ruefully. “Well—I’m going down to
ORACLE now. Nice to have known you, sir.” He hung up, stuck an unlit
cigarette in his mouth, put the two folded papers in his left pants
pocket, and began an easy stroll down the catacombs called corridors in
the Pentagon.

Just this side of ORACLE’s dead-end corridor, and not quite in visual
range of its security post, a smiling young ensign, who otherwise gave
every evidence of being about his own business, said, “Light, sir?”

“Why, thanks.”

The ensign handed him a lighter. He didn’t light it and proffer the
flame; he handed the thing over. Jones lit his cigarette and dropped the
lighter into his pocket. “Thanks.”

“That’s all right,” smiled the ensign, and walked on.

At the security post, Jones said to the guard, “Whoppen?”

“Nothing and nobody, Mr. Jones.”

“Best news I’ve had all day.” He signed the book and accompanied the
guard down the dead end. They each produced a key and together opened
the door. “I shouldn’t be too long.”

“All the same to me,” said the guard, and Jones realized he’d been
wishfully thinking out loud. He shut the door, hit the inner lock
switch, and walked through the little foyer and the swinging door which
unveiled what the crew called ORACLE’s “temple.”

He looked at the computer, and it looked back at him. “Like I told you
before,” he said conversationally, “for something that causes so much
trouble, you’re awful little and awful homely.”

ORACLE did not answer, because it was not aware of him. ORACLE could
read and do a number of more complex and subtle things, but it had no
ears. It was indeed homely as a wall, which is what the front end mostly
resembled, and the immense size of its translators, receptors, and the
memory banks was not evident here. The temple—other people called it
Suburbia Delphi—contained nothing but that animated wall, with its one
everblooming amber “on” light (for the machine never ceased gulping its
oceans of thought), a small desk and chair, and the mechanical
typewriter with the modified Bodoni typeface which was used for the
reader. The reader itself was nothing more than a clipboard (though with
machined guides to hold the paper exactly in place) with a large push
button above it, placed on a strut which extended from the front of the
computer, and lined up with a lens set flush into it. It was an eerie
experience to push that button after placing your query, for ORACLE
scanned so quickly and “thought” so fast that it was rapping away on its
writer before you could get your thumb on the button.

Usually.

Jones sat at the desk, switched on the light and took out the admiral’s
lighter. It was a square one, with two parts which telescoped apart to
get to the tank. The tight little roll of paper was there, sure enough,
with the typescript not seriously blurred by lighter fluid. He smoothed
it out, retrieved the other two, unfolded them, stacked them all neatly;
and then, feeling very like Christmas morning, said gaily to the
unresponsive ORACLE:

“Now!”

Seconds later, he was breathing hard. A flood of profanity welled upward
within him—and dissipated itself as totally inadequate.

Wagging his head helplessly, he brought the three papers to the
typewriter and wrote them out on fresh paper, staying within the
guidelines printed there, and adding the correct code symbols for the
admiral, the colonel and the civilian. These symbols had been assigned
by ORACLE itself, and were cross-checked against the personnel records
it carried in its memory banks. It was the only way in which it was
possible to ask a question including that towering monosyllable “I.”

Jones clipped the first paper in place, held his breath and pushed the
button.

There was a small flare of light from the hood surrounding the lens as
the computer automatically brought the available light to optimum. A
relay clicked softly as the writer was activated. A white tongue of
paper protruded. Jones tore it off. It was blank.

He grunted, then replaced the paper with the second, then the third. It
seemed that on one of them there was a half-second delay in the writer
relay, but it was insignificant: the paper remained blank.

“Stick your tongue out at me, will you?” he muttered at the computer,
which silently gazed back at him with its blank single eye. He went back
to the typewriter and copied one of the questions, but with his own code
identification symbols. It read:

THE ELIMINATION OF WHAT SINGLE MAN COULD RESULT IN MY PRESIDENCY?

He clipped the paper in place and pushed the button. The relay clicked,
the writer rattled and the paper protruded. He tore it off. It read
(complete with quotes):

“JOHN DOE”

“A wise guy,” Jones growled. He returned to the typewriter and again
copied one of the queries with his own code:

IF I ELIMINATE THE PRESIDENT, HOW CAN I ASSURE PERSONAL CONTROL?

Wryly, ORACLE answered:

DON’T EAT A BITE UNTIL YOUR EXECUTION.

It actually took Jones a couple of seconds to absorb that one, and then
he uttered an almost hysterical bray of laughter.

The third question he asked, under his own identification, was:

CAN MY SUPPORT OF HENNY BRING PEACE?

The answer was a flat NO, and Jones did not laugh one bit. “And you
don’t find anything funny about it either,” he congratulated the
computer, and actually physically shuddered.

For Henny—the Honorable Oswaldus Deeming Henny—was an automatic
nightmare to the likes of Jones. His weatherbeaten saint’s face, his
shoulder-length white hair (oh, what genius of a public-relations man
put him onto that?), his diapason voice, but most of all, his “Plan for
Peace” ’ had more than once brought Jones up out of a sound sleep into a
cold sweat. Now, there was once a man who entranced a certain segment of
the population with a slogan about the royalty in every man, but he
could not have taken over the country, because a slogan is not a
political philosophy. And there was another who was capable of turning
vast numbers of his countrymen—for a while—against one another and
toward him for protection: and he could not have taken over the country,
because the manipulation of fear is not an economic philosophy. This
Henny, however, was the man who had both, and more besides. His
appearance alone gave him more non-thinking, vote-bearing adherents than
Rudolph Valentino plus Albert Schweitzer. His advocacy of absolute
isolation brought in the right wing, his demand for unilateral
disarmament brought in the left wing, his credo that science could, with
a third of munitions-size budgets, replace foreign trade through
research, invention and ersatz, brought in the tech segment, and his
dead certainty of lowering taxes had a thick hook in everyone else. Even
the most battle-struck of the war-wanters found themselves shoulder to
shoulder with the peace-at-any-price extremists, because of the high
moral tone of his disarmament plan, which was to turn our weapons on
ourselves and present any aggressor with nothing but slag and
cinders—the ultimate deterrent. It was the most marvelous blend of big
bang and beneficence, able to cut chance and challenge together with
openhanded Gandhiism, with an answer for everyone and a better life for
all.

“All of which,” complained Jones to the featureless face of the
computer, “doesn’t help me find out why you wouldn’t answer those three
guys, though I must say, I’m glad you didn’t.” He went and got the desk
chair and put it down front and center before the computer. He sat down
and folded his arms and they stared silently at each other.

At length he said, “If you were a people instead of a thing, how would I
handle you? A miserable, stubborn, intelligent snob of a people?”

Just how do I handle people? he wondered. I do—I know I do. I always
seem to think of the right thing to say, or to ask. I’ve already asked
ORACLE what’s wrong, and ORACLE says nothing is wrong. The way any
miserable, stubborn, intelligent snob would.

What I do, he told himself, is to empathize. Crawl into their skins,
feel with their fingertips, look out through their eyes.

Look out through their eyes.

He rose and got the admiral’s query—the one with the admiral’s own
identification on it—clipped it to the board, then hunkered down on the
floor with his back to the computer and his head blocking the lens.

He was seeing exactly what the computer saw.

Clipboard. Query. The small bare chamber, the far wall. The …

He stopped breathing. After a long astonished moment he said, when he
could say anything, and because it was all he could think of to say:
“Well, I … be … damned …”

The admiral was the first in. Jones had had a busy time of it for the
ninety minutes following his great discovery, and he was feeling a
little out of breath, but at the same time a little louder and quicker
than the other guy, as if he had walked into the reading room after a
rub-down and a needle-shower.

“Sit down, Admiral.”

“Jones, did you—”

“Please, sir—sit down.”

“But surely—”

“I’ve got your answer, Admiral. But there’s something we have to do
first.” He made waving gestures. “Bear with me.”

He wouldn’t have made it, thought Jones, except for the colonel’s
well-timed entrance. Boy oh boy, thought Jones, look at ’m, stiff as
tongs. You come on the battlefield looking just like a target. On the
other hand, that’s how you made your combat reputation, isn’t it? The
colonel was two strides into the room before he saw the admiral. He
stopped, began an about-face and said over his left epaulet, “I didn’t
think—”

“Sit down, Colonel,” said Jones in a pretty fair imitation of the man’s
own brass gullet. It reached the officer’s muscles before it reached his
brain and he sat. He turned angrily on the admiral, who said instantly,
“This wasn’t my idea,” in a completely insulting way.

Again the door opened and old living history walked in, his head a
little to one side, his eyes ready to see and understand and his famous
mouth to smile, but when he saw the tableau, the eyes frosted over and
the mouth also said: “I didn’t think—”

“Sit down, sir,” said Jones, and began spieling as the civilian was
about to refuse, and kept on spieling while he changed his mind, lowered
himself guardedly onto the edge of a chair and perched his old bones on
its front edge as if he intended not to stay.

“Gentlemen,” Jones began, “I’m happy to tell you that I have succeeded
in finding out why ORACLE was unable to perform for you—thanks to
certain unexpected cooperation I received.” Nice touch, Jones. Each one
of ’em will think he turned the trick, single-handedly. But not for
long. “Now I have a plane to catch, and you all have things to do, and I
would appreciate it if you would hear me out with as little interruption
as possible.” Looking at these bright, eager, angry, sullen faces, Jones
let himself realize for the first time why detectives in whodunits
assemble all the suspects and make speeches. Why they _personally_ do
it—why the author has them do it. It’s because it’s fun.

“In this package”—he lifted from beside his desk a brown paper parcel a
yard long and fifteen inches wide—“is the cause of all the trouble. My
company was founded over a half century ago, and one of these has been
an appurtenance of everyone of the company’s operations, each of its
major devices and installations, all of its larger utility
equipment—cranes, trucks, bulldozers, everything. You’ll find them in
every company office and in most company cafeterias.” He put the package
down flat on his desk and fondled it while he talked. “Now, gentlemen.
I’m not going to go into any part of the long argument about whether or
not a computer can be conscious of what it’s doing, because we haven’t
time and we’re not here to discuss metaphysics. I will, however, remind
you of a childhood chant. Remember the one that runs: ‘For want of a
nail the shoe was lost; for want of a shoe the horse was lost; for want
of a horse the message was lost; for want of the message the battle was
lost; for want of the battle the kingdom was lost—and all for the want
of a horseshoe nail.’ ”

“Mr. Jones,” said the admiral, “I—we—didn’t come here to—”

“I just said that,” Jones said smoothly, and went right on talking until
the admiral just stopped trying. “This”—he rapped the package—“is
ORACLE’s horseshoe nail. If it’s no ordinary nail, that’s because
ORACLE’s no ordinary computer. It isn’t designed to solve problems in
their own context; there are other machines that do that. ORACLE solves
problems the way an educated man solves them—by bringing everything he
is and has to bear on them. Lacking this one part”—he thumped the
package again—“it can then answer your questions, and it accordingly
did.” He smiled suddenly. “I don’t think ORACLE was designed this way,”
he added musingly. “I think it … became … this way …” He shook himself.
“Anyway, I have your answers.”

Now he could afford to pause, because he had them. At that moment, the
only way any of them could have been removed was by dissection and
haulage.

Jones lined up his sights on the colonel and said, “In a way, your
question was the most interesting, Colonel. To me professionally, I
mean. It shows to what detail ORACLE can go in answering a wide
theoretical question. One might even make a case for original creative
thinking, though that’s always arguable. Could a totally obedient robot
think if you flatly ordered it to think? When does a perfect imitation
of a thing become the thing itself?”

“You’re not going to discuss my question here,” said the colonel as a
matter of absolute, incontrovertible fact.

“Yes I am,” said Jones, and raised his voice. “You listen to me, before
you stick that trigger finger of yours inside that tunic. Colonel. I’m
in a corny mood right now and so I’ve done a corny thing. Two copies of
a detailed report of this whole affair are now in the mail, and, I might
add, in a mailbox outside this building. One goes to my boss, who is a
very big wheel and a loyal friend, with as many contacts in business and
government as there are company machines operating, and that puts him on
the damn moon as well as all over the world. The other goes to someone
else, and when you find out who that is it’ll be too late, because in
two hours he can reach every paper, every wire service, every
newscasting organization on earth. Naturally, consistent with the corn,
I’ve sent these out sealed with orders to open them if I don’t phone by
a certain time—and I assure you it won’t be from here. In other words,
you can’t do anything to me and you’d better not delay me. _Sit down,
Admiral_,” he roared.

“I’m certainly not going to sit here and—”

“I’m going to finish what I started out to do whether you’re here or
not.” Jones waved at the other two. “They’ll be here. You want that?”

The admiral sat down. The civilian said, in a tolling of mighty sorrow,
“Mr. Jones, I had what seemed to be your faithful promise—”

“There were overriding considerations,” said Jones. “You know what an
overriding consideration is, don’t you, sir?” and he held up the
unmistakable ORACLE query form. The civilian subsided.

“Let him finish,” gritted the colonel. “We can—well, let him finish.”

Jones instantly, like ORACLE, translated: _We can take care of him
later_. He said to the colonel, “Cheer up. You can always deny
everything, like you said.” He fanned through the papers before him and
dealt out the colonel’s query. He read it aloud:

“ ‘IF I ELIMINATE THE PRESIDENT, HOW CAN I ASSURE PERSONAL CONTROL?’ ”

The colonel’s face could have been shipped out, untreated, and installed
on Mount Rushmore. The civilian gasped and put his knuckles in his
mouth. The admiral’s slitted eyes went round.

“The answer,” said Jones, “makes that case for creative thinking I was
talking about. ORACLE said: ‘DETONATE ONE BOMB WITHIN UNDERGROUND H.Q.
SPEND YOUR SUBSEQUENT TENURE LOOKING FOR OTHERS.’ ”

Jones put down the paper and spoke past the colonel to the other two.
“Get the big picture, gentlemen? ‘UNDERGROUND H.Q.’ could only mean the
centralized control for government in the mountains. Whether or not the
President—or anyone else—was there at the time is beside the point. If
not, he’d find another way easily enough. After that happened, our hero
here would take the posture of the national savior, the only man
competent to track down a second bomb, which could be anywhere. Imagine
the fear, the witchhunts, the cordons, the suspicion, the ‘Emergency’
and ‘For the Duration’ orders and regulations.” Suddenly savage, Jones
snarled, “I’ve got just one more thing to say about this warrior and his
plans. All his own strength, and the entire muscle behind everything he
plans for himself, derives from the finest _esprit de corps_ the world
has ever known. I told you I’m in a corny mood, so I’m going to say it
just the way it strikes me. That kind of _esprit_ is a bigger thing than
obedience or devotion or even faith, it’s a species of love. And there’s
not a hell of a lot of that to go around in this world. Butchering the
President to make himself a little tin god is a minor crime compared to
his willingness to take a quality like that and turn it into a
perversion.”

The civilian, as if unconsciously, hitched his chair a half inch away
from the colonel. The admiral trained a firing-squad kind of look at
him.

“Admiral,” said Jones, and the man twitched, “I’d like to call your
attention to the colonel’s use of the word ‘eliminate’ in his query. You
don’t, you know, you just _don’t_ eliminate a live President.” He let
that sink in, and then said, “I mention it because you, too, used it,
and it’s a fair conjecture that it means the same thing. Listen: ‘WHAT
SINGLE MAN CAN I ELIMINATE TO BECOME PRESIDENT?’ ”

“There could hardly be any _one_ man,” said the civilian thoughtfully,
gaining Jones’ great respect for his composure. Jones said, “ORACLE
thinks so. It wrote your name, sir.”

Slowly the civilian turned to the admiral. “Why, you sleek old son of a
bitch,” he enunciated carefully, “I do believe you could have made it.”

“Purely a hypothetical question,” explained the admiral, but no one paid
the least attention.

“As for you,” said Jones, rather surprised that his voice expressed so
much of the regret he felt, “I do believe that you asked your question
with a genuine desire to see a world at peace before you passed on. But,
sir—it’s like you said when you walked in here just now—and the colonel
said it, too: ‘I didn’t think …’ You are sitting next to two certifiable
first-degree murderers; no matter what their overriding considerations,
that’s what they are. But what you planned is infinitely worse.”

He read, “ ‘CAN MY SUPPORT OF HENNY BRING PEACE?’ You’ll be pleased to
know—oh, you already know; you were just checking, right?—that the
answer is Yes. Henny’s position is such right now that your support
would bring him in. But—you didn’t _think_. That demagogue can’t do what
he wants to do without a species of thought-policing the like of which
the ant-heap experts in China never even dreamed of. Unilateral
disarmament and high morality scorched-earth! Why, as a nation we
couldn’t do that unless we meant it, and we couldn’t mean it unless
every man, woman and child thought alike—and with Henny running things,
they would. Peace? Sure we’d have peace! I’d rather take on a Kodiak
bear with boxing gloves than take my chances in that kind of a world.
These guys,” he said carelessly, “are prepared to murder one or two or a
few thousand. You,” said Jones, his voice suddenly shaking with scorn,
“are prepared to murder every decent free thing this country ever stood
for.”

Jones rose. “I’m going now. All your answers are in the package there.
Up to now it’s been an integral part of ORACLE—it was placed exactly in
line with the reader, and has therefore been a part of everything the
machine has ever done. My recommendation is that you replace it, or
ORACLE will be just another computer, answering questions in terms of
themselves. I suggest that you make similar installations in your own
environment … and quit asking questions that must be answered in terms
of _your_selves. Questions which in the larger sense would be
unthinkable.”

The civilian rose, and did something that Jones would always remember as
a decent thing. He put out his hand and said, “You are right. I needed
this, and you’ve stopped me. What will stop _them?_”

Jones took the hand. “They’re stopped. I know, because I asked ORACLE
and ORACLE said this was the way to do it.” He smiled briefly and went
out. His last glimpse of the office was the rigid backs of the two
officers, and the civilian behind his desk, slowly unwrapping the
package. He walked down the endless Pentagon corridors, the skin between
his shoulder blades tight all the way: ORACLE or no, there might be
overriding considerations. But he made it, and got to the first outside
phone booth still alive. Marvelously, wonderfully alive.

He heard Ann’s voice and said, “It’s a real wonderful world, you know
that?”

“Jones, darling! … you certainly have changed your tune. Last time I
talked to you it was a horrible place full of evil intentions and
smelling like feet.”

“I just found out for sure three lousy kinds of world it’s not going to
be,” Jones said. Ann would not have been what she was to him if she had
not been able to divine which questions not to ask. She said, “Well,
good,” and he said he was coming home.

“Oh, darling! You fix that gadget?”

“Nothing to it,” Jones said. “I just took down the

THINK

sign.”

She said, “I never know when you’re kidding.”



IF ALL MEN WERE BROTHERS,
WOULD YOU LET ONE MARRY YOUR SISTER?


The Sun went Nova in the Year 33 A.E. “A.E.” means “After the Exodus.”
You might say the Exodus was a century and a half or so A.D. if “A.D.”
means “After the Drive.” The Drive, to avoid technicalities, was a
device somewhat simpler than Woman and considerably more complicated
than sex, which caused its vessel to cease to exist _here_ while
simultaneously appearing _there_, bypassing the limitations imposed by
the speed of light. One might compose a quite impressive account of
astrogation involving the Drive, with all the details of orientation
_here_ and _there_ and the somewhat philosophical difficulties of
establishing the relationships between them, but this is not that kind
of a science fiction story.

It suits our purposes rather to state that the Sun went Nova with plenty
of warning, that the first fifty years A.D. were spent in improving the
Drive and exploring with unmanned vehicles which located many planets
suitable for human settlement, and that the next hundred years were
spent in getting humanity ready to leave. Naturally there developed a
number of ideological groups with a most interesting assortment of plans
for one Perfect Culture or another, most of which were at bitter odds
with all the rest. The Drive, however, had presented Earth with so
copious a supply of new worlds, with insignificant subjective distances
between them and the parent, that dissidents need not make much of their
dissent, but need merely file for another world and they would get it.
The comparisons between the various cultural theories are pretty
fascinating, but this is not that kind of a science fiction story
either. Not quite.

Anyway, what happened was that, with a margin of a little more than
three decades, Terra depopulated itself by its many thousands of ships
to its hundreds of worlds (leaving behind, of course, certain die-hards
who died, of course, certainly) and the new worlds were established with
varying degrees of bravery and a pretty wide representation across the
success scale.

It happened, however (in ways much too recondite to be described in this
kind of a science fiction story), that Drive Central on Earth, a
computer central, was not only the sole means of keeping track of all
the worlds; it was their only means of keeping track with one another;
and when this installation added its bright brief speck to the ocean of
Nova-glare, there simply was no way for all the worlds to find one
another without the arduous process of unmanned Drive-ships and search.
It took a long while for any of the new worlds to develop the necessary
technology, and an even longer while for it to be productively
operational, but at length, on a planet which called itself Terratu (the
suffix meaning both “too” and “2”) because it happened to be the third
planet of a GO-type sun, there appeared something called the Archives, a
sort of index and clearinghouse for all known inhabited worlds, which
made this planet the communications central and general dispatcher for
trade with them all and their trade with one another—a great convenience
for everyone. A side result, of course, was the conviction on Terratu
that, being a communications central, it was also central to the
universe and therefore should control it, but then, that is the
occupational hazard of all conscious entities.

We are now in a position to determine just what sort of a science
fiction story this really is.

“Charli Bux,” snapped Charli Bux, “to see the Archive Master.”

“Certainly,” said the pretty girl at the desk, in the cool tones
reserved by pretty girls for use on hurried and indignant visitors who
are clearly unaware, or uncaring, that the girl is pretty. “Have you an
appointment?”

He seemed like such a nice young man in spite of his hurry and his
indignation. The way, however, in which he concealed all his niceness by
bringing his narrowed eyes finally to rest on her upturned face, and
still showed no signs of appreciating her pretty-girlhood, made her
quite as not-pretty as he was not-nice.

“Have you,” he asked coldly, “an appointment book?”

She had no response to that, because she had such a book; it lay open in
front of her. She put a golden and escaloped fingernail on his name
therein inscribed, compared it and his face with negative enthusiasm,
and ran the fingernail across the time noted. She glanced at the
clockface set into her desk, passed her hand over a stud, and said, “A
Mr. Charli, uh, Bux to see you, Archive Master.”

“Send him in,” said the stud.

“You may go in now.”

“I know,” he said shortly.

“I don’t like you.”

“What?” he said, but he was thinking about something else, and before
she could repeat the remark he had disappeared through the inner door.

The Archive Master had been around long enough to expect courtesy,
respect, and submission, to get these things, and to like them. Charli
Bux slammed into the room, banged a folio down on the desk, sat down
uninvited, leaned forward, and roared redly, “Goddamnit—”

The Archive Master was not surprised because he had been warned. He had
planned exactly what he would do to handle this brash young man, but
faced with the size of the Bux temper, he found his plans somewhat less
useful than worthless. Now he was surprised, because a single glance at
his gaping mouth and feebly fluttering hands—a gesture he thought he had
lost and forgotten long ago—accomplished what no amount of planning
could have done.

“Oh-h-h … bitchballs,” growled Bux, his anger visibly deflating.
“Buggerly bangin’ bumpkin’ _bitch_balls.” He looked across at the old
man’s horrified eyebrows and grinned blindingly. “I guess it’s not your
fault.” The grin disappeared. “But of all the hydrocephalous,
drool-toothed, cretinoid runarounds I have ever seen, this was the
stupidest. Do you know how many offices I’ve been into and out of with
this”—he banged the heavy folio—“since I got back?”

The Archive Master did, but, “How many?” he asked.

“Too many, but only half as many as I went to before I went to Vexvelt.”
With which he shut his lips with a snap and leaned forward again,
beginning his bright penetrating gaze at the old man like twin lasers.
The Archive Master found himself striving not to be the first to turn
away, but the effort made him lean slowly back and back, until he
brought up against his chair cushions with his chin up a little high. He
began to feel a little ridiculous, as if he had been bamboozled into
Indian wrestling with some stranger’s valet.

It was Charli Bux who turned away first, but it was not the old man’s
victory, for the gaze came off his eyes as tangibly as a pressing palm
might have come off his chest, and he literally slumped forward as the
pressure came off. Yet if it was Charli Bux’s victory, he seemed utterly
unaware of it. “I think,” he said after his long, concentrated pause,
“that I’m going to tell you about that—about how I happened to get to
Vexvelt. I wasn’t going to—or at least, I was ready to tell you only as
much as I thought you needed to know. But I remember what I had to go
through to get there, and I know what I’ve been going through since I
got back, and it looks like the same thing. Well, it’s not going to be
the same thing. Here and now, the runaround stops. What takes its place
I don’t know, but by all the horns of all the owls in Hell’s northeast,
I have been pushed around my last push. All right?”

If this was a plea for agreement, the Archive Master did not know what
he would be agreeing to. He said diplomatically, “I think you’d better
begin _somewhere_.” Then he added, not raising his voice, but with
immense authority, “And quietly.”

Charli Bux gave him a boom of laughter. “I never yet spent upwards of
three minutes with anybody that they didn’t shush me. Welcome to the
Shush Charli Club, membership half the universe, potential membership,
everybody else. And I’m sorry. I was born and brought up on Biluly where
there’s nothing but trade wind and split-rock ravines and surf, and the
only way to whisper is to shout.” He went on more quietly, “But what I’m
talking about isn’t that sort of shushing. I’m talking about a little
thing here and a little thing there and adding them up and getting the
idea that there’s a planet nobody knows anything about.”

“There are thousands—”

“I mean a planet nobody _wants_ you to know anything about.”

“I suppose you’ve heard of Magdilla.”

“Yes, with fourteen kinds of hallucinogenic microspores spread through
the atmosphere, and carcinogens in the water. Nobody wants to go there,
nobody wants anybody to go—but nobody stops you from getting information
about it. No, I mean a planet not ninety-nine percent Terran Optimum, or
ninety-nine point ninety-nine, but so many nines that you might just as
well shift your base reference and call Terra about ninety-seven percent
in comparison.”

“That would be a little like saying ‘one hundred and two percent
normal,’ ” said the Master smugly.

“If you like statistical scales better than the truth,” Bux growled.
“Air, water, climate, indigenous flora and fauna, and natural resources
six nines or better, just as easy to get to as any place else—and nobody
knows anything about it. Or if they do, they pretend they don’t. And if
you pin them down, they send you to another department.”

The Archive Master spread his hands. “I would say the circumstances
prove themselves. If there is no trade with this, uh, remarkable place,
it indicates that whatever it has is just as easily secured through
established routes.”

Bux shouted, “In a pig’s bloody and protruding—” and then checked
himself and wagged his head ruefully. “Sorry again, Archive Master, but
I just been too mad about this for too long. What you just said is like
a couple troglodytes sitting around saying there’s no use building a
house because everybody’s living in caves.” Seeing the closed eyes, the
long white fingers tender on the white temples, Bux said, “I said I was
sorry I yelled like that.”

“In every city,” said the Archive Master patiently, “on every settled
human planet in all the known universe, there is a free public clinic
where stress reactions of any sort may be diagnosed, treated or
prescribed for, speedily, effectively, and with dignity. I trust you
will not regard it as an intrusion on your privacy if I make the
admittedly unprofessional observation (you see, I do not pretend to be a
therapist) that there are times when a citizen is not himself aware that
he is under stress, even though it may be clearly, perhaps painfully
obvious to others. It would not be a discourtesy, would it, or an
unkindness, for some understanding stranger to suggest to such a citizen
that—”

“What you’re saying, all wrapped up in words, is I ought to have my head
candled.”

“By no means. I am not qualified. I did, however, think that a visit to
a clinic—there’s one just a step away from here—might
make—ah—communications between us more possible. I would be glad to
arrange another appointment for you, when you’re feeling better. That is
to say, when you are … ah …” He finished with a bleak smile and reached
toward the calling stud.

Moving almost like a Drive-ship, Bux seemed to cease to exist on the
visitor’s chair and reappeared instantaneously at the side of the desk,
a long thick arm extended and a meaty hand blocking the way to the stud.
“Hear me out first,” he said, softly. Really softly. It was a much more
astonishing thing than if the Archive Master had trumpeted like an
elephant. “Hear me out. Please.”

The old man withdrew his hand, but folded it with the other and set the
neat stack of fingers on the edge of the desk. It looked like
stubbornness. “I have a limited amount of time, and your folio is very
large.”

“It’s large because I’m a bird dog for detail—that’s not a brag, it’s a
defect: sometimes I just don’t know when to quit. I can make the point
quick enough—all that material just supports it. Maybe a tenth as much
would do, but you see, I—well, I give a damn. I really give a high,
wide, heavy damn about this. Anyway—you just pushed the right button in
Charli Bux. ‘Make communication between us more possible.’ Well, all
right. I won’t cuss, I won’t holler, and I won’t take long.”

“Can you do all these things?”

“You’re goddamn—whoa, Charli.” He flashed the
thirty-thousand-candlepower smile and then hung his head and took a deep
breath. He looked up again and said quietly, “I certainly can, sir.”

“Well, then.” The Archive Master waved him back to the visitor’s chair:
Charli Bux, even a contrite Charli Bux, stood just too tall and too
wide. But once seated, he sat silent for so long that the old man
shifted impatiently. Charli Bux looked up alertly, and said, “Just
getting it sorted out, sir. A good deal of it’s going to sound as if you
could diagnose me for a stun-shot and a good long stay at the funny
farm, yeah, and that without being modest about your professional
knowledge. I read a story once about a little girl was afraid of the
dark because there was a little hairy purple man with poison fangs in
the closet, and everybody kept telling her no, no, there’s no such
thing, be sensible, be brave. So they found her dead with like snakebite
and her dog killed a little hairy purple man and so on. Now if I told
you there was sort of a conspiracy to keep me from getting information
about a planet, and I finally got mad enough to go there and see for
myself, and ‘They’ did their best to stop me; ‘They’ won me a sweepstake
prize trip to somewhere else that would use up my vacation time; when I
turned that down, ‘They’ told me there was no Drive Guide orbiting the
place, and it was too far to reach in real space (and that’s a God, uh,
doggone _lie_, sir!) and when I found a way to get there by hops, ‘They’
tangled up my credit records so I couldn’t buy passage; why, then I
can’t say I’d blame you for peggin’ me paranoid and doing me the
kindness of getting me cured. Only thing was, these things did happen
and they were not delusions, no matter what everybody plus two thirds of
Charli Bux (by the time ‘They’ were done with me) believed. I had an
ounce of evidence and I believed it. I had a ton of opinion saying
otherwise. I tell you, sir, I _had_ to go. I had to stand knee-deep in
Vexvelt sweet grass with the cedar smell of a campfire and a warm wind
in my face,” _and my hands in the hands of a girl called Tyng, along
with my heart and my hope and a dazzling wonder colored like sunrise and
tasting like tears_, “before I finally let myself believe I’d been right
all along, and there is a planet called Vexvelt and it does have all the
things I knew it had,” _and more, more, oh, more than I’ll ever tell you
about, old man_. He fell silent, his gaze averted and luminous.

“What started you on this—this quest?”

Charli Bux threw up his big head and looked far away and back at some
all-but-forgotten detail. “Huh! I’d almost lost that in the clutter.
Workin’ for Interworld Bank & Trust, feeding a computer in the
clearin’house. Not as dull as you might think. Happens I was a
mineralogist for a spell, and the cargoes meant something to me besides
a name, a quantity and a price. Huh!” came the surprised I’ve-found-it!
little explosion. “I can tell you the very item. Feldspar. It’s used in
porcelain and glass, antique style. I got a sticky mind, I guess. Long
as I’d been there, feldspar ground and bagged went for about twenty-five
credits a ton at the docks. But here was one of our customers bringing
it in for eight and a half F.O.B. I called the firm just to check; mind,
I didn’t care much, but a figure like that could color a statistical
summary of imports and exports for years. The bookkeeper there ran a
check and found it was so: eight and a half a ton, high-grade feldspar,
ground and bagged. Some broker on Lethe: they hadn’t been able to
contact him again.

“It wasn’t worth remembering until I bumped into another one. Niobium
this time. Some call it columbium. Helps make steel stainless, among
other things. I’d never seen a quotation for rod stock at less than a
hundred and thirty-seven, but here was some—not much, mind you—at ninety
credits _delivered_. And some sheets too, about thirty percent less than
I’d ever seen it before, freight paid. I checked that one out too. It
was correct. Well-smelted and pure, the man said. I forgot that one too,
or I thought I had. Then there was that space-hand.” _Moxie
Magiddle—honest! That was his name. Squint-eyed little fellow with a
great big laugh bulging the walls of the honky-tonk out at the
spaceport. Drank only alcohol and never touched a needle. Told me the
one about the fellow had a big golden screwhead in his belly button.
Told me about times and places all over—full of yarns, a wonderful gift
for yarning_. “Just mentioned in passing that Lethe was one place where
the law was ‘Have Fun’ and nobody ever broke it. The whole place just
one big transfer point and rest-and-rehab. A water world with only one
speck of land in the tropics. Always warm, always easy. No industry, no
agriculture, just—well, services. Thousands of men spent hundreds of
thousands of credits, a few dozen pocketed millions. Everybody happy. I
mentioned the feldspar, I guess just so I would sound as if I knew
something about Lethe too.” _And laid a big fat egg, too. Moxie looked
at me as if he hadn’t seen me before and didn’t like what he saw. If it
was a lie I was telling it was a stupid one. “Y’don’t dig feldspar out
of a swamp, fella. You puttin’ me on, or you kiddin’ y’rself?” And a
perfectly good evening dried up and blew away_. “He said it couldn’t
possibly have come from Lethe—it’s a water world. I guess I could have
forgotten that too but for the coffee beans. Blue Mountain Coffee, it
was called; the label claimed it descended in an unbroken line from Old
Earth, on an island called Jamaica. It went on to say that it could be
grown only in high cool land in the tropics—a real mountain plant. I
liked it better than any coffee I ever tasted, but when I went back for
more they were sold out. I got the manager to look in the records and
traced it back to through the Terratu wholesaler to the broker and then
to the importer—I mean, I _liked_ that coffee!

“And according to him, it came from Lethe. High cool mountain land and
all. The port at Lethe was tropical all right, but to be cool it would
have to have mountains that were really mountains.

“The feldspar that did, but couldn’t have, come from Lethe—and at those
prices!—reminded me of the niobium, so I checked on that one too. Sure
enough—Lethe again. You don’t—you just do _not_ get pure niobium rod and
sheet without mines and smelters and mills.

“Next off-day I spent here at Archives and got the history of Lethe
halfway back, I’ll swear, to Yiem and the Big Bang. It was a swamp, it
practically always has been a swamp, and something was wrong.

“Mind you, it was only a little something, and probably there was a good
simple explanation. But little or not, it bothered me.” _And besides, it
had made me look like a horse’s ass in front of a damn good man. Old
man, if I told you how much time I hung around the spaceport looking for
that bandy-legged little space-gnome, you’d stop me now and send for the
stun-guns. Because I was obsessed—not a driving addiction kind of thing,
but a very small deep splinter-in-the-toe kind of thing, that didn’t
hurt much but never failed to gig me every single step I took. And then
one day—oh, months later—there was old Moxie Magiddle, and he took the
splinter out. Hyuh! Ol’ Moxie … he didn’t know me at first, he really
didn’t. Funny little guy, he has his brains rigged to forget anything he
doesn’t like—honestly forget it. That feldspar thing, when a fella he
liked to drink with and yarn to showed up to be a know-it-all kind of
liar, and to boot, too dumb to know he couldn’t get away with it—well,
that qualified Charli for zero minus the price of five man-hours of
drinking. Then when I got him cornered—I all but wrestled him—and told
about the feldspar and the niobium and now the mountain-grown coffee,
all of it checked and cross-checked, billed, laded, shipped, insured—all
of it absolutely Lethe and here’s the goddamn proof, why, he began to
laugh till he cried, a little at himself, a little at the situation, and
a whole lot at me. Then we had a long night of it and I drank alcohol
and you know what? I’ll never in life find out how Moxie Magiddle can
hold so much liquor. But he told me where those shipments came from, and
gave me a vague idea why nobody wanted much to admit it. And the name
they call all male Vexveltians_. “I mentioned it one day to a cargo
handler,” Bux told the Archive Master, “and he solved the mystery—the
feldspar and niobium and coffee came from Vexvelt and had been
transshipped at Lethe by local brokers, who, more often than not, get
hold of some goods and turn them over to make a credit or so and dive
back into the local forgetteries.

“But any planet which could make a profit on goods of this quality at
such prices—transshipped, yet!—certainly could do much better direct.
Also, niobium is Element 41, and Elkhart’s Hypothesis has it that, on
any planet where you find elements in Periods Three to Five, chances are
you’ll find ’em all. And that coffee! I used to lie awake at night
wondering what they had on Vexvelt that they liked too much to ship, if
they thought so little of their coffee that they’d let it out.

“Well, it was only natural that I came here to look up Vexvelt. Oh, it
was listed at the bank, all right, but if there ever had been trade, it
had been cleared out of the records long ago—we wipe the memory cells
every fifty years on inactive items. I know at least that it’s been
wiped four times, but it could have been blank the last three.

“What do you think Archives has on Vexvelt?”

The Archive Master did not answer. He _knew_ what Archives had on the
subject of Vexvelt. He knew where it was, and where it was not. He knew
how many times this stubborn young man had been back worrying at the
mystery, how many ingenious approaches he had made to the problem, how
little he had gotten, how much less he or anyone would get if they tried
it today. He said nothing.

Charli Bux held up fingers to count. “Astronomical: no observations past
two light-years. Nothing but sister planets (all dead) and satellites
within two light-years. Cosmological: camera scan, if ever performed
(but it must have been performed, or the damn thing wouldn’t even be
listed at all!), missing and never replaced. So there’s no way of
finding out where in real space it is, even. Geological: unreported.
Anthropological: unreported. Then there’s some stuff about local
hydrogen tension and emission of the parent star, but they’re not much
help. And the summation in Trade Extrapolation: untraded. Reported
undesirable. Not a word as to who reported it or why he said it.

“I tried to sidle into it by looking up manned exploration, but I could
find only three astronauts’ names in connection with Vexvelt. Troshan.
He got into some sort of trouble when he came back and was executed—we
used to kill certain criminals six, seven hundred years ago, did you
know that?—but I don’t know what for. Anyway, they apparently did it
before he filed his report. Then Balrou. Oh—Balrou—he did report. I can
tell you his whole report word for word: ‘In view of conditions on
Vexvelt contact is not recommended,’ period. By the word, that must be
the most expensive report ever filed.”

It was, thought the Archive Master, but he did not say it aloud.

“And then somebody called Allman explored Vexvelt but—how did the report
put it—’it was found on his return that Allman was suffering from
confinement fatigue and his judgment was so severely impaired that his
report is discounted.’ Does that mean it was destroyed, Archive Master?”

Yes, thought the old man, but he said, “I can’t say.”

“So there you are,” said Charli Bux. “If I wanted to present a classic
case of what the old books called persecution mania, I’d just have to
report things exactly as they happened. Did I have a right to suspect,
even, that ‘They’ had picked me as the perfect target and set up those
hints—low-cost feldspar, high-quality coffee—bait I couldn’t miss and
couldn’t resist. Did I have the right to wonder if a living caricature
with a comedy name—Moxie for-god’s-sake Magiddle—was working for ‘Them’?
Then, what happened next, when I honestly and openly filed for Vexvelt
as my next vacation destination? I was told there was no Drive Guide
orbiting Vexvelt—it could only be reached through normal space. That
happens to be a lie, but there’s no way of checking on it here, or even
on Lethe—Moxie never knew. Then I filed for Vexvelt via Lethe and a
real-space transport, and was told that Lethe was not recommended as a
tourist stop and there was no real-space service from there anyhow. So I
filed for Botil, which I _know_ is a tourist stop, and which I know has
real-space shuttles and charter boats, and which the star charts call
Kricker III while Lethe is Kricker V, and that’s when I won the God—uh,
the sweepstakes and a free trip to beautiful, beautiful Zeenip, paradise
of paradises with two indoor 36-hole golf courses and free milk baths. I
gave it to some charity or other, I said to save on taxes, and went for
my tickets to Botil, the way I’d planned. I had it all to do over
because they’d wiped the whole transaction when they learned about the
sweepstakes. It seemed reasonable but it took so long to set it all up
again that I missed the scheduled transport and lost a week of my
vacation. Then when I went to pay for the trip my credit showed up zero,
and it took another week to straighten out that regrettable error. By
that time the tour service had only one full passage open, and in view
of the fact that the entire tour would outlast my vacation by two weeks,
they wiped the whole deal again—they were quite sure I wouldn’t want
it.”

Charli Bux looked down at his hands and squeezed them. The Archives
Office was filled with a crunching sound. Bux did not seem to notice it.
“I guess anybody in his right mind would have got the message by then,
but ‘They’ had underestimated me. Let me tell you exactly what I mean by
that. I _don’t_ mean that I am a man of steel and by the Lord when my
mind is made up it stays made. And I’m not making brags about the
courage of my convictions. I had very little to be convinced about,
except that there was a whole chain of coincidences which nobody wanted
to explain even though the explanation was probably foolishly simple.
And I never thought I was ’specially courageous.

“I was just—scared. Oh, I was frustrated and I was mad, but mostly I was
scared. If somebody had come along with a reasonable explanation I’d’ve
forgotten the whole thing. If someone had come back from Vexvelt and it
was a poison planet (with a pocket of good feldspar and one clean
mountainside) I’d have laughed it off. But the whole sequence—especially
the last part, trying to book passage—really scared me. I reached the
point where the only thing that would satisfy me as to my own sanity was
to stand and walk on Vexvelt and _know_ what it was. And that was the
one thing I wasn’t being allowed to do. So I couldn’t get my solid proof
and who’s to say I wouldn’t spend the next couple hundred years
wondering when I’d get the next little splinter down deep in my toe? A
man can suffer from a thing, Master, but then he can also suffer for
fear of suffering from a thing. No, I was scared and I was going to stay
scared until I cleared it up.”

“My.” The old man had been silent, listening, for so long that his voice
was new and arresting. “It seems to me that there was a much simpler way
out. Every city on every human world has free clinics where—”

“That’s twice you’ve said that,” crackled Charli Bux. “I have something
to say about that, but not now. As to my going to a patch-up parlor, you
know as well as I do that they don’t change a thing. They just make you
feel good about being the way you are.”

“I fail to see the distinction, or what is wrong if there is one.”

“I had a friend come up to me and tell me he was going to die of cancer
in the next eight weeks, ‘just in time,’ he says, and whacks me so hard
I see red spots, ‘just in time for my funeral,’ and off he goes down the
street whooping like a loon.”

“Would it be better if he huddled in his bed terrified and in pain?”

“I can’t answer that kind of a question, but I do know what I saw is
just as wrong. Anyway—there was something out there called Vexvelt, and
it wouldn’t make me feel any better to get rolled through a machine and
come out thinking there isn’t something called Vexvelt, and don’t tell
me that’s not what those friendly helpful spot removers would do to me.”

“But don’t you see, you’d no longer be—”

“Call me throwback. Call me radical if you want to, or ignorant.” Charli
Bux’s big voice was up again and he seemed angry enough not to care.
“Ever hear that old line about ‘in every fat man there’s a thin man
screaming to get out’? I just can’t shake the idea that if something is
_so_, you can prick, poke, and process me till I laugh and scratch and
giggle and admit it ain’t so after all, and even go out and make
speeches and persuade other people, but away down deep there’ll be a me
with its mouth taped shut and its hands tied, bashing up against my guts
trying to get out and say it is so after all. But what are we talking
about me for? I came here to talk about Vexvelt.”

“First tell me something—do you really think there was a ‘They’ who
wanted to stop you?”

“_Hell_ no. I think I’m up against some old-time stupidity that got
itself established and habitual, and that’s how come there’s no
information in the files. I don’t think anybody today is all that
stupid. I like to think people on this planet can look at the truth and
not let it scare them. Even if it scares them they can think it through.
As to that rat race with the vacation bookings, there seemed to be a
good reason for each single thing that happened. Science and math have
done a pretty good job of explaining the mechanics of ‘the bad break’
and ‘a lucky run’, but neither of them ever got repealed.”

“So.” The Master tented his fingers and looked down at the ridgepole.
“And just how did you manage to get to Vexvelt after all?”

Bux flicked on his big bright grin. “I hear a lot about this free
society, and how there’s always someone out to trim an edge off here and
a corner there. Maybe there’s something in it, but so far they haven’t
got around to taking away a man’s freedom to be a damn fool. Like, for
example, his freedom to quit his job. I’ve said it was just a gruesome
series of bad breaks, but bad breaks can be outwitted just as easily as
a superpowerful masterminding ‘They.’ Seems to me most bad breaks happen
inside a man’s pattern. He gets out of phase with it and every step he
takes is between the steppin’ stones. If he can’t phase in, and if he
tries to maintain his pace, why there’s a whole row of stones ahead of
him laid just exactly where each and every one of them will crack his
shins. What he should do is head upstream. It might be unknown
territory, and there might be dangers, but one thing for sure, there’s a
whole row of absolutely certain, absolutely planned agonies he is just
not going to have to suffer.”

“How did you get to Vexvelt?”

“I told you.” He waited, then smiled. “I’ll tell you again. I quit my
job. ‘They,’ or the ‘losing streak,’ or the stinking lousy Fates, or
whatever had a bead on me—they could do it to me because they always
knew where I was, when I’d be the next place, and what I wanted. So they
were always waiting for me. So I headed upstream. I waited till my
vacation was over and left the house without any luggage and went to my
local bank and had all my credits before I could have any tough breaks.
Then I took a Drive jumper to Lunatu, booked passage on a semi-freight
to Lethe.”

“You booked passage, but you never boarded the ship.”

“You know?”

“I was asking.”

“Oh,” said Charli Bux. “Yeah, I never set foot in that cozy little
cabin. What I did, I slid down the cargo chute and got buried in Hold
No. 2 with a ton of oats. I was in an interesting position, Archive
Master. In a way I’m sorry nobody dug me out to ask questions. You’re
not supposed to stow away but the law says—and I know exactly what it
says—that a stowaway is someone who rides a vessel without booking
passage. But I did book passage, and paid in full, and all my papers
were in order for where I was going. What made things a lot easier, too,
was that where I was going nobody gives much of a damn about papers.”

“And you felt you could get to Vexvelt through Lethe.”

“I felt I had a chance, and I knew of no others. Cargoes from Vexvelt
_had_ been put down on Lethe, or I wouldn’t have been sucked into this
thing in the first place. I didn’t know if the carrier was Vexveltian or
a tramp (if it was a liner I’d have known it) or when one might come or
if it would be headed for Vexvelt when it departed. All I knew was that
Vexvelt had shipped here for sure, and this was the only place where
maybe they might be back. Do you know what goes on at Lethe?”

“It has a reputation.”

“Do you _know_?”

The old man showed a twinge of irritation. Along with respect and
obedience, he had become accustomed to catechizing and not to being
catechized. “Everyone knows about Lethe.”

Bux shook his head. “They don’t, Master.”

The old man lifted his hands and put them down. “That kind of thing has
its function. Humanity will always—”

“You approve of Lethe and what goes on there.”

“One neither approves nor disapproves,” said the Archive Master stiffly.
“One knows about it, recognizes that for some segments of the species
such an outlet is necessary, realizes that Lethe makes no pretensions to
being anything but what it is, and then—one accepts, one goes on to
other things. How did you get to Vexvelt?”

“On Lethe,” said Charli Bux implacably, “you can do anything you want to
or with any kind of human being, or any number of combination of them,
as long as you can pay for it.”

“I wouldn’t doubt it. Now, the next leg of your trip—”

“There are men,” said Charli Bux, suddenly and shockingly quiet, “who
can be attracted by disease—by sores, Archive Master, by the stumps of
amputated limbs. There are people on Lethe who cultivate diseases to
attract such men. Crones, Master, with dirty leather skin, and boys and
little—”

“You will cease this nauseating—”

“In just a minute. One of the unwritten and unbreakable traditions of
Lethe is that, what anyone pays to do, anyone else may pay to watch.”

_“Are you finished?”_ It was not Bux who shouted now. “You accept Lethe.
You condone Lethe.”

“I have not said I approve.”

“You trade with Lethe.”

“Well, of course we do. That doesn’t mean we—”

“The third day—night, rather, that I was there,” said Bux, overriding
what was surely about to turn into a helpless sputter, “I turned off one
of the main streets and into an alley. I knew this might be less than
wise, but at the moment there was an ugly fight going on between me and
the corner, and some wild gunning. I was going to turn right and go to
the other avenue anyway, and I could see it clearly through the alley.

“I couldn’t describe to you how fast this happened, or explain where
they came from—eight of them, I think, in an alley, not quite dark and
very narrow, when only a minute before I had been able to see it from
end to end.

“I was grabbed from all sides all over my body, lifted, slammed down
flat on my back and a bright light jammed in my face.

“A woman said, ‘Aw shoot, ’tain’t him.’ A man’s voice said to let me up.
They picked me up. Somebody even started dusting me off. The woman who
had held the light began to apologize. She did it quite nicely. She said
they had heard that there was a—Master, I wonder if I should use the
word.”

“How necessary do you feel—”

“Oh, I guess I don’t have to; you know it. On any ship, any construction
gang, in any farm community—anywhere where men work or gather, it’s the
one verbal bullet which will and must start a fight. If it doesn’t, the
victim will never regain face. The woman used it as casually as she
would have said Terran or Lethean. She said there was one right here in
town and they meant to get him. I said, ‘Well, how about that.’ It’s the
one phrase I know that can be said any time about anything. Another
woman said I was a good big one and how would I like to tromp him. One
of the men said all right, but he called for the head. Another began to
fight him about it, and a third woman took off her shoe and slapped both
their faces with one swing of the muddy sole. She said for them to
button it up or next time she’d use the heel. The other woman, with the
light, giggled and said Helen was Veddy Good Indeed that way. She spoke
in a beautifully cultivated accent. She said Helen could hook out an eye
neat as a croupier. The third woman suddenly cried out, ‘Dog turds!’ She
asked for some light. The dog turds were very dry. One of the men
offered to wet them down. The women said no—they were her dog turds and
she would do it herself. Then and there she squatted. She called for a
light, said she couldn’t see to aim. They turned the light on her. She
was one of the most beautiful women I have ever seen. Is there something
wrong, Master?”

“I would like you to tell me how you made contact with Vexvelt,” said
the old man a little breathlessly.

“But I am!” said Charli Bux. “One of the men pressed through, all
grunting with eagerness, and began to mix the filth with his hands. And
then, by a sort of sixth sense, the light was out and they were
simply—_gone!_ Disappeared. A hand came out of nowhere and pulled me
back against a house wall. There wasn’t a sound—not even breathing. And
only then did the Vexveltian turn into the alley. How they knew he was
coming is beyond me.

“The hand that had pulled me back belonged to the woman with the light,
as I found out in a matter of seconds. I really didn’t believe her hand
meant to be where I found it. I took hold of it and held it, but she
snatched it away and put it back. Then I felt the light bump my leg. And
the man came along toward us. He was a big man, held himself straight,
wore light-colored clothes, which I thought was more foolhardy than
brave. He walked lightly and seemed to be looking everywhere—and still
could not see us.

“If this all happened right this minute, after what I’ve learned about
Vexvelt—about Lethe too—I wouldn’t hesitate, I’d know exactly what to
do. What you have to understand is that I didn’t know anything at all at
the time. Maybe it was the eight against one that annoyed me.” He paused
thoughtfully. “Maybe that coffee. What I’m trying to say is that I did
the same thing then, in my ignorance, that I’d do now, knowing what I
do.

“I snapped the flashlight out of the woman’s hand and got about twenty
feet away in two big bounds. I turned the light on and played it back
where I’d come from. Two of the men had crawled up the sheer building
face like insects and were ready to drop on the victim. The beautiful
one was crouched on her toes and one hand; the other, full of filth, was
ready to throw. She made an absolutely animal sound and slung her
handful, quite uselessly. The others were flattened back against wall
and fence, and in the light, for a long second, they flattened all the
more, blinking. I said over my shoulder, ‘Watch yourself, friend. You’re
the guest of honor, I think.’

“You know what he did? He laughed. I said. ‘They won’t get by me for a
while. Take off.’ ‘What for?’ says he, squeezing past me. ‘There’re only
eight of them.’ And he marches straight down on them.

“Something rolled under my foot and I picked it up—half a brick. What
must have been the other half of it hit me right on the breastbone. It
made me yelp, I couldn’t help it. The tall man said to douse the light,
I was a target. I did, and saw one of them in silhouette against the
street at the far end, standing up from behind a big garbage can. He was
holding a knife half as long as his forearm, and he rose up as the big
man passed him. I let fly with the brick and got him right back of the
head. The tall man never so much as turned when he heard him fall and
the knife go skittering. He passed one of the human flies as if he had
forgotten he was there, but he hadn’t forgotten. He reached up and got
both the ankles and swung the whole man screaming off the wall like a
flail, wiping the second one off and tumbling the both of them on top of
the rest of the gang.

“He stood there with the back of his hands on his hips for a bit, not
even breathing hard, watching the crying, cursing mix-up all over the
alley pavement. I came up beside him. One, two got to their feet and ran
limping. One of the women began to scream—curses, I suppose, but you
couldn’t hear the words. I turned the light on her face and she shut
right up.

“ ‘You all right?’ says the tall man.

“I told him, ‘Caved in my chest is all, but that’s all right, I can use
it for a fruit bowl lying in bed.’ He laughed and turned his back on the
enemy and led me the way he had come. He said he was Vorhidin from
Vexvelt. I told him who I was. I said I’d been looking for a Vexveltian,
but before we could go on with that a black hole opened up to the left
and somebody whispered, ‘Quick, quick.’ Vorhidin clapped a hand on my
back and gave me a little shove. ‘In you go, Charli Bux of Terratu.’ And
in we went, me stumbling all over my feet down some steps I didn’t know
were there, and then again because they weren’t there. A big door boomed
closed behind us. Dim yellow light came on. There was a little man with
olive skin and a shiny, oily mustache. ‘Vorhidin, for the love of God, I
told you not to come into town, they’ll kill you.’ Vorhidin only said,
‘This is Charli Bux, a friend.’ The little man came forward anxiously
and began to pat Vorhidin on the arms and ribs to see if he was all
right.

“Vorhidin laughed and brushed him off. ‘Poor Trettti! He’s always afraid
something is going to happen! Never mind me, you fusspot. See to Charli
here. He took a shot in the bows that was meant for me.’ The little one,
Tretti, sort of squeaked and before I could stop him he had my shirt
open and the light out of my hand switched on and trained on the bruise.
‘Your next woman can admire a sunset,’ says Vorhidin. Tretti’s away and
back before you can blink and sprays on something cool and good and most
of the pain vanished.

“ ‘What do you have for us?’ and Tretti carries the light into another
room. There’s stacks of stuff, mostly manufactured goods, tools, and
instruments. There was a big pile of trideo cartridges, mostly music and
new plays, but a novel or so too. Most of the other stuff was one of a
kind. Vorhidin picked up a forty-pound crate and spun it twice by
diagonal corners till it stopped where he could read the label. ‘Molar
spectroscope. Most of this stuff we don’t really need but we like to see
what’s being done, how it’s designed. Sometimes ours are better,
sometimes not. We like to see, that’s all.’ He set it down gently and
reached into his pocket and palmed out a dozen or more stones that
flashed till it hurt. One of them, a blue one, made its own light. He
took Tretti’s hand and pulled it to him and poured it full of stones.
‘That enough for this load?’ I couldn’t help it—I glanced around the
place and totted it up and made a stab estimate—a hundred each of
everything in the place wouldn’t be worth that one blue stone. Tretti
was goggle-eyed. He couldn’t speak. Vorhidin wagged his head and laughed
and said, ‘All right, then,’ and reached into his pants pocket again and
ladled out four or five more. I thought Tretti was going to cry. I was
right. He cried.

“We had something to eat and I told Vorhidin how I happened to be here.
He said he’d better take me along. I said where to? and he said Vexvelt.
I began to laugh. I told him I was busting my brains trying to figure
some way to make him say that, and he laughed too and said I’d found it,
all right, twice over. ‘Owe you a favor for that,’ he says, dipping his
head at the alley side of the room. ‘Reason two, you wouldn’t live out
the night on Lethe if you stayed here.’ I wanted to know why not,
because from what I’d seen there were fights all the time, then you’d
see the fighters an hour later drinking out of the same bowl. He says
it’s not the same thing. Nobody helps a Vexveltian but a Vexveltian.
Help one, you are one, far as Lethe was concerned. So I wanted to know
what Lethe had against Vexvelt, and he stopped chewing and looked at me
a long time as if he didn’t understand me. Then he said, ‘You really
don’t know anything about us, do you?’ I said, not much. ‘Well,’ he
says, ‘now there’s three good reasons to bring you.’

“Tretti opened the double doors at the far end of the storeroom. There
was a ground van in there, with another set of doors into the street. We
loaded the crates into it and got in, Vorhidin at the tiller. Tretti
climbed a ladder and put his eyes to something and spun a wheel.
‘Periscope,’ Vorhidin told me. ‘Looks like a flagpole from outside.’
Tretti waved his hand at us. He had tears running down his cheeks again.
He hit a switch and the doors banged out of the way. The van screeched
out of there as the doors bounced and started back. After that Vorhidin
drove like a little old lady. One-way glass. Sometimes I wondered what
those crowds of drunks and queers would do if they could see in. I asked
him, ‘What are they afraid of?’ He didn’t seem to understand the
question. I said, ‘Mostly when people gang up on somebody, it’s because
one way or another they’re afraid. What do they think you’re going to
take away from them?’

“He laughed and said, ‘Their decency.’ And that’s all the talk I got out
of him all the way out to the spaceport.

“The Vexveltian ship was parked miles away from the terminal, way the
hell and gone at the far end of the pavement near some trees. There was
a fire going near it. As we got closer I saw it wasn’t near it, it was
spang under it. There was a big crowd, maybe half a hundred, mostly
women, mostly drunk. They were dancing and staggering around and
dragging wood up under the ship. The ship stood up on its tail like the
old chemical rockets in the fairy stories. Vorhidin grunted. ‘Idiots,’
and moved something on his wrist. The rocket began to rumble and
everybody ran screaming. Then there was a big explosion of steam and the
wood went every which way, and for a while the pavement was full of
people running and falling and screaming, and cycles and ground cars
milling around and bumping each other. After a while it was quiet and we
pulled up close. The high hatch opened on the ship and a boom and frame
came out and lowered. Vorhidin hooked on, threw the latches on the van
bed, beckoned me back there with him, reached forward and set the
controls of the van, and touched the thing on his wrist. The whole van
cargo section started up complete with us, and the van started up and
began to roll home by itself.

“The only crew he carried,” said Charli Bux carefully, “was a young
radio officer.” _With long shining black wings for hair and bits of sky
in her tilted eyes, and a full and asking kind of mouth. She held
Vorhidin very close, very long, laughing the message that there could be
no words for this: he was safe. “Tamba, this is Charli. He’s from
Terratu and he fought for me.” Then she came and held him too, and she
kissed him; that incredible mouth, that warm strong soft mouth, why, he
and she shared it for an hour; for an hour he felt her lips on his, even
though she had kissed him for only a second. For an hour her lips could
hardly be closer to her than they were to his own astonished flesh_.
“The ship blasted off and headed sunward and to the celestial north. It
held this course for two days. Lethe has two moons, the smaller one just
a rock, an asteroid. Vorhidin matched velocities with it and hung half a
kilo away, drifting in.”

_And the first night he had swung his bunk to the after bulkhead and had
lain there heavily against the thrust of the jets, and against the
thrust of his heart and his loins. Never had he seen such a woman—only
just become woman, at that. So joyful, so utterly and so rightly
herself. Half an hour after blastoff: “Clothes are in the way on ship,
don’t you think? But Vorhidin says I should ask you, because customs are
different from one world to another, isn’t that so?”_

_“Here we live by your customs, not mine,” Charli had been able to say,
and she had thanked him, thanked him! and touched the bit of glitter at
her throat, and her garment fell away. “There’s much more privacy this
way,” she said, leaving him. “A closed door means more to the naked;
it’s closed for a real reason and not because one might be seen in one’s
petticoat.” She took her garment into one of the state-rooms.
Vorhidin’s. Charli leaned weakly against the bulkhead and shut his eyes.
Her nipples were like her mouth, full and asking. Vorhidin was casually
naked, but Charli kept his clothes on, and the Vexveltians made no
comment. The night was very long. For a while part of the weight on
Charli turned to anger, which helped. Old bastard, silver-temples. Old
enough to be her father. But that could not last, and he smiled at
himself. He remembered the first time he had gone to a ski resort. There
were all kinds of people there, young, old, wealthy, working,
professionals; but there was a difference. The resort, because it was
what it was, screened out the pasty-faced, the round-shouldered lungless
sedentaries, the plumping sybarites. All about him had been clear eyes,
straight backs, and skin with the cosmetics of frost and fun. Who walked
idled not, but went somewhere. Who sat lay back joyfully in well-earned
weariness. And this was the aura of Vorhidin—not a matter of carriage
and clean color and clear eyes, though he certainly had all these, but
the same qualities down to the bone and radiating from the mind. A
difficult thing to express and a pleasure to be with. Early on the
second day Vorhidin had leaned close when they were alone in the control
room and asked him if he would like to sleep with Tamba tonight. Charli
gasped as if he had been clapped on the navel with a handful of crushed
ice. He also blushed, saying, “If she, if she—” wildly wondering how to
ask her. He need not have wondered, for “He’d love to, honey,” Vorhidin
bellowed. Tamba popped her face into the corridor and smiled at Charli.
“Thank you so much,” she said. And then (after the long night) it was
going to be the longest day he had ever lived through, but she let it
happen within the hour instead, sweetly, strongly, unhurried. Afterward
he lay looking at her with such total and long-lasting astonishment that
she laughed at him. She flooded his face with her black hair and then
with her kisses and then all of him with her supple strength; this time
she was fierce and most demanding until with a shout he toppled from the
very peak of joy straight and instantly down into the most total slumber
he had ever known. In perhaps twenty minutes he opened his eyes and
found his gaze plunged deep in a blue glory, her eyes so close their
lashes meshed. Later, talking to her in the wardroom, holding both her
hands, he turned to find Vorhidin standing in the doorway. He was on
them in one long stride, and flung an arm around each. Nothing was said.
What could be said?_

“I talked a lot with Vorhidin,” Charli Bux said to the Archive Master.
“I never met a man more sure of himself, what he wanted, what he liked,
what he believed. The very first thing he said when I brought up the
matter of trade was ‘Why?’ In all my waking life I never thought to ask
that about trade. All I ever did, all anyone does, is to trade where he
can and try to make it more. ‘Why?’ he wanted to know. I thought of the
gemstones going for that production-line junk in the hold, and pure
niobium at manganese prices. One trader would call that ignorance,
another would call it good business and get all he could—glass beads for
ivory. But cultures have been known to trade like that for religious or
ethical reasons—always give more than you get in the other fellow’s
coin. Or maybe they were just—_rich_. Maybe there was so much Vexvelt
that the only thing they could use was—well, like he said: manufactures,
so they could look at the design ‘sometimes better than ours, sometimes
not.’ So I asked him.

“He gave me a long look that was, at four feet, exactly like” _drowning
in the impossibly blue lakes of Tamba’s eyes, but watch yourself, don’t
think about that when you talk to this old man_ “holding still for an
X-ray continuity. Finally he said, ‘Yes, I suppose we’re rich. There’s
not much we need.’

“I told him, all the same, he could get a lot higher prices for the
little he did trade. He just laughed a little and shook his head. ‘You
have to pay for what you get or it’s no good. If you “Trade well,” as
you call it, you finish with more than you started with; you didn’t pay.
That’s as unnatural as energy levels going from lesser to greater, it’s
contrary to ecology and entropy.’ Then he said, ‘You don’t understand
that.’ I didn’t and I don’t.”

“Go on.”

“They have their own Drive cradle back of Lethe’s moon, and their own
Guide orbiting Vexvelt. I told you—all the while I thought the planet
was near Lethe; well, it isn’t.”

“Now, that I do _not_ understand. Cradles and guides are public
utilities. Two days, you say it took. Why didn’t he use the one at the
Lethe port?”

“I can’t say, sir. Uh—”

“Well?”

“I was just thinking about that drunken mob building a fire under the
ship.”

“Ah yes. Perhaps the moon cradle is a wise precaution after all. I have
always known, and you make it eminently clear, that these people are not
popular. All right—you made a Drive jump.”

“We made a Drive jump.” Charli fell silent for a moment, reliving that
breathless second of revelation as black, talcdusted space and a lump
moonlet winked away to be replaced by the great arch of a purple-haloed
horizon, marbled green and gold and silver and polished blue, with a
chromium glare coming from the sea on the planet’s shoulder. “A tug was
standing by and we got down without trouble.” The spaceport was tiny
compared even with Lethe—eight or ten docks, with the warehouse area
under them and passenger and staff areas surrounding them under a deck.
“There were no formalities—I suppose there’s not enough space travel to
merit them.”

“Certainly no strangers, at any rate,” said the old man smugly.

“We disembarked right on the deck and walked away.” _Tamba had gone out
first. It was sunny, with a warm wind, and if there was any significant
difference between this gravity and that of Terratu, Charli’s legs could
not detect it. In the air, however, the difference was profound. Never
before had he known air so clear, so winy, so clean—not unless it was
bitter cold, and this was warm. Tamba stood by the silent, swiftly
moving “up” ramp, looking out across the foothills to the most
magnificent mountain range he had ever seen, for they had everything a
picture-book mountain should have—smooth vivid high-range, shaggy
forest, dramatic gray, brown, and ocher rock cliff, and a starched white
cloth of snowcap tumbled on the peaks to dry in the sun. Behind them was
a wide plain with a river for one margin and foothills for the other,
and then the sea, with a wide golden beach curving a loving arm around
the ocean’s green shoulder. As he approached the pensive girl the warm
wind curled and laughed down on them, and her short robe streamed from
her shoulders like smoke, and fell about her again. It stopped his pace
and his breath and his heart for a beat, it was so lovely a sight. And
coming up beside her, watching the people below, the people rising on
one ramp and sliding down the other, he realized that in this place
clothing had but two conventions—ease and beauty. Man, woman and child,
they wore what they chose, ribbon or robe, clogs, coronets, cummerbunds
or kilts, or a ring, or a snood, or nothing at all. He remembered a
wonderful line he had read by a pre-Nova sage called Rudofsky, and
murmured it:_ Modesty is not so simple a virtue as honesty. _She turned
and smiled at him; she thought it was his line. He smiled back and let
her think so. “You don’t mind waiting a bit? My father will be along in
a moment and then we’ll go. You’re to stay with us. Is that all right?”_

_Did he mind. Would he wait, bracketed by the thundering colors of that
mountain, the adagio of the sea. Is that all right_.

_There was nothing, no way, no word to express his response but to raise
his tense fists as high as he could and shout as loud as he could and
then turn it into laughter and to tears_.

_Vorhidin, having checked out his manifests, joined them before Charli
was finished. He had locked gazes with the girl, who smiled up at him
and held his forearm in both her hands, stroking and he laughed and
laughed. “He drank too much Vexvelt all at once,” she said to Vorhidin.
Vorhidin put a big warm hand on Charli’s shoulder and laughed with him
until he was done. When he had his breath again, and the water-lenses
out of his eyes, Tamba said, “That’s where we’re going.”_

_“Where?”_

_She pointed, very carefully. Three slender dark trees like poplars came
beseeching out of a glad tumble of luminous light willow-green. “Those
three trees.”_

_“I can’t see a house_ …”

_Vorhidin and Tamba laughed together: this pleased them. “Come.”_

_“We were going to wait for—”_

_“No need to wait any longer. Come.”_

Charli said, “The house was only a short walk from the port, but you
couldn’t see the one from the other. A big house, too, trees all around
it and even growing up through it. I stayed with the family and worked.”
He slapped the heavy folio. “All this. I got all the help I needed.”

“_Did_ you indeed.” The Archive Master seemed more interested in this
than in anything else he had heard so far. Or perhaps it was a different
kind of interest. “Helped you, did they? Would you say they’re anxious
to trade?”

The answer to this was clearly an important one. “All I can say,” Charli
Bux responded carefully, “is that I asked for this information—a
catalogue of the trade resources of Vexvelt, and estimates of F.O.B.
prices. None of them are very far off a practical, workable arrangement,
and every single one undercuts the competition. There are a number of
reasons. First of all, of course, is the resources themselves—almost
right across the board, unbelievably rich. Then they have mining methods
like nothing you’ve ever dreamed of, and harvesting, and
preserving—there’s no end to it. At first blush it looks like a pastoral
planet—well, it’s not. It’s a natural treasure house that has been
organized and worked and planned and understood like no other planet in
the known universe. Those people have never had a war, they’ve never had
to change their original cultural plan; it works, Master, it _works_.
And it has produced a sane healthy people which, when it goes about a
job, goes about it single-mindedly and with … well, it might sound like
an odd term to use, but it’s the only one that fits: with joy … I can
see you don’t want to hear this.”

The old man opened his eyes and looked directly at the visitor. At Bux’s
cascade of language he had averted his face, closed his eyes, curled his
lip, let his hands stray over his temples and near his ears, as if it
was taking a supreme effort to keep from clapping the palms over them.

“All I can hear is that a world which has been set aside by the whole
species, and which has kept itself aloof, is using you to promote a
contact which nobody wants. Do they want it? They won’t get it, of
course, but have they any idea of what their world would be like if
this”—he waved at the folio—“is all true? How do they think they could
control the exploiters? Have they got something special in defenses as
well as all this other?”

“I really don’t know.”

“I know!” The old man was angrier than Bux had yet seen him. “What they
are is their defense! No one will _ever_ go near them, not _ever_. Not
if they strip their whole planet of everything it has, and refine and
process the lot, and haul it to their spaceport at their own expense,
and give it away free.”

“Not even if they can cure cancer?”

“Almost all cancer is curable.”

“They can cure _all_ cancer.”

“New methods are discovered every—”

“They’ve had the methods for I don’t know how many years. Centuries.
_They have no cancer.”_

“Do you know what this cure is?”

“No, I don’t. But it wouldn’t take a clinical team a week to find out.”

“The incurable cancers are not subject to clinical analysis. They are
all deemed psychosomatic.”

“I know. That is exactly what the clinical team would find out.”

There was a long, pulsing silence. “You have not been completely frank
with me, young man.”

“That’s right, sir.”

Another silence. “The implication is that they are sane and cancer-free
because of the kind of culture they have set up.”

This time Bux did not respond, but let the old man’s words hang there to
be reheard, reread. At last the Archive Master spoke again in a near
whisper, shaking and furious. “Abomination! Abomination!” Spittle
appeared on his chin: he seemed not to know. “I would—rather—die—eaten
alive—with cancer—and raving _mad_ than live with such sanity as that.”

“Perhaps others would disagree.”

“No one would disagree! Try it? Try it! They’ll tear you to pieces!
That’s what they did to Allman. That’s what they did to Balrou! We
killed Troshan ourselves—he was the first and we didn’t know then that
the mob would do it for us. That was a thousand years ago, you
understand that? And a thousand years from now the mob will still do it
for us! And that—that _filth_ will go to the locked files with the
others, and someday another fool with too much curiosity and not enough
decency and his mind rotten with perversion will sit here with another
Archive Master, who will send him out as I’m sending you out, to shut
his mouth and save his life or open it and be torn to pieces. Get _out!_
Get _out!_ Get _out!_” His voice had risen to a shriek and then a sort
of keening, and had rasped itself against itself until it was a painful
forced whisper and then nothing at all: the old eyes glared and the chin
was wet.

Charli Bux rose slowly. He was white with shock. He said quietly,
“Vorhidin tried to tell me, and I wouldn’t believe it. I couldn’t
believe it. I said to him, ‘I know more about greed that you do; they
will not be able to resist those prices.’ I said, I know more about fear
than you do; they will not be able to stand against the final cancer
cure.’ Vorhidin laughed at me and gave me all the help I needed.

“I started to tell him once that I knew more about the sanity that lives
in all of us, and very much in some of us, and that it could prevail.
But I knew while I was talking that I was wrong about that. Now I know
that I was wrong in everything, even the greed, even the fear, and he
was right. And he said Vexvelt has the most powerful and the least
expensive defense ever devised—sanity. He was right.”

Charli Bux realized then that the old man, madly locking gazes with him
as he spoke, had in some way, inside his head, turned off his ears. He
sat there with his old head cocked to one side, panting like a foundered
dog in a dust bowl, until at last he thought he could shout again. He
could not. He could only rasp, he could only whisper-squeak, “Get out!
Get out!”

Charli Bux got out. He left the folio where it was; it, like Vexvelt,
defended itself by being immiscible—in the language of chemistry, by
being noble.

_It was not Tamba after all, but Tyng who captured Charli’s heart_.

When they got to the beautiful house, so close to everything and yet so
private, so secluded, he met the family. Breerho’s radiant—almost
heat-radiant—shining red hair, and Tyng’s, showed them to be mother and
daughter. Vorhid and Stren were the sons, one a child, the other in his
mid-teens, were straight-backed, wide-shouldered like their father, and
by the wonderful cut and tilt of their architecttured eyes, were
brothers to Tyng, and to Tamba.

There were two other youngsters, a lovely twelve-year-old girl called
Fleet, who was singing when they came in, and for whose song they
stopped and postponed the introductions, and a sturdy tumblebug of a boy
they called Handr, possibly the happiest human being any of them would
ever see. In time Charli met the parents of these two, and black-haired
Tamba seemed much more kin to the mother than to flame-haired Breerho.

It was at first a cascade of names and faces, captured only partially,
kaleidoscoping about in his head as they all did in the room, and making
a shyness in him. But there was more love in the room than ever the
peaks of his mind and heart had known before, and more care and caring.

Before the afternoon and evening were over, he was familiar and accepted
and enchanted. And because Tamba had touched his heart and astonished
his body, all his feelings rose within him and narrowed and aimed
themselves on her, hot and breathless, and indeed she seemed to delight
in him and kept close to him the whole of the time. But when the little
ones went off yawning, and then others, and they were almost alone, he
asked her, he begged her to come to his bed. She was kind as could be,
and loving, but also completely firm in her refusal. “But, darling, I
just can’t now. I can’t. I’ve been away to Lethe and now I’m back and I
_promised.”_

“Promised who?”

“Stren.”

“But I thought …” He thought far too many things to sort out or even to
isolate one from another. Well, maybe he hadn’t understood the
relationships here—after all, there were four adults and six children
and he’d get it straight by tomorrow who was who, because otherwise
she—oh. “You mean you promised Stren you wouldn’t sleep with me.”

“No, my silly old dear. I’ll sleep with Stren tonight. Please, darling,
don’t be upset. There’ll be other times. Tomorrow. Tomorrow morning?”
She laughed and took his cheeks in her two hands and shook his whole
head as if she could make the frown drop off. “Tomorrow morning _very_
early?”

“I don’t mean to be like this my very first night here. I’m sorry, I
guess there’s a lot I don’t understand,” he mumbled in his misery. And
then anguish skyrocketed within him and he no longer cared about host
and guest and new customs and all the rest of it. “I love you,” he
cried, “don’t you know that?”

“Of course, of course I do. And I love you, and we will love one another
for a long, long time. Didn’t you think I knew that?” Her puzzlement was
so genuine that even through pain-haze he could see it. He said, as
close to tears as he felt a grown man should ever get, that he just
guessed he didn’t understand.

“You will, beloved, you will. We’ll talk about it until you do, no
matter how long it takes.” Then she added, with absolutely guileless
cruelty, “Starting tomorrow. But now I have to go, Stren’s waiting. Good
night, true love,” and she kissed the top of his averted head and
sprinted away lightly on bare tiptoe.

She had reached something in him that made it impossible for him to be
angry at her. He could only hurt. He had not known until these past two
days that he could feel so much or bear so much pain. He buried his face
in the cushions of the long couch in the—living room?—anyway, the place
where indoors and outdoors were as tangled as his heart, but more
harmoniously—and gave himself up to sodden hurt.

In time, someone knelt beside him and touched him lightly on the neck.
He twisted his head enough to be able to see. It was Tyng, her hair all
but luminous in the dimness, and her face, what he could see of it,
nothing but compassion. She said, “Would you like me to stay with you
instead?” and with the absolute honesty of the stricken, he cried,
“There couldn’t be anyone else instead!”

Her sorrow, its genuineness, was unmistakable. She told him of it,
touched him once more, and slipped away. Sometime during the night he
twisted himself awake enough to find the room they had given him, and
found surcease in utter black exhaustion.

Awake in daylight, he sought his other surcease, which was work, and
began his catalogue of resources. Everyone tried at one time or another
to communicate with him, but unless it was work he shut it off (except,
of course, for the irresistible Handr, who became his fast and lifelong
friend). He found Tyng near him more and more frequently, and usefully
so; he had not become so surly that he would refuse a stylus or
reference book (opened at the right place) when it was placed in his
hand exactly at the moment he needed it. Tyng was with him for many
hours, alert but absolutely silent, before he unbent enough to ask her
for this or that bit of information, or wondered about weights and
measures and man-hour calculations done in the Vexveltian way. If she
did not know, she found out with a minimum of delay and absolute
clarity. She knew, however, a very great deal more than he had
suspected. So the time came when he was chattering like a macaw, eagerly
planning the next day’s work with her.

He never spoke to Tamba. He did not mean to hurt her, but he could sense
her eagerness to respond to him and he could not bear it. She, out of
consideration, just stopped trying.

One particularly knotty statistical sequence kept him going for two days
and two nights without stopping. Tyng kept up with him all the way
without complaint until, in the wee small hours of the third morning,
she rolled up her eyes and collapsed. He staggered up on legs gone
asleep with too much sitting, and shook the statistics out of his eyes
to settle her on the thick fur rug, straighten the twisted knee. In what
little light spilled from his abandoned hooded lamp, she was exquisite,
especially because of his previous knowledge that she was exquisite in
the most brilliant of glares. The shadows added something to the
alabaster, and her unconscious pale lips were no longer darker than her
face, and she seemed strangely statuesque and non-living. She was
wearing a Cretan sort of dress, a tight stomacher holding the bare
breasts cupped and supporting a diaphanous skirt. Troubled that the
stomacher might impede her breathing, he unhooked it and put it back.
The flesh of her midriff where it had been was, to the finger if not to
the eye, pinched and ridged. He kneaded it gently and pursued
indefinable thoughts through the haze of fatigue: pyrophyllite, Lethe,
brother, recoverable vanadium salts, Vorhidin, precipitate, Tyng’s
watching me. Tyng in the almost dark was watching him. He took his eyes
from her and looked down her body to his hand. It had stopped moving
some vague time ago, slipped into slumber of its own accord. Were her
eyes open now or closed? He leaned forward to see and over-balanced.
They fell asleep with their lips touching, not yet having kissed at all.

The pre-Nova ancient Plato tells of the earliest human, a quadruped with
two sexes. And one terrible night in a storm engendered by the forces of
evil, all the humans were torn in two; and ever since, each has sought
the other half of itself. Any two of opposite sexes can make something,
but it is usually incomplete in some way. But when one part finds its
true other half, no power on earth can keep them apart, nor drive them
apart once they join. This happened that night, beginning at some moment
so deep in sleep that neither could ever remember it. What happened to
each was all the way into new places where nothing had ever been before,
and it was forever. The essence of such a thing is acceptance, and lest
he be judged, Charli Bux ceased to judge quite so much and began to
learn something of the ways of life around him. Life around him
certainly concealed very little. The children slept where they chose.
Their sexual play was certainly no more enthusiastic or more frequent
than any other kind of play—and no more concealed. There was very much
less talk about sex than he had ever encountered in any group of any
age. He kept on working hard, but no longer to conceal facts from
himself. He saw a good many things he had not permitted himself to see
before, and found to his surprise that they were not, after all, the end
of the world.

He had one more very, very bad time coming to him. He sometimes slept in
Tyng’s room, she sometimes in his. Early one morning he awoke alone,
recalling some elusive part of the work, and got up and padded down to
her room. He realized when it was too late to ignore it what the soft
singing sound meant; it was very much later that he was able to realize
his fury at the discovery that this special song was not his alone to
evoke. He was in her room before he could stop himself, and out again,
shaking and blind.

He was sitting on the wet earth in the green hollow under a willow when
Vorhidin found him. (He never knew how Vorhidin had accomplished this,
nor for that matter how he had come there himself.) He was staring
straight ahead and had been doing so for so long that his eyeballs were
dry and the agony was enjoyable. He had forced his fingers so hard down
into the ground that they were buried to the wrists. Three nails were
bent and broken over backwards and he was still pushing.

Vorhidin did not speak at all at first, but merely sat down beside him.
He waited what he felt was long enough and then softly called the young
man’s name. Charli did not move. Vorhidin then put a hand on his
shoulder and the result was extraordinary. Charli Bux moved nothing
visibly but the cords of his throat and his jaw, but at the first touch
of the Vexveltian’s hand he threw up. It was what is called clinically
“projectile” vomiting. Soaked and spattered from hips to feet, dry-eyed
and staring, Charli sat still. Vorhidin, who understood what had
happened and may even have expected it, also remained just as he was, a
hand on the young man’s shoulder. “Say the words!” he snapped.

Charli Bux swiveled his head to look at the big man. He screwed up his
eyes and blinked them, and blinked again. He spat sour out of his mouth,
and his lips twisted and trembled. “Say the words,” said Vorhidin
quietly but forcefully, because he knew Charli could not contain them
but had vomited rather than enunciate them. “Say the words.”

“Y-y—” Charli had to spit again. “You,” he croaked. “You—her _father!”_
he screamed, and in a split second he became a dervish, a windmill, a
double flail, a howling wolverine. The loamy hands, blood-muddy, so
lacked control from the excess of fury that they never became fists.
Vorhidin crouched where he was and took it all. He did not attempt to
defend himself beyond an occasional small accurate movement of the head,
to protect his eyes. He could heal from almost anything the blows might
do, but unless the blows were spent, Charli Bux might never heal at all.
It went on for a long time because something in Charli would not show,
probably would not even feel, fatigue. When the last of the resources
was gone, the collapse was sudden and total. Vorhidin knelt grunting,
got painfully to his feet, bent dripping blood over the unconscious
Terran, lifted him in his arms, and carried him gently into the house.

Vorhidin explained it all, in time. It took a great deal of time,
because Charli could accept nothing at all from anyone at first, and
then nothing from Vorhidin, and after that, only small doses. Summarized
from half a hundred conversations, this is the gist:

“Some unknown ancient once wrote,” said Vorhidin, “ ‘Tain’t what you
don’t know that hurts you; it’s what you do know that ain’t so.’ Answer
me some questions. Don’t stop to think. (Now that’s silly. Nobody off
Vexvelt ever stops to think about incest. They’ll say a lot, mind you,
and fast, but they don’t think.) I’ll ask, you answer. How many bisexual
species—birds, beasts, fish, and insects included—how many show any sign
of the incest taboo?”

“I really couldn’t say. I don’t recall reading about it, but then, who’d
write such a thing? I’d say—quite a few. It would be only natural.”

“Wrong. Wrong twice, as a matter of fact. _Homo sapiens_ has the patent,
Charli—all over the wall-to-wall universe, only mankind. Wrong the
second: it would _not_ be natural. It never was, it isn’t, and it never
will be natural.”

“Matter of terms, isn’t it? I’d call it natural. I mean, it comes
naturally. It doesn’t have to be learned.”

“Wrong. It does have to be learned. I can document that, but that’ll
wait—you can go through the library later. Accept the point for the
argument.”

“For the argument, then.”

“Thanks. What percentage of people do you think have sexual feelings
about their siblings—brothers and sisters?”

“What age are you talking about?”

“Doesn’t matter.”

“Sexual feelings don’t begin until a certain age, do they?”

“Don’t they? What would you say the age is, on the average?”

“Oh—depends on the indi—but you did say ‘average,’ didn’t you? Let’s put
it around eight. Nine maybe.”

“Wrong. Wait till you have some of your own, you’ll find out. I’d put it
at two or three minutes. I’d be willing to bet it existed a whole lot
before that, too. By some weeks.”

“I don’t believe it!”

“I know you don’t,” said Vorhidin. “ ‘Strue all the same. What about the
parent of the opposite sex?”

“Now, that would have to wait for a stage of consciousness capable of
knowing the difference.”

“Wel-l-l—you’re not as wrong as usual,” he said, but he said it kindly.
“But you’d be amazed at how early that can be. They can smell the
difference long before they can see it. A few days, a week.”

“I never knew.”

“I don’t doubt that a bit. Now, let’s forget everything you’ve seen
here. Let’s pretend you’re back on Lethe and I ask you, what would be
the effects on a culture if each individual had immediate and welcome
access to all the others?”

_“Sexual_ access?” Charlie made a laugh, a nervous sort of sound.
“Sexual excess, I’d call it.”

“There’s no such thing,” said the big man flatly. “Depending on who you
are and what sex, you can do it only until you can’t do it any more, or
you can keep on until finally nothing happens. One man might get along
beautifully with some mild kind of sexual relief twice a month or less.
Another might normally look for it eight, nine times a day.”

“I’d hardly call that normal.”

“I would. Unusual it might be, but it’s one hundred percent normal for
the guy who has it, long as it isn’t pathological. By which I mean,
capacity is capacity, by the cupful, by the horsepower, by the flight
ceiling. Man or machine, you do no harm by operating within the
parameters of design. What does do harm—lots of it, and some of the
worst kind—is guilt and a sense of sin, where the sin turns out to be
some sort of natural appetite. I’ve read case histories of boys who have
suicided because of a nocturnal emission, or because they yielded to the
temptation to masturbate after five, six weeks of self-denial—a denial,
of course, that all by itself makes them preoccupied, absolutely
obsessed by something that should have no more importance than clearing
the throat. (I wish I could say that this kind of horror story lives
only in the ancient scripts, but on many a world right this minute, it
still goes on.)

“This guilt and sin thing is easier for some people to understand if you
take it outside the area of sex. There are some religious orthodoxies
which require a very specific diet, and the absolute exclusion of
certain items. Given enough indoctrination for long enough, you can keep
a man eating only (we’ll say) ‘flim’ while ‘flam’ is forbidden. He’ll
get along on thin moldy flim and live half starved in a whole warehouse
full of nice fresh flam. You can make him ill—even kill him, if you have
the knack—just by convincing him that the flim he just ate was really
flam in disguise. Or you can drive him psychotic by slipping him
suggestions until he acquires a real taste for flam and gets a supply
and hides it and nibbles at it secretly every time he fights temptation
and loses.

“So imagine the power of guilt when it isn’t a flim-and-flam kind of
manufactured orthodoxy you’re violating, but a deep pressure down in the
cells somewhere. It’s as mad, and as dangerous, as grafting in an
ethical-guilt structure which forbids or inhibits yielding to the need
for the B-vitamin complex or potassium.”

“Oh, but,” Charli interrupted, “now you’re talking about vital
necessities—survival factors.”

“I sure as hell am,” said Vorhidin in Charli’s own idiom, and grinned a
swift and hilarious—and very accurate—imitation of Charli’s flash-beacon
smile. “Now it’s time to trot out some of the things I mentioned before,
things that can hurt you much more than ignorance—the things you know
that ain’t so.” He laughed suddenly. “This is kind of fun, you know?
I’ve been to a lot of worlds, and some are miles and years different
from others in a thousand ways: but this thing I’m about to demonstrate,
this particular shut-the-eyes, shut-the-brains conversation you can get
anywhere you go. Are you ready? Tell me, then: what’s wrong with incest?
I take it back—you know me. Don’t tell me. Tell some stranger, some
fume-sniffer or alcohol addict in a spaceport bar.” He put out both
hands, the fingers so shaped that one could all but see light glisten
from the imaginary glass he held. He said in a slurred voice, “Shay,
shtranger, whut’s a-wrong wit’ in-shest, hm?” He closed one eye and
rolled the other toward Charli.

Charli stopped to think. “You mean, morally, or what?”

“Let’s skip that whole segment. Right and wrong depend on too many
things from one place to another, although I have some theories of my
own. No—let’s be sitting in this bar and agree that incest is just
awful, and go on from there. What’s really wrong with it?”

“You breed too close, you get faulty offspring. Idiots and dead babies
without heads and all that.”

“I knew it! I knew it!” crowed the big Vexveltian. “Isn’t it wonderful?
From the rocky depths of a Stone Age culture through the brocades and
knee-breeches sort of grand opera civilizations all the way out to the
computer technocracies, where they graft electrodes into their heads and
shunt their thinking into a box—you ask that question and you get that
answer. It’s something everybody just _knows_. You don’t have to look at
the evidence.”

“Where do you go for evidence?”

“To dinner, for one place, where you’ll eat idiot pig or feebleminded
cow. Any livestock breeder will tell you that, once you have a strain
you want to keep and develop, you breed father to daughter and to
granddaughter, and then brother to sister. You keep that up indefinitely
until the desirable trait shows up recessive, and you stop it there. But
it might never show up recessive. In any case, it’s rare indeed when
anything goes wrong in the very first generation; but you in the bar,
there, you’re totally convinced that it will. And are you prepared to
say that every mental retard is the product of an incestuous union?
You’d better not, or you’ll hurt the feelings of some pretty nice
people. That’s a tragedy that can happen to anybody, and I doubt there’s
any more chance of it between related parents than there is with anyone
else.

“But you still don’t see the funniest … or maybe it’s just the oddest
part of that thing you know that just ain’t so. Sex is a pretty popular
topic on most worlds. Almost every aspect of it that is ever mentioned
has nothing to do with procreation. For every mention of pregnancy or
childbirth, I’d say there are hundreds which deal only with the sex act
itself. But mention incest, and the response always deals with
offspring. Always! To consider and discuss a pleasure or love
relationship between blood relatives, you’ve apparently got to make some
sort of special mental effort that nobody, anywhere, seems able to do
easily—some not at all.”

“I have to admit I never made it. But then—what _is_ wrong with incest,
with or without pregnancy?”

“Aside from moral considerations, you mean. The moral consideration is
that it’s a horrifying thought, and it’s a horrifying thought because it
always has been. Biologically speaking, I’d say there’s nothing wrong
with it. Nothing. I’d go even further, with Dr. Phelvelt—ever hear of
him?”

“I don’t think so.”

“He was a biological theorist who could get one of his books banned on
worlds that had never censored anything before—even on worlds which had
science and freedom of research and freedom of speech as the absolute
keystones of their whole structure. Anyway, Phelvelt had a very special
kind of mind, always ready to take the next step no matter where it is,
without insisting that it’s somewhere where it isn’t. He thought well,
he wrote well, and he had a vast amount of knowledge outside his
specialty and a real knack for unearthing what he happened not to know.
And he called that sexual tension between blood relatives a survival
factor.”

“How did he come to that?”

“By a lot of separate paths which came together in the same place.
Everybody knows (this one _is_ so!) that there are evolutionary
pressures which make for changes in a species. Not much (before
Phelvelt) had been written about stabilizing forces. But don’t you see,
inbreeding is one of them?”

“Not offhand, I don’t.”

“Well, look at it, man! Take a herd animal as a good example. The bull
covers his cows, and when they deliver heifers and the heifers grow up,
he covers them too. Sometimes there’s a third and even fourth generation
of them before he gets displaced by a younger bull. And all that while,
the herd characteristics are purified and reinforced. You don’t easily
get animals with slightly different metabolisms which might tend to
wander away from the feeding ground the others were using. You won’t get
high-bottom cows which would necessitate Himself bringing something to
stand on when he came courting.” Through Charli’s shout of laughter he
continued, “So there you have it—stabilization, purification, greater
survival value—all resulting from the pressure to breed in.”

“I see, I see. And the same thing would be true of lions or fish or tree
toads, or—”

“Or any animal. A lot of things have been said about Nature, that she’s
implacable, cruel, wasteful, and so on. I like to think
she’s—reasonable. I concede that she reaches that state cruelly, at
times, and wastefully and all the rest. But she has a way of coming up
with the pragmatic solution, the one that works. To build in a pressure
which tends to standardize and purify a successful stage, and to call in
the exogene, the infusion of fresh blood, only once in several
generations—that seems to me most reasonable.”

“More so,” Charli said, “than what we’ve always done, when you look at
it that way. Every generation a new exogene, the blood kept churned up,
each new organism full of pressures which haven’t had a chance with the
environment.”

“I suppose,” said Vorhidin, “you could argue that the incest taboo is
responsible for the restlessness that pulled mankind out of the caves,
but that’s a little too simplistic for me. I’d have preferred a mankind
that moved a little more slowly, a little more certainly, and never fell
back. I think the ritual exogamy that made inbreeding a crime and
‘deceased wife’s sister’ a law against incest is responsible for another
kind of restlessness.”

He grew very serious. “There’s a theory that certain normal habit
patterns should be allowed to run their course. Take the sucking reflex,
for example. It has been said that infants who have been weaned too
early plague themselves all their lives with oral activity—chewing on
straws, smoking intoxicants in pipes, drinking out of bottle by
preference, nervously manipulating the lips, and so on. With that as an
analogy, you may look again at the restlessness of mankind all through
his history. Who but a gaggle of frustrates, never in their lives
permitted all the ways of love within the family, could coin such a
concept as ‘motherland’ and give their lives to it and for it? There’s a
great urge to love Father, and another to topple him. Hasn’t humanity
set up its beloved Fathers, its Big Brothers, loved and worshiped and
given and died for them, rebelled and killed and replaced them? A lot of
them richly deserved it, I concede, but it would have been better to
have done it on its own merits and not because they were nudged by a
deep-down, absolutely sexual tide of which they could not speak because
they had learned that it was unspeakable.

“The same sort of currents flow within the family unit. So-called
‘sibling rivalry’ is too well known to be described, and the frequency
of bitter quarreling between siblings is, in most cultures and their
literature, a sort of cliché. Only a very few psychologists have dared
to put forward the obvious explanation that, more often than not, these
frictions are inverted love feelings, well salted with horror and guilt.
It’s a pattern that makes conflict between siblings all but a certainty,
and it’s a problem which, once stated, describes its own solution … Have
you ever read Vexworth? No? You should—I think you’d find him
fascinating. Ecologist; in his way quite as much of a giant as
Phelvelt.”

“Ecologist—that has something to do with life and environment, right?”

“Ecology has _everything to_ do with life and environment; it studies
them as reciprocals, as interacting and mutually controlling forces. It
goes without saying that the main aim and purpose of any life form is
optimum survival; but ‘optimum survival’ is a meaningless term without
considering the environment in which it has to happen. As the
environment changes, the organism has to change its ways and means, even
its basic design. Human beings are notorious for changing their
environment, and in most of our history in most places, we have made
these changes without ecological considerations. This is disaster, every
time. This is over-population, past the capabilities of producing food
and shelter enough. This is the rape of irreplaceable natural resources.
This is the contamination of water supplies. And it is also the twisting
and thwarting of psychosexual needs in the emotional environment.

“Vexvelt was founded by those two, Charli—Phelvelt and Vexworth—and is
named for them. As far as I know it is the only culture ever devised on
ecological lines. Our sexual patterns derive from the ecological base
and are really only a very small part of our structure. Yet for that one
aspect of our lives, we are avoided and shunned and pretty much
unmentionable.”

It took a long time for Charli to be able to let these ideas in, and
longer for him to winnow and absorb them. But all the while he lived
surrounded by beauty and fulfillment, by people, young and old, who were
capable of total concentration on art and learning and building and
processing, people who gave to each other and to their land and air and
water just a little more than they took. He finished his survey largely
because he had started it; for a while he was uncertain of what he would
do with it.

When at length he came to Vorhidin and said he wanted to stay on
Vexvelt, the big man smiled, but he shook his head. “I know you want to,
Charli—but do you?”

“I don’t know what you mean.” He looked out at the dark bole of one of
the Vexveltian poplars; Tyng was there, like a flower, an orchid. “It’s
more than that,” said Charli, “more than my wanting to be a Vexveltian.
You need me.”

“We love you,” Vorhidin said simply. “But—need?”

“If I went back,” said Charli Bux, “and Terratu got its hands on my
survey, what do you think would become of Vexvelt?”

“You tell me.”

“First Terratu would come to trade, and then others, and then others;
and then they would fight each other, and fight you … you need someone
here who knows this, really knows it, and who can deal with it when it
starts. It will start, you know, even without my survey; sooner or later
someone will be able to do what I did—a shipment of feldspar, a sheet of
pure metal. They will destroy you.”

“They will never come near us.”

“You think not. Listen: no matter how the other worlds disapprove, there
is one force greater: greed.”

“Not in this case, Charli. And this is what I want you to be able to
understand, all the way down to your cells. Unless you do, you can never
live here. We are shunned, Charli. If you had been born here, that would
not matter so much to you. If you throw in your lot with us, it would
have to be a total commitment. But you should not make such a decision
without understanding how completely you will be excluded from
everything else you have ever known.”

“What makes you think I don’t know it now?”

“You say we need defending. You say other-world traders will exploit us.
That only means you don’t understand. Charli: listen to me. Go back to
Terratu. Make the strongest presentation you can for trade with Vexvelt.
See how they react. Then you’ll know—then you can decide.”

“And aren’t you afraid I might be right, and because of me, Vexvelt will
be robbed and murdered?”

And Vorhidin shook his big head, smiling, and said, “Not one bit, Charli
Bux. Not one little bit.”

So Charli went back, and saw (after a due delay) the Archive Master, and
learned what he learned, and came out and looked about him at his home
world and, through that, at all the worlds like it; and then he went to
the secret place where the Vexveltian ship was moored, and it opened to
him.

Tyng was there, Tamba, and Vorhidin. Charli said, “Take me home.”

In the last seconds before they took the Drive jump, and he could look
through the port at the shining face of Terratu for the last time in his
life, Charli said, “Why? Why? How did human beings come to hate this one
thing so much that they would rather die insane and in agony than accept
it? How did it happen, Vorhidin?”

“I don’t know,” said the Vexveltian.

_Afterword:_

And now you know what sort of a science fiction story this is, and
perhaps something about science fiction stories that you didn’t know
before.

I have always been fascinated by the human mind’s ability to think
itself to a truth, and then to take that one step more (truly the basic
secret of all human progress) and the inability of so many people to
learn the trick. Case in point: “We mean to get that filth off the
newsstands and out of the bookstores.” Ask why, and most such crusaders
will simply point at the “filth” and wonder that you asked. But a few
will take one step more: “Because youngsters might get their hands on
it.” That satisfies most, but ask: “And suppose they do?” a still
smaller minority will think it through to: “Because it’s bad for them.”
Ask again: “In what way is it bad for them?” and a handful can reach
this: “It will arouse them.” By now you’ve probably run out of
crusaders, but if there are a couple left, ask them, “How does being
aroused harm a child?” and if you can get them to take that one more
step, they will have to take it out of the area of emotional conviction
and into the area of scientific research. Such studies are available,
and invariably they show that such arousement is quite harmless—indeed,
there is something abnormal about anyone who is not or cannot be so
roused. The only possible harm that can result comes not from the sexual
response itself but from the guilt-making and punitive attitude of the
social environment—most of all that part of it which is doing the
crusading.

Casting about for some more or less untouched area in which to exercise
this one-step-more technique, I hit on this one. That was at least
twenty years ago, and I have had to wait until now to find a welcome for
anything so unsettling. I am, of course, very grateful. I hope the yarn
starts some fruitful argument.



RUNESMITH


by Harlan Ellison® and Theodore Sturgeon

_Dedicated to the memory of Cordwainer Smith_

Crouching there in the darkness on the 102nd floor, Smith fumbled for
the skin-bag of knucklebones. Somewhere down below in the
stairwell—probably the ninety-fifth or -sixth floor by now, judging from
the firefly ricochets of their flashlight beams on the walls, coming
up—the posse was sniffing him out. Soundlessly he put his good shoulder
against the fire door, but it was solid. Probably bulged and wedged for
months, since Smith had made the big mistake.

He was effectively trapped in a chimney. The dead stairwell of the
carcass that was the Empire State Building, in the corpse that was New
York City, in the mammoth graveyard he had made of the world. And
finding the only escape hatch closed off, he reluctantly fumbled at his
belt for the skin-bag of knucklebones.

Smith. First and last of the magic men. About to cast the runes again.

The posse had reached the ninety-ninth floor. If he were going to do
it—terrible!—he had to do it now …

He hesitated a second. There were fifteen or sixteen men and women in
that pack. He didn’t want to hurt them. Despite their slavering hatred,
despite their obvious intention, he was reluctant to call into effect
that power again.

He had done it before, and destroyed the world.

“He’s gotta be up there,” one of them called down to the rest of the
pack. “Now we got ’im.”

The silence they had maintained since morning, climbing like insects up
the inside of the Empire State, was suddenly broken. “Let’s take ’im!”
yelled another one. The slap-slap of their rag-and-hide-wrapped feet on
the metal stairs rose to Smith. He swallowed and it tasted sour, and he
upended the skin-bag.

The knucklebones spilled chatteringly on the landing. The pattern was
random; he murmured. Hunkered down on his haunches, he called up the
power, and there was the faintest hiss of a breeze in the stairwell. A
breeze that was peculiarly bittersweet, the way Holland chocolates used
to be. A chill breeze that broke sweat out on Smith’s spine, in the
hollows between his shoulder blades. Then the screams began. Below him,
on the one hundredth floor.

Terrible screams. Small creatures with things growing inside them,
pushing their vital organs out of alignment, then out through the skin.
Watery screams. As solids turned liquid and boiled and ran leaving their
containers empty husks. Short, sharp screams. As dull cutting edges
appeared where none had been before and severed the flesh that had
contained them when they were merely bones. Then the screams stopped.
The silence that had climbed with the posse since morning, _that_
silence deepened, returned.

Smith crawled away from the knucklebones, far into the corner of the
landing, drew his boney knees up to his bearded chin, and whimpered. The
breeze—casting about like an animal that was still hungry—reluctantly
died away, fled back to the place from which it had come.

Smith, alone. Caster of runes. Reader from a strange grimoire only he
could interpret. The only survivor of the catastrophe he had caused. The
only survivor because anyone else out there was merely one step away
from animal. Smith, whimpering.

Smith, alone.

_Alone_. The terrible word broke away out of him like projectile vomit:
“Alone!” and fled to the walls, rebounded to sting him, turned
echo-edged and rebounded again.

“But for me.” Then a girl laughed girl-laughter, and down amidst the
silence was the sound of quick soft footsteps, and again girl-laughter,
not spread about the floor below, but right in the stairwell. And it was
laughter again, footstepping up and nearer.

Terror and joy, terror and joy, shock and disbelief. Terror and joy and
a terrible fear: oh, guard, oh fight, oh run, _look out!_ Grunting
_akh!_, grunting _hah!_ Smith scrabbled to his knucklebones, so hurried
that he would not take standing-time, but hurried hunkering, hams and
knuckles to his knucklebones. He swept them into a clack-chattering
heap, and “Mind now,” he cautioned her (whoever she was), “I’ll cast
again. I will!” he plucked up a bone, fumbled in the blackness for the
magic bag, put in the bone, plucked up another, his shiny-dry dirty
hands doing his seeing, for his eyes were elbow-useless for seeing in
such a black.

“But oh! I love you,” she said, so near now she could say it in a
strumming whisper and be heard: oh! What a voice, oh, a clean, warm
woman’s voice, full of care and meaning: but oh! She loved him.

Terror and joy. He plucked up the last of the bones, his eyes in the
black-on-black, driving at the doorway to the stairs, where now a
hand-torch flashlightninged an agony into him; and he cried out. The
flash was gone a-borning, too brief, almost, to have a name at all, gone
before its pointed tip had slashed its way from lens to optic nerve,
gone long before its agony was done with him. And something alive, _life
alive even after what he had done;_ life alive was breathing in the
dark.

A threat, a warning—yes and a kind of begging: _be real! and in God’s
name don’t make me do it again!_—he rattled his bag of bones.

The torch lit, arced, wheeling and swording a great blade of light,
scraping and spinning across the floor to him. The flashlight struck the
one knee he had down and he screamed, not for the knee but for the light
sandblasting his unready open eyes. She made wide-smiling,
welcome-words: “Here’s light, my darling. Look at me.”

He hand-heeled the scorching water out of his eyes and picked up the
light. He pointed it at the doorway, and the man who stood there was
seven feet, one and a half inches tall and wrapped in rags, he had a
bloody beard down to his clavicles and a split stomach, and when the
light hit him he bowed down and down and crashed dead on his face. He
was a man whose liver was homogenized and had sweated out through the
pores of his back—all of it, and a liver is a very very large thing, he
knew that now.

“Oh please,” she begged him, “find me beautiful …” and since he had not
thought to move the light and the big dead bloody-bearded man stood no
longer in the wall, he saw a naked woman standing well back from the
doorway, at the head of the stairs.

For a long time he crouched there with the light in one hand and his bag
of bones in the other.

He rose to his feet and the bones tumbled a whisper down the path of
light to the woman. He was ever so careful, because perhaps if the light
left her she might be gone. He took a careful step, because perhaps she
would escape. But no, but no, she waited there sculpture-still and he
went to her.

She looked straight and unblinking at the light as the light grew and
grew near, until at last he could reach her. He transferred the bag to
dangle from the fingers which held the light, studying her face as he
had studied the darkness. He knew the instant before he touched her what
his hand told him when it touched: that she was dead. She toppled away
from him backwards and down, and disappeared in the darkness of the
stairwell. The final sound of the fall was soft, vaguely moist, but
ended.

Smith backed to the wall of the landing. The first finger of his right
hand went idly to his lips, and he sucked on it. It had to have been a
cruel joke of his own magic. These perambulating corpses. Something
inherent in the incantations as they were filtered down through his
consciousness, his conscience, his libido, his id. They were sympathetic
magic, and that meant he, himself, Smith, was an integral part, not
merely the voice-box. Not merely a way station through which the charms
worked. He was part _of_ them, helped form them, was as necessary as the
wood into which the nails were driven to form the shell of the house.
And if this were so, then the filtering process was necessarily
influenced by what he was, who he was, what he thought. So:

Side-effects.

Like the destruction of the civilization he had known. Like the hideous
torments that came to those he was compelled to destroy. Like the
walking dead. Like the visible, tangible, terrifying creatures of his
mind; that came and went with his magic.

He was alone, this Smith. But unfortunately he was alone inside a skull
densely populated with Furies.

In the rabbit warren he called a home, that barricaded cistern to which
entrance was only possible through the ripped and sundered walls of the
IRT-7th Avenue subway tunnel just north of 36th Street, Smith collapsed
with weariness. He had failed to get the canned goods. His mouth had
watered for days, for Cling peaches, for that exquisite sweetness. He
had left the eyrie late the night before, heading uptown toward a tiny
Puerto Rican _bodega_ he had known was still intact. A grocery he had
seen soon after the mistake, and around which he had danced widdershins,
placing a powerful incantation in the air, where it would serve as
shield and obstruction.

But crossing Times Square—with the checkerboard pattern of bottomless
pits and glass spires—the posse had seen him. They had recognized his
blue serge suit immediately, and one of them had unleashed a bolt from a
crossbow. It had struck just above Smith’s head, on the frame of the
giant metal waste basket that asked the now-vanished citizenry of
Manhattan to KEEP OUR CITY CLEAN. Then a second bolt, that had grazed
his shoulder. He had run, and they had followed, and what had happened,
had happened, and now he was back. Peachless. He lay down on the
chaise-lounge, and fell asleep at once.

The incubus spoke to the nixie.

_Have we opened him up enough yet?_ No, not nearly enough. We counted
too much on the first blast. _But what’s left?_ Enough is left that I
still have difficulty emerging. We’ll have to wait. They’ll do it to
him, and for us. There’s all the time in eternity. Stop rushing. _I’m
concerned. I have my principals as well as you, and they have equally as
unpleasant a way of making their wishes and sorrows known as yours_.
They’ll have to wait, like mine. _They won’t wait_. Well, they’ll have
to. This is a careful operation. _They’ve waited two million eternities
already_. You turn poetry, but that isn’t the figure. _A long time, at
any rate_. Then a few more cycles won’t twit them that much. _I’ll tell
them what you said_. You do that. _I can’t guarantee anything_. When did
you ever? _I do my best_. That’s an explanation, not an excuse. _I’m
leaving now_. You’re fading; it’s obvious you’re leaving. _You’ll stay
with Smith?_ No, I’ll leave him, and go take a rest at the black pool
spa … of course I’ll stay with him! Get out of here. _Arrogance!_
Imbecile!

Smith slept, and did not dream. But there were voices. When he awoke, he
was more weary than when he had lay down. The grimoire still stood open,
propped against the skull on the kitchen table he had set against the
wall. The charts were still there, the candle was still half-down.

Something ferocious was gnawing at the back of his mind. He tried to
focus on it, but it went chittering away into the darkness. He looked
around the cistern. It was chill and empty. The fire had gone out. He
swung his legs off the cot and stood up. Bones cracked. There was pain
in his shoulder where a crossbow bolt had grazed him. He went to the
rack and took out a corked decanter, pulled the cork with his teeth and
let the dark gray smoke-fluid within dribble onto the raw, angry wound.

He was trying to remember. Something. What?

Oh … yes. Now he remembered. The girl. The one who was spreading the
word about him. _Blue serge suit_, she was telling them, crowds of them,
rat-packs in the streets, _blue serge suit, a little weasel man, with a
limp. He’s the one who did it. He’s the one who killed the world_.

If he’d been able to get out of the city, he might have been able to
survive without having to kill anyone else. But they’d closed off the
bridges and tunnels … they were now actively looking for him, scouring
the city. And beyond the city … now … it wasn’t safe.

Not even for him, for Smith who had done it.

So he had to find the girl. If he could stop her mouth, end her crusade
to find him, he might be able to escape them, go to the Bronx, or even
Staten Island (no, not Staten Island: it wasn’t there).

He knew he must find her quickly. He had had dreams, there in the
cistern. He had gone to Nicephorus to glean their meaning, and even
though he read Greek imperfectly he found that his dream of burning
coals meant a threat of some harm at the hands of his enemies, his dream
of walking on broken shells meant he would escape from his enemies’
snares, his dream of burning incense foretold danger, and his dream of
holding keys meant there was an obstacle in the path of his plans. The
girl.

He prepared to go out to find her. He took a piece of virgin parchment
from the sealed container on which had been inscribed the perfect square
in Latin:

[]

and with the dried beak of a black chicken he wrote in purple ink he had
made from grapes and shoe polish, the names of the three Kings, Gaspar,
Melchior, and Balthazar. He put the parchment in his left shoe, and as
he left the cistern he made the first step with his left foot,
pronouncing the names softly.

Thus he knew he would travel without encountering any difficulties. And
he wore a black agate, veined with white. To protect him from all danger
and to give him victory over his enemies.

Why had they somehow failed him at other times?

It was night. The city glowed with an eerie off-orange color, as though
it had lain beneath great waters for ages, then the water had been
drained away and the city left to rust.

He conjured up a bat and tied to its clawed foot a kind of kite-tail
made from the carefully twined and knotted hair of men he had found
lying dead in the streets. Then he swung the bat around and around his
head, speaking words that had no vowels in them, and loosed the bat into
the rusty night. It flew up and circled and squealed like an infant
being skewered, and when it came back down to light on his shoulder, it
told him where she was.

He turned the bat free. It swooped twice to bless him, then went off
into the sky.

It was a long walk uptown. He took Broadway, after a while avoiding the
checkerwork of pits without even seeing them. The buildings had been
turned to glass. Many of them had shattered from sounds in the street
caverns.

There was a colony of things without hands living in rubble-strewn shops
on Broadway and 72nd Street. He got through them using the black agate.
It blinded them with darkness and they fell back crying for mercy.

Finally he came to the place the bat told him to find if he wanted to
locate the girl. It was, of course, where he had lived when he had made
the mistake. He went inside the old building and found the room that had
been his.

Here it had all begun, or had it begun when he went to work at the Black
Arts Bookstore? or when in college he had sunk himself so deeply in the
arcane back in the library stacks that he had flunked out? Or perhaps
when as a youth he had first thrilled to the ads in yellowed copies of
_Weird Tales: UNLOCK YOUR SECRET POWER, ANCIENT MYSTERIES OF THE
PYRAMIDS REVEALED,_ or even earlier, when on All Hallows’ Eve he and
some others had drawn a pentagram in yellow chalk? How old had he been
then? Eight? Nine?

There had been the candles and the geometric shape drawn on the floor,
and he had begun to chant _Eu-hu, Elihu, Asmodeus, deus deus
stygios_—nonsense syllables of course—how could they be anything else?
But they had come to him and something in his monotonous soprano had
shaped them—no, fleshed them. A glove looks like a hand; thrust a hand
into it and it looks the same but is not, it is a far more potent thing.
Words are words—nothings—but there seemed to be that in his young
chanting that filled, that fleshed them, each of them. And as for the
words themselves, they came to him each dictated by the last, like the
cadence of pacing feet: being here, there is only one place to go next;
from _Ahriman_ to _Satani_ is somehow simply obvious, and then like
hopscotch the young voice bounced on _Thanatos, Thanatos, Thanatos_. It
was then that the bulge happened in the middle of the pentagram. The
floor couldn’t have swelled like that (it showed no signs later), but it
did all the same, and the thin pennants of many-colored smoke and the
charnel smell did happen, and the crowding feeling of—of—of Something
coming up, coming in. Then goggle-eyed kids deliciously ready to be
terrified were terrified, ready to scream, screamed, ready to escape,
fled in a galloping synergy of wild fears—all but young Smith, who
stayed to watch the plumes of smoke subside, the bulge recede … for his
chant had stopped, a panic-driven sneaker had cut the careful yellow
frame of the pentagram, so that soon nothing was left but the echoes of
that abandoned abattoir smell and in Smith’s heart a terrified yet
fascinated dedication; he cried, he whispered: “It really worked …”

An old wives’ tale once had heart-attack victims munch on the leaves of
the foxglove and recover. Along came science and extracted digitalis. In
just this way Smith learned what it really is about bat’s blood, and the
special potency of the body-fat of a baby murdered and bled at the dark
of the moon, and how these and many other things may be synthesized and
their potency multiplied without recourse to bats or babies, stars or
stumpwater, Eucharists, eunuchs, or unicorn horn.

Basics are simple. The theory of solid-state electronic is complicated
but the thing itself is not; the tiny block of semi-conductive germanium
called transistor, nuvistor, thermistor, tunnel diode is, as any fool
can see, a simple thing indeed. So it was that Smith, working his way
through matters incomprehensible, indescribable, and unspeakable, came
all the way through the complexities of the earnest alchemists and
Satanists and the strangely effective religious psychology which steeps
the worship of the Nameless One sometimes called the Horned God, and
many others, until he reached basics.

Simple as a transistor, as difficult to understand.

And who, using a transistor, needs to understand it?

But a transistor (however precise) without a power supply (however tiny)
is useless. The runes and the bones without the runesmith … nothing.
With one, with the smith called Smith, fear more terrifying than any
ever known by humankind; disaster unexpected, inexplicable, seeming
random, operating on unknown logic and unleashing unknown forces.

In the hall of the Seven Faceless ones.

Stood the incubus and the nixie.

Before their masters.

Who told them.

Things they needed to know.

The time has come. After time within time that has eaten time till it be
gorged on its own substance, the time has come. You have been chosen
emissaries. You will go and you will find us an instrument and you will
train it and teach it and hone it and mold it to our needs. And when the
instrument is ready you will use it to open a portal, and we will pour
through and regain what was once and always ours, what was taken from us
when we were exiled.

Here.

Where it is cold.

Where it is dark.

Where we receive no nourishment.

You will do this.

_I am ready to serve_. So am I. But what sort of weapon do you want us
to get? _I think I know what they mean_. You always know what they mean;
listen, masters, I don’t want to be a nuisance, but I can’t work with
this incubus. He’s a complainer and a befuddler and he’s got delusions
of authority. _Masters, don’t listen to him. He’s jealous of the faith
and trust you’ve put in me. He rails under the lash of envy. My success
with the coven against the Norns infuriates him_. Rails? What the Thoth
are you gibbering about? Look, Masters, I serve gladly; there isn’t much
else for me to do. But I can’t work under this lunatic. One of us has to
be in charge of things on this. If it’s him, then put me on some other
duty. If it’s me, then put him in his place.

Silence!

You will work together as needs be.

The incubus.

The nixie will be in charge of this matter.

And you will assist.

_I serve gladly, Masters_. Then why are you foaming? _Shut up!_ Darling,
you’re lovely when you’re angry.

We will hear.

No more.

You will begin now.

Find.

The weapon and teach it.

Open the portal.

We long to return.

How you do it is your concern but.

Do not fail us.

The nixie and the incubus had worked together as well as might be
expected. The nixie said: We’ll give him magic and let him use it. We
can’t go through, not yet at least, but we can send dreams and thoughts
and desires: they’ll pass through the veil. _And what good will that
do?_

He’ll tear a rift in the veil for us. _Oh, I can’t believe the stupidity
of your ideas_. Stupid or not, it’s the way I’m doing it; carefully and
smoothly, and you keep your trachimoniae out of it. _Just don’t order me
about. I’m the highest-ranking incubus—_

Just shut up will you.

_Shut up? How dare you speak to me like that? You’d better succeed
quickly, nixie. My principals are anxious, and if you go wrong or slow
down I’ll make certain they have their way with you_.

The nixie had found his weapon. Smith. He had given him first a series
of dreams. Then a hunger to know the convolutions of black magic. The
bulge in the floor. The hunger of curiosity. Leading him, step by step
through his life: the Black Arts Book Store, the proper volumes, the
revealed secrets, the dusty little room, and at last … the power. But
given not quite whole. Given in a twisted manner. The runes had been
cast, and the mistake made—and Smith had destroyed the world, tearing
the veil in the process. But not quite enough for the return of the
Faceless Ones.

And the incubus grew impatient for his revenge.

The girl.

Smith was sorry. Standing in the room to which his bat had led him, he
was sorry. He hadn’t meant to do it. Smith had not, in the deepest
sense, known it was loaded (nor had he been meant to know); and when it
went off (in this room with half a candle and dust and books bound in
human flesh, and the great grimoire) it was aimed at the whole world.

Peking, Paris, Rome, Moscow, Detroit, New York, New Orleans, Los
Angeles: Miles of cinders burying cold roast corpses. Checkerboard
arrangements of bottomless pits and glass spires. Acres of boiling
swamp. Whole cities that were now only curling, rising green mist.
Cities and countries that had been, were totally gone.

And in the few cities that remained … Water no longer flowed through
their veins nor electricity through their nerves, and there they sat,
scraping the sky, useless, meaningless, awaiting erosion. And at their
dead feet, scurrying loners and human rat-packs, survivors hunting and
sometimes eating one another, a species in its glorious infancy with the
umbilical cord a thousand ways pinhole-perforated before it had had a
chance really to be born; and Smith knew this and had to see it all
around him, had to see it and say, “My fault. My fault.”

Guilty Smith the runesmith.

Back then, here, to the room where the runes had begun, to trap a girl
he sensed would come. He set a noise-trap at the outer door (it opened
outward so he propped a 4×4 against it and an old tin washtub under it;
open the door and _whamcrash!_) and next to it a rune-trap (which cannot
be described here) and he settled down to wait.

The nixie to the incubus:

What have you been doing? _I’ve lured him back to the focus location_.
You fool! He may suspect now. _He suspects nothing. I’ve implanted a
delusion, a girl. When he sleeps we take him and rip the veil
completely_. What girl!? What have you done? You can ruin it all, you
egomaniac! _There is no girl. A succubus. I tried earlier, but it went
wrong. This time he’s weaker, he’ll sleep, we’ll take him_.

What makes you think he’ll succumb this time, any more than he did the
last time? _Because he’s a human and he’s weak and stupid and lonely and
filled with guilt and he has never known love. I will give him love.
Love that will drain him, empty him. Then he’s mine_.

Not yours … ours!

_Not yours at all, Nixie. The Masters will see to you_.

He stood in a dark corner, waiting. And sleep suddenly seemed the most
important thing in the world to him. He wanted to sleep.

Sleep! Should a man live three-score years, one of them must go to this
inert stupidity, a biochemical habit deriving from the accident of
diurnal rotation. The caveman must huddle away behind rocks and flame
during the hours of darkness because of the nocturnal predators who can
see better in the dark than he can. They, in turn, must hide from him.
Hence the habit, long outmoded but still inescapable. A third of a life
spent sprawled out paralyzed, mostly unconscious, and oh vulnerable.
Twenty years wasted out of each life, when life itself is so brief a
sparkle in a surrounding immensity of nothingness. Brief as it is, still
we must give away a third of it to sleep, for no real reason. Twenty
years. Smith had hated and despised sleep, the cruel commanding
necessity for sleep, the intrusion, the interruption, the sheer waste of
sleep; but never had he hated it so much as now, when everyone in the
world was his enemy and all alone he must stand them off. Who would
stand sentry over Smith? Only Smith, lying mostly unconscious with his
own lids blinding him and his ears turned off and his soft belly upward
to whatever soft-footed enemy might penetrate his simple defenses.

But he could not help himself; he _wanted_ to sleep.

He lay down fully dressed and pulled a blanket over him. He murmured his
goodnight words, which for a long time had been (as he slid toward the
edge of slumber’s precipice and scanned the day past and the weeks and
months since that first terrible rune-work) “I didn’t mean it. I didn’t
mean it. I’m sorry. I’m sorry …” and as he tumbled off the edge of
waking, he would catch one awful glimpse of tomorrow—more of the same,
but worse.

But not tonight. Perhaps it was his exhaustion, the long thirty-six-hour
flight up the Empire State Building, trying, out of guilt and
compassion, not to use his terrible weapon (how many times had he made
that firm resolution … how many times, falling sickly asleep, had he
determined to walk out unarmed, to build an attention aura around
himself, to get from the new barbarians that which his guilt deserved?),
or perhaps he had reached a new peak of terror and shame, and feared
especially the vulnerability of sleep.

As he approached the dark tumble into oblivion, something made him claw
at the edge, hold fast, neither asleep nor awake, just at that point
through which he usually hurtled, unable to stay awake, on guard no
more.

And he heard voices.

_Now I send her to him. Now when he’s weakest_. Wait! Are you sure? This
man … he’s … different. There’s been a change in him. _Since we last
manipulated him? Don’t be ridiculous_. No, wait! There is … something.
Sleep. Yes, that’s it. It had to do with sleep. _I’m not waiting; my
Principals want through now, in this tick of time, now! I want success
more than you, that is why the triumph and the rewards will be mine. The
twelve generations it took to breed this Smith as a gateway and the
lifetime it took to train him. It’s all come down to me, to me to fail
or succeed, and I’ll succeed! I’m sending the succubus, now! He’s never
been loved_ … now _he’ll be loved_.

No! You fool! Your ego! Sleep is his strength. You have it all wrong.
Nothing can harm him when he sleeps!

_Success!_

Smith had a brief retinal impression of _something_ … it was being a
gateway, and what it was like. Mouth open till the flesh tore at the
corners. Darkness pouring from within him, then flames that expanded and
rolled over the land, filling the sky; and himself burning burning
burning.

Then it was gone. Smith clung for one more amazed moment to this place,
this delicately-limned turnover point between waking and sleep. This
line was a crack in—in something incomprehensible, but it was a crack
through which his mind could peep as between boards in a fence.

Something began to beat in him, daring him to move, hope. He quelled it
quickly lest it wake him altogether and those—those _others_—know of it.
Slipping, slipping, losing his clutch on this half-wakefulness, about to
drop and over end into total sleep, he snatched at phrases and concepts,
forcing himself to keep and remember them: twelve generations it took to
breed this Smith as a gateway … lifetime it took to train.

And: nothing can reach him, nothing can harm him while he’s asleep.

Sleep.

Sleep the robber, sleep the intruder, sleep the enemy—all his life he
had tried to avoid it, had succumbed as little as possible, had fought
to live without it. _Who had taught him that?_ Why did he want to
unlearn it so desperately now? And what did the doctors and poets say
about sleep: surcease, strengthener, healer, knitter-up of the raveled
sleeve of care. And he had sneered at them. Had he been _taught_ to
sneer?

He had. For _their_ purposes, he had been taught. More; he had been bred
for this—twelve generations, was it? And why? To be given the power to
decimate humanity so that something unspeakable, something long-exiled
could return to possess this world? Would it be the Earth alone, or all
the planets, the galaxies, the universe? Could it be time itself? Or
other sets of dimensions?

The one thing he must do is sleep. _Nothing can harm him when he
sleeps_.

Then she came to him. The girl from the stairwell, alive again, a second
time, or how many times back to the inky beginnings he could not even
imagine? She came to him through the door, and there was no sound of
crashing washtub; she came through the room and there was no stench and
death from the rune-trap.

She came toward him, lying there, without clothes, without sound,
without pain or anger, and she extended her flawless arms to him in
love. The pleasure of her love swept across the room. She wanted to give
herself, to give him everything, all she was and all she could be, for
no other return than his love. She wanted his love, all of his love, all
of him, everything, all the substance and strength of him.

He half-rose to meet her, and then he knew what she was, and he trembled
with the force of losing her, of destroying her, and he murmured words
without vowels and a slimy darkness began to eat at her feet, her legs,
her naked thighs, her torso, and she let one ghastly shriek as something
took her, and her face dissolved in slime and darkness, and she was
gone … and he fell back, weak.

Smith the runesmith let go his shred of wakefulness and plunged joyfully
into the healing depths. It was not until he awakened, rested and strong
and healthily starving, that he realized fully what else he had let go.

Guilt.

The sin was not his. He had been shaped to do what he had done. A
terrible enemy had made him its instrument, its weapon. You do not
accuse, condemn, imprison the murder-weapon.

The runesmith, smiling (how long since?) fumbled for the skin-bag of
knucklebones. He closed his eyes, his strong, clear rested eyes, and
turned his rested mind to the talent (inborn) and skills (instilled) in
him alone of all men ever. No jaded blind buckshot in the faces of his
kin, done in anguish to stay alive, but the careful, knowing, precise
drawing of a bead. The location, direction, range known to Smith the
weapon in ways impossible to Smith the man.

The knucklebones spilled chatteringly on the floor.

The pattern was random; his talent and his skills understood it.

He murmured a new murmur.

Hunkered down on his haunches, he called up the power.

There was the faintest hiss of a breeze in the tumbled warren of this
focus-room, a breeze that was peculiarly bittersweet, the way Holland
chocolates used to be. A chill breeze that broke sweat out on Smith’s
spine, in the hollows between his shoulder blades.

Then the screams began.

They were screams beyond sound, and surely only and immeasurable
fraction of them reached Smith, so different were they in quality and
kind from anything remotely human. Yet their echoes and their backlash
seemed to blur the world for a moment of horror beyond imagining. A
soundless, motionless quake, the terror of countless billions of
frightful beings facing death and (unlike the millions who had perished
here) knowing it, knowing why.

Smith’s skills knew as Smith himself could not, that the universe itself
was relieved of a plague.

Was it a long time later? Probably it was—Smith was never able to
remember that—when he stood up and filled his lungs with the dusty,
sweet air and looked out on tomorrow and forever with clear and
guiltless eyes.

He tested his power. It was intact.

He walked to the inner and outer barriers, kicking them down. He looked
out at the sunlit ruins of the city.

If I live, he thought (and barring accident I can live forever), I can
build it up again. I have magic; they gave it to me and no one can take
it away. Magic and science, humanity and the Powers. It’s supposed to
have worked that way long ago. It will again. Build it up again …

And if I don’t, if I fail, then at least I’ve fixed it so they have no
enemies but themselves. Terrible as that might be, there are worse
things.

He saw a flicker of movement in the distance, something feeble, hungry,
misshapen, ragged.

The runesmith stepped out of the shadows, and walked toward the movement
in the distance. There was sun now. For the first time. Because he
wanted sun. And he wanted cool breezes. And the scent of good things in
the air.

He could have it all now. They might never forgive him, but they could
not harm him, and he would help them, as they had never been able to
help themselves.

They were still alone, but perhaps it would be better now.



JORRY’S GAP


“Jorry!”

Dam_damn!_ Jorry never said dam_damn_ out loud; it was something that
happened inside his head when he realized he couldn’t get away with
whatever, or when it wasn’t going the way he wanted it to. “Yeh Mom.”
How come she could hear him even when Pop had his head in the boob-tube
with horses galloping and gunshots and all, every time?

Mom got up and stood in the door of the living room and looked at him as
he stood at the bottom of the stairs where he had just stepped over the
third step which squeaked and timed it with the big noise on the TV and
all. She said, “You’re going out.”

“Well yeh.”

“You’re not going out.”

“It’s early.”

“Out till all hours, and where, and who with, I want to know.”

“It’s Friday.”

“Speak to your son.”

Without moving his eyes from the tube, Pop said, “What.”

Not a question, not an answer, just a flat statement “What.”

Mom said to Jorry, “You’re not going out.”

Up to now it was like wired-in with relays, the way a traffic light does
no matter what, red to yellow, yellow to green, green to red again. If
he wanted to he could make the whole thing go again: It’s early, out
till all hours and where and who with, it’s Friday, speak to your son,
what. So he tried the don’t-worry.

“Don’t worry, Mom. I’ll be back early.”

“Early in the morning early, five o’clock in the morning,” Mom said.
“With that addict Chatz.”

“Chazz,” he corrected. Chazz had a whole new thing with special words:
lid, joint, roach, weed, grass. “You smoke?” meant something brand new.
Chazz lied a lot and Jorry had never seen him with anything, and if he
acted funny once or twice well, hell, you didn’t need to blow a joint to
learn that, you could learn it in the movies. Then yesterday Chazz said
“I got a stash. You want?” and maybe it was a lie, but it scared Jorry
like hell; he was real cool though: “Later, man.” Now he said to his
mother, “Nothing the matter with Chazz.”

“With those eyes close together, round-shouldered,” Mom said. “I can
tell. Whatever he’s taking now, even if he isn’t he will and it will
lead to something worse. Or it’s that Jane.”

“Joan.” Dam_damn_. The instant he corrected her he knew she knew he had
been thinking about pale parted hair and bright knowing laughter with
some other guy, but with him a kind of _Finish your sentence, I got to
go_ even when all he said was hello. “That one,” said Mom, “will give
you a disease. Speak to your son.”

“Wha-at. Wha-at.” Pop still didn’t take his eyes off the cowboys, but
each “what” now had two syllables, and that meant he’d go into action if
she gigged him once more.

“You’ll hang around that Stube.”

“Strobe,” he corrected her before he could stop himself. “They don’t
have anything there, not even beer, only sodas and fruit juice.”

“You’re going to get killed riding around in that cheap flashy
junkheap”—which was a hightailed Mustang with Shelby spoilers, oh
wow—“which no man in his right mind would give to a retarded draft
dodger like that Highball”—

“Highboy,” Jorry said faintly.

—“no matter how much money he has. Speak to your son.” Dam_damn_. Now
everything depended on how it was with the cowboys. If Pop was locked in
to this show, it would be short. If not, this could go on for hours and
nobody was going no place.

“What.” Back to one syllable, but he yelled it, and he bounced out of
the fat chair with a two-handed bang and came out of the living room,
wattle-jawed, clamp-lipped, squinch-eyed. “Well what.”

Mom said, “He’s going out.” Pop said, “He’s going out?” Mom said, “He’s
not going out.”

Pop said, “So go out, go out, a man has a right to work all day and come
home and see one show all the way through.”

Good, good, the show was good, this would be short.

“Go, go,” Mom yelled, “Go to your creepy friends, never mind here where
you get taken care of, eat the best food for your health, I work my
fingers to the bone. Go.”

Jorry went, feeling funny like he always did when it went this way,
getting his way, winning, but all the same like thrown out in the
street, nobody cared enough. There is no word for a feeling like that.
He went quickly but did not bump the door closed because sometimes that
would bring Pop out on the porch, to make him come back. Behind him he
could hear Mom starting in on Pop: how can I be his mother and his
father all at the same time, he hasn’t got a father who cares enough to
keep him in the house running around at all hours with those creepy
kids, and Pop yelling “After! After!” meaning shut up while he sees his
show.

Jorry got as far as Third without seeing anybody, and then from out of
nowhere there was Specs, waiting for the light to change. Specs had real
bad skin and shorter hair than anyone else but he was always around the
action and knew everything. “Highboy got Libby,” was his greeting. Libby
was a very unreachable chick; you see them carrying the flag at
high-school assemblies and president of the Student Council and the
honor roll and like that, and clean and kind and pretty and square, man,
forget it. But with four hundred horsepower and a tach on the dash,
Highboy gets Libby, vooming along dark roads anyplace for anything he
wants, and back on time. “What else?” he said, and knew Specs understood
him perfectly. The light changed and they walked across. Jorry stopped.

“Strobe,” said Specs, announcing and asking.

“Not now.” Jorry wasn’t sure why not now. Maybe it was not wanting to
arrive at the place with Specs; you didn’t go anywhere with Specs, you
found him there. And maybe it was wanting to be alone on a dark street
for a while, to think about Libby on real leather next to you and the
tach pushing up towards six, towards seven, towards someplace way out of
town where nobody would know, and lots of time there and back early.
Spec said, “Later, man,” and walked. Jorry stood next to a high hedge
and did his thing about the Mustang.

Maybe it took a while and maybe not; there’s no time in there, but what
brought him back was _bang_ on the sidewalk with a little plastic
handbag that skittered lipstick and Tampax and a cracked compact and
some change all out and around.

It was Joanie with the long pale hair falling away from the clean pink
part. She didn’t see him and she said, “I don’t _care_.” Then she stood
quite still for the longest time with her eyes closed. Jorry didn’t want
to say anything while her eyes were closed, but then under the
streetlamp he saw they were not closed tight enough to keep tears in,
and the streaks on her face were like cracks in a doll if you put a
light inside. So he picked up the handbag and touched her with it and
said her name. She gasped and banged at the bridge of her nose with the
back of her hand and looked at him. After a while she said, “Jorry,” and
took the bag.

“I was just standing here,” was all he could say, and bent to pick up
the compact and the Tampax. He found a quarter and a dime and
straightened up. She held out the handbag, open, and he dumped the stuff
into it and dropped the compact again. “Are you all right?”

She started to laugh in a way he didn’t like at all, but by the time he
had dipped down and up for the compact he realized that she wasn’t
laughing at him. It wasn’t even laughing. Whatever it was stopped
abruptly and she did something no girl he had ever heard of had ever
done; she took his hand and put it against her breast. Never in all his
life had he felt anything so soft and alive and wonderful. She asked him
in a soft, breathy voice, “Is there anything wrong with that?”

“Well, no,” was all he could say.

She lifted her hand away from his; it was up to him whether or not he
left it on her. He dropped it away. His hand could still feel her; he
had the crazy thought that it always would. She said, very slowly, “I
have been so damn lonesome.”

He just shook his head a little. He hadn’t seen her around for a while
but he couldn’t ever remember her looking lonesome. Not ever.

“Jorry—”

“What?”

She wet her lips. “You know where I live.”

“Well, yes.”

“Look, I’ve got something to do right now, but I’ll be home about
eleven. There’s nobody there tonight. You come.”

“Well, I don’t—” His mouth was suddenly too dry to release another word.

“I mean,” she said, “I just don’t _care_.” He was hung on her eyes like
a coat on a nail. “Please, Jorry. _Please_.”

“Well, all right,” he said, and she held him for a moment and then
turned away; he thought his knees were going to buckle. He watched her
walking away, long legs, long back, long hair all flogged by the shadows
of tree trunks as she walked. “Oh wow,” he whispered.

After a while he walked slowly down Third, somehow aware as never before
of the impact of heels on pavement, the press of toes, the smell of a
lawn mowed that afternoon and a hint of cat pee and how sharp blue
starspecks could pierce a small town’s Friday sky-glow. Then and there
he didn’t feel any more like I’ll-have-to-ask-Mom Jorry, or
they-won’t-let-me Jorry, or Jorry who was always on the outside looking
in, or the inside looking on. “Man,” he said quietly to the nighttime,
“you got to do your thing.” He was quoting somebody or other but he
meant it. Then he was in the light, and who should be coming out of the
candy store but Chazz.

Chazz had long green eyes and an eagle’s beak and no chin, and a funny
way of coming up to you as if he was walking a little sidewise. Jorry
called him. It seemed to make Chazz glad. “Hey man.”

Jorry made a c’mon motion with his head and walked away from lights and
people and let Chazz catch up with him. They moved along for a moment
and Joanie’s, “I don’t _care!_” popped into Jorry’s head. It made him
grin a little and it made a pleasant cold vacuum appear in his solar
plexus: fun-fear. He said, in a Chazz-sidewise kind of way, “About that
stash.”

Pleased astonishment. Chazz banged his hands together once and smiled
all around as if at an invisible audience in the dark, to whom he said,
“He’s with it, he’s with it.” He hit Jorry. “I about had you wrote off
as a brownshoes.”

“Me.” Jorry knew how to use a question word as a flat statement. He
liked how it came out. “Where’s this grass?”

Chazz released a sudden roar of laughter and shut it off. Full of glee,
he looked all around and sidewised up close, and said in a half whisper,
“Man, I been _looking_ for you. I just didn’t know till now it was you.”
He began walking purposefully, and Jorry strode along beside him,
willing enough but a little puzzled. They got to the next streetlight
and Chazz looked all around again. “Roll up your sleeve.”

“What?”

“Roll it up. I want to see something.”

Jorry started to think something and then didn’t want to think it. He
rolled up his sleeve. Chazz grasped the biceps with both hands and
squeezed and held on. Jorry tugged a bit, but Chazz held on, a great
eagerness showing on his face. “What the hell you doing?”

“Shut up a minute,” said Chazz, and hung on. He was peering at the crook
of Jorry’s elbow. Suddenly he released the arm. “Beautiful. Oh man, but
beautiful.”

“Beautiful what.”

“Like that vein, it’s a piece of hose, man.”

“Chazz, what the hell you talking about?”

“Like you’re like me, man. Some cats, you can’t find it with an X-ray,
but you and me, we got the gates wide open.”

Jorry tried out the words. “Chazz, if you’re holding we’ll smoke. If not
we’ll Injun rassle or just forget it.”

Chazz again produced that cut-off blast of laughter that went on in
silent glee. When he could he said, “Smoke! That shit can wait, man. I
got us a trip, not a buzz. Like four, six hours at twenty thousand feet
with the wind behind us.” He came close and whispered, “I got … speed.”

“Speed.”

There was a long pause. Jorry had the painful realization that
I’ll-have-to-ask-Mom, They-won’t-let-me Jorry was maybe standing on a
higher step, but he was still around. On the other hand, to have missed
being a brownshoes by so close a margin, only to fall right out of this
fellowship and back into Squaresville—it was unthinkable. And besides—he
was scared. Veins-Speed-God. His mouth was suddenly completely dry,
which had the odd effect of reminding him of something. He worked up
spit and swallowed hard before he could say, very carefully, “Oh hell,
man, six hours. I got a date at eleven. I’m going to need everything I
got.”

“You don’t need the date.”

“Oh, huh.”

“Who is it?”

“A chick.”

“You’re putting me on.”

“Honest to God. Any other time, Chazz, but not tonight.” Apparently he
said this just right too, because Chazz sounded real sad when he said
“Oh wow,” and hopeless when he said “She got a friend?” and Jorry knew
for a second (he forgot it later) why round shoulders and a big nose and
no chin was looking to shoot speed. Chazz bit on his lip a while and
then said nakedly, “Look, I’m going to wait for you. Like I got it and I
checked it out and I know how, but man, I don’t figure to fly solo, not
the first time.”

Jorry said, “I dig.” What Jorry dug most was how scared Chazz was. He
didn’t have to look at whether or not he was scared or how much; this
could come first and it made him grateful. He hit Chazz and said, “So
later,” and could see Chazz was grateful too. Then the Mustang flew in
_wawoom_ to the curb, nosed down and squatted there.

Highboy: crisp hair the color of French vanilla, white shirt, white
sweater, white strong teeth, and next to him oh Libby. Oh. Highboy said,
“Hey, who wants to make it with us to Little Gate?” Little Gate was
forty miles away.

Chazz said so it showed, “Jorry’s hung up, he’s making out.” Jorry
thought from what he could see that Highboy liked this and Libby didn’t,
but what could that matter, ever? Chazz was saying, “But you could drop
me by the Strobe, right?”

Highboy waved at his door latch: permission, but Chazz could open it for
himself, and said to Jorry, “Keep the beat, baby,” which was so-long and
also something to do with making out, and made him feel pretty good, but
all the same dam_damn_ there go the tail-lights. And the funny thing
was, he had to go by the Strobe to get to Joanie’s house anyway. You
never know why you play it the way you do.

At night (it isn’t even there in the daytime) the Strobe is a wide
bright storefront on a row of dark ones; light is a lake in front, with
lightning; cars whale through it, people shark and minnow through it,
and away a bit, once in a while, the Highway Patrol hawks by seeing
everything, looking for something. Specs was there, knowing it all, and
as soon as he saw Jorry’s face he said to it, “Making out.” Two words:
congratulations, you didn’t think you could keep it from me, who is it,
if you don’t tell me I’ll find out anyway, you are maybe becoming
something to notice around here, I’m watching you. All of which Jorry
acknowledged: “You know how it is.” He saw the Mustang in the middle of
the light-lake, tail-up in a sprinter’s crouch in the shallows two feet
away from the curb; Highboy needn’t park straight. Chazz wasn’t there.

Specs said, “Three guys got burned by the same chick. Their folks got
together and went to the school.”

Burned. Jorry couldn’t grab that, unless—“Who?”

Specs said who, three guys he knew, two of them were in History with
him. But that wasn’t what he wanted to know. He wanted to know who the
girl was. He didn’t want to ask and he didn’t have to; Specs said it was
Joanie. Dam_damn_. At which point Highboy and Libby came out of the
Strobe and crossed to the Mustang. Highboy opened her door for her and
that shining car fielded her like a good catcher’s mitt. Highboy legged
around front and slid in, and the chrome pipes growl-howled. From the
Strobe came a chick with sit-on-it shining black hair and hip huggers
tight as a blister, white, cut so low in front that “They give away
shaving cream when you buy those,” Specs said in his ear, and Highboy
made a gesture that Jorry would remember all his life it was so great,
that would last longer in his head even than what else happened right
after. Highboy blew her a kiss. Highboy blew her a kiss right in front
of and all around Libby and made Libby smile at it. Highboy blew that
chick a kiss while he snapped his clutch and the wide ovals screamed him
away in a burning launch; he blew her a kiss turning evenly in his
luscious-leather bucket; he blew and threw his kiss in a wide steady
backhand that ended with him smiling and releasing the last of it
through the big wide rear window, all the while scorching rubber and
squashed tight, him and Libby, against the welcoming seat-backs. So
great.

Also he misfigured his angles. At the end of the row of dark stores and
across a small street was no curb or sidewalk but a bare bank, low at
first and tipping up steep, and the engineer doesn’t live who could
design it more perfectly to lift up the right side of a car and flip it,
not to spin and flip, but to take off and corkscrew. It wasn’t more than
seventy, seventy-five yards from the Strobe that the Mustang flew and
flipped and hit upside down and against an elm tree and burned. The
Highway Patrol always knows what to do and they were there, but knowing
how isn’t enough sometimes.

Jorry walked home through the dark streets, trying hard to wipe out what
was behind him without opening up what was in front, trying to get by
himself, not with Jorry-maybe-you’re-worth-watching or with
Mom-can-I-Jorry, but with himself; and who the hell might that be?

About Chazz and mainlining, about Joanie and the burn, about getting
killed in the Mustang, he could have known without leaving the house.
Mom said it all, Mom batted one thousand. He could’ve known it all even
if she hadn’t said it—but she did say it.

Also she said she worked hard and saw to it he ate and got good clothes
and had a place for himself. She said it funny and she said it so often
you didn’t hear it any more, but she did say it.

Pop also said he worked hard all day and when he came home he had a
right. He said it to Mom and he said it to Jorry. Then Jorry would say
whatever it was he always said, and nobody heard him either.

Jorry began to walk faster.

Because if there was a way to say something to Mom, and if she could say
it to him and to Pop, so that they heard each other, they wouldn’t need
to stay mad or feel useless, not any of them. Like if somehow you can
make people just _listen_ to each other, not just listen to you. And you
listen too. Everybody.

Jorry began to run because he really believed you could make someone
else listen. He knew because he’d done it. He’d listened to every word
Mom said about tonight, the only thing was he couldn’t hear it until
later when those things happened. And now he really believed you could
make somebody listen _now_. And would you believe it, after all that had
happened it was still only a quarter of twelve.

He went in the back way because no matter what else, Mom always had for
him a way in. He locked the door from inside because when he was in Mom
liked the rest of everything shut out. This seemed to mean something as
he climbed the stairs. He heard their voices up there, hammer-and-tongs.
He smiled to himself because he knew something they didn’t.

It was the same thing he had heard going away: why can’t you speak to
your son. And: Coming home I got a right. But it was the same thing
drawn out ragged and harsh: Jorry realized that they had been going
around and around since he left. Believing that people could listen,
listen and hear, he knocked on the door.

Pop, undershirt, galluses down, the last straw was under the angry eaves
of his eyes and burning; Mom, gray pigtails (only at night, pigtails)
and so worn, so worn altogether out by not being heard.

“Pop, listen.”

“I wash my hands,” Mom cried. “Do what you want, the waste. Go in the
ashcan, live there with your Chatz and the other garbage. I wash my
hands.”

“Mom, listen.”

Pop probably didn’t hit him all that hard but it was so unexpected and
he wasn’t at all ready. Lying down on the floor of the upstairs hall
looking up, with Mom screaming, he saw his father big. Huge. Like he
hadn’t since he was three years old.

“I had this for the last time and never again, you going out and her on
my back, so out of my sight,” Pop bellowed and spit flew.

Jorry sat up and then knelt up. He said “Pop, listen,” or maybe he
thought he said it. As he knelt there Pop went for him again, this time
not with a man’s punch like the other one, but with a push in the face
to throw him back and skidding, the kind of push where being hurt isn’t
any part of it, but insult is. “Out of my sight!” Pop bawled,
crack-voiced, and Mom was in the doorway and he pushed her too, back on
the bed, and slammed the door. Somewhere in there Jorry stopped
believing in anything.

He went back in town and did his thing here, and did it again there, and
at a quarter to five he and Chazz were busted for use and holding, and a
couple of weeks later the first chancre showed; that was in the House of
Correction.

And that’s how Jorry got started.



BROWNSHOES


His name was Mensch; it once was a small joke between them, and then it
became a bitterness. “I wish to God I could have you now the way you
were,” she said, “moaning at night and jumping up and walking around in
the dark and never saying why, and letting us go hungry and not caring
how we lived or how we looked. I used to bitch at you for it, but I
never minded, not really. I held still for it. I would’ve, just for
always, because with it all you did your own thing, you were a free
soul.”

“I’ve always done my own thing,” said Mensch, “and I did so tell you
why.”

She made a disgusted sound. “Who could understand all that?” It was
dismissal, an old one; something she had recalled and worked over and
failed to understand for years, a thing that made tiredness. “And you
used to love people—really love them. Like the time that kid wiped out
the fire hydrant and the streetlight in front of the house and you
fought off the fuzz and the schlock lawyer and the ambulance and
everybody, and got him to the hospital and wouldn’t let him sign the
papers because he was dazed. And turning that cheap hotel upside down to
find Victor’s false teeth and bring them to him after they put him in
jail. And sitting all day in the waiting room the time Mrs. What’s-her
name went for her first throat cancer treatment, so you could take her
home, you didn’t even know her. There wasn’t anything you wouldn’t do
for people.”

“I’ve always done what I could. I didn’t stop.”

Scorn. “So did Henry Ford. Andrew Carnegie. The Krupp family. Thousands
of jobs, billions in taxes for everybody. I know the stories.”

“My story’s not quite the same,” he said mildly.

Then she said it all, without hate or passion or even much emphasis; she
said in a burnt-out voice, “We loved each other and you walked out.”

They loved each other. Her name was Fauna; it once was a small joke
between them. Fauna the Animal and Mensch the Man, and the thing they
had between them. “Sodom is a-cumen in,” he misquoted Chaucer, “Lewd
sing cuckold” (because she had a husband back there somewhere amongst
the harpsichord lessons and the mildewed unfinished hooked rugs and the
skeleton of a play and all the other abandoned projects in the attic of
her life). Mensch was the first one she could have carried through, all
the way. She was one of those people who waits for the right thing to
come along and drops all others as soon as she finds out they aren’t the
main one. When someone like that gets the right thing, it’s forever, and
everyone says, my how you’ve changed. She hasn’t changed.

But then when the right thing comes along, and it doesn’t work out,
she’ll never finish anything again. Never.

They were both very young when they met and she had a little house back
in the woods near one of those resort towns that has a reputation for
being touristy-artsy-craftsy and actually does have a sprinkling of real
artists in and around it. Kooky people are more than tolerated in places
like that providing only that (a) they attract, or at least do not
repel, the tourists and (b) they never make any important money. Nothing
disturbs the people who really run a town like that more than an oddball
who strikes it rich; people begin to listen to him, and that could
change things. Fauna wasn’t about to change things. She was a slender
pretty girl who liked to be naked under loose floor-length gowns and
take care of sick things as long as they couldn’t talk—broken-wing birds
and philodendrons and the like—and lots of music—lots of _kinds_ of
music; and cleverly doing things she wouldn’t finish until the real
thing came along. She had a solid title to the little house and a
part-time job in the local frame shop; she was picturesque and
undemanding and never got involved in marches and petitions and the
like. She just believed in being kind to everyone around her and
thought … well, that’s not quite right. She hadn’t ever thought it out
all the way, but she _felt_ that if you’re kind to everyone the kindness
will somehow spread over the world like a healing stain, and that’s what
you do about wars and greed and injustice. So she was an acceptable,
almost approved fixture in the town even when they paved her dirt road
and put the lamppost and fire hydrant in front of it.

Mensch came into this with long hair and a guitar strapped to his back,
a head full of good books and a lot of very serious restlessness. He
moved in with Fauna the day after she discovered his guitar was tuned
like a lute. He had busy hands too, and a way of finishing what he
started, yes, and making a dozen more like them—beautifully designed
kitchen pads for shopping lists made out of hand-rubbed local woods,
which used adding-machine rolls and had a hunk of hacksaw blade down at
the bottom so you could neatly tear off a little or a lot, and authentic
reproductions of fireplace bellows and apple-peelers and stuff like that
which could be displayed in the shoppes (not stores, they were shoppes)
on the village green, and bring in his share. Also he knew about
transistors and double-helical gears and eccentric linkages and things
like Wankels and fuel cells. He fiddled around a lot in the back room
with magnets and axles and colored fluids of various kinds, and one day
he had an idea and began fooling with scissors and cardboard and some
metal parts. It was mostly frame and a rotor, but it was made of certain
things in a certain way. When he put it together the rotor began to
spin, and he suddenly understood it. He made a very slight adjustment
and the rotor, which was mostly cardboard, uttered a shrill rising sound
and spun so fast that the axle, a tenpenny nail, chewed right through
the cardboard bearings and the rotor took off and flew across the room,
showering little unglued metal bits. He made no effort to collect the
parts, but stood up blindly and walked into the other room. Fauna took
one look at him and ran to him and held him: what is it? what’s the
matter? but he just stood there looking stricken until the tears began
rolling down his cheeks. He didn’t seem to know it.

That was when he began moaning suddenly in the middle of the night,
jumping up and walking around in the dark. Then she said years later
that he would never tell her why, it was true, and it wasn’t, because
what he told her was that he had something in his head so important that
certain people would kill him to get it, and certain other people would
kill him to suppress it, and that he wouldn’t tell her what it was
because he loved her and didn’t want her in danger. She cried a lot and
said he didn’t trust her, and he said he did, but he wanted to take care
of her, not throw her to the wolves. He also said—and this is what the
moaning and nightwalking was all about—that the thing in his head could
make the deserts bloom and could feed hungry people all over the world,
but that if he let it loose it could be like a plague too, not because
of what it was but because of what people would do with it; and the very
first person who died because of it would die because of him, and he
couldn’t bear the idea of that. He really had a choice to make, but
before he could make it he had to decide whether the death of one person
was too great a price to pay for the happiness and security of millions,
and then if the deaths of a thousand would be justified if it meant the
end of poverty for all. He knew history and psychology and he had a
mathematician’s head as well as those cobbler’s hands, and he knew
damned well what would happen if he took this way or that. For example,
he knew where he could unload the idea and all responsibility for it for
enough money to keep him and Fauna—and a couple hundred close friends,
if it came to that—in total luxury for the rest of their lives; all he
would have to do would be to sign it away and see it buried forever in a
corporate vault, for there were at least three industrial giants which
would urgently bid against one another for the privilege.

Or kill him.

He also thought of making blueprints and scattering millions of copies
over cities all over the world, and of finding good ethical scientists
and engineers and banding them together into a firm which would
manufacture and license the device and use it only for good things. Well
you can do that with a new kind of rat-killer or sewing machine, but not
with something so potent that it will change the face of the earth,
eliminate hunger, smog, and the rape of raw materials—not when it will
also eliminate the petro-chemical industry (except for dyes and
plastics), the electric-power companies, the internal-combustion engine
and everything involved in making it and fueling it, and even atomic
energy for most of its purposes.

Mensch tried his very best to decide not to do anything at all about it,
which was the moaning and nightwalking interval, and that just wouldn’t
work—the thing would not let him go. Then he decided what to do, and
what he must do in order to do it. His first stop was at the town
barbershop.

Fauna held still for this and for his getting a job at Flextronics, the
town’s light industry, which had government contracts for small computer
parts and which was scorned by the town’s art, literature and library
segment. The regular hours appalled her, and although he acted the same
(he certainly didn’t look the same) around the house, she became deeply
troubled. She had never seen so much money as he brought in every
payday, and didn’t want to, and for the first time in her life had to
get stubborn about patching and improvising and doing without instead of
being able to blame poverty for it. The reasons she found now for living
that way seemed specious even to her, which only made her stubborn about
it, and more of a kook than ever. Then he bought a car, which seemed to
her an immorality of sorts.

What tore it was when somebody told her he had gone to the town-board
meeting, which she had never done, and had proposed that the town pass
ordinances against sitting on the grass on the village green, playing
musical instruments on town thoroughfares, swimming at the town swimming
hole after sundown, and finally, for hiring more police. When she
demanded an explanation he looked at her sadly for a long time, then
would not deny it, would not discuss it, and moved out.

He got a clean room in a very square boarding house near the factory,
worked like hell until he got his college credits straightened out, went
to night school until he had another degree. He took to hanging around
the Legion post on Saturday nights and drank a little beer and bought a
lot of whiskey for other people. He learned a whole portfolio of dirty
jokes and dispensed them carefully, two-thirds sex, one-third bathroom.
Finally he took a leave of absence from his job, which was, by this
time, section manager, and moved down the river to a college town where
he worked full time on a postgraduate engineering degree while going to
night school to study law. The going was very tough around then because
he had to pinch every nickel to be able to make it and still keep his
pants creased and his brown shoes shiny, which he did. He still found
time to join the local church and become a member of the vestry board
and a lay preacher, taking as his text the homilies from _Poor Richard’s
Almanac_ and delivering them (as did their author) as if he believed
every word.

When it was time he redesigned his device, not with cardboard and glue,
but with machined parts that were seventy percent
monkey-puzzle-mechanical motions that canceled each other out, and
wiring which energized coils which shorted themselves out. He patented
parts and certain groupings of parts, and finally the whole contraption.
He then took his degrees and graduate degrees, his published scholarly
papers, his patents and his short haircut, together with a letter of
introduction from his pastor, to a bank, and borrowed enough to buy into
a failing company which made portable conveyor belts. His device was
built into the drive segment, and he went on the road to sell the thing.
It sold very well. It should. A six-volt automobile battery would load
coal with that thing for a year without needing replacement or
recharging, and no wonder, because the loading was being powered by that
little black lump in the drive segment, which, though no bigger than a
breadbox, and requiring no fuel, would silently and powerfully spin a
shaft until the bearings wore out.

It wasn’t too long before the competition was buying Mensch’s loaders
and tearing them down to see where all that obscene efficiency was
coming from. The monkey-puzzle was enough to defeat most of them, but
one or two bright young men and a grizzled oldster or so were able to
realize that they were looking at something no bigger than a breadbox
which would turn a shaft indefinitely without fuel, and wonder what
things would be like with this gadget under the hood of a car or in the
nacelles of aircraft, or pumping water in the desert, or generating
light and power ‘way back in the hills and jungles without having to
build roads or railways or to string power lines. Some of these men
found their way to Mensch. Either he hired them and tied them up tight
with ropes of gold and fringe benefits, or had them watched and
dissuaded, or discredited, or, if need be, ruined.

Inevitably someone was able to duplicate the Mensch effect, but by that
time Mensch had a whole office building full of lawyers with their
pencils sharpened and their instructions ready. The shrewd operator who
had duplicated the effect, and who had sunk everything he had and could
borrow into retooling an engine factory for it, found himself in such a
snarl of infringement, torts, ceases-and-desists, and prepaid royalty
demands that he sold his plant at cost to Mensch and gratefully accepted
a job managing it. And he was only the first.

The military moved in at about this point, but Mensch was ready for them
and their plans to take over his patents and holdings as a national
resource. He let himself be bunted higher and higher in the chain of
command, while his refusals grew stronger and stronger and the threats
greater and greater, until he emerged at the top in the company of the
civilian who commanded them all. This meeting was brought about by a
bishop, for never in all these busy years did Mensch overlook his weekly
duty at the church of his choice, nor his tithes, nor his donations of
time for an occasional Vacation Bible School or picnic or bazaar. And
Mensch, on this pinnacle of wealth, power and respectability, was able
to show the president the duplicate set of documents he had placed in a
Swiss bank, which, on the day his patents were preempted by the
military, would donate them to research institutes in Albania and points
north and east. That was the end of that.

The following year a Mensch-powered car won the Indy. It wasn’t as fast
as the Granatelli entry; it just voomed around and around the brickyard
without making any stops at all. There was, of course, a certain amount
of static for a while, but the inevitable end was that the automobile
industry capitulated, and with it the fossil-fuel people. Electric light
and power had to follow and, as the gas and steam and diesel power
sources obsolesce and are replaced by Mensch prime movers, the atomic
plants await their turn.

It was right after the Indianapolis victory that Mensch donated his
blueprints to Albania anyway—after all, he had never said he
wouldn’t—and they showed up about the same time in Hong Kong and quickly
reached the mainland. There was a shrill claim from the Soviet Union
that the Mensch Effect had been discovered in the nineteenth century by
Siolkovsky, who had set it aside because he was more interested in
rockets, but even the Russians couldn’t keep that up for long without
laughing along with the audience, and they fell to outstripping all
other nations in development work. No monkey-puzzle on earth can survive
this kind of effort—monkey-puzzles need jungles of patent law to live
and thrive—and it was not long before the Soviets (actually, it was a
Czech scientist, which is the same thing, isn’t it? Well, the Soviets
said it was) were able to proclaim that they had improved and refined
the device to a simple frame supporting one moving part, the rotor: each
made, of course, of certain simple substances which, when assembled,
began to work. It was, of course, the same frame and rotor with which
Mensch, in terror and tears, had begun his long career, and the Czech,
that is, Soviet “refinement” was, like all else, what he had predicted
and aimed himself toward.

For now there wasn’t a mechanics magazine in the world, nor hardly a
tinkerer’s workshop anywhere, that didn’t begin turning out Mensch
rotors. Infringements occurred so widely that even Mensch’s
skyscraperful of legal-eagles couldn’t have begun to stem the flood. And
indeed they did not try, because—

For the second time in modern history (the first was an extraordinary
man named Kemal Ataturk) a man of true national-dictator stature set his
goal, achieved it, and abdicated. It didn’t matter one bit to Mensch
that the wiser editorialists, with their knowledgeable index fingers
placed alongside their noses, were pointing out that he had defeated
himself, shattered his own empire by extending its borders, and that by
releasing his patents into the public domain he was making an empty
gesture to the inevitable. Mensch knew what he had done, and why, and
what other people thought of it just did not matter.

“What does matter,” he said to Fauna in her little house by the old fire
hydrant and the quaint streetlamp, “is that there isn’t a kraal in
Africa or a hamlet in Asia that can’t pump water and plow land and heat
and light its houses by using a power plant simple enough to be built by
any competent mechanic anywhere. There are little ones to rock cradles
and power toys and big ones to light whole cities. They pull trains and
sharpen pencils, and they need no fuel. Already desalted Mediterranean
water is pouring into the northern Sahara; there’ll be whole new cities
there, just as there were five thousand years ago. In ten years the air
all over the earth will be measurably cleaner, and already the demand
for oil is down so much that offshore drilling is almost completely
stopped. ‘Have’ and ‘have-not’ no longer mean what they once meant,
because everyone has access to cheap power. And that’s why I did it,
don’t you see?” He really wanted very much to make her understand.

“You cut your hair,” she said bitterly. “You wore those awful shoes and
went to church and got college degrees and turned into a—a typhoon.”

“Tycoon,” he corrected absently. “Ah, but Fauna, listen: remember when
we were kids, how there were protests and riots in the universities?
Think of just one small aspect of that. Suppose a crowd of students
wanted to take the administration building—how did they do it? They
swarmed up the roads and sidewalks, didn’t they? Now—oh hear me out!”
for she was beginning to shake her head, open her mouth to interrupt.
“Up the roads and sidewalks. Now when those roads and walks were built,
the planners and architects didn’t put them there to be used that way,
did they? But that doesn’t matter—when the mob wants to get to the
administration building, they take the road that’s there. And that’s all
I did. The way to get what I wanted was short hair, was brown shoes, was
published postgraduate papers, was the banks and businesses and
government and all of those things that were already there for me to
use.”

“You didn’t need all that. I think you just wanted to move things and
shake things and be in the newspapers and history books. You could’ve
made your old motor right here in this house and showed it to people and
sold it and stayed here and played the lute, and it would have been the
same thing.”

“No, there you’re wrong,” said Mensch. “Do you know what kind of a world
we live in? We live in a world where, if a man came up with a sure cure
for cancer, and if that man were found to be married to his sister, his
neighbors would righteously burn down his house and all his notes. If a
man built the most beautiful tower in the country, and that man later
begins to believe that Satan should be worshipped, they’ll blow up his
tower. I know a great and moving book written by a woman who later went
quite crazy and wrote crazy books, and nobody will read her great one
any more. I can name three kinds of mental therapy that could have
changed the face of the earth, and in each case the men who found it
went on to insane Institutes and so-called religions and made fools of
themselves—dangerous fools at that—and now no one will look at their
really great early discoveries. Great politicians have been prevented
from being great statesmen because they were divorced. And I wasn’t
going to have the Mensch machine stolen or buried or laughed at and
forgotten just because I had long hair and played the lute. You know,
it’s easy to have long hair and play the lute and be kind to people when
everyone else around you is doing it. It’s a much harder thing to be the
one who does it first, because then you have to pay a price, you get
jeered at and they throw stones and shut you out.”

“So you joined them,” she accused.

“I used them,” he said flatly. “I used every road and path that led to
where I was going, no matter who built it or what it was built for.”

“And you paid your price,” she all but snarled. “Millions in the bank,
thousands of people ready to fall on their knees if you snap your
fingers. Some price. You could have had love.”

He stood up then and looked at her. Her hair was much thinner now, but
still long and fine. He reached for it, lifted some. It was white. He
let it go.

He thought of fat Biafran babies and clean air and unpolluted beaches,
cheaper food, cheaper transportation, cheaper manufacturing and
maintenance, more land to lessen the pressures and hysteria during the
long slow process of population control. What had moved him to deny
himself so much, to rebel, to move and shake and shatter the status quo
the way he had, rather than conforming—conforming to long hair and a
lute? _You could have had love_.

“But I did,” he said; and then, knowing she would never, could never
understand, he got in his silent fuelless car and left.



IT WAS NOTHING—REALLY!


Having reached that stage in his career when he could have a personal
private washroom in his office, Henry Mellow came out of it and said
into the little black box on his desk “Bring your book, please.” Miss
Prince acknowledged and entered and said “Eeek.”

“ ‘Ever since the dawn of history,’ ” Henry Mellow dictated, “ ‘mankind
has found himself face to face with basic truths that—’ ”

“I am face to face,” said Miss Mellow, “with your pants are down, Mr.
Mellow, and you are waving a long piece of toilet paper.”

“Ah yes, I’m coming to that … with basic truths that he cannot see, or
does not recognize, or does not understand.’ Are you getting this, Miss
Prince?”

“I am getting very upset, Mr. Mellow. Please pull up your pants.”

Mr. Mellow looked at her for a long moment while he put his thoughts on
“hold” and tuned them out, and tuned her in, and at last looked down.
“Archimedes,” he said, and put his piece of toilet paper down on the
desk. Pulling up his pants, he said, “At least I think it was
Archimedes. He was taking a bath and when he lay back in it, displacing
the water and watching it slop over the sides of the tub, the solution
to a problem came to him, about how to determine how much base metal was
mixed in with the king’s gold ornaments. He jumped out of the bath and
ran naked through the streets shouting Eureka, which means in Greek, ‘I
have found it.’ You, Miss Prince, are witnessing such a moment. Or was
it Aristotle?”

“It was disgraceful is what it was,” said Miss Prince, “and no matter
how long I work here you make me wonder. Toilet paper.”

“Some of the most profound thinking in human history has come about in
toilets,” said Henry Mellow. “The Protestant reformation was begun in a
toilet, when Luther was sitting there working on his—am I offending you,
Miss Prince?”

“I don’t know. I guess it depends on what comes next,” said Miss Prince,
lowering her hands from her ears, but not much. Warily she watched as he
arranged his pennant of toilet paper on the desk and began tearing it,
placing his hands palm down on the desk and drawing them apart. “You
will observe—Miss Prince, are you getting this?”

She picked up her notebook from where she had flung it to cover her
ears. “No, sir, not really.”

“Then I shall begin again,” said Henry Mellow, and began to dictate the
memo which was to strike terror into the hearts and souls of the
military-industrial complex. Oh yes, they have hearts and souls. It’s
just that they never used them until Henry Mellow. Notice the structure
there. Henry Mellow was more than a man, he was a historical event. You
don’t have to say “Wilbur and Orville Wright and their first successful
experiment at,” you just have to say “Kitty Hawk.” You can say “Since
Hiroshima” or “Dallas” or “Pasteur” or “Darwin” and people know what you
are talking about. So it is that things haven’t been the same with the
military-industrial complex since Henry Mellow.

The Mellow memo reached the Pentagon by the usual channels, which is to
say that a Bureau man, routinely going through the segregated trash from
the Mellow offices, found three pages done by a new typist and discarded
because of forty-three typographical errors, and was assigned, after
they had gone through all the layers of the Bureau to the desk of the
Chief himself, to burglarize the Mellow offices and secure photographs
of a file copy. He was arrested twice and injured once in the
accomplishment of this mission, which was not reported in for some time
due to an unavoidable accident: he left the papers in a taxicab after
stealing them and it took him three weeks to locate the taxi driver and
burglarize _him_. Meanwhile the memo had been submitted to the _Times_
in the form of a letter, which in turn formed the basis for an
editorial; but as usual, appearance of such material in the public media
escaped the notice of public and Pentagon alike.

The impact of the memo on the Pentagon, and most especially on its
target point, the offices of Major General Fortney Superpate, was that
of an earthquake seasoned with a Dear John letter. His reactions were
immediate and in the best military tradition, putting his whole section
on Condition Red and invoking Top Secret, so that the emergency would be
heard by no one outside his department. What then followed was total
stasis for two hours and forty minutes, because of his instant decision
to check out Mellow’s results. This required toilet paper, and though
General Superpate, like Henry Mellow, had a washroom at the corner of
his office, he had enough respect for tradition to stifle his impulse to
get up and get some, but instead summoned his adjutant, who snapped a
smart salute and received the order. From the outer office the adjutant
required the immediate attendance in person of the supply sergeant
(remember, this was now a classified matter) who was on leave; the
qualifications of his corporal had then to be gone into before he could
substitute. Requisition papers were made out, with an error in the
fourth copy (of six) which had to be adjusted before the roll of toilet
paper, double-locked in a black locked equipment case, was delivered to
the general. At this point he was interrupted by a Jamestown gentleman
named (he said) Mr. Brown: black suit, black tie, black shoes, and a
black leather thing in his breast pocket which, when unfolded, displayed
a heavy bright badge with eagles and things on it. “Oh damn,” said the
general, “how did you people find out about this?” which got him a
smile—it was the only thing these Mr. Brown types ever really smiled
at—while Mr. Brown scooped up the photocopy of the Mellow memo and the
locked equipment case containing the roll of toilet paper. He left,
whereupon the general, realizing with a soldier’s practicality that the
matter was now out of his hands, restored Condition Green and lifted
Secrecy, and then felt free to step into his own washroom and do his own
toilet-paper procurement. He returned with a yard or so of it, spread it
out on his immaculate desk, placed his hands palms down on it and began
to pull it apart. He turned pale.

The injection of the Mellow Memo into the industrial area is more of a
mystery. Certainly it was the cause of Inland Corp’s across-the-board
six-percent reduction of raw material orders, and when a corporation as
big, and as diversified as Inland cuts back six percent, the whole
market shakes like a load of jello in a truck with square wheels. This
is the real reason for Outland Industries starting merger talks with
Inland, because one of their spies had gotten the word to Outland, but
not the memo, and the big wheels at Outland figured if they bought
Inland, the memo would come along with the deal. Imagine their surprise,
then, when the Chairman of the Board at Inland not only agreed
enthusiastically to the merger, but sent along a copy of the memo for
free. There is no record of the midnight meetings of the top brass of
the two industrial giants, but when they broke up they were, it is
reported, a badly frightened bunch. The dawn came up on many a wealthy
suburb, estate, club, and hotel suite to the soft worried sound of
tearing toilet paper.

And paper towels.

And checks from checkbooks.

As for the merger, it was left in its current state of negotiation,
neither withdrawn nor pursued, but waiting; meanwhile, Inland’s order to
reduce raw materials purchases was lowered to a compromised three
percent while the world—the little, real world, not the mass, sleeping
world—waited to see what would happen.

The Mellow Memo’s most frightening impact, however, was on the secret
headquarters in Jamestown. (It’s probably the most secret headquarters
in the world or anywhere else. No signs out front, unmarked cars, and
everybody’s named Brown. Sometimes twelve, fourteen lunches are
delivered to the front office for “Mr. Brown.” Nobody knows how they get
sorted out. Everybody in town keeps the secret.)

They had done everything they could; Henry Mellow’s home, office, person
and immediate associates were staked out, tailed, and bugged, his
probable movements computed and suitable responses by the Agency
programmed, and there was nothing to do but sit around and wait for
something to happen. On total assignment to the Mellow affair were three
top agents, Red Brown and Joe Brown and a black-power infiltrator called
Brown X. Due to the extremely sensitive nature of the Memo, Red Brown
had sent Brown X off on an extremely wild goose chase, tracking down and
interviewing Henry Mellow’s ex-schoolteachers, kindergarten through
fourth grade, in places like Enumclaw, Washington and Turtle Creek,
Pennsylvania.

Red Brown rose from his pushbuttoned, signal-light-studded desk and
crossed the room and closed the door against the permeating susurrus of
computers and tapes and rubber footfalls and hand-shrouded phone calls:
“Brown here.… Ready. Scramble Two. Brown out.” Joe Brown watched him
alertly, knowing that this meant they were going to discuss their
assignment. He knew too that they would refer to Henry Mellow only as
“Suspect.” Not The suspect or Mr. Suspect: just Suspect.

Red Brown regained his saddle, or control tower—nobody would call it a
chair—and said: “Review. Brainstorm.”

Joe Brown started the tape recorder concealed in his black jacket and
repeated “Review. Brainstorm,” and the date and time.

“Just who is Suspect?” Red Brown demanded. Comprehending perfectly that
this would be a fast retake of everything pertinent that they knew about
Henry Mellow, with an aim of getting new perspectives and insights, no
matter how far out; and that he, Joe Brown, was on trial and on the
record in a “have you done your homework” kind of way, Joe Brown
responded swiftly, clearly, and in official staccato: “WMA, five ten,
unmarried, thirty-six years old, eyes hazel, weight one seventy—”

“All right, all right. Occupation.”

“Writer, technical, also science fact articles and book reviews.
Self-employed. Also inventor, holding patents number—”

“Never mind those or you’ll be reeling off numbers all day, and besides
you’re bragging, Brown: I know that thing you have with numbers.”

Joe Brown was crushed but knew better than to show it.

Memorizing numbers was the one thing he did really well and patent
numbers were where he could really shine. “Holds patents on kitchen
appliances, chemical processes, hand tools, optical systems …”

“Genius type, very dangerous. The Bureau’s been segregating his garbage
for eighteen months.”

“What put them onto him?”

“Internal Revenue. Gets royalties from all over the world. Never fails
to report any of it.”

Joe Brown pursued his lips. “Has to be hiding something.”

“Yes, not usual, not normal. Politics?”

“No politics. Registers and votes, but expresses no opinions.”

Joe Brown pursued his lips again, the same purse as before, because it
was part of the same words: “Has to be hiding something. And what
happens if he turns this thing loose on the world?”

“Worse than the bomb, nerve gas, Dederick Plague, you name it.”

“And what if he gets sole control?”

“King of the world.”

“For maybe ten minutes.” Joe Brown squinted through an imaginary
telescopic sight and squeezed an invisible trigger. “Not if he had the
Agency.”

Joe Brown looked at Red Brown for a long, comprehending moment. Before
he had become an Agent, and even for a while when he was in training, he
had been very clear in his mind who the Agency worked for. But as time
went on that didn’t seem to matter any more; agents worked for the
Agency, and nobody in or out of the Agency or the Government or anywhere
else would dream of asking who the Agency worked for. So if the Agency
decided to work for the king of the world, well, why not? Only one man.
It’s very easy to take care of one man. The agency had long known how
things should be, and with sole control of a thing like this the Agency
could make them be that way. For everybody, everywhere.

Red Brown made a swift complex gesture which Joe Brown understood. They
both took out their concealed recorders and wiped that last sentence
from the tape. They put their recorders away again and looked at each
other with new and shining eyes. If the two of them should come by sole
possession of the Mellow Effect, then their superior, a Mr. Brown, and
his superior, who was head of the whole Agency, had a surprise coming.

Red Brown removed a bunch of keys from his belt and selected one, with
which he unlocked a compartment, or drawer, in his desk, or console, and
withdrew a heavy steel box, like a safety deposit. Flicking a glance at
his colleague to be sure he was out of visual range, he turned a
combination knob with great care and attention, this way, that, around
again and back, and then depressed a handle. The lid of the box rose,
and from it he took two photocopies of the Mellow Memo. “We shall now,”
he said for the record, “read the Mellow Memo.”

And so shall you.

_THE MELLOW MEMO_

_Ever since the dawn of history, mankind has found himself face to face
with basic truths that, through inattention, preconception, or sheer
stupidity, he cannot see, or does not recognize, or does not understand.
There have been times when he has done very well indeed with complex
things—for example, the Mayan calendar stones and the navigation of the
Polynesians—while blindly overlooking the fact that complex things are
built of simple things, and that the simple things are, by their nature,
all around us, waiting to be observed_.

_Mankind has been terribly tardy in his discovery of the obvious. Two
clear illustrations should suffice:_

_You can, for a few pennies, at any toy store or fairgrounds, pick up a
pinwheel. Now, I have not been able to discover just when this device
was invented, where, or by whom, but as far as I know there are no
really early examples of it. An even simpler device can be whittled by
an eight-year-old from a piece of pine: a two-bladed propeller. Mounted
on a shaft, or pin, it will spin freely in the wind. This would seem to
be the kind of discovery which could have been made five hundred years
ago, a thousand—even five thousand, when Egyptian artisans were turning
out far more complex designs and devices. To put the propeller on a
fixed shaft, to spin the shaft and create a wind, to immerse the thing
in water and envision pumps and propulsion—these seem to be obvious,
self-describing steps to take, and yet for thousands of years, nobody
took them. Now imagine if you can—and you can’t—what the history of
civilization would be, where we would now be technologically, had there
been propellers and pumps a thousand years ago—or three, or five! All
for the lack of one whittling child, one curious primitive whose eye was
caught by a twisted leaf spinning on a spiderweb_.

_One more example; and this time we will start with modern materials and
look back. If you drill a one-sixteenth-inch hole in a sheet of tin, and
place a drop of water on the hole, it will suspend itself there. Gravity
will pull it downward, while surface tension will draw it upward into a
dome shape. Viewed from the edge of the piece of tin, the drop of water
is in the shape of a lens—and it is a lens. If you look down through it,
with the eye close to the drop, at something held under it and well
illuminated, you will find that the liquid lens has a focal length of
about half an inch and a power of about fifty diameters. (And if by any
chance you want a microscope for nothing, drill your hole in the center
of the bottom of a soup can, then cut three sides of a square—right,
left, top—in the side of the can and bend the tab thus formed inward to
forty-five degrees, to let the light in and reflect it upwards. Cut a
slip of glass and fix it so it rests inside the can and under the hole.
Mount your subject—a fly’s foot, a horsehair, whatever you like—on the
glass, put a drop of water in the hole, and you will see your subject
magnified fifty times. A drop of glycerin, by the way, is not quite as
clear but works almost as well and does not evaporate.)_

_Microscopes and their self-evident siblings, telescopes, did not appear
until the eighteenth century. Why not? Were there not countless
thousands of shepherds who on countless dewy mornings were in the
presence of early sunlight and drops of water captured on cobwebs or in
punctured leaves; why did not just one of them look, just once, through
a dewdrop at the whorls of his own thumb? And why, seemingly, did the
marvelous artisans of glass in Tyre and Florence and ancient Babylon
never think to look through their blown and molded bowls and vases
instead of at them? Can you imagine what this world would be if the
burning glass, the microscope, the eyeglasses, the telescope had been
invented three thousand years earlier?_

_Perhaps by now you share with me a kind of awe at human blindness,
human stupidity. Let me then add to that another species of blindness:
the conviction that all such simple things have now been observed and
used, and all their principles understood. This is far from so. There
are in nature numberless observations yet to be made, and many of them
might still be found by an illiterate shepherd; but in addition to
these, our own technology has produced a whole new spectrum of
phenomena, just waiting for that one observant eye, that one undeluded
mind which sees things placed right in front of its nose—not once, not
rarely, but over and over and over again, shouting to be discovered and
developed_.

_There is one such phenomenon screaming at you today and every day from
at least three places in your house—your bathroom, your kitchen, and, if
you have a bank account, your pocket_.

_Two out of five times, on the average, when you tear off a sheet of
toilet tissue, a paper towel, or a check from your checkbook, it will
tear across the sheet and not along the perforated line. The same is
true of note pads, postage stamps, carbon-and-second-sheet tablets, and
virtually every other substance or device made to be torn along
perforations_.

_To the writer’s present knowledge, no exhaustive study has ever been
made of this phenomenon. I here propose one_.

_We begin with the experimentally demonstrable fact that in a large
percentage of cases, the paper will tear elsewhere than on the
perforation line. In all such cases the conclusion is obvious: that the
perforation line is stronger than the nonperforated parts_.

_Let us next consider what perforation is—that is to say, what is done
when a substance is perforated. Purely and simply: material is removed_.

_Now if, in these special cases, the substance becomes stronger when a
small part of it is removed, it would seem logical to assume that if
still more were removed, the substance would be stronger still. And
carried to its logical conclusion, it would seem reasonable to
hypothesize that by removing more and more material, the resulting
substance would become stronger and stronger until at last we would
produce a substance composed of nothing at all—which would be
indestructible!_

_If conventional thinking makes it difficult for you to grasp this
simple sequence, or if, on grasping it, you find you cannot accept it,
please permit me to remind you of the remark once uttered by a Corsican
gentleman by the name of Napoleon Bonaparte: “To find out if something
is impossible—try it.” I have done just that, and results so far are
most promising. Until I have completed more development work, I prefer
not to go into my methods nor describe the materials tested—except to
say that I am no longer working with paper. I am convinced, however,
that the theory is sound and the end result will be achieved_.

_A final word—which surely is not needed, for like everything else about
this process, each step dictates and describes the next—will briefly
suggest the advantages of this new substance, which I shall conveniently
call, with a capital letter, Nothing:_

_The original material, to be perforated, is not expensive and will
always be in plentiful supply. Processing, although requiring a rather
high degree of precision in the placement of the holes, is easily
adaptable to automatic machinery which, once established, will require
very little maintenance. And the most significant—one might almost say,
pleasant—thing about this processing is that by its very nature (the
removal of material) it allows for the retrieval of very nearly_ _100_
_percent of the original substance. This salvage may be refabricated
into sheets which can then be processed, by repeated perforations, into
more Nothing, so that the initial material may be used over and over
again to produce unlimited quantities of Nothing_.

_Simple portable devices can be designed which will fabricate Nothing
into sheets, rods, tubing, beams or machine parts of any degree of
flexibility, elasticity, malleability, or rigidity. Once in its final
form, Nothing is indestructible. Its permeability, conductivity, and
chemical reactivity to acids and bases all are zero. It can be made in
thin sheets as a wrapping, so that perishables can be packed in Nothing,
displayed most attractively on shelves made of Nothing. Whole buildings,
homes, factories, schools can be built of it. Since, even in tight
rolls, it weighs nothing, unlimited quantities of it can be shipped for
virtually nothing, and it stows so efficiently that as yet I have not
been able to devise a method of calculating how much of it could be put
into a given volume—say a single truck or airplane, which could
certainly carry enough Nothing to build, pave, and equip an entire
city_.

_Since Nothing (if desired) is impermeable and indestructible, it would
seem quite feasible to throw up temporary or permanent domes over
houses, cities, or entire geographical areas. To shield aircraft,
however, is another matter: getting an airflow through the invisible
barrier of Nothing and over the wings of an airplane presents certain
problems. On the other hand, orbiting devices would not be subject to
these_.

_To sum up: the logical steps leading to the production of Nothing seem
quite within the “state of the art,” and the benefits accruing to
humanity from it would seem to justify proceeding with it_.

There was a certain amount of awe in Miss Prince’s voice as it emerged
from the little black box saying, “A Mr. Brown is here and would like to
see you.”

Henry Mellow frowned a sort of “Oh, dear” kind of frown and then said,
“Send him in.”

He came in, black suit, black shoes, black tie, and in his eyes,
nothing. Henry Mellow did not rise, but he was pleasant enough as he
gestured, “Sit down, Mr. Brown.” There was only one chair to sit in, and
it was well placed, so Mr. Brown sat. He identified himself with
something leathery that opened and shut like a snapping turtle with a
mouthful of medals. “What can I do for you?”

“You’re Henry Mellow.” Mr. Brown didn’t ask, he _told_.

“Yes.”

“You wrote a memo about Noth—about some new substance to build things
with.”

“Oh that, yes. You mean Nothing.”

“That depends,” said Mr. Brown humorlessly. “You’ve gone ahead with
research and development.”

“I have?”

“That’s what we’d like to know.”

“We?”

Mr. Brown’s hand dipped in and out of his black jacket and made the
snapping turtle thing again.

“Oh,” said Henry Mellow. “Well, suppose we just call it an intellectual
exercise—an entertainment. We’ll send it out to a magazine, say, as
fiction.”

“We can’t allow that.”

“Really not?”

“We live in a real world, Mr. Mellow, where things happen that maybe
people like you don’t understand. Now I don’t know whether or not
there’s any merit in your idea or how far you’ve gone with it, but I’m
here to advise you to stop it here and now.”

“Oh? Why, Mr. Brown?”

“Do you know how many large corporations would be affected by such a
thing—if there was such a thing? Construction, mining, hauling,
prefabrication—everything. Not that we take it seriously, you
understand, but we know something about you and we have to take it
seriously anyway.”

“Well, I appreciate the advice, but I think I’ll send it out anyway.”

“Then,” continued Mr. Brown as if he had not spoken, and acquiring,
suddenly, a pulpit resonance, “Then … there’s the military.”

“The military.”

“Defense, Mr. Mellow. We can’t allow just anybody to get their hands on
plans to put impenetrable domes over cities—suppose somebody overseas
got them built first?”

“Do you think if a lot of people read it in a magazine, someone overseas
would do it first?”

“That’s the way we have to think.” He leaned closer. “Look, Mr.
Mellow—have you thought maybe you’ve got a gold mine for yourself here?
You don’t want to turn it over to the whole world.”

“Mr. Brown, I don’t want a gold mine for myself. I don’t much want any
kind of mines for anybody. I don’t want people cutting down more forests
or digging more holes in the ground to take out what they can’t put
back, not when there are better ways. And I don’t want to get paid for
not using a better way if I find one. I just want people to be able to
have what they want without raping a planet for it, and I want them to
be able to protect themselves if they have to, and to get comfortable
real quick and real cheap even if it means some fat cats have to get
comfortable along with them. Not thin, Mr. Brown—just comfortable.”

“I thought it was going to be something like this,” said Mr. Brown. His
hand dipped in and out of the black jacket again, but this time it was
holding a very small object like a stretched-out toy pistol. “You can
come along with me willingly or I’ll have to use this.”

“I guess you’d better use it, then,” said Henry Mellow regretfully.

“It’s nice,” said Mr. Brown. “It won’t even leave a mark.”

“I’m sure it won’t,” said Henry Mellow as the little weapon went off
with a short, explosive hiss. The little needle it threw disintegrated
in midair.

Mr. Brown turned gray. He raised the weapon again. “Don’t bother, Mr.
Brown,” said Henry Mellow. “There’s a sheet of just plain Nothing
between us, and it’s impenetrable.”

Still holding his weapon, Mr. Brown rose and backed away—and brought up
sharply against some Nothing behind him. He turned and patted it wildly
and then ran to the side, where he struck an invisible barrier that sat
him down on the rug. He looked as if he was going to cry.

“Sit in the chair,” said Henry Mellow, not unkindly. “Please. There.
That’s better. Now then: listen to me.” And something, at that moment,
seemed to happen to Henry Mellow: to Mr. Brown he looked bigger, wider,
and, somehow realer than he had been before. It was as if the business
he was in had for a long time kept him from seeing people as real, and
now, suddenly, he could again.

Henry Mellow said, “I’ve had a lot longer to think this out than you
have, and besides, I don’t think the way you do. I guess I don’t think
the way anybody does. So I’ve been told. But for what it’s worth, here
it is: If I tried to keep this thing and control it myself, I wouldn’t
live ten minutes. (What’s the matter, Mr. Brown? Somebody else say that?
I wouldn’t doubt it.) Or I could just file it away and forget it; matter
of fact, I tried that and I just couldn’t forget it, because there’s a
lot of people dying now, and more could die in the future, for lack of
it. I even thought of printing it up, in detail, and scattering it from
a plane. But then, you know what I wrote about how many shepherds didn’t
look into how many dewdrops; that could happen again—probably would, and
it’s not a thing I could do thousands of times. So I’ve decided to do
what I said—publish it in a magazine. But not in detail. I don’t want
anyone to think they stole it, and I don’t want anyone to make a lot out
of it and then come looking for me, either to eliminate me (that could
happen) or to share it, because I don’t want to share it with one person
or two or a company—I want to share it with everybody, all the good that
comes of it, all the bad. You don’t understand that, do you, Mr. Brown?

“You’re going to meet a doctor friend of mine in a minute who will give
you something that will help you forget. It’s quite harmless, but you
won’t remember any of this. So before you go, I just want to tell you
one thing: there’s another Mr. Brown downstairs. Mr. Brown X, he said
you called him, and all he wanted was the process—not for himself, not
for the Agency, but for his people; he said they really know how to get
along with Nothing.” He smiled. “And I don’t want you to feel too badly
about this, but your Agency’s not as fast on its feet as you think it
is. Last week I had a man with some sort of Middle European accent and a
man who spoke Ukrainian and two Orientals and a fellow with a beard from
Cuba. Just thought I’d tell you.…

“So good-bye, Mr. Brown. You’ll forget all about this talk, but maybe
when you write a check and tear it in two getting it out of the book, or
when you rip off a paper towel or a stamp and the perforations hold,
something will tell you to stop a minute and think it through.” He
smiled and touched a second button on his intercom.

“Stand by, Doc.”

“Ready,” said the intercom.

Henry Mellow moved something under the edge of his desk and the
visitor’s chair dropped through the floor. In a moment it reappeared,
empty. Henry Mellow touched another control, and the sheets of Nothing
slid up and away, to await the next one.

So when it happens, don’t just say Damn and forget it. Stop a minute and
think it through. Somebody’s going to change the face of the earth and
it could be you.



TAKE CARE OF JOEY


Talking to this bartender, I forget what about, he said wait and reached
for the backbar phone. I hadn’t much noticed the little guy in the green
sweater but he had. He was eyeing him while he dialed so I did too. The
little guy was ambling down the whole length of the place and slowing
down, not quite stopping, at each bar stool. Every customer got the eye,
a cold, up-down and back kind of hit-me-why-doncha look. Spooky. Some
little guys got this banty-cock thing going: you know, I’m little but
I’m tough, try me out, and they really are tough. This one wasn’t.
Somehow his legs didn’t work right, I can’t say how, it wasn’t even a
limp, and he was real skinny.

“Hello, Dwight. This is Danny at the Ramble Inn. Joey just come in and
it looks like he—Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.” He hung up and the both of us
watched this little guy, this Joey. Some of the customers turned their
back, swing to the left as he come near, swing to the right as he
passed, and when that happened he would edge in next to them and hang
there until they had to face him. He’d give them that eye and like
twitch his upper lip at one side and if they didn’t say nothing he would
walk on, and they didn’t say nothing.

Then some others would look at him what-the-hell, and he would look
right back at them until they turned away, and then move on. One
customer, he was a big guy and kind of sleepy-looking, but look out for
guys like that, he said “You want something?” and this little Joey waits
a good long time to answer him, “Maybe later.” Then there’s me, because
I’m down at the bottom end with the bartender. I’m watching him in the
mirror by then and he can’t know that, so he stands by my elbow doing
nothing so long I got to turn around and look at him. I said Hi.

He didn’t say nothing. He waited what got to be an awful long time,
hanging those boiled-looking eyes on me, and then he spit on the floor.
I didn’t have to move my feet, but almost. He kept on looking and then
rounded me and said to the bartender, “I want to make a boiler.”

Danny the bartender got him his shot and chaser and the little guy took
the glasses and moved over to a table where he could see everybody. I
said, “Guy like that, could be trouble.”

“Will be trouble,” Danny the bartender says.

Before I can talk any more there comes in a tall man, worried, looked
all around but I don’t think he could see this Joey because he come
straight down to where I am and says to the bartender, “Danny, where.…”

“Hi, Dwight. There he is.” He points with his eyes.

Dwight, that’s the tall one, he flashes a look and then uses the backbar
mirror to study out this Joey, seems like he wants to know everything he
can by looking without talking to him. I seen him squinch up his face
when Joey knocks back the rye and chugalugs his chaser. I hear him say O
God when Joey gets up.

Joey puts a cigarette in his chops and kind of sets his chin down and
moves halfway up the bar where sits this big sleepy-looking guy who told
him before, “You want something?” and he reaches for the guy’s cigar
which is in an ashtray on the bar. Dwight says in my ear again O God and
Danny the bartender says, “Dwight, you better get him out of here,” and
Sleepy says, “Hey get your goddamn hands off my _seegar_.”

Joey goes right on getting a light off the cigar for his cigarette and
paying no mind and Dwight starts moving up toward the two of them and
maybe it would of been all right even then but Joey taken the cigar and
dropped it in the big guy’s highball. Well, of course, that was it and
Sleepy takes a swing, but by that time Dwight is there in between them
and more than that—he gives little Joey a shoulder that sends him
cakewalking back out of the way. For that Dwight has to take the punch
on the side of his neck and he puts up his hands like peacemaking and
says Cool it or some such.

But Sleepy is not about to cool it now and gets on his feet, and he is a
much bigger man than I thought. He winds up a ham-handed right at the
end of an arm like a tree-trunk, and I have seen guys who do that and I
want to yell at Dwight don’t pay no attention to that big looping
windup, he wants you to, and sure enough Sleepy’s left comes out from
under his armpit traveling short and straight and lays Dwight out flat
on the floor and sliding.

Disgusted and scared I hear Danny the bartender say “God now I got to
call the pleece, I hate to call the pleece,” so I told him not to and
went up there where the trouble was, Dwight wiggling a little on the
floor and Sleepy with his eye on Joey and Joey backing away. I guess I
was going to try to talk it through but Sleepy tromps Dwight. He does it
still looking at Joey like he don’t care where he tromps him and he
don’t, either. I don’t like guys who tromp guys unless they need to, so
I told Sleepy to quit and he tromped Dwight again looking at me now and
cocking that big phony right-hander my way, and when you see them do
that twice in a row you know you got a one-trick fighter, which makes it
easy for anyone who knows two, and I know half a hundred.

I showed him some and he never laid a hand on me but the one I grabbed
the wrist of and rolled him over my back and airplaned him, and by that
time I had got to him four times already and he wasn’t about to get up
again for a while. I got Dwight up on his feet and over to where my
drink was and he hung onto the bar shaking his head. Danny the bartender
give him a shot and that seemed to help a little while the customers
went back to their stools except a couple over to see about Sleepy. I
called over to them not to worry. And meanwhile that little Joey that
started it all is standing right where he was where Sleepy had pushed
him to.

Danny said for me to drink my drink. “It’s on the house, grateful, but
get that Joey out of here, he’s bad news from now on out, I know him,
honest to God, Dwight”—and I realized it was Dwight he was talking to
now not me—“I don’t know why you do it. If it was me I would just let
somebody plow him under.”

Dwight says, “Well it ain’t you. Thanks for the drink.” He looks at me
and he thanks me too. I said I’ll go along with him. Sometimes when
these things happen they are not finished where they start and you get
jumped outside. Dwight said he didn’t think so this time and neither did
I but I went anyway. We kind of collected Joey one on each side walking
out. He went right along with it, he held back only a second at the door
to look back where a couple of guys was helping Sleepy onto his feet,
and then he looked at Dwight, and then he laughed at him. He didn’t pay
no attention to me at all. I mean he was a very creepy little guy.

I went along with them and I will tell you why. I have seen a lot in a
lot of places, and there is one thing that always hooks me and that is
when I see somebody taking care of somebody, because to tell you the
truth I just cannot understand it. Why a guy throws his self on a
grenade to save other guys. Why some stranger runs into a burning house
to get someone out. How it is you can call somebody up in the middle of
the night and he will run out to get some other guy out of trouble. You
can say all you want about heroes and survival of the race and sacrifice
and all like that, and I say bullshit. Maybe you want to believe that
stuff but what I believe is that people is either wolves or wolverines
when they are not tapeworms or sheep, and that is that.

All the same I keep looking, I really don’t know why. I look very hard
and I don’t like it. I mean it’s like I don’t want to find out even once
that anyone would really and truly take care of someone else without he
got something out of it. It’s like I’m scared to find it out, like my
whole world would get shook upside down if I ever did, but I keep
looking.

The first thing happened when we left the Ramble Inn was Joey pulled
away from us and run straight out into the street. There was cars coming
and a truck and a bus and Joey just did not seem to give a damn. There
was a lot of honking and screeching and cussing right away and Dwight,
he was still rocking from that powerhouse punch, but all the same he
dove out into that traffic and got to Joey and throwed both arms around
him and rassled him to the dotted line between lanes and held him there
until the traffic opened up and he could shove him back to the sidewalk.
He was cussing him out too, and he meant it. Joey just laughed. Dwight
told him to get the hell home before somebody killed him, and I think he
really meant himself, him, Dwight, was the somebody. Joey just said
Nope. He still did not pay any attention to me.

Dwight turned the little guy loose and he started to amble down the
street, and Dwight walked slow behind him. He kept his eyes on him
almost every second. He said to me well, thanks for what you done in
there, it was like good-bye, beat it. But I walked along with him. So
after a while Dwight said he could handle things all right. He said, “He
gets like this every once in a while, wants to go out and drink. It is
not too hard as long as you keep your eye on him and head him off from
the big ones.” I don’t think he meant big guys, I think he meant big
trouble.

I said if he didn’t mind me asking, when a guy is so eager to get his
self killed, why not just let him do it? because he sure is asking for
it. And Dwight said “No he’s not.” He said that positive, I mean like he
_knew_.

So there was Joey walking along in the middle of the night like he
wasn’t going no place in particular and didn’t much care, and the two of
us following along a little way behind watching him and talking a little
once in a while. When I kept on sticking around, Dwight quit saying
thanks-and-goodnight things. I found out they were not related, they did
not come from the same town, they did not live together or work in the
same company or even in the same line. Dwight was a shop foreman, I
think in some kind of printing place, he was a pretty educated guy, I
mean you got the idea he could go a lot farther if something wasn’t
holding him back. Joey was a sheet metal man in an auto body place. Also
they were not queer. The more I found out about them the more worried I
got that here was somebody who was ready to lay it on the line for
somebody else without any payoff, none at all. I mean, I don’t think
they even liked each other.

So I finally asked him right out, why? and all he said was, “There’s
some things you just got to do.” Then Joey began to run.

You wouldn’t believe a spindly little guy like that could take off that
way, one second ambling along looking into store windows, the next
scooting like a squirted apple seed. I heard that same tired O God from
Dwight, and then voom he’s off after the little guy. I thought well
hell, and went after them.

Joey went straight for three blocks widening the gap all the way. I
right away dug that Dwight was not in good shape at all because when I
passed him in the first half-block he was already wheezing for breath.
So I did not bother with him but made it my business to round up that
Joey and nail him down good. It was not easy.

He turned right into an alley and if I had not really been pushing
myself I would not of seen him turn right again into a dead-end loading
area behind a big warehouse. It was dark in there but not altogether.
All the same I could not see him any place.

I backed away looking every place until I was in the alley again so
Dwight would see me when he come by, and he did. He was so pooped and
tuckered and winded out he could not talk at all, and when I told him
which way Joey had went he just nodded his head and hung on to a brick
wall gasping and coughing a little once in a while until he was put
together again. Then he said, “We got to stop him now. He got something
wrong with his heart muscle, he shouldn’t run like that. He knows that
but he does it every once in a while anyway the dirty rotten little son
of a bitch.” So now I knew it wasn’t just not liking each other, Dwight,
he hated that little guy.

He went back into the loading area and looked all around.

Somebody told me once that if you ever want to hide, don’t go down or
behind, go up. Guys looking for something will always look down or under
or behind things, never up unless something attracts them. I remembered
that and so started looking up, and sure enough.

I hit on Dwight’s arm and pointed. There was a fire escape that went
clear up to the roof and about sixty feet up there was a black blob kind
of weaving back and forth. If you looked real careful you could see it
was Joey, and after a while you could see he was on one of the landings
of the steel stairway, and when your eyes got really used to it you
could see he was at the end of the landing on the wrong side of the
railing, hanging on to it and standing on one leg and pivoting back and
forth, hanging out over nothing at all.

“O God. I got to get him. He gets dizzy spells.” Dwight started to run
for the bottom of the ladder. I got to him in two jumps. It was easy, he
did not have his breath back even yet. I said how the hell did he think
he was going to get to the ladder?

It was one of those swing-down ladders that if you are on the fire
escape coming down you get on it and it comes down, otherwise it stays
up on the second floor level so burglars can’t get to use it. Somebody
must of tied it down and Joey found it like that, he sure did not leave
it like that. You would have to be a bird or a polevaulter to get to it
now. And up there Joey was swinging like a monkey, I heard him laugh.

Dwight got right under the ladder and jumped. It was pathetic. He jumped
and jumped, I think he was more than half out of his mind. “We got to
get to him,” I think he was saying over and over in between those little
tired useless jumps—you could not tell he was so out of breath.

There was a smooth six-inch pipe at the corner of the building running
from the ground up to the third floor, I don’t know why. It passed about
four feet away from that second-floor landing of the fire escape where
the swing-down ladder was. From the ground it looked like a long way up
and a hell of a way from the landing, and a smooth six-inch pipe is not
the easiest thing to get hold of but what the hell. I started up it hand
over hand. There wasn’t nothing feet could do so I just let them hang
there and come along for the ride. Down below me Dwight was trying to
follow me, he could not even get off the ground.

When I got above the landing I stopped for a couple seconds to get my
breath because a couple of seconds was all my hands had left in them. I
flipped my feet up and out to get a swing, swung back and then forward
and let go, trying to shove at the same time. It was a nice idea but it
did not altogether work. I did not get both hands on the guard-rail as I
figured; I got one hand on the flat floor-bars. It hurt a whole lot but
I could hang on until I stopped swinging and was able to climb to the
landing. I had to lay down for quite a time before I was ready to move
on.

I guess I could of pushed the ladder down then and let Dwight take over
but tell you the truth I never thought of it. I started up after that
crazy Joey.

I heard him laughing again.

I went up kind of on all fours. I think he thought it was Dwight, not
me. Anyway when I got to the sixth landing he started to scream at me,
“You ain’t Dwight, you get the hell out of here, you mind your own
goddamn business, it’s old Dwight’ll take care of me.” I did not say
nothing but kept on coming. He was still over the rail leaning back
against his grip. All he had to do was open his fingers and that was it.
I came on slow.

Maybe it was all fun for him up to then, I don’t know.

Maybe it was getting mad at me like that, that made some difference
inside his crazy head. But as I come close I could see in the little bit
of stray light his eyes go funny. I mean he stopped screaming and he
stopping swinging and his eyes went white, I guess they rolled right on
up out of sight. And his knees started to buckle.

I jumped. I reached for him with my right hand because I am right-handed
and because I did not have no time to think. It was the same hand I
caught myself with when I swung off the pipe and it was bloody and
skinned. It hurt a whole lot but that was all right—it just wouldn’t
work very good. It landed into his armpit as he fell, which is a hell of
a way to catch anybody, and got hold of a bunch of shirt and skin. I
fell down and slid forward and he would of pulled me right off after him
but I arched my back and caught the underside of the rail with my heels.
As long as I could keep my knees bent my heels made a sort of half-ass
hook that at least stopped the sliding. I got my other hand on him. He
was no help, he was dead weight, he was out cold. I remember thinking to
myself for just one second, oh the hell with it, I’ve done enough. But I
did not listen to that and I hung on, and after a minute I found the
strength to pull him up high enough to bend his chest onto the deck bars
and press back and fall full length on them and pull him all the way in.

Way down below in the dark Dwight was yelling and yelling something. He
was yelling, “Don’t hit him. For God’s sake don’t hit him.”

I think if he had not passed out like that I would of hit him. Like I
said I know a lot of tricks but there are some I know I never got to try
yet and I would of liked to try some of them out. But there wasn’t any
need, and after I rested I hung him on my shoulder and walked down the
fire escape with him. The swinging ladder went down without no trouble
and I got to the ground and it swung up again with a clang and I put
Joey down on the ground.

Dwight jumped on him and felt him all over and put his ear on Joey’s
mouth and lit a match and rolled back an eyelid and then he hunkered
down and pulled a deep sigh. “He’s going to be all right.”

I said that was a damn shame.

Dwight said he would lay like this for a half hour or so and then come
to, and he would take him home. He said then he probably would not pull
anything like this again for two, three weeks.

I think I got a little bit mad then and I called him a number of names
all meaning Stupid. I said to waste his time looking out for a crazy
ugly little fart like that Joey, he should have his head candled.

He hunkered there by Joey and looked up at me and let me run down and
then he said well, he guessed I had the right to hear the whole story.

He said there’s always one kid in any crowd that is the goat for
everybody—the little fat boy. Or sometimes the little skinny boy or the
one boy with curly hair. He said the more everybody jumps on that one
kid the more you get to hate him, and sometimes it does you good to get
him alone and beat the hell out of him just because he is there to beat
the hell out of. So Joey was that kid, see, and one day Dwight got him
alone and beat the hell out of him, and Joey got up off the ground and
hit him. Maybe it was just he was not ready, but he went over like tall
timber and banged his head into some broken bottles and was knocked out
and cut some, and when he came to in a minute or so Joey was trying to
wipe away the blood off his head. Somehow that made him like crazy, and
he jumped up and beat Joey and knocked him down and tromped him till he
was tired. Then he went home. When they found Joey they thought he was
dead and for months in the hospital they thought he was not going to
make it. But he made it kind of.

He had something wrong with his spleen and his central nervous system
that made him walk a little funny and in his head where the skull
fracture had squeezed his brains. Also a broken rib done something to
his heart. And according to the state law, a death resulting from an
assault was murder even if it happened a long time after. With all that,
any punch or fall was liable to take Joey right off. Dwight knew that
and Joey knew that. If ever they found Joey dead the chances were that
whatever killed him would not of killed him without he was so messed up,
and any coroner would be able to tell. So all Dwight could do was try to
see to it that Joey did not get into trouble.

“Every once in a while he gets to brooding about he will never get
married or go to college or be like other people, and he goes out and
drinks and tries to get himself clobbered so maybe I will wind up in the
chair, and also he likes to see me doing all I have to do to take care
of him.” He looked down at Joey for a long time and then up at me. “He
moved from home to Philadelphia and then to Macon and Cleveland, Ohio
and now here, and I had to go along too.” He looked down at Joey again
and said, “I never went to college either and I never got to marry
anybody or have kids, I guess I never will. It’s twenty-two years now.”

I said, “Well, you have just made me feel one hell of a lot better.” I
said, “I been looking all my life for somebody who does things for other
people without he gets anything for it and if I ever found one I believe
it would blow my mind.” I said, “All the dogs eating all the dogs, I can
understand that and I can see how the whole thing works, but if ever you
show me one guy who will do big things for other people just because
they need doing, I will freak out.” And I said, “What the hell are you
laughing at?”

He said, “You’re one.”

I said, “No I ain’t.” I ran away saying, No I ain’t. I don’t want to be
like that, I don’t want anyone to be like that, if anyone was like that,
I wouldn’t understand how things work.



STORY NOTES


By Paul Williams

The stories collected in this volume were written between 1957 and 1970.
Sturgeon’s writing output during this period began to decrease, and he
turned to writing for TV and movies for income. During the period from
1965 to 1966, while his relationship with his third wife, Marion, was
unraveling, he traveled back and forth between Woodstock, NY and Los
Angeles. On the West Coast, he worked with the creators and writers
involved in the first _Star Trek_ TV series. The first episode of _Star
Trek_, “The Man-Trap,” which aired on September 8, 1966, mentions him
obliquely. In his honor, the first crewman killed by the “salt monster”
of the story was satirically named “Sturgeon.” Sturgeon’s first _Star
Trek_ episode, “Shore Leave,” aired in December 1966, and the second
one, “Amok Time,” aired in September 1967. This last episode is
well-known in _Star Trek_ lore for its introduction of the Vulcan hand
salute, Spock’s sex life, and elements of Vulcan culture.

In the spring of 1966, Sturgeon began to make Los Angeles his permanent
home, first living for a period with the writer Harlan Ellison, and then
in Sherman Oaks. In the spring of 1969, he met and began living with his
fourth long-term companion, Wina. They moved to a house in Echo Park and
in January 1970, they had a son, Andros.

“RIDE IN, RIDE OUT” by Theodore Sturgeon and Don Ward; first published
in _Sturgeon’s West_, (Doubleday, 1973). Probably written in 1957
(judging from a mention in Sturgeon’s correspondence of stories he was
trying unsuccessfully to sell). In 1956, Sturgeon described the process
of his collaboration with Ward: _Don dreams ’em up and I write ’em my
way and submit them without his seeing them_. Ward, who was editor of
the short story magazine _Zane Grey’s Western (ZGW)_, describes _ZGW_ as
“one of the last Western magazines to fall before the rising challenge
of the TV horse opera.” “The market for Western short stories vanished,”
he reports in his introduction to _Sturgeon’s West_, reminding us that
the existence of genre fiction, including most of Theodore Sturgeon’s
opus, depends on the existence of a paying market for such particular
types of story.

The epigram “Beware the fury of a patient man” is also quoted in the
story “Extrapolation” in the 1964 anthology _Sturgeon in Orbit_ (first
published under the title “Beware the Fury” in _Fantastic Stories_
magazine in 1954).

“ASSAULT AND LITTLE SISTER”: first published in _Mike Shayne Mystery
Magazine_, July 1961. Editor’s blurb from the original magazine appeared
as “A TERRIFYING STORY OF SUSPENSE: THE AUTHOR OF THIS UNUSUAL AND
CHILLING MYSTERY STORY SHARES WITH RAY BRADBURY THE DISTINCTION OF BEING
ONE OF THE TWO OR THREE OUTSTANDING FANTASY WRITERS OF OUR DAY. WE THINK
YOU’LL AGREE THAT HE HAS MORE THAN ONE STRING TO HIS BOW.”

“WHEN YOU CARE, WHEN YOU LOVE”: first published in _The Magazine of
Fantasy and Science Fiction (F&SF)_, September, 1962; probably written
in the first months of 1962. This was identified by Sturgeon
bibliographers Benson and Stephenson-Payne as the long-awaited first
installment of a Sturgeon novel called _The Unbegotten Man_, which was
originally announced in the back pages of the 1950 Greenberg Publishers’
hardcover edition of _The Dreaming Jewels_. That means that as far back
as 1950, Sturgeon was already developing the novel that he ultimately
contracted to write in the early 1960s in which “When You Care, When You
Love” became the out-of-sequence opening section, as “Baby Is Three” had
been in _More than Human_. As I indicated in the notes to the first
volume of this _Complete Stories_ series, Sturgeon’s interest in
pursuing this theme began with his story “Accidentally on Porpoise” in
1938.

The novel-length expansion of “When You Care” that Sturgeon contracted
with a publisher to write in the 1960s was to be called _The Tulip
Tree_. A large file folder containing notes for this novel can be found
among the papers belonging to the Sturgeon Literary Trust. In an
introductory feature of a special Sturgeon issue, Editor Avram Davidson
of _F&SF_ wrote, “There is, of course, the new Theodore Sturgeon story,
the first of three, which, when finished, will be published as one book;
plus Judith Merril’s ‘personality’ article on the Guest of Honor [while
the magazine was on sale, Sturgeon was Guest of Honor at the annual
World Science Fiction Convention, held in 1962 in Chicago]; plus James
Blish’s cameo-like critique of Sturgeon as literary craftsman; plus Sam
Moskowitz’s Sturgeon bibliography—and, for lagniappe, a short excursion
into extraterrestrial zoology by Robin Sturgeon, penultimate child to
Theodore.”

The editor’s introduction to Robin’s half-page piece reveals that he is
ten years old and that “this article [“Martian Mouse”] was originally
written as a school composition.”

Blish’s article describes Sturgeon, in a much-quoted line, as “the
finest conscious artist science fiction has ever had. Davidson’s
introduction in _F&SF_ read:

“Among the paradoxes of the kingdom of nature is this: that the
golden-throated nightingale is drab, while the splendid peacock has a
harsh scream for a voice. ‘Paradox,’ in the sense of ‘a seeming
contradiction’—but of course really no contradiction at all. The
splendor of song is sufficient for the nightingale. The peacock’s
plumage is glory enough for him. Nature, there, is neither niggardly nor
lavish past measure. We have writers who sing sweetly as nightingales,
writers who are gorgeous as peacocks. It is a flat fact that Theodore
Sturgeon is both. As someone put it to us recently, he ‘has an aura.’
His flashing eyes, his floating hair, Pan-like beard, continually
sparkling wit, his alchemist’s fingers, and his ardent pen.… It is
around us that the circle is thrice-woven; it is we who feed on honeydew
and drink the milk of paradise. Much have we traveled in the realms of
gold, who have read much (or even little) of his work. It seems only
right, somehow, that, with all this, Theodore Sturgeon should have a
beautiful wife and beautiful children as well. It seems, anyhow, not
right that we can find (after long searching) nothing fresher to say at
this point than this: We are proud to publish this newest story by
Theodore Sturgeon. It will form (though complete in itself) part of a
book, and he has promised us the privilege of publishing the other parts
as they are written. The tale has its beginnings with the long, deep
thoughts of Captain Gamaliel Wyke, crouching by the winter fire in his
four great grey shawls, near the tolling breakers and the creaking
gulls. Thus it begins. There is time enough before we consider its
ending.”

“HOLD-UP À LA CARTE”: first published in _Ellery Queen’s Mystery
Magazine_, February, 1964. Editor’s blurb from the first page of the
original magazine appearance: “Once upon a time (in September, 1962, to
be exact), Theodore Sturgeon had occasion to look through his old files
for the carbon copy of an early short story—when lo and behold, out
popped another short story, one that had never been published and which
Mr. Sturgeon had completely forgotten. This original manuscript was
resting in peace under (to quote Mr. Sturgeon) some layers of peat moss
in the bottom of an old box.… Now, Mr. Sturgeon could not remember how
long ago he had written this newly discovered story—he judged he had
done it for some demanding editor back in the 16th or 17th Century.…

Well, the interesting thing about this previously unpublished Sturgeon
is simply this: it is a genuine ‘period piece’—a story that will remind
you of ‘the good old days’ of Street and Smith’s _Detective Story
Magazine—_the ‘dear, dead days’ of Herman Landon’s _The Gray Phantom_,
and of Johnston (_The Mark of Zorro_) McCulley’s Thubway Tham; ah,
remember? This new-old Sturgeon is the kind of story that was sedately
popular in the 1920s, the accepted detective fare of its time (when the
hard-boiled experiment was just beginning). It is the kind of story
that, we judge, could have been written early in the same decade that
saw the birth of Dorothy Sayers’ Lord Peter Wimsey, Earl Derr Bigger’s
Charlie Chan, S.S. van Dine’s Philo Vance, and E.Q.’s Ellery Queen.

“HOW TO FORGET BASEBALL”: first published in _Sports Illustrated_,
December 21, 1964. In the introduction to the tenth anniversary issue of
_Sports Illustrated_, the editors described the special feature on “The
Future of Sport” as “a practical look at what to expect in the next
decade,” “the sporting miracles of tomorrow, in color today,” and “a
chilling glimpse of a game of the far future” (the Sturgeon story). In
introducing the special issue, the publisher, Sidney L. James, writes,
among other things: “Beyond the practical side of the future is the
fanciful. Ours is a science fiction sports story by Theodore Sturgeon,
one of the two or three writers who emerged as giants in the field when
science fiction moved out of pulp country after the atom bomb made
impossibilities valid subjects for serious speculation. Sturgeon’s grim,
sardonic and somewhat Orwellian view of how sport and society may evolve
is one that we are far from sharing, but we do feel that his story—which
effectively demonstrates the high level of writing skill in this
genre—is a contribution to thinking about sport. And sport is to be
thought about as well as enjoyed.”

On the title page of the story: OUT OF A FANTASTIC SOMEDAY WORLD WHIRLS
A DEMONIAC FLACK IN A FORMLESS CAR TO SHOW A POOR PRIMITIVE FROM AN
ALL-BUT-VANISHED SOCIETY THE NEW NATIONAL GAME, QUOIT. ONE OF THE
COUNTRY’S MOST DISTINGUISHED SCIENCE FICTION WRITERS TELLS HOW THE
PRIMITIVE IS AT FIRST CONFUSED, THEN HORRIFIED, FASCINATED AND—IN THE
END—ENTRAPPED BY A THING HE ABHORS.

“THE NAIL AND THE ORACLE”: first published in _Playboy_, Oct. 1965.

“IF ALL MEN WERE BROTHERS, WOULD YOU LET ONE MARRY YOUR SISTER?”: first
published in Harlan Ellison, ed., _Dangerous Visions_, in 1967. In
_Dangerous Visions_, each story was bookended by an introduction by the
book’s editor and an afterword or epilogue by the story’s author.
Sturgeon, consistent with his use of the auctorial voice (in the style
of British novelist Henry Fielding) as part of his stories from the
beginning of his writing career, made the afterword part of his story.
He used a shortened, rewritten version of the afterword (when he first
published the story outside of Harlan’s anthology—in _Case and the
Dreamer_, a Sturgeon collection of three short novels published in 1974)
to conclude themes raised in auctorial asides earlier in the story. So
the afterword appears in that shortened form as part of the story, as in
_Case and the Dreamer_. It’s a letter to the story’s reader, parallel to
the letter from TS to Harlan quoted in Ellison’s introduction.

Finally, for the reader’s enjoyment, this is a letter Sturgeon wrote to
his wife Marion and their children in Woodstock, New York, dated July
15, 1966, and thus during the period he was staying with Harlan and
writing some of the stories in this volume:

_Dear Dear Everybody:_

_This is just a short note to let you know I love you all, each and
every single one, and love you well; and that I miss you and will
appreciate any tiny word from any of you about what you are doing and
what you are thinking about, no matter how trivial you might think it
is; it’s important to me. Also I want you to know that I am working very
hard on my two television shows, The Invaders and Star Trek, and
although it is very hard, and coming too slowly, it is going well, and
if I work very hard I will be able to be back in Woodstock before the
second week in August_.

_I will tell you about one adventure and one wonderful surprise. The
other night Harlan had the wild and sudden impulse to go to a huge
discount store called Akron—kind of a Big Scot. Harlan’s little bronze
Austin-Healey only has two seats, and Norman Spinrad, the writer, is
here, and Harlan’s girlfriend Sherri, so we took my car, which is a
little brown Volkswagen I rented, and off we went. As soon as we got
there Harlan dived into the clothing section and I disappeared into
Hardware and Tools and Sherri began to look at hats and sweaters and
Norman sort of got lost_.

_After quite a long time, Harlan found me looking at some lumber
thoughtfully, and zeroed in on something stacked next to the lumber.
“Just what we need,” he said, in that superpositive Harlan Ellison way,
pointing at a twelve-foot stepladder. “What on earth for?” says I. Says
he: “To clean the inside of the skylight.” “But Harlan!” “Come on,” says
he. “Let’s take it over to the checkout.” “But Harlan,” I said gently,
knocking him down and putting my knee to his chest, “don’t you think
it’s too big?” “Oh no. It’ll just reach,” says he. Says I, patiently, “I
don’t mean for the skylight, Harlan, I mean for the Volkswagen, Harlan:
that stepladder is TWELVE FEET LONG.” Says he, a great light dawning:
“Oh.” So we went to the check-out to pick up the other things he had
bought_.

_He had bought the way nobody else in the world buys: hot plate trivets,
some Italian knit dickies, some stationery, kitchen stuff, some
electrical fixtures, an ebony and wicker settle about the size of our
piano bench, and FOUR THIRTY-QUART GARBAGE CANS. We loaded everything
into the garbage cans and carried them out to the Volks. We put them
down on the sidewalk. We looked at each other and at the car, which
somehow looked very much smaller than it had before we went in. Spinrad,
who at the best of times is an Eeyore, immediately sent up a wail of
total despair and impossibility. Sherri, who is usually a very
self-contained girl, began to laugh uncontrollably. Harlan took out his
glasses and put them on, and uttering small sounds of purpose and
reassurance, began attacking the problem of loading the car. “See? No
sweat! Told you. Now the other garbage can? Just give it a good shove
there. Right. What do you mean you can’t get the door shut?” and so on.
Norman began to get really persuasive with his Eeyorisms_.

_The store was now closed and we wouldn’t be able to return the
merchandise. If the police saw the car loaded like that they’d make us
take half of it out, probably miles out on a freeway. And besides it
looked as if it were going to rain. About this time Harlan got the last
of our purchases into the car and got both doors and the trunk lid
closed. ‘I told you!’ he said triumphantly. The trunk was full and the
back seat was full and the seat-backs were tipped forward, the right one
against the windshield and the left one smack against the steering
wheel. ‘Harlan,’ I said. ‘Where are we going to put the people?’ ‘Yeah,’
he acknowledged, wrenched the door open and started to pull everything
out again. The self-contained Sherri staggered backwards across the
sidewalk and clung to the building front to keep from collapsing; I
don’t think I have ever seen anyone laugh so hard. Norman, on the other
hand, seemed about to dissolve in tears. Harlan got everything back out
on the sidewalk, took off his glasses, polished them, put them back on
again and began loading things in a different way. (Do you know how big
a thirty-quart garbage can is? Big enough for one of me, or two of
Harlan, to hide in with the cover on.…) Well—he did it_.

_And all four of us got into the front seat. We went to a place which
serves nothing but pancakes—Swedish and German and French and flaming
and with sausages and sour cream and six kinds of syrup and lots more.
We ate so many pancakes that we came this close to being too fat to get
back in the car. And all the while I was chewing on the knobby thought
that Harlan had already bought the garbage cans and that settle when he
came back to where I was and started lusting after a twelve-foot
stepladder_.

“RUNESMITH”: by Theodore Sturgeon and Harlan Ellison; first published in
_F&SF_, May 1970. Harlan Ellison’s introduction to this story, in his
1983 book _Partners in Wonder:_

“Sturgeon and I go back many years. No words by me are needed to add to
the luster and familiarity of his reputation and his writings. Of his
personal warmth and understanding of people I’ve written at length in
Dangerous Visions and elsewhere, as I have written of his many
kindnesses to me.

Ted came out to the Coast about five years ago and stayed with me for a
while, and we got to know each other almost better than we wanted to.
(Picture this, if you will: Ted has a penchant for running around in the
buff; that’s cool; I do it myself a lot of the time. But I make these
tiny concessions to propriety when I know nice people with easily blown
minds are coming to the house; I wear a towel. After the first few
incidents—a cookie-peddling Brownie ran screaming, an Avon lady had an
orgasm on my front stoop, a gentleman of undetermined sexual orientation
started frothing—I suggested to Ted that while he had one of the truly
imposing physiques of the Western World, and while we all loved him
sufficiently to overlook the vice squad pigs who came to the door at the
request of the Brownie’s den momma, that he would make me much happier
if he would for Christ’s sake put something on. So he wandered around
wearing these outrageous little red bikini underpants.) For his part,
Ted had to put up with my quixotic morality, which flails wildly between
degenerate and Puritan. I would catch him, from time to time, when I’d
done something either terribly one or the other with a look on his face
usually reserved for Salvation Army musicians who find their street
corner is occupied by a nasty drunk lying in the gutter.

But we managed to be roommates without too much travail, and during that
period I suggested to Ted that we do a story that we could dedicate to
the memory of Dr. Paul Linebarger, who wrote speculative fiction of the
highest order under the name Cordwainer Smith. Ted thought that was a
pretty fair idea, so I typed out the title “Runesmith” and sat down—I
type titles standing—and did the first section, up to the sentence,
Smith, alone. Then!

Then, the dumb motherfucker pulled one of those wretched tricks only a
basically evil person can conceive. He decided in between paragraphs
that he didn’t care for the way the story was going and he wrote the
section beginning with ‘Alone’ and ending—without hope of linking or
continuing—at the sentence that begins, ‘The final sound of the fall was
soft …’

‘Now what the hell is that supposed to be?’ I demanded, really pissed
off. Sturgeon just smiled. ‘How do you expect me to proceed from there,
you clown? Everybody knows the plot has to start emerging in the first
1500 words, and you’ve tied me off like a gangrenous leg!’ Sturgeon just
smiled. I suppose you think that’s funny, dump the hero into a pit, he
can’t get out, the lions are gnawing at his head. You think that’s
really funny. Dumb is what it is, Ted, it is dumb!” Sturgeon just
smiled.

I threw my hands in the air, dumped the six pages of the story in a file
for a week, and didn’t get back to it till I’d calmed down. Then I went
on and wrote—struggling to smooth the break between my first and second
sections and that gibberish of his—the section running from Smith backed
to the wall of the landing to the section where he returns to his former
lodgings, where the mistake was first made. (But much of what you now
find in that longish section came in rewrite. It was only three pages of
typescript originally.)

Then I gave it to Ted. Twenty-six months passed. Finally, I called
him—he was long since gone from my house, where it was possible to get
an armlock on him—and told him if he wasn’t going to get off his ass and
finish the story, to return it to me, so I could lift out that demented
section he’d written, and complete it myself. Nine months passed.

So I called him and told him I’d trash his damned house, rape his old
lady, murder his kids, loot his exchequer, pillage his pantry, burn his
silo, slaughter his oxen, pour salt on his fields and in general carry
on cranky. Four months passed.

So I had a lady friend call him and tell him I was dying of the Dutch
Elm Blight, lying on my death bed and asking, as a last request, for the
story. He went to the mountains with his wife and kids for a holiday.

‘What is all this nonsense about Sturgeon understanding love?’ I
screamed, stamping my foot.

Two weeks later Dr. Jekyll waltzed into the house and handed me the
completed first draft, smiled, went away. I didn’t waste any time. I
rewrote it from stem to stern, cackling fiendishly all the while, sent
it off, and kept the money!

Now how about that, Sturgeon!”

“JORRY’S GAP”: first published in _Adam_, October 1968. This was one of
the first of the “Wina stories” (a name given by Sturgeon to a burst of
new stories that flowed forth from his pen and typewriter shortly after
the arrival in his southern California life of a woman named Wina who
would become his fourth long-term committed life partner and the mother
of his seventh child, Andros). He recounts Wina’s positive effect on his
life and writing in the introduction to his 1971 collection _Sturgeon Is
Alive and Well_, which consists almost entirely of “Wina stories.”

These stories were also the product of a special relationship Sturgeon
developed with two young editors of “men’s magazines,” Merrill Miller
and Jared Rutter, who agreed to purchase and publish any stories
Sturgeon sent them, whether science fiction or not. _One can approach
the typewriter with a wonderful sense of wingspread with a market like
that_, Sturgeon said in his introduction to _Sturgeon Is Alive and
Well_. He went on to say: _Nothing will ever stop me from writing
science fiction, but there sure is a plot afoot to keep me from writing
anything else, and I won’t have it. Perhaps now you can understand why I
am so pleased with this collection_ In 1968, when this story was
written, Ted’s son Robin was 16, and was living in the small town of
Woodstock with his mother, two younger teenage sisters, and his little
brother.

“BROWNSHOES”: first published in _Adam_, May 1969. This story was then
reprinted in _F&SF_, October 1969, under the title “The Man Who Learned
Loving.” It went on to win the Nebula Award (voted on by members of the
Science Fiction Writers of America) for best science fiction short story
of the year. It is also an early “Wina story.” The ongoing argument
between the hippie chick and her hip guy on whether it is possible to
save the world while wearing unhip brown shoes or whether in fact that
was necessary as protective coloration is classic, evidence that
Sturgeon was writing from his own experience.

“IT WAS NOTHING—REALLY!” first published in _Knight_, November 1969, and
another early “Wina story.” This is another of a series of Sturgeon
stories (including “Brownshoes”) on “how to save the world,” very much
an expression of what was on the minds of intelligent, caring people
when the story was written.

“TAKE CARE OF JOEY”: first published in _Knight_, January 1971. The line
near the end, “or the one boy with curly hair” is a reference to
himself, Ted Sturgeon, a recollection of what he went through as a young
man with curly hair.

[]
